An Efficient PointLSTM for Point Clouds Based Gesture Recognition
Yuecong Min1,2 , Yanxiao Zhang1,2 , Xiujuan Chai3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Agricultural Information Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, China
{yuecong.min,yanxiao.zhang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, chaixiujuan@caas.cn, xlchen@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Point clouds contain rich spatial information, which provides complementary cues for gesture recognition. In this
paper, we formulate gesture recognition as an irregular sequence recognition problem and aim to capture long-term
spatial correlations across point cloud sequences. A novel
and effective PointLSTM is proposed to propagate information from past to future while preserving the spatial structure. The proposed PointLSTM combines state information
from neighboring points in the past with current features to
update the current states by a weight-shared LSTM layer.
This method can be integrated into many other sequence
learning approaches. In the task of gesture recognition,
the proposed PointLSTM achieves state-of-the-art results on
two challenging datasets (NVGesture and SHREC’17) and
outperforms previous skeleton-based methods. To show its
advantages in generalization, we evaluate our method on
MSR Action3D dataset, and it produces competitive results
with previous skeleton-based methods.

𝑠

f

𝑡−1

LSTM

𝑠

shared
LSTM

𝑡

(a) PointLSTM on ordered point clouds.
𝑠

𝑡−1

f

LSTM

𝑠

shared

𝑠

LSTM
𝑡

(b) PointLSTM on orderless point clouds.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The basic idea of PointLSTM (s and f are states and features, respectively). (a) In an ideal situation, each point in the current frame can find the corresponding point in the previous frame.
(b) The proposed PointLSTM relaxes the previous assumption and
gather relevant information from past neighbors.

Vision-based gesture recognition [37] is a well-studied
yet challenging problem in computer vision and has considerable potential applications in human-computer interaction, such as touchless interfaces and nonverbal communication systems. Effectively extracting spatio-temporal features from sequence data is one of the most crucial issues for
gesture recognition. Most previous gesture recognition systems capture dynamic motion information with two-stream
based methods [24, 34, 22, 44] or 3D convolutional neural
networks [18, 22, 24, 25, 34, 35].
Compared with RGB data, point clouds precisely describe the latent geometric structure and distance information of object surfaces, which provide complementary
cues for gesture recognition. Nevertheless, how to lever-

age such rich spatial information in point clouds remains a
major challenge. Instead of representing point clouds as
voxels or multi-view formats, Qi et al. [30] propose the
PointNet architecture to extract structure information from
raw point clouds directly. PointNet++ [31] extends PointNet by applying hierarchical grouping and sampling operations to capture local structure information. Some recent
works [19, 20, 23] modify the grouping operation to extract
both motion and structure features from spatio-temporal
neighbors. Nevertheless, these methods merely focus on
short-term modeling and have insufficient abilities to capture long-term relationships.
The recent successes of recurrent neural network (RNN)
and long short-term memory (LSTM) in sequence model-

5761

