Learning nanoscale motion patterns of vesicles in living cells
Arif Ahmed Sekh1
Ida Sundvor Opstad1
Åsa Birna Birgisdottir1,2
Truls Myrmel1,2
Balpreet Singh Ahluwalia1
Krishna Agarwal1
Dilip K. Prasad1∗
1 UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway
2 University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway
∗ dilip.prasad@uit.no

Abstract
Detecting and analyzing nanoscale motion patterns of
vesicles, smaller than the microscope resolution (∼ 250 nm),
inside living biological cells is a challenging problem. Stateof-the-art CV approaches based on detection, tracking, optical ﬂow or deep learning perform poorly on this problem.
We propose an integrative approach built upon physics-based
simulations, nanoscopy algorithms and shallow residual attention network to permit for the ﬁrst time analysis of subresolution motion patterns in vesicles, also of sub-resolution
diameter. Our results show state-of-the-art performance, 89%
validation accuracy on simulated dataset and 82% testing accuracy on an experimental dataset of images of living heart
muscle cells grown under three diﬀerent pathophysiologically
relevant conditions. We demonstrate automated analysis of
the motion states and changes in them for over 9000 vesicles.
Such analysis will enable large scale biological studies of vesicle transport and interactions in living cells in the future.

1. Introduction
Microscopy images and videos are the only visual windows to the life in biological cells. The life events in a
cell are orchestrated by a variety of organelles, such as
nanoscale vesicles (30 nm to ∼1 μm). The vesicles perform
their tasks by undergoing diverse motions in the scale of
tens of nanometers to a few micrometers and interacting
with other sub-cellular structures. The analysis of dynamic
behaviour of vesicles may hold key to understanding and
treating diverse neurological and immunological disorders
[21, 27, 35]. However, learning about their motion patterns
from microscopy videos of vesicles inside living cells is an
imposing task, both visually and through computer vision
(CV), for multiple reasons presented next:
• Optical and digital resolutions − The digital resolution (eﬀective pixel size) of the most advanced live-cell
compatible ﬂuorescence microscopes are limited to ∼ 100
nm and their optical resolution (smallest resolvable feature

Figure 1. Our integrative approach of experiments, physics,
nanoscopy, and computer vision allows analysis of nanoscale motion patterns of vesicles inside living cells.

size) is ∼250 nm. As a consequence, the structures as well
as the motion patterns of nanometer scale (< 250 nm) are
not discernible by the microscopes, unless super-resolution
microscopy (i.e. nanoscopy) approaches are employed.
• Noise − As compared to conventional imaging and
videography, ﬂuorescence microscopy deals with light of
the order of a few photons per pixel. The shot noise and the
dark noise of the camera often make the measurements signiﬁcantly noisy. This has further negative eﬀect on identiﬁcation of motion patterns from microscopy videos.
• Lack of data − Live-cell experiments are not quite repeatable. Small variations in cell culture and imaging processes introduce diﬀerences in cell behaviour. Further,
the age of the cells and the number of times of cell culture result in variations in the frequencies of normative
life-events. Moreover, generating ground truth for such
data is practically impossible. Therefore, generating large,
controlled, statistically consistent, and suitably annotated
114014

