Alleviation of Gradient Exploding in GANs: Fake Can Be Real
Song Tao, Jia Wang∗
Department of Electronic Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{taosong, jiawang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In order to alleviate the notorious mode collapse phenomenon in generative adversarial networks (GANs), we
propose a novel training method of GANs in which certain
fake samples are considered as real ones during the training
process. This strategy can reduce the gradient value that
generator receives in the region where gradient exploding
happens. We show the process of an unbalanced generation
and a vicious circle issue resulted from gradient exploding
in practical training, which explains the instability of GANs.
We also theoretically prove that gradient exploding can be
alleviated by penalizing the difference between discriminator outputs and fake-as-real consideration for very close real and fake samples. Accordingly, Fake-As-Real GAN (FARGAN) is proposed with a more stable training process and
a more faithful generated distribution. Experiments on different datasets verify our theoretical analysis.

GAN objective and analyzed the generalization capacity of
neural network distance. The author argued that for a low
capacity discriminator, it can not provide generator enough
information to fit the target distribution owing to lack of ability to detect mode collapse. [31] argued that poor generation capacity in GANs comes from the discriminators
trained on finite training samples resulting in overfitting to
real data samples and gradient exploding when generated
datapoints approach real ones. As a result, [31] proposed a
zero-centered gradient penalty on linear interpolations between real and fake samples to improve generalization capability and prevent mode collapse resulted from gradient
exploding. Recent work [32] further studied generalization
from a new perspective of privacy protection.
In this paper, we focus on mode collapse resulted from
gradient exploding studied in [31] and achieve a better generalization with a much more stable training process. Our
contributions are as follows:
1. We explain the generation process of an unbalanced
distribution in GAN training, which becomes more and
more serious as training progresses owing to the existence of the vicious circle issue resulted from gradient
exploding.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [10] have been one of the most popular topics in
generative models and achieved great success in generating
diverse and high-quality images [5, 16, 8]. GANs can be
expressed as a zero-sum game between discriminator and
generator. When a final theoretical equilibrium is achieved,
discriminator can never distinguish between real and fake
generated samples. However, we show that a theoretical
equilibrium actually can be seldom realized in practice with
only discrete finite samples in datasets during the training
process.
Although GANs have achieved remarkable progress, numerous researchers have tried to improve the performance
of GANs from various aspects [2, 23, 11, 21], because of
the inherent problem in GAN training, such as instability
and mode collapse. [3] showed that a theoretical generalization guarantee does not be provided with the original
∗ Corresponding author

2. We prove that the gradient exploding issue can be effectively alleviated by difference penalization for discriminator between very close real and fake samples
and fake-as-real consideration where gradient exploding happens.
3. We propose a novel GAN training method by considering certain fake samples as real ones (FARGAN)
according to discriminator outputs in a training minibatch to effectively prevent the unbalanced generation.
Experiments on synthetic and real world datasets verify that our method can stabilize training process and
achieve a more faithful generated distribution.
In the sequel, we use the terminologies of generated samples (datapoints) and fake samples (datapoints) indiscriminately. Tab. 1 lists some key notations used in the rest of
the paper.

1191

