Image Super-Resolution with Cross-Scale Non-Local Attention
and Exhaustive Self-Exemplars Mining
Yiqun Mei1 , Yuchen Fan1 , Yuqian Zhou1 , Lichao Huang2 ,
Thomas S. Huang1 , Honghui Shi3,1
1

IFP Group, UIUC, 2 Horizon Robotics, 3 University of Oregon

Abstract
Deep convolution-based single image super-resolution
(SISR) networks embrace the benefits of learning from
large-scale external image resources for local recovery, yet
most existing works have ignored the long-range featurewise similarities in natural images. Some recent works
have successfully leveraged this intrinsic feature correlation by exploring non-local attention modules. However,
none of the current deep models have studied another inherent property of images: cross-scale feature correlation.
In this paper, we propose the first Cross-Scale Non-Local
(CS-NL) attention module with integration into a recurrent
neural network. By combining the new CS-NL prior with
local and in-scale non-local priors in a powerful recurrent
fusion cell, we can find more cross-scale feature correlations within a single low-resolution (LR) image. The performance of SISR is significantly improved by exhaustively integrating all possible priors. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed CS-NL module by
setting new state-of-the-arts on multiple SISR benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Single image super resolution (SISR) aims at recovering a high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution
(LR) counterpart. SISR has numerous applications in the
areas of satellite imaging, medical imaging, surveillance
monitoring and high-definition display and imaging etc
[3, 32, 40, 41, 43]. The mapping between LR and HR image
is not bijective, which yields more possibilities for a faithful
and high-quality HR recovery. Due to this ill-posed nature,
SISR remains challenging in the past decades.
Early efforts in traditional methods provide good practices for resolving SISR. By fully using the intrinsic property of the LR images, they mostly focus on local prior
and non-local prior for patch matching and reconstruction.

Figure 1. Visualization of most engaged patches captured by our
Cross-Scale Non-Local (CS-NL) attention. Cross-scale similarities widely exist in natural images. Multiple high-resolution (HR)
patches from the low-resolution (LR) image itself significantly improve target patch super-resolution.

Specifically, local prior based methods, like bilinear or bicubic interpolation, reconstruct pixels merely by the weighted
sum of neighbour ones. To go beyond the local limitation,
methods based on non-local mean filtering [24, 35] start to
globally search similar patches over the whole LR image.
The non-local search for self-similarity can be further
extended to cross-scale cues. It has been verified that
cross-scale patch similarity widely exists in natural images
[9, 42]. Intuitively, in addition to non-local pixel-to-pixel
matching, pixels can also be matched with larger image
patches. The natural cross-scale feature correspondence
makes us search high-frequency details directly from LR
images, leading to more faithful, accurate and high-quality
reconstructions.
Since the first deep learning-based method [4] was proposed, discriminative learning based methods make it possible to use large-scale external image priors for SISR. Compared with traditional methods, they tend to have better
feature representation ability, faster inference speed, end15690

