S3VAE: Self-Supervised Sequential VAE
for Representation Disentanglement and Data Generation
Yizhe Zhu1,2 , Martin Renqiang Min1 , Asim Kadav1 , Hans Peter Graf1
yizhe.zhu@rutgers.edu, {renqiang, asim, hpg}@nec-labs.com
1
NEC Labs America, 2 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University

Abstract
We propose a sequential variational autoencoder to
learn disentangled representations of sequential data (e.g.,
videos and audios) under self-supervision. Specifically, we
exploit the benefits of some readily accessible supervisory
signals from input data itself or some off-the-shelf functional models and accordingly design auxiliary tasks for
our model to utilize these signals. With the supervision of
the signals, our model can easily disentangle the representation of an input sequence into static factors and dynamic
factors (i.e., time-invariant and time-varying parts). Comprehensive experiments across videos and audios verify the
effectiveness of our model on representation disentanglement and generation of sequential data, and demonstrate
that, our model with self-supervision performs comparable
to, if not better than, the fully-supervised model with ground
truth labels, and outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised
models by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Representation learning is one of the essential research
problems in machine learning and computer vision [5].
Real-world sensory data such as videos, images, and audios are often in the form of high dimensions. Representation learning aims to map these data into a low-dimensional
space to make it easier to extract semantically meaningful information for downstream tasks such as classification and detection. Recent years have witnessed rising interests in disentangled representation learning, which tries
to separate the underlying factors of observed data variations such that each factor exclusively interprets one type
of semantic attributes of sensory data. The representation
of sequential data is expected to be disentangled into timevarying factors and time-invariant factors. For video data,
the identity of a moving object in a video is regarded as
time-invariant factors, and the motion in each frame is considered as time-varying ones [36]. For speech data, the

Self-supervision
and regularization

zf
Or

E

D

Or

zt
Sequential data

Latent variable

Reconstructed data

Figure 1. Self-supervision and regularizations enforce the latent
variable of our sequential VAE to be disentangled into a static representation zf and a dynamic representation zt .

representations of the timbre of speakers and the linguistic
contents are expected to be disentangled [27]. There are
several benefits of learning disentangled representations.
First, the models that produce disentangled representations
are more explainable. Second, disentangled representations
make it easier and more efficient to manipulate data generation, which has potential applications in entertainment
industry, training data synthesis [53, 54] and several downstream tasks [32, 19, 18, 43, 55].
Despite the vast amount of works [24, 33, 6, 15, 16, 7,
30] on disentangled representations of static data (mainly
image data), fewer works [27, 36, 23, 46] have explored representation disentanglement for sequential data generation.
For unsupervised models, FHVAE [27] and DSVAE [36]
elaborately designed model architectures and factorized latent variables into static and dynamic parts. These models
may well handle simple data forms such as synthetic animation data but fail when dealing with realistic ones as
we will show later. Besides, as pointed out in [37], unsupervised representation disentanglement is impossible without inductive biases. Without any supervision, the performance of disentanglement can hardly be guaranteed and
greatly depends on the random seed and the dimensionality of latent vectors set in the models. On the other hand,
several works [23, 46] resort to utilizing label information
or attribute annotation as strong supervision for disentanglement. For instance, VideoVAE [23] leveraged holistic
attributes to constrain latent variables. Nevertheless, the
16538

