Cars Can’t Fly up in the Sky: Improving Urban-Scene Segmentation via
Height-driven Attention Networks
Sungha Choi1,3
Joanne T. Kim2,3
Jaegul Choo4
1
A&B Center, LG Electronics, Seoul, South Korea
2
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA
3
4
Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
{shachoi,tengyee}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper exploits the intrinsic features of urban-scene
images and proposes a general add-on module, called
height-driven attention networks (HANet), for improving
semantic segmentation for urban-scene images. It emphasizes informative features or classes selectively according
to the vertical position of a pixel. The pixel-wise class distributions are significantly different from each other among
horizontally segmented sections in the urban-scene images. Likewise, urban-scene images have their own distinct characteristics, but most semantic segmentation networks do not reflect such unique attributes in the architecture. The proposed network architecture incorporates the
capability exploiting the attributes to handle the urbanscene dataset effectively. We validate the consistent performance (mIoU) increase of various semantic segmentation
models on two datasets when HANet is adopted. This extensive quantitative analysis demonstrates that adding our
module to existing models is easy and cost-effective. Our
method achieves a new state-of-the-art performance on the
Cityscapes benchmark with a large margin among ResNet101 based segmentation models. Also, we show that the proposed model is coherent with the facts observed in the urban
scene by visualizing and interpreting the attention map. Our
code and trained models are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation, a fundamental task in
computer vision, is employed for basic urban-scene understanding in autonomous driving. Fully convolutional networks (FCNs) [28] are seminal work that adopts deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in semantic segmentation, by replacing fully connected layers with convolutional ones at the last stage in typical CNN architectures.
Other advanced techniques, such as skip-connections in an
encoder-decoder architecture [2, 34, 8], an atrous convolu1 https://github.com/shachoi/HANet

jchoo@kaist.ac.kr

tion [6, 46], an atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) [7],
and a pyramid pooling module [51], have further improved
the FCN-based architecture in terms of semantic segmentation performance. They have proven to be successful in
diverse semantic segmentation benchmarks [14, 15, 31, 12,
1, 25, 32] including urban-scene datasets.
Yet, urban-scene images have their own distinct nature
related to perspective geometry [23] and positional patterns [55, 10]. Due to the fact that the urban-scene images are captured by the cameras mounted on the front
side of a car, the urban-scene datasets consist only of roaddriving pictures. This leads to the possibility of incorporating common structural priors depending on a spatial position, markedly in a vertical position. To verify this characteristic, we present the class distribution of an urban-scene
dataset across vertical positions in Fig. 1. Although the pixels of the few classes are dominant in an entire region of an
image (Fig. 1(a)), the class distribution has significant dependency on a vertical position. That is, a lower part of an
image is mainly composed of road, while the middle part
contains various kinds of relatively small objects. In the upper part, buildings, vegetation, and sky are principal objects
as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Table 1 shows the probabilities with respect to the dominant top-5 classes: road, building, vegetation, car, and sidewalk. The class distribution is extremely imbalanced that
the dominant classes take over 88% of the entire dataset. As
mentioned above, the class distribution is completely different if the image is divided into three regions: upper, middle,
and lower parts. For instance, the probability of the road
class proad is 36.9% on average given an entire image, but
this chance drops dramatically to 0.006% for an upper region, while jumps to 87.9% if a lower region is considered.
Also, we analyzed this observation using entropy, a measure of uncertainty. The entropy of the probability distribution X of a pixel over 19 classes in the Cityscapes
dataset [12] is computed as

9373

