Adaptive Loss-aware Quantization for Multi-bit Networks
Zhongnan Qu1 , Zimu Zhou2 , Yun Cheng1 , and Lothar Thiele1
1

Computer Engineering Group, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{quz, chengyu, thiele}@ethz.ch

2

School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
zimuzhou@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
We investigate the compression of deep neural networks
by quantizing their weights and activations into multiple
binary bases, known as multi-bit networks (MBNs), which
accelerate the inference and reduce the storage for the deployment on low-resource mobile and embedded platforms.
We propose Adaptive Loss-aware Quantization (ALQ), a new
MBN quantization pipeline that is able to achieve an average bitwidth below one-bit without notable loss in inference
accuracy. Unlike previous MBN quantization solutions that
train a quantizer by minimizing the error to reconstruct full
precision weights, ALQ directly minimizes the quantizationinduced error on the loss function involving neither gradient approximation nor full precision maintenance. ALQ
also exploits strategies including adaptive bitwidth, smooth
bitwidth reduction, and iterative trained quantization to allow a smaller network size without loss in accuracy. Experiment results on popular image datasets show that ALQ
outperforms state-of-the-art compressed networks in terms
of both storage and accuracy.

network into binary encodes and the corresponding scaling
factors [4, 36], which are also interpreted as binary basis
vectors and floating-point coordinates in a geometry viewpoint [9]. Neural networks quantized with binary encodes
replace expensive floating-point operations by bitwise operations, which are supported even by microprocessors and
often result in small memory footprints [29]. Since the space
spanned by only one-bit binary basis and one coordinate is
too sparse to optimize, many researchers suggest a multi-bit
network (MBN) [8, 9, 15, 26, 42, 43], which allows to obtain
a small size without notable accuracy loss and still leverages
bitwise operations. An MBN is usually obtained via trained
quantization. Recent studies [31] leverage bit-packing and
bitwise computations for efficient deploying binary networks
on a wide range of general devices, which also provides more
flexibility to design multi-bit/binary networks.
Most MBN quantization schemes [8, 9, 15, 26, 42, 43]
predetermine a global bitwidth, and learn a quantizer to
transform the full precision parameters into binary bases and
coordinates such that the quantized models do not incur a
significant accuracy loss. However, these approaches have
the following drawbacks:
• A global bitwidth may be sub-optimal. Recent studies on fixed-point quantization [18, 25] show that the
optimal bitwidth varies across layers.

1. Introduction
There is a growing interest to deploy deep neural networks
on resource-constrained devices to enable new intelligent
services such as mobile assistants, augmented reality, and
autonomous cars. However, deep neural networks are notoriously resource-intensive. Their complexity needs to be
trimmed down to fit in mobile and embedded devices.
To take advantage of the various pretrained models for
efficient inference on resource-constrained devices, it is common to compress the pretrained models via pruning [10],
quantization [8, 9, 26, 42, 43], distillation [12], among others. We focus on quantization, especially quantizing both
the full precision weights and activations of a deep neural

• Previous efforts [26, 42, 43] retain inference accuracy
by minimizing the weight reconstruction error rather
than the loss function. Such an indirect optimization
objective may lead to a notable loss in accuracy. Furthermore, they rely on approximated gradients, e.g.
straight-through estimators (STE) to propagate gradients through quantization functions during training.
• Many quantization schemes [36, 43] keep the first and
last layer in full precision, because quantizing these
layers to low bitwidth tends to dramatically decrease

7988

