GeoDA: a geometric framework for black-box adversarial attacks
Ali Rahmati∗ , Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli† , Pascal Frossard‡ , and Huaiyu Dai∗
∗

Department of ECE, North Carolina State University
†
Institue for Machine Learning, ETH Zurich
‡
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne

arahmat@ncsu.edu, seyed.moosavi@inf.ethz.ch, pascal.frossard@epfl.ch, hdai@ncsu.edu

Abstract
Adversarial examples are known as carefully perturbed
images fooling image classifiers. We propose a geometric
framework to generate adversarial examples in one of the
most challenging black-box settings where the adversary
can only generate a small number of queries, each of them
returning the top-1 label of the classifier. Our framework
is based on the observation that the decision boundary of
deep networks usually has a small mean curvature in the
vicinity of data samples. We propose an effective iterative
algorithm to generate query-efficient black-box perturbations with small ℓp norms for p ≥ 1, which is confirmed
via experimental evaluations on state-of-the-art natural image classifiers. Moreover, for p = 2, we theoretically show
that our algorithm actually converges to the minimal ℓ2 perturbation when the curvature of the decision boundary
is bounded. We also obtain the optimal distribution of the
queries over the iterations of the algorithm. Finally, experimental results confirm that our principled black-box attack
algorithm performs better than state-of-the-art algorithms
as it generates smaller perturbations with a reduced number of queries.1

1. Introduction
It has become well known that deep neural networks
are vulnerable to small adversarial perturbations, which are
carefully designed to cause miss-classification in state-ofthe-art image classifiers [26]. Many methods have been
proposed to evaluate adversarial robustness of classifiers in
the white-box setting, where the adversary has full access
to the target model [14, 24, 2]. However, the robustness of
classifiers in black-box settings – where the adversary has
only access to the output of the classifier – is of high relevance in many real-world applications of deep neural networks such as autonomous systems and healthcare, where it
1 The code of GeoDA is available at https://github.com/
thisisalirah/GeoDA.

Normal vector

Boundary

Hyperplane

Figure 1: Linearization of the decision boundary.
poses serious security threats. Several black-box evaluation
methods have been proposed in the literature. Depending
on what the classifier gives as an output, black-box evaluation methods are either score-based [25, 5, 18] or decisionbased [3, 1, 20].
In this paper, we propose a novel geometric framework
for decision-based black-box attacks in which the adversary
only has access to the top-1 label of the target model. Intuitively small adversarial perturbations should be searched
in directions where the classifier decision boundary comes
close to data samples. We exploit the low mean curvature
of the decision boundary in the vicinity of the data samples to effectively estimate the normal vector to the decision
boundary. This key prior permits to considerably reduces
the number of queries that are necessary to fool the blackbox classifier. Experimental results confirm that our Geometric Decision-based Attack (GeoDA) outperforms stateof-the-art black-box attacks, in terms of required number
of queries to fool the classifier. Our main contributions are
summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel geometric framework based on linearizing the decision boundary of deep networks in the
vicinity of samples. The error for the estimation of
the normal vector to the decision boundary of classifiers with flat decision boundaries, including linear
classifiers, is shown to be bounded in a non-asymptotic
regime. The proposed framework is general enough to
be deployed for any classifier with low curvature decision boundary.

8446

