Learning a Dynamic Map of Visual Appearance
Tawfiq Salem

Scott Workman

Nathan Jacobs

Miami University

DZYNE Technologies

University of Kentucky

Summer
Morning
Winter
Evening

The appearance of the world varies dramatically not
only from place to place but also from hour to hour and
month to month. Every day billions of images capture this
complex relationship, many of which are associated with
precise time and location metadata. We propose to use these
images to construct a global-scale, dynamic map of visual
appearance attributes. Such a map enables fine-grained understanding of the expected appearance at any geographic
location and time. Our approach integrates dense overhead
imagery with location and time metadata into a general
framework capable of mapping a wide variety of visual attributes. A key feature of our approach is that it requires
no manual data annotation. We demonstrate how this approach can support various applications, including imagedriven mapping, image geolocalization, and metadata verification.

Spring
Afternoon

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent concern about “fake news” has lead to a significant interest in verifying that imagery is real and unmanipulated. Early work on this problem focused on lowlevel image statistics [4, 6], but this approach is unable
to detect the falsification of image metadata. Matzen and
Snavely [21] introduce an approach for finding anomalous
timestamps, but their method is based on visual correspondences and requires overlapping imagery. Recent work has
begun to look at this problem more thoroughly, with new
datasets [10] and proposals for comprehensive systems [3].
However, no previous work provides the dynamic map of
visual attributes that is necessary for detecting time/location
metadata falsification.
We propose to use visual attributes estimated from
ground-level images, such as those shown in Figure 1, to
learn a dynamic map of visual attributes. Beyond metadata verification, there are numerous applications for such
a map, including geolocalizing images, providing contextual information for autonomous vehicles, and supporting
further studies on the relationship between the visual envi-

Figure 1: Visual appearance changes dramatically due to
differences in location and time. Our work takes advantage of sparsely distributed ground-level image data, with
associated location and time metadata, in conjunction with
overhead imagery to construct dynamic maps of visual appearance attributes.

ronment and human health and happiness [26].
Predicting visual attributes directly from location and
time is difficult because of the complexity of the distribution. It would, for example, require memorizing the location of every road and building in the area of interest. To
overcome this, our model combines overhead imagery with
location and time using a multi-modal convolutional neural network. The result is a model capable of generating a
worldwide, dynamic map of visual attributes that captures
both local and global patterns.
We focus on two visual attributes: the scene category [44], such as whether the image views an attic or a zoo,
and transient attributes [15], which consist of time-varying
112435

