Solving Mixed-modal Jigsaw Puzzle for
Fine-Grained Sketch-Based Image Retrieval

1

Kaiyue Pang1,2 Yongxin Yang1 Timothy M. Hospedales1,3 Tao Xiang1 Yi-Zhe Song1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey 2 Queen Mary University of London 3 The University of Edinburgh
kaiyue.pang@qmul.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk, {yongxin.yang, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Pre-training stage

Abstract

Triplet ranking model

Jigsaw puzzle solver

Fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval (FG-SBIR)
methods enable users to express their mental image or visual intention via free-hand sketch, so as to retrieve a photo
of a specific object instance. Due to its commercial potential, the field has flourished recently with various research
angles being considered including CNN architecture [19],
attention [28], choice of instance matching loss [23], improving efficiency via hashing [36], and data augmentation
via heuristics [34] or abstraction [22].
Despite the great strides made, almost all contemporary
competitive FG-SBIR models depend crucially on one necessary condition: the model must be fine-tuned from the
pre-trained weights of an ImageNet [6] classifier. The reason behind this is that collecting instance-level sketch-photo
pairs for FG-SBIR is very expensive, with the largest current single product-category dataset being only on a scale of

Jigsaw puzzle solver

1. Introduction

FG-SBIR dataset

…

ImageNet pre-training has long been considered crucial
by the fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval (FG-SBIR)
community due to the lack of large sketch-photo paired
datasets for FG-SBIR training. In this paper, we propose a
self-supervised alternative for representation pre-training.
Specifically, we consider the jigsaw puzzle game of recomposing images from shuffled parts. We identify two key
facets of jigsaw task design that are required for effective
FG-SBIR pre-training. The first is formulating the puzzle in
a mixed-modality fashion. Second we show that framing the
optimisation as permutation matrix inference via Sinkhorn
iterations is more effective than the common classifier formulation of Jigsaw self-supervision. Experiments show that
this self-supervised pre-training strategy significantly outperforms the standard ImageNet-based pipeline across all
four product-level FG-SBIR benchmarks. Interestingly it
also leads to improved cross-category generalisation across
both pre-train/fine-tune and fine-tune/testing stages.

Fine-tuning stage

✓

Figure 1: Conventionally, a competitive FG-SBIR system relies on two prerequisites: ImageNet pre-training and
triplet fine-tuning. Here we investigate substituting the former with a mixed-domain jigsaw puzzle solver, leading to
improved FG-SBIR accuracy and generalisation.

thousands. Scaling such data collection to the size required
to train a contemporary deep CNN from scratch is infeasible. Thus, ImageNet pre-training is ubiquitously leveraged
to provide initialisation for FG-SBIR.
While useful in ameliorating the otherwise fatal lack of
data for FG-SBIR, ImageNet pre-training suffers from mismatch to the intended downstream task. Training for object
category classification requires detecting high-level primitives that characterise different object categories, while
learning to ignore certain fine-grained details critical for the
instance-level recognition task in FG-SBIR. Crucially, ImageNet only contains images from the photo modality, while
FG-SBIR requires cross-modality matching between photo
and sketch. This suggests that ImageNet classification may
not be the most effective pre-training strategy for FG-SBIR.
Indeed, recently [20] explored the self-supervised task of
matching a photo with its edgemap to substitute the sketchphoto pair for model training. This could potentially be
used for pre-training as well. However, its effectiveness is
110347

