Rotate-and-Render: Unsupervised Photorealistic Face Rotation
from Single-View Images
Hang Zhou1∗ Jihao Liu2∗ Ziwei Liu1 Yu Liu1† Xiaogang Wang1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research
{zhouhang@link,yuliu@ee,xgwang@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

liujihao@sensetime.com

zwliu.hust@gmail.com

Figure 1: The rotated faces synthesized by our approach on CelebA-HQ dataset. The first row is the input and the
second row is our result. It can be observed that our unsupervised framework produces near photo-realistic results even under
extreme poses and expressions.

Abstract
Though face rotation has achieved rapid progress in recent years, the lack of high-quality paired training data
remains a great hurdle for existing methods. The current
generative models heavily rely on datasets with multi-view
images of the same person. Thus, their generated results
are restricted by the scale and domain of the data source.
To overcome these challenges, we propose a novel unsupervised framework that can synthesize photo-realistic rotated faces using only single-view image collections in the
wild. Our key insight is that rotating faces in the 3D space
back and forth, and re-rendering them to the 2D plane can
serve as a strong self-supervision. We leverage the recent
advances in 3D face modeling and high-resolution GAN to
constitute our building blocks. Since the 3D rotation-andrender on faces can be applied to arbitrary angles without losing details, our approach is extremely suitable for
in-the-wild scenarios (i.e. no paired data are available),
where existing methods fall short. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our approach has superior synthesis quality as well as identity preservation over the state-of-theart methods, across a wide range of poses and domains.
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Furthermore, we validate that our rotate-and-render framework naturally can act as an effective data augmentation
engine for boosting modern face recognition systems even
on strong baseline models1 .

1. Introduction
Face rotation, or more generally speaking multi-view
face synthesis, has long been a topic of great research interests, due to its wide applications in computer graphics,
augmented reality and particularly, face recognition. It is
also an ill-posed task with inherent ambiguity that can not
be well solved by existing methods. Traditionally, this problem is addressed by using 3D models such as 3DMM [1].
A common challenge here is that invisible areas would appear when rotating a 3D-fitted face. Previous researchers
propose to solve this problem through symmetric editing
and invisible region filling [48]. However, this filling process usually introduces visible artifacts which lead to nonrealistic results.
With the rapid progress of deep learning and generative
adversarial networks (GANs), reconstruction-based methods have been widely applied to face frontalization and ro1 Code and models are available at: https://github.com/
Hangz-nju-cuhk/Rotate-and-Render.

5911

