X3D: Expanding Architectures for Efficient Video Recognition
Christoph Feichtenhofer
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract

1. Introduction
Neural networks for video recognition have been largely
driven by expanding 2D image architectures [23, 37, 51, 58]
into spacetime. Naturally, these expansions often happen
along the temporal axis, involving extending the network
inputs, features, and/or filter kernels into spacetime (e.g.
[6, 12, 16, 32, 43, 62]); other design decisions—including
depth (number of layers), width (number of channels), and
spatial sizes—however, are typically inherited from 2D image architectures. While expanding along the temporal axis
(while keeping other design properties) generally increases
accuracy, it can be sub-optimal if one takes into account the
computation/accuracy trade-off —a consideration of central
importance in applications.
In part because of the direct extension of 2D models
to 3D, video recognition architectures are computationally
heavy. In comparison to image recognition, typical video
models are significantly more compute-demanding, e.g. an
image ResNet [23] can use around 27× fewer multiply-add
operations than a temporally extended video variant [68].

Íd

Input frames
res2

res3
res4
prediction

This paper presents X3D, a family of efficient video networks that progressively expand a tiny 2D image classification architecture along multiple network axes, in space,
time, width and depth. Inspired by feature selection methods
in machine learning, a simple stepwise network expansion
approach is employed that expands a single axis in each step,
such that good accuracy to complexity trade-off is achieved.
To expand X3D to a specific target complexity, we perform
progressive forward expansion followed by backward contraction. X3D achieves state-of-the-art performance while
requiring 4.8× and 5.5× fewer multiply-adds and parameters for similar accuracy as previous work. Our most surprising finding is that networks with high spatiotemporal resolution can perform well, while being extremely light in terms
of network width and parameters. We report competitive
accuracy at unprecedented efficiency on video classification
and detection benchmarks. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/SlowFast.

Ít
Ís

Ís

ÍÜ

Íb
Íw

H,W

T
C

Figure 1. X3D networks progressively expand a 2D network across
the following axes: Temporal duration γt , frame rate γτ , spatial
resolution γs , width γw , bottleneck width γb , and depth γd .

This paper focuses on the low-computation regime in
terms of computation/accuracy trade-off for video recognition. We base our design upon the “mobile-regime" models [24, 25, 48] developed for image recognition. Our core
idea is that while expanding a small model along the temporal axis can increase accuracy, the computation/accuracy
trade-off may not always be best compared with expanding
other axes, especially in the low-computation regime where
accuracy can increase quickly along different axes.
In this paper, we progressively “expand" a tiny base 2D
image architecture into a spatiotemporal one by expanding
multiple possible axes shown in Fig. 1. The candidate axes
are temporal duration γt , frame rate γτ , spatial resolution
γs , network width γw , bottleneck width γb , and depth γd .
The resulting architecture is referred as X3D (Expand 3D)
for expanding from the 2D space into 3D spacetime domain.
The 2D base architecture is driven by the MobileNet [24,
25,48] core concept of channel-wise1 separable convolutions,
but is made tiny by having over 10× fewer multiply-add
operations than mobile image models. Our expansion then
progressively increases the computation (e.g., by 2×) by
expanding only one axis at a time, train and validate the
resultant architecture, and select the axis that achieves the
best computation/accuracy trade-off. The process is repeated
until the architecture reaches a desired computational budget.
This can be interpreted as a form of coordinate descent [70]
in the hyper-parameter space defined by those axes.
1 Also referred as “depth-wise". We use the term “channel-wise" to avoid
confusions with the network depth, which is also an axis we consider.

203

