PADS: Policy-Adapted Sampling for Visual Similarity Learning
Karsten Roth∗
Timo Milbich∗
Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing / IWR
Heidelberg University, Germany

Abstract
Learning visual similarity requires to learn relations, typically between triplets of images. Albeit triplet approaches
being powerful, their computational complexity mostly limits
training to only a subset of all possible training triplets. Thus,
sampling strategies that decide when to use which training
sample during learning are crucial. Currently, the prominent
paradigm are fixed or curriculum sampling strategies that
are predefined before training starts. However, the problem
truly calls for a sampling process that adjusts based on the
actual state of the similarity representation during training.
We, therefore, employ reinforcement learning and have a
teacher network adjust the sampling distribution based on
the current state of the learner network, which represents
visual similarity. Experiments on benchmark datasets using standard triplet-based losses show that our adaptive
sampling strategy significantly outperforms fixed sampling
strategies. Moreover, although our adaptive sampling is
only applied on top of basic triplet-learning frameworks,
we reach competitive results to state-of-the-art approaches
that employ diverse additional learning signals or strong
ensemble architectures. Code can be found under https:
//github.com/Confusezius/CVPR2020_PADS.

1. Introduction
Capturing visual similarity between images is the core
of virtually every computer vision task, such as image
retrieval[57, 50, 36, 33], pose understanding [32, 8, 3, 51],
face detection[46] and style transfer [26]. Measuring similarity requires to find a representation which maps similar
images close together and dissimilar images far apart. This
task is naturally formulated as Deep Metric Learning (DML)
in which individual pairs of images are compared[17, 50, 35]
or contrasted against a third image[46, 57, 54] to learn
a distance metric that reflects image similarity. Such
triplet learning constitutes the basis of powerful learning
algorithms[42, 36, 44, 59]. However, with growing training
∗ Authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1: Progression of negative sampling distributions
over training iterations. A static sampling strategy[57] follows a fixed probability distribution over distances dan between anchor and negative images. In contrast, our learned,
discretized sampling distributions change while adapting
to the training state of the DML model. This leads to improvements on all datasets close to 4% compared to static
strategies (cf. Tab. 1). Moreover, the progression of the
adaptive distributions varies between datasets and, thus, is
difficult to model manually which highlights the need for a
learning based approach.

set size, leveraging every single triplet for learning becomes
computationally infeasible, limiting training to only a subset
of all possible triplets. Thus, a careful selection of those
triplets which drive learning best, is crucial. This raises the
question: How to determine which triplets to present when
16568

