Learning Situational Driving
Eshed Ohn-Bar1,3 Aditya Prakash1 Aseem Behl1,2 Kashyap Chitta1,2 Andreas Geiger1,2
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 2 University of Tübingen 3 Boston University
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

3HUFHSWLRQ0RGXOH

Abstract
Human drivers have a remarkable ability to drive in diverse visual conditions and situations, e.g., from maneuvering in rainy, limited visibility conditions with no lane
markings to turning in a busy intersection while yielding to
pedestrians. In contrast, we find that state-of-the-art sensorimotor driving models struggle when encountering diverse
settings with varying relationships between observation and
action. To generalize when making decisions across diverse
conditions, humans leverage multiple types of situationspecific reasoning and learning strategies. Motivated by
this observation, we develop a framework for learning a
situational driving policy that effectively captures reasoning under varying types of scenarios. Our key idea is to
learn a mixture model with a set of policies that can capture
multiple driving modes. We first optimize the mixture model
through behavior cloning and show it to result in significant gains in terms of driving performance in diverse conditions. We then refine the model by directly optimizing for the
driving task itself, i.e., supervised with the navigation task
reward. Our method is more scalable than methods assuming access to privileged information, e.g., perception labels,
as it only assumes demonstration and reward-based supervision. We achieve over 98% success rate on the CARLA
driving benchmark as well as state-of-the-art performance
on a newly introduced generalization benchmark.

1. Introduction
Realizing highly accurate and fail-safe autonomous vehicles that can handle the range of perceptual and situational complexities of driving has challenged researchers
for decades. For instance, the systems’ perception-to-action
reasoning must ﬂexibly accommodate both normal highway
driving on a sunny day, as well as driving in a busy intersection full of pedestrians on a rainy day, where lane markings
may not even be visible. To drive in such diverse scenarios,
humans leverage different types of situation-speciﬁc strategies and contextual cues [11], e.g., identifying the need to
slow-down and follow scene-level cues if lane information

9LVXDO2EVHUYDWLRQ

HJ6HJPHQWDWLRQ

$FWLRQ

%HKDYLRU5HIOH[
%HKDYLRU0RGXOH RXUV 

$FWLRQ3URSRVDOV

Figure 1: Situational Driving. To address the complexity
in learning perception-to-action driving models, we introduce a situational framework using a behavior module. The
module reasons over current on-road scene context when
composing a set of learned behavior policies under varying
driving scenarios. Our approach is used to improve over
behavior reﬂex and privileged approaches in terms of robustness and scalability.

is not available. Moreover, drivers leverage combinations of
driving strategies, in particular when encountering a novel
scenario [26]. How can we endow machines with similar reasoning and learning capabilities, crucial for operating
under the vast diversity of all possible visual, planning, and
control scenarios?
Towards addressing this question, several learning
paradigms have been previously proposed. On one hand,
the complex task of mapping visual observations to a control action can be decomposed into modules or subtasks using dedicated auxiliary loss functions, i.e., addressing the
perception and action tasks as two modules (e.g., [4,28,37]).
Leveraging prior and domain knowledge through handengineered modular structures can improve generalization
under certain conditions [40], but the training requires additional annotations and the representations might not be
optimal when not learned with respect to the actual navigation task. On the other hand, learning sensorimotor
111296

