Part-aware Context Network for Human Parsing
Xiaomei Zhang

Yingying Chen

Bingke Zhu

Jinqiao Wang

Ming Tang

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
{xiaomei.zhang, yingying.chen, bingke.zhu, jqwang, tangm}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent works have made significant progress in human
parsing by exploiting rich contexts. However, human parsing still faces a challenge of how to generate adaptive contextual features for the various sizes and shapes of human
parts. In this work, we propose a Part-aware Context Network (PCNet), a novel and effective algorithm to deal with
the challenge. PCNet mainly consists of three modules, including a part class module, a relational aggregation module, and a relational dispersion module. The part class
module extracts the high-level representations of every human part from a categorical perspective. We design a relational aggregation module to capture the representative
global context by mining associated semantics of human
parts, which adaptively augments the context for human
parts. We propose a relational dispersion module to generate the discriminative and effective local context and neglect disturbing one by making the affinity of human parts
dispersed. The relational dispersion module ensures that
features in the same class will be close to each other and
away from those of different classes. By fusing the outputs of the relational aggregation module, the relational
dispersion module and the backbone network, our PCNet
generates adaptive contextual features for various sizes of
human parts, improving the parsing accuracy. We achieve
a new state-of-the-art segmentation performance on three
challenging human parsing datasets, i.e., PASCAL-PersonPart, LIP, and CIHP.

1. Introduction
Human parsing aims at classifying every pixel in images to one of the predefined categories of parts or clothes
(e.g., head, torso, etc.). It has been widely used in various
challenging fields such as person re-identification [9], human behavior analysis [40], clothing style recognition and
retrieval [44], clothing category classification [38]. With
the rapid development of electronic commerce and on-

Image

Ground Truth

Mislabeling in
Pred ictions

Improvement in
Pred ictions

Figure 1. Examples of the challenge in human parsing. The original images and ground-truth come from PASCAL-Person-Part
dataset [5]. There are various scales and shapes of human parts.
Third column: CE2P [27] fails to extract the lower-arms, upperarms, and upper-legs with the predefined fixed context. Fourth
column: our method has better performance in extracting the three
parts by the adaptive context.

line shopping, human parsing has attracted much attention
[37, 42, 43, 14, 20, 22, 24, 15, 47, 31, 27]. However, it
is still a challenging task to generate adaptive contextual
features for different human parts, due to various sizes and
shapes of human parts.
The most widely used method [25, 31, 14, 27] to solve
the above problem is aggregating various contexts from predefined fixed regions. However, the semantic context represented by predefined fixed contexts cannot meet the requirement of dense prediction tasks. Another way is applying attention mechanisms [4, 41] that assigning different
weights on different channels or positions. However, attention models have a major drawback that they focus on
local patterns of parts and ignore the relation between parts,
which restricts their capability to capture the global context.
As shown in Figure 1, lower-arms, upper-arms and upperlegs cannot be categorized correctly due to the lack of adaptive contextual features for human parts with various scales
and shapes. Different from the above methods, we argue
that different human parts need an adaptive context. In this

8971

