A Physics-based Noise Formation Model for Extreme Low-light Raw Denoising
Kaixuan Wei1 Ying Fu1∗ Jiaolong Yang2 Hua Huang1
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Microsoft Research

Abstract
Lacking rich and realistic data, learned single image denoising algorithms generalize poorly to real raw images
that do not resemble the data used for training. Although
the problem can be alleviated by the heteroscedastic Gaussian model for noise synthesis, the noise sources caused by
digital camera electronics are still largely overlooked, despite their significant effect on raw measurement, especially
under extremely low-light condition. To address this issue,
we present a highly accurate noise formation model based
on the characteristics of CMOS photosensors, thereby enabling us to synthesize realistic samples that better match
the physics of image formation process. Given the proposed
noise model, we additionally propose a method to calibrate
the noise parameters for available modern digital cameras,
which is simple and reproducible for any new device. We
systematically study the generalizability of a neural network trained with existing schemes, by introducing a new
low-light denoising dataset that covers many modern digital cameras from diverse brands. Extensive empirical results collectively show that by utilizing our proposed noise
formation model, a network can reach the capability as if
it had been trained with rich real data, which demonstrates
the effectiveness of our noise formation model.

1. Introduction
Light is of paramount importance to photography. Night
and low light place very demanding constraints on photography due to limited photon count and inescapable noise.
The natural reaction is to gather more light by, e.g., enlarging aperture setting, lengthening exposure time and opening flashlight. However, each method is a tradeoff – large
aperture incurs small depth of field, and is unavailable in
smartphone cameras; long exposure can induce blur due to
scene variations or camera motions; flash can cause color
aberrations and is useful only for nearby objects.
A practical rescue for low-light imaging is to use burst
capturing [46, 28, 42, 40], in which a burst of images
are aligned and fused to increase the signal-to-noise ratio
∗ Corresponding author: fuying@bit.edu.cn

(a) Input

(b) G

(c) G+P

(d) Paired real data

(e) Ours

(f) Reference

Figure 1: An image from the See-in-the-Dark (SID) Dataset [9],
where we present (a) the short-exposure noisy input image; (f)
the long-exposure reference image; (b-e) the outputs of UNets
[51] trained with (b) synthetic data generated by the homoscedastic Gaussian noise model (G), (c) synthetic data generated by
the signal-dependent heteroscedastic Gaussian noise model (G+P)
[22], (d) paired real data of [9], and (e) synthetic data generated
by our proposed noise model respectively. All images were converted from raw Bayer space to sRGB for visualization; similarly
hereinafter.

(SNR). However, burst photography can be fragile, suffering from ghosting effect [28, 56] when capturing dynamic
scenes in the presence of vehicles, humans, etc. An emerging alternative approach is to employ a neural network to
automatically learn the mapping from a low-light noisy image to its long-exposure counterpart [9]. However, such a
deep learning approach generally requires a large amount of
labelled training data that resembles low-light photographs
in the real world. Collecting rich high-quality training samples from diverse modern camera devices is tremendously
labor-intensive and expensive.
In contrast, synthetic data is simple, abundant and inexpensive, but its efficacy is highly contingent upon how
accurate the adopted noise formation model is. The heteroscedastic Gaussian noise model [22], instead of the
commonly-used homoscedastic one, approximates well the
real noise occurred in daylight or moderate low-light settings [5, 27, 28]. However, it cannot delineate the full picture of sensor noise under severely low illuminance. An
illustrative example is shown in Fig. 1, where the objec-

2758

