Exploring Data Aggregation in Policy Learning
for Vision-based Urban Autonomous Driving

1

Aditya Prakash1 Aseem Behl∗1,2 Eshed Ohn-Bar∗1,3 Kashyap Chitta1,2 Andreas Geiger1,2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 2 University of Tübingen 3 Boston University
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Data aggregation techniques can significantly improve
vision-based policy learning within a training environment,
e.g., learning to drive in a specific simulation condition.
However, as on-policy data is sequentially sampled and
added in an iterative manner, the policy can specialize
and overfit to the training conditions. For real-world applications, it is useful for the learned policy to generalize to novel scenarios that differ from the training conditions. To improve policy learning while maintaining robustness when training end-to-end driving policies, we perform an extensive analysis of data aggregation techniques
in the CARLA environment. We demonstrate how the majority of them have poor generalization performance, and
develop a novel approach with empirically better generalization performance compared to existing techniques. Our
two key ideas are (1) to sample critical states from the collected on-policy data based on the utility they provide to the
learned policy in terms of driving behavior, and (2) to incorporate a replay buffer which progressively focuses on the
high uncertainty regions of the policy’s state distribution.
We evaluate the proposed approach on the CARLA NoCrash
benchmark, focusing on the most challenging driving scenarios with dense pedestrian and vehicle traffic. Our approach improves driving success rate by 16% over stateof-the-art, achieving 87% of the expert performance while
also reducing the collision rate by an order of magnitude
without the use of any additional modality, auxiliary tasks,
architectural modifications or reward from the environment.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving research has been gaining traction
in industry and academia with the advancement in deep
learning, availability of simulators [20, 24, 50] and large
scale datasets [1,13,26,51,64,65]. While industrial research
∗ indicates equal contribution, listed in alphabetical order

Figure 1: Overview. Top: Data Aggregation (DAgger).
Bottom: We propose a modified version of DAgger with
critical states and replay buffer for improved driving in
dense urban scenarios.

is mostly focused on modular approaches [19, 21, 22, 35]
that learn perception and control separately, researchers
in academia are turning their attention towards end-toend trainable systems [6, 9, 11, 12, 45, 63, 66] that can simultaneously learn both perception and control. In this
regard, camera-based end-to-end autonomous driving involves learning a mapping from visual observations of the
road directly to a control output. Imitation learning reduces learning end-to-end policies for autonomous driving
to supervised learning. While this reduction enables leveraging recent advances in supervised learning, learning robust policies that generalize well to diverse environments is
still challenging. Even though conditional imitation learning (CILRS [12]) outperforms modular [38], affordancebased [57] and reinforcement learning [40] approaches, the
performance of imitation learning deteriorates significantly
when evaluated across a broader spectrum of driving behaviors. This holds particularly true for urban driving [12]
where dense traffic, pedestrians and red traffic lights pose
challenges.
A primary challenge in imitation learning is that in
the presence of covariate shift [54], i.e., variation in the
111763

