PFCNN: Convolutional Neural Networks on 3D Surfaces Using Parallel Frames
Yuqi Yang∗1,3
1

Tsinghua University

2

Shilin Liu∗2,3

Hao Pan†3

Yang Liu3

University of Science and Technology of China

Xin Tong3
3

Microsoft Research Asia

yangyq18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn freelin@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{haopan,yangliu,xtong}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Surface meshes are widely used shape representations
and capture finer geometry data than point clouds or volumetric grids, but are challenging to apply CNNs directly due
to their non-Euclidean structure. We use parallel frames
on surface to define PFCNNs that enable effective feature
learning on surface meshes by mimicking standard convolutions faithfully. In particular, the convolution of PFCNN not
only maps local surface patches onto flat tangent planes, but
also aligns the tangent planes such that they locally form
a flat Euclidean structure, thus enabling recovery of standard convolutions. The alignment is achieved by the tool of
locally flat connections borrowed from discrete differential
geometry, which can be efficiently encoded and computed
by parallel frame fields. In addition, the lack of canonical
axis on surface is handled by sampling with the frame directions. Experiments show that for tasks including classification, segmentation and registration on deformable geometric domains, as well as semantic scene segmentation on
rigid domains, PFCNNs achieve robust and superior performances without using sophisticated input features than
state-of-the-art surface based CNNs.

1. Introduction
Applying CNNs to 3D geometric domains is critical for
deep learning beyond the 2D images. Unlike regular 2D
images, 3D geometric data can be represented in different
forms, posing challenges to standard CNNs. For example,
volumetric grids regularly sample R3 on which CNNs can
be trivially deployed, but they are memory consuming and
inflexible for capturing fine geometric details. For representation efficiency, 3D objects and scenes are frequently
encoded by their boundary surfaces discretized as triangle meshes. However, the curved and irregularly sampled
meshes do not admit the standard CNNs designed for flat
image domains with regular pixel grids. While several surface based CNNs have been proposed to tackle this problem, in this paper we use parallel frame fields that con∗ Joint first author. Work done during internship at Microsoft.
† Corresponding author.

tain pointwise N -direction frames (Fig. 1) to define a novel
PFCNN framework whose convolution mimics standard image convolutions more faithfully.
Similar to standard CNNs, the PFCNN convolution
works on a local surface patch each time and maps it onto
the flat tangent space where the convolution kernel is parameterized, as done by many previous surface based CNNs
[28, 3, 30, 32]. Different from the previous approaches,
however, we also align the tangent spaces of different surface points such that they locally form a flat Euclidean structure, on which the surface-based feature maps and convolution kernels can be moved as in the standard image domain.
For images, such translation operations are formally captured by the translation equivariance property of convolution [4], which is a key factor contributing to the effectiveness of CNNs by enabling shared trainable weights and thus
significantly reducing the amount of network parameters to
avoid overfitting and achieve generalization [23, 13]; our
surface based convolution is shown to reproduce the imagedomain translation equivariance locally.
We adopt the tool of locally flat connections from discrete differential geometry [45] to align the tangent spaces.
The locally flat connection is encoded by the field of pointwise tangential N -direction frames (Fig. 1) that is efficiently computed to be parallel and aligned to salient geometric features to better capture semantics. In addition, because there exists no canonical axis on a surface, we sample
the axes using the same N frame directions and organize the
resulting feature maps with an N -cover space of the domain
surface [9]; on each sheet of the cover space, the canonical axis is selected and the convolution is readily defined.
Furthermore, to handle the irregular mesh vertices, for each
patch we resample with a regular grid and apply standard
shaped convolution kernels on it.
The PFCNNs resemble standard CNNs so that efficient
network structures can be leveraged accordingly. Through
experiments of deformable shape classification, segmentation and matching as well as rigid scene segmentation, we
show that PFCNNs using only raw input signals achieve superior performances than competing surface CNN frameworks. In addition, we do extensive ablation studies to validate the components of our framework.
113578

