Towards Learning Structure via Consensus for Face Segmentation and Parsing
Iacopo Masi
Joe Mathai
Wael AbdAlmageed
USC Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA, USA
{masi,jmathai,wamageed}@isi.edu

Abstract
Input Image

Face segmentation is the task of densely labeling pixels on the face according to their semantics. While current
methods place an emphasis on developing sophisticated architectures, use conditional random fields for smoothness,
or rather employ adversarial training, we follow an alternative path towards robust face segmentation and parsing. Occlusions, along with other parts of the face, have a
proper structure that needs to be propagated in the model
during training. Unlike state-of-the-art methods that treat
face segmentation as an independent pixel prediction problem, we argue instead that it should hold highly correlated
outputs within the same object pixels. We thereby offer a
novel learning mechanism to enforce structure in the prediction via consensus, guided by a robust loss function that
forces pixel objects to be consistent with each other. Our
face parser is trained by transferring knowledge from another model, yet it encourages spatial consistency while fitting the labels. Different than current practice, our method
enjoys pixel-wise predictions, yet paves the way for fewer
artifacts, less sparse masks, and spatially coherent outputs.

1. Introduction
Face segmentation and parsing are invaluable tools since
their output masks can enable next-generation face analysis
tools, advanced face swapping [34, 54, 53], more complex
face editing applications [67], and face completion [40, 38,
51]. Segmenting and parsing a face is strongly related to
generic semantic segmentation [47, 39, 58, 29, 41, 11, 12]
since it involves the task of densely predicting conditioned
class probabilities for each pixel in the input image according to pixel semantics. Although the two share the
same methodology, face parsing is different than scene
object segmentation since faces are already roughly scale
and translation invariant, after a face detection step, and a
plethora of methods has been developed towards solving the
face parsing task [31, 45, 46, 43, 70, 56].
While state-of-the-art methods emphasize developing
sophisticated architectures (e.g., two-stage networks with

Nirkin et al.

Softmax and
cross-entropy

Structure via
Consensus
(ours)

Figure 1: Structure via Consensus. From left to right: the input
image; result by [54]; our model with a pixel-wise loss; our proposed method. Previous methods predict only face (blue) vs. background (black), while ours yields separate predictions for occlusions (green) and background (black). Our loss enforces smoothness over objects covering the face via consensus constraint.

recurrent models [45]) or a complex face augmenter to simulate occlusions [54], or rather employ adversarial training [56], we take an alternative path towards robust face
segmentation and parsing. Our method builds on an important observation related to the assumption of the independence of pixel-wise predictions. Despite the significance
of the aforementioned tasks, current methods overlook the
regular structure present in nature and simply optimize for
a cost that does not explicitly back-propagate any smoothness into the network parameters. This issue is particularly
important for objects and faces, which have a well-defined
and continuous (non-sparse) structure.
Fig. 1 shows the advantage of the proposed method on a
few samples drawn from the validation set tested on unseen
subjects. While publicly available state-of-the-art models [54] perform face segmentation, they do so with very
sparse and noncontinuous predictions and by modeling two
classes only (face, non-face). In contrast, by virtue of our
method, we can separate occlusions from background, and

5508

