CRNet: Cross-Reference Networks for Few-Shot Segmentation
Weide Liu1 , Chi Zhang1 , Guosheng Lin1∗, Fayao Liu2
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
A*Star, Singapore
E-mail: weide001@e.ntu.edu.sg, chi007@e.ntu.edu.sg , gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Support Branch

Over the past few years, state-of-the-art image segmentation algorithms are based on deep convolutional neural
networks. To render a deep network with the ability to understand a concept, humans need to collect a large amount
of pixel-level annotated data to train the models, which is
time-consuming and tedious. Recently, few-shot segmentation is proposed to solve this problem. Few-shot segmentation aims to learn a segmentation model that can be generalized to novel classes with only a few training images. In
this paper, we propose a cross-reference network (CRNet)
for few-shot segmentation. Unlike previous works which
only predict the mask in the query image, our proposed
model concurrently make predictions for both the support
image and the query image. With a cross-reference mechanism, our network can better find the co-occurrent objects in
the two images, thus helping the few-shot segmentation task.
We also develop a mask refinement module to recurrently refine the prediction of the foreground regions. For the k-shot
learning, we propose to finetune parts of networks to take
advantage of multiple labeled support images. Experiments
on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset show that our network
achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been widely applied to visual understanding tasks, e.g., objection detection, semantic segmentation and image captioning, since the huge success in ImageNet classification challenge [4]. Due to its
data-driving property, large-scale labeled datasets are often required to enable the training of deep models. However, collecting labeled data can be notoriously expensive
in tasks like semantic segmentation, instance segmentation,
and video segmentation. Moreover, data collecting is usually for a set of specific categories. Knowledge learned in
previous classes can hardly be transferred to unseen classes
∗ Corresponding author: G. Lin (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg)

Support Image

Query Branch
Query Image

Support Image

CrossReference

Query Image

Figure 1. Comparison of our proposed CRNet against previous
work. Previous work (upper part) unilaterally guide the segmentation of query images with support images, while in our CRNet
(lower part) support and query images can guide the segmentation
of each other.

directly. Directly finetuning the trained models still needs
a large amount of new labeled data. Few-shot learning, on
the other hand, is proposed to solve this problem. In the
few-shot learning tasks, models trained on previous tasks
are expected to generalize to unseen tasks with only a few
labeled training images.
In this paper, we target at few-shot image segmentation.
Given a novel object category, few-shot segmentation aims
to find the foreground regions of this category only seeing a
few labeled examples. Many previous works formulate the
few-shot segmentation task as a guided segmentation task.
The guidance information is extracted from the labeled support set for the foreground prediction in the query image,
which is usually achieved by an unsymmetrical two-branch
network structure. The model is optimized with the ground
truth query mask as the supervision.
In our work, we argue that the roles of query and support sets can be switched in a few-shot segmentation model.
Specifically, the support images can guide the prediction of

4165

