PolyTransform: Deep Polygon Transformer for Instance Segmentation
Justin Liang1 Namdar Homayounfar1,2
Wei-Chiu Ma1,3 Yuwen Xiong1,2 Rui Hu1 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Toronto 3 MIT
{justin.liang,namdar,weichiu,yuwen,rui.hu,urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose PolyTransform, a novel
instance segmentation algorithm that produces precise,
geometry-preserving masks by combining the strengths of
prevailing segmentation approaches and modern polygonbased methods. In particular, we first exploit a segmentation network to generate instance masks. We then convert
the masks into a set of polygons that are then fed to a deforming network that transforms the polygons such that they
better fit the object boundaries. Our experiments on the
challenging Cityscapes dataset show that our PolyTransform significantly improves the performance of the backbone instance segmentation network and ranks 1st on the
Cityscapes test-set leaderboard. We also show impressive
gains in the interactive annotation setting. 1

1. Introduction
The goal of instance segmentation methods is to identify
all countable objects in the scene, and produce a mask for
each of them. With the help of instance segmentation, we
can have a better understanding of the scene [68], design
robotics systems that are capable of complex manipulation
tasks [17], and improve perception systems of self-driving
cars [44]. The task is, however, extremely challenging. In
comparison to the traditional semantic segmentation task
that infers the category of each pixel in the image, instance
segmentation also requires the system to have the extra notion of individual objects in order to associate each pixel
with one of them. Dealing with the wide variability in the
scale and appearance of objects as well as occlusions and
motion blur make this problem extremely difficult.
To address these issues, most modern instance segmentation methods employ a two-stage process [21, 63, 42],
where object proposals are first created and then foreground
background segmentation within each bounding box is performed. With the help of the box, they can better handle
situations (e.g., occlusions) where other methods often fail
1 The supplementary of this paper can be found here.

[4]. While these approaches have achieved state-of-theart performance on multiple benchmarks (e.g., COCO [38],
Cityscapes [11]) their output is often over-smoothed failing
to capture fine-grained details.
An alternative line of work tackles the problem of interactive annotation [5, 2, 62, 39]. These techniques have been
developed in the context of having an annotator in the loop,
where a ground truth bounding box is provided. The goal
of these works is to speed up annotation work by providing an initial polygon for annotators to correct as annotating from scratch is a very expensive process. In this line of
work, methods exploit polygons to better capture the geometry of the object [5, 2, 39], instead of treating the problem
as a pixel-wise labeling task. This results in more precise
masks and potentially faster annotation speed as annotators
are able to simply correct the polygons by moving the vertices. However, these approaches suffer in the presence of
large occlusions or when the object is split into multiple disconnected components.
With these problems in mind, in this paper we develop a
novel model, which we call PolyTransform, and tackle both
the instance segmentation and interactive annotation problems. The idea behind our approach is that the segmentation
masks generated by common segmentation approaches can
be viewed as a starting point to compute a set of polygons,
which can then be refined. We performed this refinement
via a deforming network that predicts for each polygon the
displacement of each vertex, taking into account the location of all vertices. By deforming each polygon, our model
is able to better capture the local geometry of the object.
Unlike [5, 2, 39], our model has no restriction on the number of polygons utilized to describe each object. This allows
us to naturally handle cases where the objects are split into
parts due to occlusion.
We first demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
the Cityscapes dataset [11]. On the task of instance segmentation, our model improves the initialization by 3.0 AP and
10.3 in the boundary metric on the validation set. Importantly, we achieve 1st place on the test set leaderboard, beating the current state of the art by 3.7 AP. We further eval-

9131

