All in One Bad Weather Removal using Architectural Search
Ruoteng Li1 , Robby T. Tan1,2 , and Loong-Fah Cheong1
1

National University of Singapore
2
Yale-NUS College

Abstract
Many methods have set state-of-the-art performance on
restoring images degraded by bad weather such as rain,
haze, fog, and snow, however they are designed specifically
to handle one type of degradation. In this paper, we propose a method that can handle multiple bad weather degradations: rain, fog, snow and adherent raindrops using a
single network. To achieve this, we first design a generator
with multiple task-specific encoders, each of which is associated with a particular bad weather degradation type. We
utilize a neural architecture search to optimally process the
image features extracted from all encoders. Subsequently,
to convert degraded image features to clean background
features, we introduce a series of tensor-based operations
encapsulating the underlying physics principles behind the
formation of rain, fog, snow and adherent raindrops. These
operations serve as the basic building blocks for our architectural search. Finally, our discriminator simultaneously
assesses the correctness and classifies the degradation type
of the restored image. We design a novel adversarial learning scheme that only backpropagates the loss of a degradation type to the respective task-specific encoder. Despite
being designed to handle different types of bad weather, extensive experiments demonstrate that our method performs
competitively to the individual and dedicated state-of-theart image restoration methods.

1. Introduction
Bad weather image restoration problem has been studied intensively in the research fields of image processing
and computer vision; examples include deraining [20, 18,
59, 8, 53, 30, 50, 62, 36, 4, 44, 29], dehazing/defogging
[47, 3, 1, 57, 7, 13, 26, 43], desnowing [44, 37], and adherent raindrops removal [41, 42], etc.. Most of these works
focus only on single weather types and propose dedicated
† This work is supported by MOE2019-T2-1-130.

All-in-One Network
RainFog
Encoder
Raindrop
Encoder

Generic
Decoder

Snow
Encoder

Figure 1: High-level view of our network, with different
types of bad weather images as input and the respective
clean images as output. The proposed method is able to process multiple types of bad weather images using the same
set of weights/parameters.

solutions [29, 43, 41]. While they can attain excellent performance, they may not yield optimal results on other types
of bad weather degradations, since the factors that cause
the degradations in other types are not carefully considered.
As a result, real outdoor systems would have to decide and
switch between a series of bad weather image restoration
algorithms.
In this paper, we develop a single network-based method
to deal with many types of bad weather phenomena including rain, fog, snow and adherent raindrop. It is worth noting
that a few recent studies attempt to recover multiple degradation problems [39, 6]. However, none of them can deal
with multiple degradations with solely one set of pretrained
weights. To achieve our goal, we need to consider a few
factors related to our problem.
First, different bad weathers are formed based on different physical principles, which means the degraded images
do not share the same characteristics. In order to yield the
4321
3175

