Counterfactual Vision and Language Learning
Ehsan Abbasnejad, Damien Teney, Amin Parvaneh, Javen Shi, Anton van den Hengel
{ehsan.abbasnejad,damien.teney,amin.parvaneh,javen.shi,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Australian Institute for Machine Learning & The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
The ongoing success of visual question answering methods has been somewhat surprising given that, at its most
general, the problem requires understanding the entire variety of both visual and language stimuli. It is particularly
remarkable that this success has been achieved on the basis
of comparatively small datasets, given the scale of the problem. One explanation is that this has been accomplished
partly by exploiting bias in the datasets rather than developing deeper multi-modal reasoning. This fundamentally
limits the generalization of the method, and thus its practical applicability. We propose a method that addresses
this problem by introducing counterfactuals in the training. In doing so we leverage structural causal models for
counterfactual evaluation to formulate alternatives, for instance, questions that could be asked of the same image set.
We show that simulating plausible alternative training data
through this process results in better generalization.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in computer vision and natural language understanding have paved the way for a variety of
tasks that combine visual and textual modalities [28, 15, 7,
5, 33]. Visual Question Answering (VQA) is one such task
in which the goal is to answer a question framed in natural language that relates to an image. VQA thus requires a
high-level understanding of the visual scene and the question, and an ability to relate (or ground) the two. Much
of the interest around VQA, and the associated vision-andlanguage problems, stems from the fact that success might
represent a step toward artificial intelligence. A variety of
real-world applications have arisen also, including aiding
the visually impaired, searching through large quantities of
visual data via natural language interfaces, and flexible tasking of robots.
Current end-to-end VQA models achieve high accuracies on most of the available benchmarks and surpass human performance in a selection of cases (compositional reasoning [25], for example). It has been shown, however, that

these methods exploit statistical regularities and biases in
the data to achieve this performance [25, 33, 23, 6]. In
addition, although these approaches are expected to merge
information from multiple modalities, in practice they often exploit unimodal biases and ignore the other modalities
entirely. In addition, particular signals in the input trigger
specific answers; for instance, when the image contains a
banana, the answer is most likely to be yellow, irrespective
of the remainder of the image, or the question. This dependence on spurious correlations in the training data leaves
VQA methods vulnerable to a failure to generalize. In addition, this phenomenon highlights the lack of high-level understanding of the input and its connection to other modalities.
To remedy the weaknesses identified above and improve generalization, we propose to utilize counterfactuals
[30, 12] in the learning process. In traditional causal inference counterfactuals are unobserved scenarios, and are often used to estimate the effect of an intervention that is not
directly represented in the data. In machine learning they
can equally represent a potential training data element for
which we do not have a label, or a data-label pair for which
we do not have a reward. This is particularly relevant in
those supervised learning settings where more than one true
label might apply to each training data element, yet only one
true answer is typically observed. This is the case in many
vision-and-language problems, as the fact that the training
set documents a particular answer to a VQA question does
not mean that every alternate answer is wrong. This is referred to as bandit feedback [24], and such problems are
labelled nonstochastic multiarmed bandit problems [9]. In
the context of VQA, counterfactual analysis leads us to ask
“what would have happened if we observed a different image or asked a different question, given the past observations”.
We consider the causal model underlying the training
data, and introducing an extra (exogenous) variable that
governs the question and image generation (from which the
observed answers are produced). Then, we learn a distribution for that variable, providing a model of how the
observational data was generated. Subsequently, we ask
110044

