Distilled Semantics for Comprehensive Scene Understanding from Videos
Fabio Tosi∗
Filippo Aleotti∗
Pierluigi Zama Ramirez∗
Matteo Poggi
Samuele Salti
Luigi Di Stefano
Stefano Mattoccia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
∗

{fabio.tosi5, filippo.aleotti2, pierluigi.zama}@unibo.it

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Given an input monocular video (a), our network can provide the following outputs in real-time: depth (b), optical flow (c),
semantic labels (d), per-pixel motion probabilities (e), motion mask (f).

Abstract
Whole understanding of the surroundings is paramount
to autonomous systems. Recent works have shown that
deep neural networks can learn geometry (depth) and motion (optical flow) from a monocular video without any explicit supervision from ground truth annotations, particularly hard to source for these two tasks. In this paper, we
take an additional step toward holistic scene understanding with monocular cameras by learning depth and motion
alongside with semantics, with supervision for the latter
provided by a pre-trained network distilling proxy ground
truth images. We address the three tasks jointly by a) a novel
training protocol based on knowledge distillation and selfsupervision and b) a compact network architecture which
enables efficient scene understanding on both power hungry
GPUs and low-power embedded platforms. We thoroughly
assess the performance of our framework and show that it
yields state-of-the-art results for monocular depth estimation, optical flow and motion segmentation.

1. Introduction
What information would an autonomous agent be keen
to gather from its sensory sub-system to tackle tasks like
navigation and interaction with the explored environment?
It would need to be informed about the geometry of the surroundings and the type of objects therein, and likely better
∗ Joint first authorship.

know which of the latter are actually moving and how they
do so. What if all such cues may be provided by as simple
a sensor as a single RGB camera?
Nowadays, deep learning is advancing the state-of-theart in classical computer vision problems at such a quick
pace that single-view holistic scene understanding seems to
be no longer out-of-reach. Indeed, highly challenging problems such as monocular depth estimation and optical flow
can nowadays be addressed successfully by deep neural networks, often through unified architectures [88, 3, 96]. Selfsupervised learning techniques have yielded further major
achievements [95, 58] by enabling effective training of deep
networks without annotated images. In fact, labels are hard
to source for depth estimation due to the need of active sensors and manual filtering, and are even more cumbersome in
the case of optical flow. Concurrently, semi-supervised approaches [90, 16] proved how a few semantically labelled
images can improve monocular depth estimation significantly. These works have also highlighted how, while producing per-pixel class labels is tedious yet feasible for a human annotator, manually endowing images with depth and
optical flow ground-truths is prohibitive.
In this paper, we propose the first-ever framework
for comprehensive scene understanding from monocular
videos. As highlighted in Figure 1, our multi-stage network
architecture, named ΩNet, can predict depth, semantics, optical flow, per-pixel motion probabilities and motion masks.
This comes alongside with estimating the pose between adjacent frames for an uncalibrated camera, whose intrinsic
parameters are also estimated. Our training methodology

4654

