FALCON: A Fourier Transform Based Approach for Fast and Secure
Convolutional Neural Network Predictions
Shaohua Li1 Kaiping Xue1 Bin Zhu1 Chenkai Ding1 Xindi Gao1 David Wei2 Tao Wan3
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Fordham University 3 CableLabs
lshhsl@mail.ustc.edu.cn

kpxue@ustc.edu.cn
dsl.wei01@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep learning as a service has been widely deployed
to utilize deep neural network models to provide prediction services. However, this raises privacy concerns since
clients need to send sensitive information to servers. In
this paper, we focus on the scenario where clients want to
classify private images with a convolutional neural network
model hosted in the server, while both parties keep their
data private. We present FALCON, a fast and secure approach for CNN predictions based on fast Fourier Transform. Our solution enables linear layers of a CNN model
to be evaluated simply and efficiently with fully homomorphic encryption. We also introduce the first efficient and
privacy-preserving protocol for softmax function, which is
an indispensable component in CNNs and has not yet been
evaluated in previous work due to its high complexity.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been applied to quite a few ﬁelds
to overcome the limitations of traditional data processing methods, such as image classiﬁcation [19, 17], speech
recognition [3, 4], medical diagnosis [28, 11], etc. Some
companies and institutions have also invested in deep learning technologies, and trained their own deep neural network
models to provide users with paid or free services. For example, Google Vision [9] provides an API for image classiﬁcation for developers and general users, and one can upload an image to the cloud to obtain the classiﬁcation result
and its corresponding probability. Although these services
provide rich experiences to users, they also cause serious
privacy concerns because uploaded user data may contain
private information [29], such as face pictures and X-ray
images. Although many companies claim that they will
never leak or use users’ data for commercial purposes, the
increasing number of data leaks alert us that there is no
guarantee on what they promised [2].

{cnzb01, chimkie, khronos}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
t.wan@cablelabs.com

Certainly, the clients’ input data is not the only sensitive information, because for servers, their own models also
need to be protected from adversarial clients. First, models
may be trained with large amount of private data, e.g., medical records to obtain a model for disease prediction. Thus,
sensitive information could be extracted from a trained
model if disclosed to a malicious client [30, 31]. Second,
model parameters and detailed prediction results, i.e., accurate probabilities over all classes, can be used to generate adversarial examples to deceive deep learning models
[27, 8], to result in incorrect classiﬁcation results. Third,
many prediction models themselves, even without considering sensitive training data, require intellectual property
protection and cannot be disclosed to third parties including their clients [21, 18].
To tackle this problem, researchers have put forward
a secure deep learning scenario, where the server has a
model, the client has data, and these two interact in such
a way that the client can obtain the prediction result without leaking anything to the server, while learning nothing
about the model. They usually use homomorphic encryption (e.g., CryptoNets [15]), secure multi-party computation [34] (e.g., MiniONN [21]), or their combination (e.g.,
GAZELLE [18]), for secure evaluation.
In this paper, we focus on the fast and secure solution
for Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), one of the
most important neural networks in deep learning. CNNs
are characterized by the spatial input data, such as images
and speeches. Typically, a CNN model consists of convolutional, activation, pooling, and fully-connected layers, and
often follows by a softmax layer. Convolutional and fullyconnected layers have linear property, while activation and
pooling are nonlinear layers. The softmax layer is used to
normalize the output into probabilities, usually used as the
last layer of a CNN. The softmax layer is indispensable in
many use cases. For example, a CNN model classiﬁes an
X-Ray image into “Pneumonia” with probability 5%. Although “Pneumonia” is the top label, the real result indicates that the patient probably has no such disease, and this

8705

