Transferring Dense Pose to Proximal Animal Classes
Artsiom Sanakoyeu∗
Heidelberg University

Vasil Khalidov
Facebook AI Research

Andrea Vedaldi
Facebook AI Research

Maureen S. McCarthy
MPI for Evolutionary Anthropology
Natalia Neverova
Facebook AI Research

Figure 1: We consider the problem of dense pose labelling in animal classes. We show that, for proximal to humans classes
such as chimpanzees (left), we can obtain excellent performance by learning an integrated recognition architecture from
existing data sources, including DensePose for humans as well as detection and segmentation information from other COCO
classes (right). The key is to establish a common reference (middle), which we obtain via alignment of the reference models of
the animals. This enables training a model for the target class without having to label a single example image for it. Source
image credit, on the left: [52, 48, 42, 57, 60, 34], on the right: COCO dataset [29].

Abstract
Recent contributions have demonstrated that it is possible to recognize the pose of humans densely and accurately
given a large dataset of poses annotated in detail. In principle, the same approach could be extended to any animal
class, but the effort required for collecting new annotations
for each case makes this strategy impractical, despite important applications in natural conservation, science and
business. We show that, at least for proximal animal classes
such as chimpanzees, it is possible to transfer the knowledge
existing in dense pose recognition for humans, as well as in
more general object detectors and segmenters, to the problem of dense pose recognition in other classes. We do this
by (1) establishing a DensePose model for the new animal
which is also geometrically aligned to humans (2) introducing a multi-head R-CNN architecture that facilitates transfer
of multiple recognition tasks between classes, (3) finding
which combination of known classes can be transferred most
effectively to the new animal and (4) using self-calibrated
uncertainty heads to generate pseudo-labels graded by quality for training a model for this class. We also introduce two
benchmark datasets labelled in the manner of DensePose for
the class chimpanzee and use them to evaluate our approach,
showing excellent transfer learning performance.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, computer vision has made significant progress in human pose recognition. Deep networks can
effectively detect and segment humans [17], localize their
sparse 2D keypoints [41], lift these 2D keypoints to 3D [43],
and even fit complex 3D models such as SMPL [22, 23], all
from a single picture or video. DensePose [14] has shown
that it is even possible to estimate a dense parameterization
of pose by mapping individual image pixels to a canonical
embedding space for the human body.
Such advances have been made possible by the introduction of large human pose datasets manually annotated with
sparse or dense 2D keypoints, or even in 3D by means of
capture systems such as domes. For example, the DensePoseCOCO dataset [14] contains 50K COCO images manually
annotated with more than 5 millions human body points.
Clearly, collecting such data is very tedious, but is amply
justified by the importance of human understanding in applications. However, the natural world contains much more
than just people. For example, as of today scientists have
identified 6,495 species of mammals, 60k vertebrates and
1.2M invertebrates [1]. The methods that have been developed for human understanding could likely be applied to
most of these animals as well, provided that one is willing to
incur the data annotation burden. Unfortunately, while the

∗ Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research

Project page: https://asanakoy.github.io/densepose-evolution

15233

