Disentangled Image Generation Through Structured Noise Injection
Yazeed Alharbi
King Abdullah University for Science and Technology (KAUST)

Peter Wonka
KAUST

yazeed.alharbi@kaust.edu.sa

Figure 1: An illustration of our structured noise injection for image generation. Our method enables changing global and
local features in a disentangled way with minimal overhead and without requiring labels.

Abstract
We explore different design choices for injecting noise
into generative adversarial networks (GANs) with the goal
of disentangling the latent space. Instead of traditional approaches, we propose feeding multiple noise codes through
separate fully-connected layers respectively. The aim is restricting the influence of each noise code to specific parts of
the generated image. We show that disentanglement in the
first layer of the generator network leads to disentanglement
in the generated image. Through a grid-based structure, we
achieve several aspects of disentanglement without complicating the network architecture and without requiring labels. We achieve spatial disentanglement, scale-space disentanglement, and disentanglement of the foreground object from the background style allowing fine-grained control over the generated images. Examples include changing
facial expressions in face images, changing beak length in
bird images, and changing car dimensions in car images.
This empirically leads to better disentanglement scores than
state-of-the-art methods on the FFHQ dataset.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in generative modeling using GANs
lead to incredible results for synthetic image generation.
Most notably, StyleGAN [12] is able to generate very high
quality images that can be hard for untrained humans to
identify as fake.
Improving disentanglement is an open area of research
as one of the main criticisms of state-of-the-art GANs is
the difficulty of controlling generated images. The goal is
to change certain attributes of the generated image without changing the other attributes. For example, it would be
desirable to be able to add smile to a face image without
changing the identity or the background.
Current methods for disentanglement are either too limited or too specific. Disentanglement in StyleGAN [12]
is mainly scale-based. Low-level features can be changed
while maintaining high-level features, but it is incredibly
difficult to change specific attributes individually. On the
other hand, HoloGAN [17] disentangles pose from identity,
but it uses a specific geometry-based architecture that does
not apply to other attributes.

5134

