Severity-Aware Semantic Segmentation with Reinforced Wasserstein Training
Xiaofeng Liu1,2∗ , Wenxuan Ji1,3 , Jane You4 , Georges El Fakhri5 , Jonghye Woo5
1

Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
3
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
4
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China.
5
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA.
*liuxiaofengcmu@gmail.com

Segment 1

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is a class of methods to classify
each pixel in an image into semantic classes, which is critical for autonomous vehicles and surgery systems. Crossentropy (CE) loss-based deep neural networks (DNN)
achieved great success w.r.t. the accuracy-based metrics,
e.g., mean Intersection-over Union. However, the CE loss
has a limitation in that it ignores varying degrees of severity
of pair-wise misclassified results. For instance, classifying
a car into the road is much more terrible than recognizing it
as a bus. To sidestep this, in this work, we propose to incorporate the severity-aware inter-class correlation into our
Wasserstein training framework by configuring its ground
distance matrix. In addition, our method can adaptively
learn the ground metric in a high-fidelity simulator, following a reinforcement alternative optimization scheme. We
evaluate our method using the CARLA simulator with the
Deeplab backbone, demonstraing that our method significantly improves the survival time in the CARLA simulator.
In addition, our method can be readily applied to existing
DNN architectures and algorithms while yielding superior
performance. We report results from experiments carried
out with the CamVid and Cityscapes datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation (SS) has been a critical visionbased task aiming to classify each pixel of an image into
different semantic classes. For autonomous driving, automatic surgery system, robotics, and augmented reality and
generation [47, 46, 42], it is an important way to precisely
understand the visual scene. Beneﬁted by the recent advances of deep learning [22, 35], a signiﬁcant amount of effort has been devoted to this topic [48] in the past decades,

Better than

Segment 2

Car
Bus
Person
Road
Sidewalk
Sky
[The same CE loss]
Car
Bus
Person
Road
Sidewalk
Sky

Figure 1. The cross-entropy loss has the same punishment for
two softmax predictions (i.e., the same probability at i∗ position),
while these two segmentors can result in different severity consequences for real-world autonomous driving system.

leading to considerable progress on major open benchmark
datasets [11]. Recently, the segmentation problem has been
successfully tackled by pixel-wise classiﬁcation based on
the cross-entropy (CE) loss.
However, the application of segmentors in many realworld tasks is still challenging, e.g., self-driving car, since
they can have varying degrees of severity w.r.t. different
misclassiﬁcation cases. For example, an accident of Tesla
is caused by wrongly perceiving a white truck as the sky,
arousing intense discussion of autonomous vehicle safety1 .
However, the result may be different if the system had just
misclassiﬁed the truck as car or bus class.
As shown in Fig. 1, compared with the bottom segmentation prediction (Car→Road), the top one is more preferable
(Car→Bus), while the cross-entropy loss does not discriminate these two softmax probability histograms. We note
that with one-hot ground-truth label, the cross-entropy loss
is only related to the prediction probability of the true class
1 https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/19/business/
tesla-model-s-autopilot-fatal-crash.html

112566

