NestedVAE: Isolating Common Factors via Weak Supervision.
Matthew J. Vowels

Necati Cihan Camgoz

Richard Bowden

m.j.vowels@surrey.ac.uk

n.camgoz@surrey.ac.uk

r.bowden@surrey.ac.uk

Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing
University of Surrey
Guildford, UK

Abstract
Fair and unbiased machine learning is an important and
active field of research, as decision processes are increasingly driven by models that learn from data. Unfortunately,
any biases present in the data may be learned by the model,
thereby inappropriately transferring that bias into the decision making process. We identify the connection between
the task of bias reduction and that of isolating factors common between domains whilst encouraging domain specific
invariance. To isolate the common factors we combine the
theory of deep latent variable models with information bottleneck theory for scenarios whereby data may be naturally
paired across domains and no additional supervision is required. The result is the Nested Variational AutoEncoder
(NestedVAE). Two outer VAEs with shared weights attempt
to reconstruct the input and infer a latent space, whilst a
nested VAE attempts to reconstruct the latent representation
of one image, from the latent representation of its paired image. In so doing, the nested VAE isolates the common latent
factors/causes and becomes invariant to unwanted factors
that are not shared between paired images. We also propose a new metric to provide a balanced method of evaluating consistency and classifier performance across domains
which we refer to as the Adjusted Parity metric. An evaluation of NestedVAE on both domain and attribute invariance,
change detection, and learning common factors for the prediction of biological sex demonstrates that NestedVAE significantly outperforms alternative methods.

1. Introduction
One of the goals of representation learning is to achieve
an embedding that informatively captures the underlying
factors of variation in data [10]. However, many techniques
for learning such embeddings have been found to also learn
unwanted or confounding factors, irrelevant or detrimental
to the intended task(s) [54]. Such factors can include distribution specific bias, which impairs the generalizability of
a model across empirical samples or in the face of distri-

xi

Paired according to
shared attribute between
domains.

Enc(x)

xj
Enc(x)

Shared Weights

σ i µi

zi

µs
σs

zs

Invariant
Embedding

µ̂j

µj σ j

zj

Shared Weights
Dec(z)

Dec(z)

x̂i

x̂j

Figure 1. Top-level architecture of NestedVAE. Images (or alternative data modality) are paired according to shared attributes or
domains. Latent representations zi and zj for images xi and xj
are derived and fed to a secondary ‘nested’ VAE. Using the principles from Information Bottleneck theory, a sufficient and minimal
representation zs for zj may be derived from zi and vice versa.
zs may therefore be interpreted as representing the common factors, or common causes for the two images. Sufficiency indicates
it contains the information common to both, and minimality indicates that it is invariant to information specific to each.

butional shift [14, 54, 74, 11], or bias associated with culturally sensitive or legally protected characteristics such as
race, age, gender or sex [55, 17, 53, 36, 71, 57, 65, 15].
Indeed, the prevalence of reports of systemic bias arising from the use of machine learning algorithms is increasing [35, 66, 77]. Furthermore, conceptually distinct factors,
such as object type and pose, may be entangled in the embedding, despite a prior expectation that they ought to be
factorized. Learning models that solve these problems is
therefore important from a number of converging engineering and societal perspectives [55]. In terms of engineer-

9202

