Autolabeling 3D Objects with Differentiable Rendering of SDF Shape Priors
Sergey Zakharov∗
Technical University of Munich

Wadim Kehl∗ , Arjun Bhargava, Adrien Gaidon
Toyota Research Institute

sergey.zakharov@tum.de

firstname.lastname@tri.global

2D detection

Abstract

NOCS

CSS Net

We present an automatic annotation pipeline to recover
9D cuboids and 3D shapes from pre-trained off-the-shelf 2D
detectors and sparse LIDAR data. Our autolabeling method
solves an ill-posed inverse problem by considering learned
shape priors and optimizing geometric and physical parameters. To address this challenging problem, we apply a
novel differentiable shape renderer to signed distance fields
(SDF), leveraged together with normalized object coordinate spaces (NOCS). Initially trained on synthetic data to
predict shape and coordinates, our method uses these predictions for projective and geometric alignment over real
samples. Moreover, we also propose a curriculum learning
strategy, iteratively retraining on samples of increasing difficulty in subsequent self-improving annotation rounds. Our
experiments on the KITTI3D dataset show that we can recover a substantial amount of accurate cuboids, and that
these autolabels can be used to train 3D vehicle detectors with state-of-the-art results. The code is available at
github.com/TRI-ML/sdflabel.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods require large labeled datasets to
achieve state-of-the-art performance. Concerning object
detection for automated driving, 3D cuboids are preferred
among other annotation types as they allow appropriately
reasoning over all nine degrees of freedom (instance location, orientation, and metric extent). However, obtaining
a sufficient amount of labels to train 3D object detectors
is laborious and costly, as it mostly relies on involving a
large number of human annotators. Existing approaches
for scaling up annotation pipelines include the usage of
better tooling, active learning, or a combination thereof
[22, 16, 39, 25, 4]. Such approaches often rely on heuristics
and require human effort to correct the outcomes of semiautomatic labeling, specifically for difficult edge cases.
∗ First co-authorship. This work resulted from an internship at TRI.

SDF

𝒇(𝒙; 𝒛
3D-3D
RANSAC

+

Figure 1: Our pipeline for 3D object autolabeling. Top: offthe-shelf 2D detections are fed into our Coordinate Shape
Space (CSS) network to predict surface coordinates and a
shape vector. We backproject the coordinates to LIDAR
in the camera frustum and decode the shape vector into an
object model. Then, we establish 3D-3D correspondences
between the scene and model to estimate an initial affine
transformation. Bottom: We iteratively refine the estimate
via differentiable geometric and visual alignment.

Alternatively, we propose a novel approach relying on
differentiable rendering of shape priors to recover metric
scale, pose, and shape of vehicles in the wild. Our 3D
autolabeling pipeline requires only 2D detections (bounding boxes or instance masks) and sparse point clouds
(ubiquitous in 3D robotic contexts). Detections themselves are produced using off-the-shelf 2D detectors. We
demonstrate that differentiable visual alignment, also re112224

