Deep Optics for Single-shot High-dynamic-range Imaging
Christopher A. Metzler

Hayato Ikoma
Yifan Peng
Stanford University

Gordon Wetzstein

{cmetzler, hikoma, evanpeng, gordon.wetzstein}@stanford.edu

Abstract
High-dynamic-range (HDR) imaging is crucial for
many applications. Yet, acquiring HDR images with
a single shot remains a challenging problem. Whereas
modern deep learning approaches are successful at hallucinating plausible HDR content from a single lowdynamic-range (LDR) image, saturated scene details
often cannot be faithfully recovered. Inspired by recent
deep optical imaging approaches, we interpret this problem as jointly training an optical encoder and electronic
decoder where the encoder is parameterized by the point
spread function (PSF) of the lens, the bottleneck is the
sensor with a limited dynamic range, and the decoder is
a convolutional neural network (CNN). The lens surface is then jointly optimized with the CNN in a training phase; we fabricate this optimized optical element
and attach it as a hardware add-on to a conventional
camera during inference. In extensive simulations and
with a physical prototype, we demonstrate that this
end-to-end deep optical imaging approach to single-shot
HDR imaging outperforms both purely CNN-based approaches and other PSF engineering approaches.

1. Introduction
High dynamic range (HDR) imaging is one of the
most widely used computational photography techniques with a plethora of applications, for example in
image-based lighting [15], HDR display [59], and image processing [55, 5]. However, the dynamic range of
a camera sensor is fundamentally limited by the full
well capacity of its pixels. When the number of generated photoelectrons exceed the full well capacity, which
is typically the case when imaging scenes with a high
contrast, intensity information is irreversibly lost due
to saturation. Ever shrinking pixel sizes, for example
in mobile devices, exacerbate this problem because the
full well capacity is proportional to the pixel size.
Several different strategies have been developed to
overcome the limited dynamic range of available sensors. One class of techniques captures multiple lowdynamic-range (LDR) sensor images with fixed [26] or

LDR Image, 0 EV

Optical Setup

E2E Measurement, 0 EV

E2E Reconstruction, 0 EV

-2.3 EV

LDR

Rec

GT

Figure 1: Conventional sensors are limited in their ability to capture high-dynamic-range (HDR) scenes. Details in brighter parts of the image, such as the light
bulb, are saturated in a low-dynamic-range (LDR) photograph (top left). Our end-to-end (E2E) approach
jointly optimizes a diffractive optical element (top
right) and a neural network to enable single-shot HDR
imaging. This deep optical imaging system records a
single sensor image (bottom left) that contains optically encoded HDR information, which helps the network recover an HDR image (bottom right).
varying [40, 16, 46] exposure settings. Unfortunately,
motion can be problematic when capturing dynamic
scenes with this approach. Another class of techniques
uses multiple optically aligned sensors [45, 66] to capture these exposures simultaneously, but calibration,
cost, and device form factor can be challenging with
such special-purpose cameras. Single-shot approaches
are an attractive solution, but traditionally required
custom exposure patterns to be multiplexed on the sensor [49, 24, 61]. More recently, single-shot HDR imaging approaches were proposed that hallucinate an HDR
image from a single saturated LDR image (HDR-CNN,
e.g. [18]). While successful in many cases, saturated
scenes details often cannot be faithfully recovered via
hallucination.
11375

