FaceScape: a Large-scale High Quality 3D Face Dataset and
Detailed Riggable 3D Face Prediction
Haotian Yang∗1 Hao Zhu∗1,2,5 Yanru Wang1 Mingkai Huang1
Qiu Shen1 Ruigang Yang2,3,4,5 Xun Cao1
1
Nanjing University 2 Baidu Research 3 University of Kentucky 4 Inceptio Inc.
5
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Applications, China

source image

938 identities

predicted face

FaceScape dataset – 18,760 topologically uniformed detailed 3D faces

rigged faces

detailed riggable face prediction

Figure 1: We present FaceScape, a large-scale detailed 3D face dataset consisting of 18,760 textured 3D face models with
pore-level geometry. By learning dynamic details from FaceScape, we present a novel algorithm to predict from a single
image a detailed rigged 3D face model that can generate various expressions with high geometric details.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a large-scale detailed 3D face
dataset, FaceScape, and propose a novel algorithm that is
able to predict elaborate riggable 3D face models from a
single image input. FaceScape dataset provides 18,760 textured 3D faces, captured from 938 subjects and each with 20
specific expressions. The 3D models contain the pore-level
facial geometry that is also processed to be topologically
uniformed. These fine 3D facial models can be represented
as a 3D morphable model for rough shapes and displacement maps for detailed geometry. Taking advantage of the
large-scale and high-accuracy dataset, a novel algorithm is
further proposed to learn the expression-specific dynamic
details using a deep neural network. The learned relationship serves as the foundation of our 3D face prediction system from a single image input. Different than the previous methods, our predicted 3D models are riggable with
highly detailed geometry under different expressions. The
unprecedented dataset and code will be released to public
for research purpose† .
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† https://github.com/zhuhao-nju/facescape.git

1. Introduction
Parsing and recovering 3D face models from images
have been a hot research topic in both computer vision and
computer graphics due to its many applications. As learning based methods have become the mainstream in face
tracking, recognition, reconstruction and synthesis, 3D face
datasets becomes increasingly important. While there are
numerous 2D face datasets, the few 3D datasets lack in 3D
details and scale. As such, learning-based methods that rely
on the 3D information suffer.
Existing 3D face datasets capture the face geometry using sparse camera array[8, 19, 34] or active depth sensor
such as Kinect[12] and coded light[33]. These setups limit
the quality of the recovered faces. We captured the 3D face
model using a dense 68-camera array under controlled illumination, which recovers the 3D face model with wrinkle
and pore level detailed shapes, as shown in Figure 1. In
addition to shape quality, our dataset provides considerable
amount of scans for study. We invited 938 people between
the ages of 16 and 70 as subjects, and each subject is guided
to perform 20 specified expressions, generating 18,760 high
quality 3D face models. The corresponding color images
and subjects’ basic information (such as age and gender)
1601

