Exploit Clues from Views:
Self-Supervised and Regularized Learning for Multiview Object Recognition
Chih-Hui Ho

Bo Liu
Tz-Ying Wu
Nuno Vasconcelos
University of California, San Diego

{chh279,boliu,tzw001,nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Multiview recognition has been well studied in the literature and achieves decent performance in object recognition and retrieval task. However, most previous works
rely on supervised learning and some impractical underlying assumptions, such as the availability of all views in
training and inference time. In this work, the problem
of multiview self-supervised learning (MV-SSL) is investigated, where only image to object association is given.
Given this setup, a novel surrogate task for self-supervised
learning is proposed by pursuing “object invariant” representation. This is solved by randomly selecting an image
feature of an object as object prototype, accompanied with
multiview consistency regularization, which results in view
invariant stochastic prototype embedding (VISPE). Experiments shows that the categorization and retrieval results using VISPE outperform that of other self-supervised learning
methods on seen and unseen data. VISPE can also be applied to semi-supervised scenario and demonstrates robust
performance with limited data available. Code is available
at https://github.com/chihhuiho/VISPE

1. Introduction
3D recognition has received increasing attention in computer vision in recent years. A popular approach, which we
pursue in this work, is to rely on the multiview object representation. Several multiview recognition approaches have
been proposed in the literature, including the use of recurrent neural networks [9, 19, 39], feature aggregation from
different views [14, 15, 58], graph modeling [13] and integration with other modalities [22, 45, 50, 68]. While achieving good recognition performance, two strong assumptions
are made. The ﬁrst is that a dense set of views, covering
the entire range of view angles, is available per object [58].
While some methods support missing views during inference [14, 23, 30], a complete view set is always assumed
for training. The second is that all these images are la-

Self-supervised
object invariant task

Prototype randomization
Collect seen data

Object prototype

Covered region

Generalization

Unseen objects

Figure 1: Lightweight unsupervised multiview object
recognition. A household robot collects multiple object
views by moving around, aggregating a multiview object
database without view labels. A self-supervised learning
algorithm is applied to this database to create an embedding
that maps images from same object into an object invariant.
At inference time, this embedding generalizes to new views,
objects, and object classes.
beled, for both object classes and view angle. The two
assumptions make multiview techniques difﬁcult to implement and limit their generalization. For example, while previous works [14, 30, 58] show strong performance on training classes, recognition on classes unseen during training is
usually not considered.
These limitations prevent many applications of interest.
Consider, for example, the setting of Fig. 1, where a household robot of limited memory is tasked with picking scattered objects and returning them to their locations. In this
setting, it is impractical to pre-train the robot with a dense
set of labelled views for each object class in the world. Instead, the robot must be able to efﬁciently learn objects from
unseen classes after deployment. This is similar to problems
like image retrieval [10, 29] or face veriﬁcation [52, 60],

9090

