CARP: Compression through Adaptive Recursive Partitioning for
Multi-dimensional Images
Rongjie Liu
Rice University

Meng Li
Rice University

Li Ma
Duke University

rongjie.liu@rice.edu

meng@rice.edu

li.ma@duke.edu

Abstract
Fast and effective image compression for multidimensional images has become increasingly important for
efficient storage and transfer of massive amounts of highresolution images and videos. Desirable properties in compression methods include (1) high reconstruction quality at
a wide range of compression rates while preserving key local
details, (2) computational scalability, (3) applicability to a
variety of different image/video types and of different dimensions, and (4) ease of tuning. We present such a method for
multi-dimensional image compression called Compression
via Adaptive Recursive Partitioning (CARP). CARP uses
an optimal permutation of the image pixels inferred from a
Bayesian probabilistic model on recursive partitions of the
image to reduce its effective dimensionality, achieving a parsimonious representation that preserves information. CARP
uses a multi-layer Bayesian hierarchical model to achieve
self-tuning and regularization to avoid overfitting—resulting
in one single parameter to be specified by the user to achieve
the desired compression rate. Extensive numerical experiments using a variety of datasets including 2D ImageNet,
3D medical image, and real-life YouTube and surveillance
videos show that CARP dominates the state-of-the-art compression approaches—including JPEG, JPEG2000, MPEG4,
and a neural network-based method—for all of these different image types and often on nearly all of the individual
images.

1. Introduction
Image compression is a long-standing, fundamental problem in computer vision and image processing, and is key
to efficient storage and transfer of the vast amount of highresolution images and videos that are routinely collected in
a variety of applications. Efficient compression relies on
parsimonious representations of images that preserve important spatial and contextual features. Standards such as
JPEG and JPEG2000 utilize fixed, deterministic linear func-

tion transforms, such as wavelets, followed by optimized
encoding under such transforms. These approaches give excellent stability and scalability in practical implementation,
and require little training and tuning. However, they lack
adaptivity to image-specific features and as such achieve
only suboptimal compression efficiency. The more recent
convolutional neural network (CNN) based approaches utilize much more flexible, nonlinear transformations of the
original image. This additional flexibility often leads to improved compression efficiency, but at the same time leads
to substantially more extensive training and tuning of the
methods.
We aim to strike a middle ground between these two approaches by introducing a Bayesian probabilistic modeling
strategy for incorporating adaptivity to image features into
the wavelet transform based image processing framework,
while maintaining its computational scalability and ease of
tuning. Instead of using fixed wavelet transforms, we treat
the transform as an unknown latent quantity and learn an
optimal transform by placing a Bayesian prior on the space
of such transforms induced by random recursive partitioning on the image and compute the maximum a posteriori
(MAP) estimate of the transform under our model. A compressed image can then be produced under the inferred transform that tailors to image-specific features. Moreover, such
computation is as efficient as the classical wavelet-based
methods—scaling linearly with the size of the image.
Aside from achieving excellent compression efficiency
(to be demonstrated in our numerical experiments), our
method, called Compression via Adaptive Recursive Partitioning (CARP), enjoys two additional advantages. First, it
is directly applicable to images of different dimensions without modification, making it readily applicable to a variety
of image/video types. Second, it does not require a separate training stage on external data and involves minimal
tuning. The Bayesian hierarchical modeling strategy uses
hyperpriors on the parameters to allow automatic tuning on
those parameters, leaving only one free parameter for the
user to specify, which corresponds directly to the desired
compression rate of the image. This makes CARP very easy
114306

