Self-Learning with Rectification Strategy for Human Parsing
Tao Li1 , Zhiyuan Liang1 , Sanyuan Zhao∗ 1 , Jiahao Gong1 , Jianbing Shen2,1
1

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{tao.li, liangzhiyuan, zhaosanyuan, gongjiahao}@bit.edu.cn, shenjianbingcg@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we solve the sample shortage problem in
the human parsing task. We begin with the self-learning
strategy, which generates pseudo-labels for unlabeled data
to retrain the model. However, directly using noisy pseudolabels will cause error amplification and accumulation.
Considering the topology structure of human body, we propose a trainable graph reasoning method that establishes
internal structural connections between graph nodes to correct two typical errors in the pseudo-labels, i.e., the global
structural error and the local consistency error. For the
global error, we first transform category-wise features into
a high-level graph model with coarse-grained structural information, and then decouple the high-level graph to reconstruct the category features. The reconstructed features
have a stronger ability to represent the topology structure
of the human body. Enlarging the receptive field of features
can effectively reducing the local error. We first project feature pixels into a local graph model to capture pixel-wise
relations in a hierarchical graph manner, then reverse the
relation information back to the pixels. With the global
structural and local consistency modules, these errors are
rectified and confident pseudo-labels are generated for retraining. Extensive experiments on the LIP and the ATR
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our global and local rectification modules. Our method outperforms other
state-of-the-art methods in supervised human parsing tasks.

1. Introduction
Human parsing, a sub-task of semantic segmentation,
aims to understand human-body parts on the pixel level. In
∗ Corresponding author: Sanyuan Zhao.

This work was supported in
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61902027),
the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (4182056), the CCF-Tencent Open
Fund, Zhijiang Lab’s International Talent Fund for Young Professionals.

particular, human parsing is characterized by utilizing the
structure of the human body. It has been widely applied
in human-computer interaction [26], human behavior understanding [45, 10, 53], security monitoring [55, 12] etc.
For deep neural network-based algorithms, they learn complex information from a large amount of labeled samples
to boost performance. But collecting accurate and finegrained labeling for human parsing is very expensive and
needs massive human labor. With insufficient training samples, weakly-supervised and semi-supervised methods are
proposed to address this issue. Most existing algorithms
adopt the human posture or skeleton key points as a supplement to human parsing [11, 27]. However, these algorithms require extra computing resources of human pose or
key points, which are usually unavailable in real cases and
may introduce new errors [52].
To enlarge the number of samples for training, we regard
the predicted masks of unlabeled images as their pseudolabels and retrain the segmentation network. But these
noisy pseudo-labels contain many errors. If the network
is blindly confident of its incorrect predictions, the error
will be amplified during retraining [34]. Thus, the technical bottleneck is how to autonomously correct the errors of pseudo-labels. For severely noisy pseudo-labels
in self-training, some label denoising algorithms are proposed. The transition matrix is adopted to capture the transition probability between the noisy label and the true label [20, 33], and the extra linear network is added to evaluate the noise [15, 40]. However, these algorithms conducting experiments on the simple MNIST dataset are hard to
learn the complex noise in human parsing. We propose a
new rectification network to detect and correct the errors of
pseudo-labels by graph reasoning.
There are two main types of predicted errors in human
parsing [32, 29], i.e., the global structure error [17] and the
local consistency error (Fig. 1). The first type is the interpart error in the human body. For example, in Fig. 1 (d),
the left-arm is incorrectly predicted as the right-arm. It is
19263

