RoutedFusion: Learning Real-time Depth Map Fusion
Silvan Weder
ETH Zurich

Johannes Schönberger
Microsoft

Marc Pollefeys
ETH Zurich/Microsoft

Martin R. Oswald
ETH Zurich

Abstract
The efficient fusion of depth maps is a key part of most
state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction methods. Besides requiring high accuracy, these depth fusion methods need to be
scalable and real-time capable. To this end, we present
a novel real-time capable machine learning-based method
for depth map fusion. Similar to the seminal depth map
fusion approach by Curless and Levoy, we only update a local group of voxels to ensure real-time capability. Instead
of a simple linear fusion of depth information, we propose
a neural network that predicts non-linear updates to better
account for typical fusion errors. Our network is composed
of a 2D depth routing network and a 3D depth fusion network which efficiently handle sensor-specific noise and outliers. This is especially useful for surface edges and thin
objects for which the original approach suffers from thickening artifacts. Our method outperforms the traditional
fusion approach and related learned approaches on both
synthetic and real data. We demonstrate the performance
of our method in reconstructing fine geometric details from
noise and outlier contaminated data on various scenes.

1. Introduction
Multi-view 3D reconstruction has been a central research
topic in computer vision for many decades. Fusing depth
maps from multiple camera viewpoints is an essential processing step in the majority of recent 3D reconstruction
pipelines [59, 58, 27, 1, 44, 43, 12, 10], especially for realtime applications [21, 37, 55, 11]. We revisit the problem
of 3D reconstruction via depth map fusion from a machine
learning perspective. The major difficulty of this task is
to deal with various amounts of noise, outliers, and missing data. The classical approach [9, 21] to fusing noisy
depth maps is to average truncated signed distance functions (TSDF). This approach has many advantages: 1+) The
updates are local (truncated) and can be done in constant
time for a fixed number of depth values. The high memory usage of voxel grids can be easily reduced with voxel
hashing [37] or octrees [49]. 2+) Online updates are simple to implement and noisy measurements are fused into a

Standard TSDF Fusion [9]

Ours

Figure 1: Standard TSDF fusion vs. our learned depth
map fusion approach (on Kinect data [48]). Due to a
more informed decision process, our approach better handles noise and fine geometric details.

single surface with very few operations. 3+) Due to local independent updates, the approach is computationally cheap
and highly parallelizable.
However, the approach also has a number of shortcomings: 1-) The average is only the optimal estimate for zeromean Gaussian noise, but the real error distribution is typically non-Gaussian, non-centered and depth-dependent. 2-)
The updates are linear and a minimal thickness assumption of surfaces has to be made according to the expected
noise level. Therefore, thickening artifacts become apparent along surface edges and for thin object structures. 3-)
This issue is even more severe when depth measurements
of a thin object are made from opposite directions. Then
the surface vanishes since the linear TSDF updates cancel
each other out. 4-) The linear fusion weights do not properly
account for view directional dependencies during TSDF aggregation. The noise level along the viewing direction is
typically very different from the one in orthogonal directions. 5-) The fusion approach is unable to handle gross
outliers. The depth map has to be pre-filtered or incorrect
measurements will clutter the scene. 6-) The fusion param-

4887

