Correspondence-Free Material Reconstruction using Sparse Surface Constraints
Sebastian Weiss

Robert Maier

Daniel Cremers

sebastian13.weiss@tum.de

robert.maier@tum.de

cremers@tum.de

Rüdiger Westermann

Nils Thuerey

westermann@tum.de

nils.thuerey@tum.de

All authors are with Technical University of Munich, Germany
Abstract
We present a method to infer physical material parameters and external boundaries from the scanned motion
of a homogeneous deformable object via the solution of
an inverse problem. Parameters are estimated from realworld data sources such as sparse observations from a
Kinect sensor without correspondences. We introduce a
novel Lagrangian-Eulerian optimization formulation, including a cost function that penalizes differences to observations during an optimization run. This formulation
matches correspondence-free, sparse observations from a
single-view depth image with a finite element simulation of
deformable bodies. In a number of tests using synthetic
datasets and real-world measurements, we analyse the robustness of our approach and the convergence behavior of
the numerical optimization scheme.

1. Introduction
Our goal is to reconstruct material parameters of realworld objects in scenarios where we cannot rely on complex multi-camera setups, but instead only have access to
single RGB-D scans from handheld devices. In this setting,
we assume that the object’s initial shape is known a-priori,
and we aim for reconstructing this object with collisions by
ﬁnding the parameterization of an elasticity simulation that
best explains the observations. The central parameters that
describe the object’s physical behaviour are the Young’s
modulus, Poisson ratio, as well as damping parameters and
boundary conditions, e.g., gravity, initial velocity, and collision planes. While previous works have likewise targeted
reconstructing materials from measured deformations and
visual observations, they typically rely either on carefully
controlled lab settings [2, 28, 50], or on dense observations
[9, 44, 19]. In contrast, we focus on real-world interactions,
such as falling and colliding objects, that are recorded from
a single viewpoint without an explicit feature tracking step.

To match observations with the simulated object without
pre-computed correspondences, we propose a novel formulation of implicit constraints that we combine with a differentiable simulation method for soft bodies. We introduce
a fully differentiable physics solver that provides gradients
for solving a non-linear inverse problem using the adjoint
method, to match the depth measurements over time with a
physical simulation. Due to the regularization properties of
the adjoint optimization, improved robustness wrt to measurement noise over, e.g., the ﬁnite difference method, can
be achieved. In addition, the adjoint method allows optimizing for multiple parameters with a negligible increase in
computations, as only a single backward pass is required to
simultaneously compute gradients for all parameters. We
further shed light on the inclusion of observed collisions
into the optimization via an implicit formulation. To reconstruct collision events even if the actual point of impact is
obstructed from view, we leverage the recorded collision response of materials and use it for the inference of a suitable
object parameterization.
Speciﬁcally, our work targets the image-based reconstruction of material parameters via inverse elasticity problems. In this context, we propose:
• A novel formulation for sparse and correspondencefree surface constraints, e.g. measurements from
RGB-D cameras.
• A hybrid Lagrangian-Eulerian formulation that yields
gradients for solving an inverse elasticity problems via
the adjoint method.
• A detailed robustness and convergence analysis of the
proposed optimization scheme using observed realworld deformations and synthetic deformations of objects with ground truth behavior.
We see our work as a step towards improved computational schemes for estimating material parameters and
boundary conditions in real-world situations using simple hardware setups. We also believe that this approach
can be an interesting alternative to incorporate soft body

4686

