Towards Large yet Imperceptible Adversarial Image Perturbations with
Perceptual Color Distance
Zhengyu Zhao, Zhuoran Liu, Martha Larson
Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands
{z.zhao, z.liu, m.larson}@cs.ru.nl

Abstract
The success of image perturbations that are designed to
fool image classifier is assessed in terms of both adversarial effect and visual imperceptibility. The conventional assumption on imperceptibility is that perturbations should
strive for tight Lp -norm bounds in RGB space. In this
work, we drop this assumption by pursuing an approach
that exploits human color perception, and more specifically, minimizing perturbation size with respect to perceptual color distance. Our first approach, Perceptual Color
distance C&W (PerC-C&W), extends the widely-used C&W
approach and produces larger RGB perturbations. PerCC&W is able to maintain adversarial strength, while contributing to imperceptibility. Our second approach, Perceptual Color distance Alternating Loss (PerC-AL), achieves
the same outcome, but does so more efficiently by alternating between the classification loss and perceptual color difference when updating perturbations. Experimental evaluation shows PerC approaches outperform conventional Lp
approaches in terms of robustness and transferability, and
also demonstrates that the PerC distance can provide added
value on top of existing structure-based methods to creating
image perturbations.

1. Introduction
Research on creating adversarial examples for deep visual classifiers has focused on perturbations that cause
misclassification while being imperceptible to the human
eye [7, 43, 49]. Larger image perturbations are known
to improve adversarial strength (i.e., the ability to fool a
classifier), but are also associated with visually noticeable
changes in the image. A commonly agreed-upon assumption is that tight Lp -norm constraints on the size of adversarial perturbations in RGB space are a good guarantee of imperceptibility. Evaluation of adversarial examples has conventionally followed this assumption, considering perturbations with smaller Lp norms to be better (e.g.,

Figure 1: Comparison of (a) C&W [7] with (b) our PerCC&W. Perceptual color (PerC) distance allows larger RGB
perturbations (cf. L2 and L∞ norm in middle row), while
also contributing to imperceptibility (bottom row). (Setting:
untargeted with κ = 40; classifier Inception v3.)

L∞ [7, 19, 29], L2 [7, 41, 49] and L0 [7, 43]). Keeping with
this assumption, defense approaches are designed to be effective against adversarial perturbations under a specific Lp
bound [10, 39, 51, 54]. Our research is motivated by the
importance of questioning the necessity of small RGB perturbations for imperceptibility.
In this work, we propose to create adversarial examples by perturbing images with respect to perceptual color
(PerC) distance. Using PerC distance makes it possible
to move away from the assumption that it is necessary to
tightly constrain the Lp norm of the perturbations in RGB
space. Fig. 1 illustrates the difference between C&W [7],
a well-known approach that perturbs with respect to an
Lp norm in RGB space, and our own extension, PerCC&W, which perturbs with respect to a perceptual color dis11039

