Automatic Neural Network Compression by Sparsity-Quantization Joint
Learning: A Constrained Optimization-based Approach
Haichuan Yang1 , Shupeng Gui1 , Yuhao Zhu1 , and Ji Liu2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester, USA
2
AI Platform, Ytech Seattle AI Lab, FeDA Lab, Kwai Inc., Seattle, USA

Abstract

Table 1: Comparison across different automated model compression methods.

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are applied in a wide
range of usecases. There is an increased demand for deploying DNNs on devices that do not have abundant resources
such as memory and computation units. Recently, network
compression through a variety of techniques such as pruning
and quantization have been proposed to reduce the resource
requirement. A key parameter that all existing compression
techniques are sensitive to is the compression ratio (e.g.,
pruning sparsity, quantization bitwidth) of each layer. Traditional solutions treat the compression ratios of each layer
as hyper-parameters, and tune them using human heuristic.
Recent researchers start using black-box hyper-parameter
optimizations, but they will introduce new hyper-parameters
and have efficiency issue. In this paper, we propose a framework to jointly prune and quantize the DNNs automatically
according to a target model size without using any hyperparameters to manually set the compression ratio for each
layer. In the experiments, we show that our framework can
compress the weights data of ResNet-50 to be 836× smaller
without accuracy loss on CIFAR-10, and compress AlexNet
to be 205× smaller without accuracy loss on ImageNet classification.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are being
applied everywhere around us. Besides running inference
tasks on cloud servers, DNNs are also increasingly deployed
in resource-constrained environments today, ranging from
embedded systems in micro aerial vehicle and autonomous
cars to mobile devices such as smartphones and Augmented
Reality headsets. In these environments, DNNs often operate
under a specific resource constraint such as the model size,
execution latency, and energy consumption. Therefore, it
is critical to compress DNNs to run inference under given

Methods \ Features Pruning Quantization Automated End-to-end
AMC [14]
HAQ [42]
CLIP-Q [41]
Ours

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓
✓

✓

resource constraints while maximizing the accuracy.
In the past few years, various techniques have been proposed to compress the DNN models. Pruning and quantization are two of which most widely used in practice. Pruning
demands the weights tensor to be sparse, and quantization
enforces each DNN weight has a low-bits representation.
These methods will compress the DNN weights in each layer
and result in a compressed DNN having lower resource consumption. It has been shown that by appropriately setting
the compression rate and performing fine-tuning, the compression could bring negligible accuracy drop [11].
Recent research works [49, 14, 42, 31] found that given
the resource constraint, the accuracy of compressed DNNs
can be further improved by tuning the compression ratio
(i.e., sparsity or quantization bitwidth) for each layer. A fundamental question is: how to find the optimal compression
ratio, e.g., sparsity and/or bitwidth, for each layer in a way
that meets a given resource budget. Traditional DNN compression methods [11, 53, 15] set the compression ratio of
each layer based on human heuristics. Since the compression
ratios can be seen as hyper-parameters, the idea in recent research of using black-box optimization for hyper-parameter
search can be directly adopted [41]. He et al. [14] applied
reinforcement learning (RL) in DNN pruning by formulating
the pruning ratio as a continuous action and the accuracy as
the reward. Wang et al. [42] applied the similar formulation
but used it for searching the quantization bitwidth of each
layer. CLIP-Q [41] proposed a compression method which
required the sparsity and quantization bitwidth to be set as

2178

