GHUM & GHUML: Generative 3D Human Shape and Articulated Pose Models
Hongyi Xu Eduard Gabriel Bazavan Andrei Zanfir
William T. Freeman Rahul Sukthankar Cristian Sminchisescu
Google Research
{hongyixu, egbazavan, andreiz, wfreeman, sukthankar, sminchisescu}@google.com

Abstract
We present a statistical, articulated 3D human shape
modeling pipeline, within a fully trainable, modular, deep
learning framework. Given high-resolution complete 3D
body scans of humans, captured in various poses, together
with additional closeups of their head and facial expressions, as well as hand articulation, and given initial, artist
designed, gender neutral rigged quad-meshes, we train all
model parameters including non-linear shape spaces based
on variational auto-encoders, pose-space deformation correctives, skeleton joint center predictors, and blend skinning functions, in a single consistent learning loop. The
models are simultaneously trained with all the 3d dynamic
scan data (over 60, 000 diverse human configurations in
our new dataset) in order to capture correlations and ensure consistency of various components. Models support
facial expression analysis, as well as body (with detailed
hand) shape and pose estimation. We provide fully trainable generic human models of different resolutions – the
moderate-resolution GHUM consisting of 10,168 vertices
and the low-resolution GHUML(ite) of 3,194 vertices –, run
comparisons between them, analyze the impact of different
components and illustrate their reconstruction from image
data. The models will be available for research.

1. Introduction
Human motion, action, and expression are of central
practical importance, and subject to continuous focus, as
well as creative capture in images and video. Immersive
photography, augmented and virtual reality, and physical
3D space reasoning would be next. Consequently, models that can accurately represent the full body detail at the
level of pose, shape, and facial expression, as well as hand
manipulation are essential in order to capture and deeply
analyze those subtle interactions that can only be fully understood in 3D. While considerable progress has been made
in localizing human stick figures in images and video, and

Figure 1. Illustration of accuracy of GHUM and GHUML on data
from GHS3D, with heatmaps of both models on the left. Renderings show registrations of different body poses of a subject (grey,
first row), as well as GHUM and GHUML reconstructions in second and third rows, respectively. Notice good level of detail capture for both models, with higher accuracy for GHUM.

– under certain conditions – lifting to equivalent 3D skeletons and basic shapes, the general quest for reconstructing
accurate models of the the human body at the level of semantically meaningful surfaces, grounded in a 3D physical
space, is still on.
The potential for model construction advances, at least
in the medium term, appears to be at the incidence between
intuitive physical and semantic human modeling, and largescale datasets. While many expressive models for faces,
hands and bodies have been constructed over time, most –
if not all – were built in isolation rather than in the context of
a full human body. Hence, inevitably, they did not take advantage of the large scale data analysis and model construction process that recently emerged in the context of deep
learning. A number of recent full body models like Adam,
Frank, or SMPL-X[14, 31], combine legacy components for
face, body and hands, but usually focus on constructing a
consistent, joint parameterization with proper scaling on top
of already learnt components, rather than on training a full
16184

