Π´nets: Deep Polynomial Neural Networks
Grigorios G. Chrysos1 , Stylianos Moschoglou1,2 , Giorgos Bouritsas1 ,
Yannis Panagakis3 , Jiankang Deng1,2 , Stefanos Zafeiriou1,2
1
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
2
Facesoft.io
3
Department of Informatics and Telecommunications , University of Athens, GR
{[first letter].[surname]}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) is currently the method of choice both for generative, as well
as for discriminative learning in computer vision and machine learning. The success of DCNNs can be attributed to
the careful selection of their building blocks (e.g., residual
blocks, rectifiers, sophisticated normalization schemes, to
mention but a few). In this paper, we propose Π-Nets, a new
class of DCNNs. Π-Nets are polynomial neural networks,
i.e., the output is a high-order polynomial of the input. ΠNets can be implemented using special kind of skip connections and their parameters can be represented via high-order
tensors. We empirically demonstrate that Π-Nets have better
representation power than standard DCNNs and they even
produce good results without the use of non-linear activation functions in a large battery of tasks and signals, i.e.,
images, graphs, and audio. When used in conjunction with
activation functions, Π-Nets produce state-of-the-art results
in challenging tasks, such as image generation. Lastly, our
framework elucidates why recent generative models, such as
StyleGAN, improve upon their predecessors, e.g., ProGAN.

1. Introduction
Representation learning via the use of (deep) multilayered non-linear models has revolutionised the field of
computer vision the past decade [32, 17]. Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) [33, 32] have been the
dominant class of models. Typically, a DCNN is a sequence
of layers where the output of each layer is fed first to a convolutional operator (i.e., a set of shared weights applied via
the convolution operator) and then to a non-linear activation
function. Skip connections between various layers allow
deeper representations and improve the gradient flow while
training the network [17, 54].
In the aforementioned case, if the non-linear activation

Π-net V1

z

∗

∗

...

G(z)

Π-net V2

z

∗

∗

...

G(z)

Figure 1: In this paper we introduce a class of networks called
Π´nets, where the output is a polynomial of the input. The input in
this case, z, can be either the latent space of Generative Adversarial
Network for a generative task or an image in the case of a discriminative task. Our polynomial networks can be easily implemented
using a special kind of skip connections.

functions are removed, the output of a DCNN degenerates
to a linear function of the input. In this paper, we propose
a new class of DCNNs, which we coin Π´nets, where the
output is a polynomial function of the input. We design
Π´nets for generative tasks (e.g., where the input is a small
dimensional noise vector) as well as for discriminative tasks
(e.g., where the input is an image and the output is a vector
with dimensions equal to the number of labels). We demonstrate that these networks can produce good results without
the use of non-linear activation functions. Furthermore, our
extensive experiments show, empirically, that Π´nets can
consistently improve the performance, in both generative
and discriminative tasks, using, in many cases, significantly
fewer parameters.
DCNNs have been used in computer vision for over 30
years [33, 50]. Arguably, what brought DCNNs again in
mainstream research was the remarkable results achieved by
the so-called AlexNet in the ImageNet challenge [32]. Even
17325

