CenterMask: single shot instance segmentation with point representation
Yuqing Wang

Zhaoliang Xu
Hao Shen
Baoshan Cheng
Meituan Dianping Group

Lirong Yang

{wangyuqing06,xuzhaoliang,shenhao04,chengbaoshan02,yanglirong}@meituan.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a single-shot instance segmentation method, which is simple, fast and accurate. There
are two main challenges for one-stage instance segmentation: object instances differentiation and pixel-wise feature alignment. Accordingly, we decompose the instance
segmentation into two parallel subtasks: Local Shape prediction that separates instances even in overlapping conditions, and Global Saliency generation that segments the
whole image in a pixel-to-pixel manner. The outputs of
the two branches are assembled to form the final instance
masks. To realize that, the local shape information is
adopted from the representation of object center points. Totally trained from scratch and without any bells and whistles, the proposed CenterMask achieves 34.5 mask AP with
a speed of 12.3 fps, using a single-model with single-scale
training/testing on the challenging COCO dataset. The accuracy is higher than all other one-stage instance segmentation methods except the 5 times slower TensorMask, which
shows the effectiveness of CenterMask. Besides, our method
can be easily embedded to other one-stage object detectors
such as FCOS and performs well, showing the generation
of CenterMask.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation [11] is a fundamental and challenging computer vision task, which requires to locate, classify, and segment each instance in the image. Therefore,
it has both the characters of object detection and semantic
segmentation. State-of-the-art instance segmentation methods [12, 21, 14] are mostly built on the advances of twostage object detectors [9, 8, 26]. Despite the popular trend
of one-stage object detection [13, 25, 22, 17, 27, 30], only
a few works[1, 2, 28, 7] are focusing on one-stage instance
segmentation. In this work, we aim to design a simple onestage and anchor-box free instance segmentation model.
Instance segmentation is much harder than object detection because the shapes of instances are more flexible than
the two-dimensional bounding boxes. There are two main

Assembly

Local Shape

Global Saliency

point representation

Figure 1: Illustration of CenterMask. The Local Shape
branch separates objects locally and the Global Saliency
Map realizes pixel-wise segmentation of the whole image.
Then the coarse but instance-aware local shape and the precise but instance-unaware global saliency map are assembled to form the final instance mask.
challenges for one-stage instance segmentation: (1) how to
differentiate object instances, especially when they are in
the same category. Some methods [3, 1] extract the global
features of the image firstly then post-process them to separate different instances, but these methods struggle when
objects overlap. (2) how to preserve pixel-wise location
information. State-of-the-art methods represent masks as
structured 4D tensors [2] or contour of fixed points [28], but
still facing the pixel misalignment problem, which makes
the masks coarse at the boundary. TensorMask [2] designs
complex pixel align operations to fix this problem, which
makes the network even slower than the two-stage counterparts.
To address these issues, we propose to break up the mask

9313

