Cops-Ref: A new Dataset and Task on Compositional Referring
Expression Comprehension
Zhenfang Chen1∗ Peng Wang2 Lin Ma3 Kwan-Yee K. Wong1 Qi Wu4†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 University of Wollongong
3
Tencent AI Lab 4 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, University of Adelaide
1
3

{zfchen, kykwong}@cs.hku.hk

forest.linma@gmail.com

4

2

pengw@uow.edu.au

qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

resting

Reasoning tree: cat (left, sleeping) −−−→ towel (white)
Expression: The cat on the left that is sleeping and resting on the white towel.

(b) Distractors of different categories

(d) Distractors with “sleeping cat”

(c) Distractors with “cat”

(e) Distractors with “cat” and “towel”

(a) The image with the target
“cat”

Figure 1: An example from the new Cops-Ref dataset for compositional referring expression comprehension. The task
requires a model to identify a target object described by a compositional referring expression from a set of images including
not only the target image but also some other images with varying distracting factors as well. The target/related/distracting
regions are marked by green/yellow/blue boxes, respectively. More details about the reasoning tree can be seen in Sec. 3.1.

Abstract
Referring expression comprehension (REF) aims at identifying a particular object in a scene by a natural language expression. It requires joint reasoning over the textual and visual domains to solve the problem. Some popular referring expression datasets, however, fail to provide
an ideal test bed for evaluating the reasoning ability of the
models, mainly because 1) their expressions typically describe only some simple distinctive properties of the object and 2) their images contain limited distracting information. To bridge the gap, we propose a new dataset for
visual reasoning in context of referring expression comprehension with two main features. First, we design a
novel expression engine rendering various reasoning logics that can be flexibly combined with rich visual properties to generate expressions with varying compositionality. Second, to better exploit the full reasoning chain
embodied in an expression, we propose a new test setting
by adding additional distracting images containing objects
sharing similar properties with the referent, thus minimising
* Work done while Zhenfang was visiting the University of Adelaide.
† Corresponding author.

the success rate of reasoning-free cross-domain alignment.
We evaluate several state-of-the-art REF models, but find
none of them can achieve promising performance. A proposed modular hard mining strategy performs the best but
still leaves substantial room for improvement. The dataset
and code are available at: https://github.com/
zfchenUnique/Cops-Ref.

1. Introduction
In recent years, computer vision tasks that require highlevel reasoning have attracted substantial interest. Visual question answering (VQA) [14, 8] and visual dialog
(VD) [5, 20] are typical examples of such a trend, where
the system answers free-form questions based on an image
by jointly reasoning over the textual and visual domains. A
prerequisite to achieve this ultimate goal of artificial intelligence is the ability to ground the rich linguistic elements
embodied in the language onto the visual content of the image. Referring expression comprehension (REF) is such a
visual grounding task, which targets at identifying a particular object in a scene by an expression phased in natural language. A number of datasets [17, 29, 45] have been
constructed for this task, and on top of which various mod-

10086

