Incremental Few-Shot Object Detection
Juan-Manuel Pérez-Rúa1

Xiatian Zhu1

Timothy Hospedales1,3

Tao Xiang1,2

j.perez-rua

xiatian.zhu

t.hospedales

tao.xiang

*@samsung.com
1

2

Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge
3
University of Surrey
University of Edinburgh
United Kingdom

Abstract
Most existing object detection methods rely on the availability of abundant labelled training samples per class and
offline model training in a batch mode. These requirements substantially limit their scalability to open-ended accommodation of novel classes with limited labelled training data. We present a study aiming to go beyond these
limitations by considering the Incremental Few-Shot Detection (iFSD) problem setting, where new classes must be
registered incrementally (without revisiting base classes)
and with few examples. To this end we propose OpeNended Centre nEt (ONCE), a detector designed for incrementally learning to detect novel class objects with few
examples. This is achieved by an elegant adaptation of
the CentreNet detector to the few-shot learning scenario,
and meta-learning a class-specific code generator model
for registering novel classes. ONCE fully respects the incremental learning paradigm, with novel class registration
requiring only a single forward pass of few-shot training
samples, and no access to base classes – thus making it
suitable for deployment on embedded devices. Extensive experiments conducted on both the standard object detection
and fashion landmark detection tasks show the feasibility
of iFSD for the first time, opening an interesting and very
important line of research.

1. Introduction
Despite the success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [21, 24, 45, 49] in object detection [43, 42,
30, 28], most existing models can be only trained offline
via a lengthy process of many iterations in a batch setting.
Under this setting, all the target classes are known, each
class has a large number of annotated training samples, and
all training images are used for training. This annotation
cost and training complexity severely restricts the potential

for these methods to grow and accommodate new classes
online. Such a missing capability is required in robotics
applications [32, 1], when the detector is running on embedded devices, or simply to scale up to addressing the long
tail of object categories to recognise [31]. In contrast, humans learn new concepts such as object classes incrementally without forgetting previously learned knowledge [14],
and often requiring only a few visual examples per class
[36, 3]. Motivated by the vision of closing this gap between state-of-the-art object detection and human-level intelligence, a couple of very recent studies [53, 22] proposed
methods for few-shot object detector learning.
Nonetheless, both methods [53, 22] are fundamentally
unscalable to real-world deployments in open-ended or
robotic learning settings, due to lacking the capability of
incremental learning of novel concepts from a data stream
over time. Specifically, they have to perform a costly training/updating of the detection model using the data of both
old (base) and new (novel) classes together, whenever a
novel class should be added. Consequently, while they
successfully reduce annotation requirements, these models essentially reduce to the conventional batch learning
paradigm. This leads to a prohibitively expensive quadratic
computation cost in number of categories in an incremental scenario, and also raises issues in data privacy over time
[9, 40]. Meanwhile, storage and compute requirements prohibit on-device deployment in robotic scenarios where a
robot might want to incrementally register objects encountered in the world for future detection [32, 1].
To overcome the aforementioned limitation, we study a
very practical learning setting – Incremental Few-Shot Detection (iFSD). The iFSD setting is defined by: (1) The
detection model can be pre-trained in advance on a set of
base classes each with abundant training samples available
– it makes sense to use existing annotated datasets to bootstrap a model [32]. (2) Once trained, an iFSD model should
be capable of deployment to real-world applications where
novel classes can be registered at any time using only a few
113846

