Iterative Context-Aware Graph Inference for Visual Dialog
Dan Guo1,2 Hui Wang1,2∗ Hanwang Zhang3 Zheng-Jun Zha4 Meng Wang1,2∗
1
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data, Hefei University of Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
3
Nanyang Technological University
4
University of Science and Technology of China
guodan@hfut.edu.cn, {wanghui.hfut, eric.mengwang}@gmail.com,
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Ԛ

Hࡽ

Q&A5

Q&A5

Q&A6
Q7

Q&A6
Q7

Q & Aഢ -1

Are there any decorations
on it?

Q

…

History H

1

N

C
Q & A1

What color is the cupcake?
Vanilla with white and
red frosting.
Does it have a wrapper on
it? Yes.

Question Q

Node: [ vi ; u]

1
2

N

…

How old is the girl? 3.

(b) Factor Graph (Schwartz et al. 2019) [28]
(Multi-modal Embedding Graph)

visual & textual
contexts

objects

Image I

C
I

(a) Dialog Graph (Zheng et al. 2019) [42]
(Textual Semantic Graph)

A young girl sitting in a
chair eating a cupcake.

A

H࡭

…

∗ Corresponding authors.

Q&A2

RCNN

Recently, cross-modal semantic understanding between
vision and language has attracted more and more interests, such as image captioning [35, 4, 36, 40, 20], referring expression [11, 41, 21], and visual question answering
(VQA) [3, 18, 38, 39]. In these works, the co-reference
between vision and language is usually performed in a single round. Taking VQA as an example, given an image

Q&A2

…

1. Introduction

C
Q&A1

…

Visual dialog is a challenging task that requires the comprehension of the semantic dependencies among implicit visual and textual contexts. This task can refer to the relation
inference in a graphical model with sparse contexts and unknown graph structure (relation descriptor), and how to
model the underlying context-aware relation inference is
critical. To this end, we propose a novel Context-Aware
Graph (CAG) neural network. Each node in the graph corresponds to a joint semantic feature, including both objectbased (visual) and history-related (textual) context representations. The graph structure (relations in dialog) is iteratively updated using an adaptive top-K message passing mechanism. Specifically, in every message passing step,
each node selects the most K relevant nodes, and only receives messages from them. Then, after the update, we impose graph attention on all the nodes to get the final graph
embedding and infer the answer. In CAG, each node has
dynamic relations in the graph (different related K neighbor nodes), and only the most relevant nodes are attributive to the context-aware relational graph inference. Experimental results on VisDial v0.9 and v1.0 datasets show
that CAG outperforms comparative methods. Visualization
results further validate the interpretability of our method.

C
Q&A1

2
H

u

5

3

4

(c) Context-aware Graph
(Fine-grained Multi-modal Context Graph)

Figure 1. Different graph structures for visual dialog. In our solution (c), we focus on a question-conditioned context-aware graph,
including both fine-grained visual-objects and textual-history semantics.

and a question, the agent identifies the interest areas related to the question and infers an answer. In contrast, visual
dialog [5, 6, 16] is a multi-round extension for VQA. The
interactions between the image and multi-round questionanswer pairs (history) are progressively changing, and the
relationships among the objects in the image are influenced
by the current question. Visual dialog is a challenging task
due to these underlying semantic dependencies in the textual and visual contexts. Therefore, how to effectively realize
the context-aware relational reasoning is vital to the task.
For relational reasoning, the graph structure is employed
to exploit the context-aware co-reference of image and history. Except for the graph structure referring to different
multi-modal entities as shown in Fig. 1, prior graph-based

10055

