Supervised Raw Video Denoising with a Benchmark Dataset on Dynamic Scenes
Huanjing Yue Cong Cao Lei Liao Ronghe Chu Jingyu Yang∗
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{huanjing.yue, caocong 123, leolei, chu rh, yjy}@tju.edu.cn
https://github.com/cao-cong/RViDeNet

Abstract
In recent years, the supervised learning strategy for real
noisy image denoising has been emerging and has achieved
promising results. In contrast, realistic noise removal for
raw noisy videos is rarely studied due to the lack of noisyclean pairs for dynamic scenes. Clean video frames for dynamic scenes cannot be captured with a long-exposure shutter or averaging multi-shots as was done for static images.
In this paper, we solve this problem by creating motions for
controllable objects, such as toys, and capturing each static
moment for multiple times to generate clean video frames.
In this way, we construct a dataset with 55 groups of noisyclean videos with ISO values ranging from 1600 to 25600.
To our knowledge, this is the first dynamic video dataset
with noisy-clean pairs. Correspondingly, we propose a raw
video denoising network (RViDeNet) by exploring the temporal, spatial, and channel correlations of video frames. Since the raw video has Bayer patterns, we pack it into four
sub-sequences, i.e RGBG sequences, which are denoised by
the proposed RViDeNet separately and finally fused into a
clean video. In addition, our network not only outputs a raw
denoising result, but also the sRGB result by going through
an image signal processing (ISP) module, which enables
users to generate the sRGB result with their favourite ISPs.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art video and raw image denoising algorithms on both indoor and outdoor videos.

1. Introduction
Capturing videos under low-light conditions with high
ISO settings would inevitably introduce much noise [8],
which dramatically deteriorates the visual quality and affects the followed analysis of these videos. Therefore, video
denoising is essential in improving the quality of low-light
videos.
∗ This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61672378, Grant 61771339, and Grant
61520106002. Corresponding author: Jingyu Yang.

However, due to the non-linear image signal processing
(ISP), such as demosaicing, white balancing and color correction, the noise in the sRGB domain is more complex
than Gaussian noise [28]. Therefore, Gaussian noise removal methods cannot be directly used for realistic noise removal [39, 41, 40]. On the other hand, convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) enable us to learn the complex mapping
between the noisy image and the clean image. Therefore,
many CNN based realistic noise removal methods have emerged in recent years [4, 19, 45]. These methods usually
first build noisy-clean image pairs, in which the noisy image
is captured with short exposure under high ISO mode and
the clean image is the average of multiple noisy images of
the same scene. Then, they design sophisticated networks to learn the mapping between the noisy image and clean
image. Since this kind of image pairs are tedious to prepare,
some methods propose to utilize both synthesized and real
data to train the network [19, 9].
In contrast, the noise statistics in the raw domain, i.e.
the direct readings from the image sensor, are simpler than
these in the sRGB domain. In addition, the raw data contains the most original information since it was not affected
by the following ISP. Therefore, directly performing denoising on the raw data is appealing. Correspondingly, there are
many datasets built for raw image denoising by capturing
the short-exposure raw noisy images and the long-exposure
clean raw images [1, 29, 3, 7]. However, there is still no
dataset built for noisy and clean videos in the raw format since we cannot record the dynamic scenes without blurring
using the long-exposure mode or averaging multiple shots
of the moment. Therefore, many methods are proposed for
raw image denoising, but raw video denoising is lagging
behind. Very recently, Chen et al. [8] proposed to perform
raw video denoising by capturing a dataset with static noisy
and clean image sequences, and directly map the raw input
to the sRGB output by simultaneously learning the noise
removal and ISP. Nevertheless, utilizing static sequences
to train the video enhancement network does not take advantage of the temporal correlations between neighboring
frames and it relies on the well developed video denoising

2301

