TEA: Temporal Excitation and Aggregation for Action Recognition
Yan Li1

∗

Bin Ji2

∗

∗

Xintian Shi1
Jianguo Zhang3
Bin Kang1
Limin Wang2
1
Platform and Content Group (PCG), Tencent
2
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
phoenixyli@tencent.com, binjinju@smail.nju.edu.cn, tinaxtshi@tencent.com
zhangjg@sustech.edu.cn, binkang@tencent.com, 07wanglimin@gmail.com

Abstract
Temporal modeling is key for action recognition in
videos. It normally considers both short-range motions
and long-range aggregations. In this paper, we propose
a Temporal Excitation and Aggregation (TEA) block, including a motion excitation (ME) module and a multiple
temporal aggregation (MTA) module, specifically designed
to capture both short- and long-range temporal evolution.
In particular, for short-range motion modeling, the ME
module calculates the feature-level temporal differences
from spatiotemporal features. It then utilizes the differences
to excite the motion-sensitive channels of the features. The
long-range temporal aggregations in previous works are
typically achieved by stacking a large number of local
temporal convolutions. Each convolution processes a local
temporal window at a time. In contrast, the MTA module
proposes to deform the local convolution to a group of subconvolutions, forming a hierarchical residual architecture.
Without introducing additional parameters, the features
will be processed with a series of sub-convolutions, and
each frame could complete multiple temporal aggregations
with neighborhoods. The final equivalent receptive field
of temporal dimension is accordingly enlarged, which is
capable of modeling the long-range temporal relationship
over distant frames. The two components of the TEA
block are complementary in temporal modeling. Finally,
our approach achieves impressive results at low FLOPs on
several action recognition benchmarks, such as Kinetics,
Something-Something, HMDB51, and UCF101, which confirms its effectiveness and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is a fundamental problem in videobased tasks. It becomes increasingly demanding in video∗ Corresponding authors.

based applications, such as intelligent surveillance, autonomous driving, personal recommendation, and entertainment [28]. Though visual appearances (and its context) is
important for action recognition, it is rather important to
model the temporal structure. Temporal modeling normally
presents (or is considered) at different scales: 1) shortrange motion between adjacent frames and 2) long-range
temporal aggregation at large scales. There are lines of
works considering one or both of those aspects, especially
in the current era of deep CNNs [21, 31, 47, 6, 36, 46, 34,
2, 1, 39, 50, 49, 27, 41, 29, 24, 20]. Nevertheless, they still
leave some gaps, and the problem is far from being solved,
i.e., it remains unclear how to model the temporal structure
with significant variations and complexities effectively and
efficiently.
For short-range motion encoding, most of the existing
methods [31, 42] extract hand-crafted optical flow [48]
first, which is then fed into a 2D CNN-based two-stream
framework for action recognition. Such a two-stream
architecture processes RGB images and optical flow in
each stream separately. The computation of optical flow
is time-consuming and storage demanding. In particular,
the learning of spatial and temporal features is isolated,
and the fusion is performed only at the late layers. To
address these issues, we propose a motion excitation (ME)
module. Instead of adopting the pixel-level optical flow as
an additional input modality and separating the training of
temporal stream with the spatial stream, our module could
integrate the motion modeling into the whole spatiotemporal feature learning approach. Concretely, the featurelevel motion representations are firstly calculated between
adjacent frames. These motion features are then utilized to
produce modulation weights. Finally, the motion-sensitive
information in the original features of frames can be excited
with the weights. In this way, the networks are forced to
discover and enhance the informative temporal features that
capture differentiated information.
For long-range temporal aggregation, existing methods

909

