FReeNet: Multi-Identity Face Reenactment
Jiangning Zhang1 * † Xianfang Zeng1† Mengmeng Wang1† Yusu Pan1
Liang Liu1
Yong Liu1‡
Yu Ding2
Changjie Fan2
1

Zhejiang University

2

↑

Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase

{186368, zzlongjuanfeng, mengmengwang, corenel, leonliuz}@zju.edu.cn
yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn, {dingyu01, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com

source
landmark

Abstract

reference
image

This paper presents a novel multi-identity face reenactment framework, named FReeNet, to transfer facial expressions from an arbitrary source face to a target face with a
shared model. The proposed FReeNet consists of two parts:
Unified Landmark Converter (ULC) and Geometry-aware
Generator (GAG). The ULC adopts an encode-decoder architecture to efficiently convert expression in a latent landmark space, which significantly narrows the gap of the face
contour between source and target identities. The GAG
leverages the converted landmark to reenact the photorealistic image with a reference image of the target person.
Moreover, a new triplet perceptual loss is proposed to force
the GAG module to learn appearance and geometry information simultaneously, which also enriches facial details
of the reenacted images. Further experiments demonstrate
the superiority of our approach for generating photorealistic and expression-alike faces, as well as the flexibility for
transferring facial expressions between identities.

1. Introduction
Face reenactment is a task to transfer the facial expression from one source face to a target face, which has vast
promising applications such as film-making, facial animations, and augmented reality. Moreover, a live video of a
particular person can be generated under the control of another person, which can attack or strengthen the bioassay
system. In this work, we focus on solving a more challenging task: multi-identity face reenactment, where the source
face is from an arbitrary person and the target person is
not specific. This task is distinguished from one(many)-toone face reenactment tasks in whether the target is specific,
which is more general and flexible in practical applications.
Benefiting from the release of the large-scale face
datasets [11, 20, 8, 41], many high-accuracy and reliable face detection algorithms are proposed [38, 21, 4, 9]
* Work mainly done during an internship at NetEase Fuxi AI Lab.
† Equal contribution.
‡ Corresponding author.

Landmark Interpolation

Pix2Pix

Ours
female

makeup

male

Figure 1. A toy experiment of the face reenactment task. The results of the first row are from Pix2Pix [12] method with the only
landmark as input, while the second to fourth rows are from our
method with different reference faces but the same geometry information. Note that the reference image of the third row is the
makeup of the girl in the second row.

that contribute to the development of the face reenactment task. Many excellent facial expression migration and
face reenactment methods have been proposed in the last
decade, which summarily fall into two main categories:
three dimensional (3D) model based synthesis and GAN
based generation. For the 3D model based synthesis methods [34, 17, 5, 31, 33], the person is represented by a predefined parametric model. Generally, the methods firstly capture the facial movement of a source video that will be fitted
into a parametric space over the predefined model and then
render the target video through morphing. These techniques
are famous for the animation of computer graphics (CG)
avatars in both games and movies [26] because they have
high-quality and high-resolution face reenactment ability.
However, these methods generally suffer from big-budget
model making and are computationally expensive.
Recently, many GAN based methods have achieved a
significant improvement [6, 13, 40, 39, 26, 37] due to the
natural advantages in learning distribution patterns from a
large-scale dataset. Generally, the encoder-decoder structure is adopted to reenact target face in an adversarial
idea [12], and some further works [43, 13, 30, 40] introduce
a powerful cycle consistent loss to achieve unpaired face

5326

