Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Multi-Pass Sieve for Name Normalization
Jennifer D’Souza
Human Language Technology Research Institute
University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75083-0688
jennifer.l.dsouza@utdallas.edu

Abstract

variations of a name via morphological or syntactic transformations one at a time from highest to lowest precision
of specificity of the name. Each tier builds on the names
constructed by previous sieve modules, guaranteeing that
stronger name tranformation methods are given precedence
over weaker ones.
In the past, a multi-pass sieve framework was successfully
applied to the coreference resolution task (Raghunathan et
al. 2010). We show that this framework, albeit with an entirely different set of sieves, is also suited for name normalization in clinical/biomedical data. Below are the sieves in
our framework.1
Sieve 1 - Exact Match. Names are normalized if they match
exactly and unambiguously with existing concept names
in the ontology. Names not normalized in this sieve pass
through to the next sieve.
Sieve 2 - Abbreviation Expansion. Names are normalized if their expanded version (e.g., klebsiella pna expanded
to klebsiella pneumonia) satisfies the exact match criterion. Abbreviations are expanded based on the algorithm in
Schwartz and Hearst (2003) or from the Wikipedia list of
medical abbreviations. The remaining names in original and
expanded form pass through to the next sieve.
Sieve 3 - Subject ⇔ Object Conversion. Names are normalized if any of their new forms produced in this sieve
matches a concept name in the ontology. New forms of a
name are obtained by: 1) replacing the preposition in the
name with other prepositions (e.g., changes on ekg converted to changes in ekg); 2) dropping the preposition from
the name and swapping the substrings surrounding it (e.g.,
changes on ekg converted to ekg changes); 3) bringing the
last token to the front, inserting a preposition as the second
token, and shifting the remaning tokens to right by two (e.g.,
mental status alteration coverted to alteration in mental status); and 4) moving the first token to the end, inserting a
preposition as the second to last token, and shifting the remaining tokens to the left by two (e.g., leg cellulitis converted to cellulitis of leg).
Sieve 4 - Numbers Replacement. For names containing
numbers between one to ten, new names are produced by
replacing the number in the name with its other forms. We

We propose a simple multi-pass sieve framework that
applies tiers of deterministic normalization modules one
at a time from highest to lowest precision for the task
of normalizing names. While a sieve based architecture
has been shown effective in coreference resolution, it
has not yet been applied to the normalization task. We
find that even in this task, the approach retains its characteristic features of being simple, and highly modular. In addition, it also proves robust when evaluated on
two different kinds of data: clinical notes and biomedical text, by demonstrating high accuracy in normalizing
disorder names found in both datasets.

Introduction
Often in natural language, one finds the same concept being
referred to with varying names. For example, swelling of
abdomen, abdominal swelling, swollen abdomen, abdominal distention, etc., are all synonymous names essentially
referring to the same concept. Without a name-to-concept
mapping mechanism, such varied forms of naming a concept
can prove quite problematic to information retrieval systems
(e.g., search engines). Name normalization facilitates precisely such a mapping.
The task of name normalization, as it is defined, involves
the mapping of a phrase/word to a unique concept in an
ontology (based on the description of that concept in the
ontology) after disambiguating potential ambiguous surface
words, or phrases, and then assigning the concept’s unique
identifier in the ontology to the name.

Multi-Pass Sieve Approach
Most existing name normalization systems use tf-idf vector
space models (VSM) to represent tokens of an entire thesaurus of concept names; these VSMs are then employed for
normalizing new names to concepts. Such approaches tend
to be complex in terms of both time and storage. To overcome these complexities, we propose using a simple multipass sieve system. This multi-pass sieve framework is organized as tiers of name normalization modules that produce

1
Additional data used in the normalization system is available
at http://www.hlt.utdallas.edu/∼jld082000/normalization/

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4150

