Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Mechanism Design for Team Formation
Mason Wright

Yevgeniy Vorobeychik

Computer Science & Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
masondw@umich.edu

Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN
yevgeniy.vorobeychik@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract

Past research on hedonic games has focused on the problem of forming stable coalitions, from which no set of agents
would prefer to defect. Since a core partition may not exist in a hedonic game, even when preferences of players
are additively separable (Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez
2001), much research is focused on alternative notions of
stability, or on highly restricted agent preferences (Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002; Alcalde and Revilla 2004;
Cechlarova and Romero-Medina 2001), or on the time complexity of testing core emptiness (Ballester 2004; Sung and
Dimitrov 2010).
We consider team formation as a mechanism design problem, where individuals have preferences over teammates, as
in hedonic games. As in traditional mechanism design (and
unlike hedonic games), we assume that these preferences
are private and must be elicited in order to partition players reasonably into teams. We draw a connection to another
budding literature, that of combinatorial matching market
design, which has course allocation as a typical application (Budish and Cantillon 2012).
An important concern in combinatorial matching, which
we inherit, is the ex post fairness of allocations. For example, consider a simple randomized mechanism, random
serial dictatorship, which has been proposed for course allocation and is readily adapted to team formation. In random serial dictatorship, agents are randomly ordered by the
mechanism and then take turns, in order, selecting their entire teams from among the remaining agents. Random serial dictatorship is strategyproof, meaning that it is a dominant strategy for any agent to report its true preferences over
teams. Random serial dictatorship is also ex post Pareto efficient, in that any allocation it returns cannot be modified
to improve an agent’s welfare without reducing some other
agent’s (assuming no indifferences). But this mechanism results in a highly inequitable distribution of outcomes ex post.
Budish and Cantillon (2012) proposed a more sophisticated alternative, approximate competitive equilibrium from
equal incomes (A-CEEI), which is strategyproof-in-thelarge (i.e., when the number of players becomes infinite),
and provably approximately fair (Budish and Cantillon
2012; Budish 2011). The work on combinatorial matching in turn follows earlier work on bipartite matching and
school choice (Roth and Peranson 1999; Abdulkadiroglu
and Sönmez 2003).

Team formation is a core problem in AI. Remarkably,
little prior work has addressed the problem of mechanism design for team formation, accounting for the
need to elicit agents’ preferences over potential teammates. Coalition formation in the related hedonic games
has received much attention, but only from the perspective of coalition stability, with little emphasis on the
mechanism design objectives of true preference elicitation, social welfare, and equity. We present the first
formal mechanism design framework for team formation, building on recent combinatorial matching market
design literature. We exhibit four mechanisms for this
problem, two novel, two simple extensions of known
mechanisms from other domains. Two of these (one
new, one known) have desirable theoretical properties.
However, we use extensive experiments to show our
second novel mechanism, despite having no theoretical
guarantees, empirically achieves good incentive compatibility, welfare, and fairness.

Introduction
Teamwork has been an important and often-studied area of
artificial intelligence research. Typically, the focus is on coordinating agents to achieve a common goal. The complementary problem of team formation considers how to form
high-quality teams, whose agents have skills that are jointly
well suited for a task (Marcolino, Jiang, and Tambe 2013).
Notable team formation applications include formation of
research teams, class project groups, groups of roommates,
or disaster relief teams.
Many prior team formation studies have assumed that
agents are indifferent about which other agents they are
teamed with, or have preferences known to the team formation mechanism. Models dealing with known agent preferences over teammates, termed hedonic games, have seen an
extensive literature since being introduced by Aumann and
Dreze (1974). In a hedonic game, the mechanism is given
a set of agents, each having public preferences over which
others might be on its team; the mechanism must partition
the agents into teams based on their preferences.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1050

