Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Improving Cross-Domain Recommendation through
Probabilistic Cluster-Level Latent Factor Model
Siting Ren, Sheng Gao, Jianxin Liao and Jun Guo
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{ rensiting, gaosheng, guojun } @bupt.edu.cn, liaojianxin@ebupt.com

Abstract

in CBT into one single step with soft membership indicator
matrices.
However, related domains do not necessarily share such
a common rating pattern. The diversity among related domains might outweigh the advantages of the common rating pattern, which may result in performance degradations.
That is, existing models cannot consider the domain-specific
knowledge about the rating patterns to improve the mutual strengths in cross-domain recommendation. To learn the
shared knowledge and not-shared effect of each domain simultaneously, we propose a novel Probabilistic Cluster-level
Latent Factor (PCLF) model. In real-world scenarios, for
items, we discover that the domain-specific clusters and the
common clusters may exist simultaneously. For example,
movies and music can be both classified by regions, but a
movie category (e.g., science fiction) may be unable to describe music. Also regions (the common clusters) and the
movie category (the domain-specific clusters) affect the rating results of movies in a certain proportion. So including
a domain-specific rating pattern may be more accurate than
sharing the common knowledge only.
Suppose that we are given Z rating matrices from related
domains for rating prediction. And we assume that the hidden cluster-level structures across multiple domains can be
extracted to learn the rating-pattern of user clusters on the
item clusters. In real world, users may have multiple personalities, causing a user can simultaneously belong to multiple
user clusters. Suppose there are K user clusters Cu among
all Z domains. The probability of a user u belonging to an
(k)
exact user cluster k can be described as P (Cu u), and then
the user cluster membership vector for a user u is equation
1. (s.t. pu 1 = 1)


pu = P (Cu(1) u), P (Cu(2) u), . . . , P (Cu(K) u)
(1)

Cross-domain recommendation has been proposed to
transfer user behavior pattern by pooling together the
rating data from multiple domains to alleviate the sparsity problem appearing in single rating domains. However, previous models only assume that multiple domains share a latent common rating pattern based on the
user-item co-clustering. To capture diversities among
different domains, we propose a novel Probabilistic
Cluster-level Latent Factor (PCLF) model to improve
the cross-domain recommendation performance. Experiments on several real world datasets demonstrate
that our proposed model outperforms the state-of-theart methods for the cross-domain recommendation task.

Methodology
Traditional recommender systems based on collaborative filtering aim to provide recommendations for users on a set
of items belonging to only a single domain (e.g., music or
movie) based on the historical user-item preference records.
In many cases, in particular when the system is new, the
data sparsity problem arises, and prevents the system from
generating accurate recommendations. With the increasing
of user-generated content, there exists a considerable number of publicly available user-item ratings from different domains. Thus, instead of treating items from each single domain independently, knowledge acquired in a single domain
could be transferred and shared in other related domains,
which has been referred to as Cross-Domain Recommendation (Gao et al. 2013) problem.
Cross-domain recommendation models have shown that
knowledge transfer and sharing among the related domains
can be beneficial to alleviate the data sparsity problem in
single-domain recommendations. CBT (Li, Yang, and Xue
2009a) is an early transfer learning model which studies
knowledge transferability between two distinct domains. A
cluster-level rating pattern (a.k.a., codebook) is constructed
from the auxiliary data via some user-item co-clustering
and transferred to the target data by codebook expansion.
A later extension called RMGM (Li, Yang, and Xue 2009b)
combines codebook construction and codebook expansion

Furthermore, item clusters should be divided into common
item clusters and domain-specific item clusters. Common
item clusters represent the mutual features of items in all Z
domains. Domain-specific item clusters describe the properties of items in each domain. Suppose there are T common item clusters Cvcom among Z domains, and Lz domainspecific item clusters Cvspez for the z-th domain. Similar to
user clusters, common item cluster membership vector and
domain-specific item cluster membership vector for an item
v in the z-th domain are defined as equation 2,3 respectively.

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4200

