Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Exact Algorithm for Solving Most
Relevant Explanation in Bayesian Networks
Xiaoyuan Zhu and Changhe Yuan
Queens College, City University of New York
65-30 Kissena Blvd., Queens, NY 11367
{xiaoyuan.zhu, changhe.yuan}@qc.cuny.edu

Abstract

Due to the difficulty of finding a meaningful bound for
GBF, no exact algorithms have been developed to solve
MRE. Only local search and Markov chain Monte Carlo
methods have been proposed previously (Yuan, Lim, and
Littman 2011). In this paper, we introduce the first nontrivial exact MRE algorithm, a Breadth-First Branch-andBound (BFBnB) algorithm. The key idea of the proposed
method is to decompose the whole Bayesian network into
a set of overlapping subnetworks. Each subnetwork is characterized by a subset of evidence variables and its Markov
blanket. An upper bound for the GBF of an MRE solution
is derived by solving independent optimization problems in
the subnetworks. To tighten the upper bound, we also introduce a greedy algorithm for merging the Markov blankets
that share target variables. The upper bound is used in the
BFBnB algorithm for pruning the search space. We evaluate the proposed algorithm in a set of benchmark diagnostic
Bayesian networks. The experimental results show that the
BFBnB algorithm scales up exact MRE inference significantly.

Most Relevant Explanation (MRE) is a new inference
task in Bayesian networks that finds the most relevant
partial instantiation of target variables as an explanation for given evidence by maximizing the Generalized
Bayes Factor (GBF). No exact algorithm has been developed for solving MRE previously. This paper fills the
void and introduces a breadth-first branch-and-bound
MRE algorithm based on a novel upper bound on GBF.
The bound is calculated by decomposing the computation of the score to a set of Markov blankets of subsets
of evidence variables. Our empirical evaluations show
that the proposed algorithm scales up exact MRE inference significantly.

Introduction
Bayesian networks are probabilistic models that represent
the conditional independencies between random variables as
directed acyclic graphs, and provide principled approaches
to explaining evidence, e.g., Most Probable Explanation
(MPE), Maximum a Posterior (MAP), and Most Relevant
Explanation (MRE). Both MPE and MAP are solved by optimizing the joint posterior probability of the target variables given the evidence. However, in explanation problems (Lacave and Dı́ez 2002; Nielsen, Pellet, and Elisseeff 2008), MPE and MAP often produce overspecified explanations (Pacer et al. 2013; Yuan et al. 2009), i.e., irrelevant target variables may be included. This is because
maximizing the joint probability alone cannot exclude irrelevant target variables directly. To address the limitation of MPE and MAP, MRE (Yuan, Lim, and Lu 2011;
Yuan and Lu 2008) was proposed to find a partial instantiation of the target variables that maximizes the Generalized Bayes Factor (GBF) (Fitelson 2007; Good 1985) as an
explanation for the evidence. GBF is a rational function of
probabilities that is suitable for comparing explanations with
different cardinalities. Theoretically, MRE is shown able to
prune away independent and less relevant variables from the
final explanation (Yuan, Lim, and Lu 2011); a recent human study also provided empirical evidence to support the
claim (Pacer et al. 2013).

Background
A Bayesian network (Pearl 1988; Koller and Friedman
2009) is represented as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG).
The nodes in the DAG represent random variables. The lack
of arcs in the DAG define conditional independence relations among the nodes. If there is an arc from node Y to
X, we say that Y is a parent of X, and X is a child of Y
(We use upper-case letters to denote variables X or variable sets X, and lower-case letters for values of scalars x or
vectors x.). A node Y is an ancestor of a node X, if there
is a directed path from Y to X. Let an(X) denote all the
ancestors of X, then the smallest ancestral set An(X) of
node set X is defined as An(X) = X ∪ (∪Xi ∈X an(Xi )).
D-separation describes the conditional independence relation between two set of nodes X and Y, given a third set of
nodes Z, i.e., p(X|Z, Y) = p(X|Z). The Markov blanket
of X, denoted by MB (X), is the smallest node set which dseparates X from the remaining nodes in the network. The
networkQas a whole represents the joint probability distribution of X p(X|PA(X)), where PA(X) is the set of all the
parents of X.
The moral graph Gm of a DAG G is an undirected graph
with the same set of nodes. There is an edge between X and

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3649

