Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

RoboCup@Home – Benchmarking Domestic Service Robots
Sven Wachsmuth

Dirk Holz

Maja Rudinac

Javier Ruiz-del-Solar

Bielefeld University
Germany
swachsmu@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de

University of Bonn
Germany
dirk.holz@ieee.org

Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
M.Rudinac@tudelft.nl

Universidad de Chile
Chile
jruizd@ing.uchile.cl

Abstract

intervention, and to advance technologies by coping with
real-life tasks in supporting humans in everyday life. Instead
of defining a final challenge, the RoboCup@Home competition is defined as a benchmarking process that guides the
system development from simple tasks towards more and
more complex tasks in realistic environments. In the scoring
scheme each task is broken down into different sub-tasks
that focus on different skills and are scored in a binary manner. This scheme drives the league towards more general
skill implementations across tasks and provides an instrument to analyze and control the development in the league.
The competition is organized in two stages plus a final
of the top five teams. There are several tests in each stage
that are defined by the technical committee (TC) covering
a wide scope of skills (navigation, mapping, person recognition, person tracking, object recognition, object manipulation, speech and gesture recognition, as well as higher cognitive functions such as planning and decision making). These
tests are incrementally adapted over the years setting challenges within reach of current state-of-the-art in artificial intelligence and related fields. The focus is on the flexible use,
robustness, and coordination of skills, the robot autonomy,
and the smoothness of human-robot interaction. In 2014, the
stage-1 consisted of the following tests defined by TC:

The RoboCup@Home league has been founded in 2006
with the idea to drive research in AI and related fields
towards autonomous and interactive robots that cope
with real life tasks in supporting humans in everday life.
The yearly competition format establishes benchmarking as a continuous process with yearly changes instead
of a single challenge. We discuss the current state and
future perspectives of this endevour.

Research on autonomous robots and human-robot interaction have been core-fields of artificial intelligence since the
very beginning. Domestic service robots combine both aspects in an application-oriented scenario. In order to solve
typical tasks, like taking orders and serving drinks, welcoming and guiding guests, or just cleaning up, they require to
integrate a large number of skills in a smooth and coordinated behavior. Measuring and comparing the performance
of such robotic systems is notorously difficult. Reported research results are typically validated through experimental
evaluation. In the last years, there have been several approaches that either focus on the re-producibility of such
tests (Bonarini et al. 2006; Lier et al. 2014) or focus on
live competitions and challenges (e.g. AAAI Robot Competition, ICRA Robot Challenges, DARPA Grand Challenges,
ELROB, or RoCKIn@Home). The balanced definition of
such tests remains a challenging task. RoboCup@Home is
part of the RoboCup initiative (www.robocup.org) and defines a live competition of service robots that need to fulfill
a series of tests in a domestic environment. Since 2006, the
rulebook of the competition is changed on a yearly basis.
Here, we discuss the main trends and how we use statistics
to drive the development of the league.

• Basic Functionalities: This is a pipelined test focussing
on a sequence of skills (object manipulation, navigation
and obstacle avoidance, person detection and speech understanding).
• Follow Me: The robot needs to follow an unknown person
through a public space dealing with narrow spaces and
several interventions by other people blocking the way.
• Emergency situation: The robot needs to detect the event
of a falling person and must flexibly react on this.

RoboCup@Home

In stage-2 robots need to cope with more complex tasks:

The RoboCup@Home league has been initiated by Tijn van
der Zant and Thomas Wisspeinter (van der Zant and Wisspeintner 2005). The first competition was held at RoboCup
2006 in Bremen, Germany, as a demonstration league, before becoming an official league in 2007. The core idea was
to go beyond the closed artificial environments of the soccer
and rescue arenas, to allow human interaction and human

• Cocktail Party: The robot needs to efficiently find persons,
get their orders, fetch the orders from the kitchen, and deliver the orders to the correct persons.
• Enduring General Purpose Service Robot: An operator
verbally specifies a complex, only partially defined, or inconsistent task to the robot. Any skill may be requested.
The robot needs to perform it, report any problems and
find alternative solutions.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4328

