Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Perceiving Group Themes from Collective Social and Behavioral Information
Peng Cui, Tianyang Zhang

Fei Wang

Peng He

Department of Computer Science
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Department of Computer Science
University of Connecticut, USA

Department of Social Network Operation
Tencent Technology, Shenzhen, China

Abstract

years, social networks, especially the online social groups,
digitally and continuously record the collective behaviors
and social profiles of users, as well as the themes of social
groups in an unprecedented level. This provides precious opportunities to investigate the link between the collective social and behavioral information of group members and the
group themes. The interplay between semantics and human
behaviors is of significant interest to both academia to understand human collective behaviors and industry to serve
customers more intelligently.
Social groups and the collective behaviors of their members have been studied in sociology for many years (Shaw
1971)(Barsade 2002), and most of them focus on the offline social groups and collective behaviors themselves and
hardly investigate their relations with semantics. In recent
years, it arouses considerable research interests in computer
science to study social groups and collective behaviors in
a large scale and with finer resolution. (Backstrom et al.
2006)(Kairam, Wang, and Leskovec 2012) studied the dynamic mechanisms of online groups, including group formation, growth, evolution and demise. In (Danescu-NiculescuMizil et al. 2013), the effects of users’ susceptibility to linguistic change on their lifecycles in groups was investigated.
(Qiu, Zhu, and Jiang 2013) exploited user behaviors and
group information to regularize the topic categorization of
online documents. Also, (Sachan et al. 2012) used content
(semantics) and user interaction behaviors to assist community (group) discovery in social networks. These works either study the dynamics of social group themselves, or using the social and behavior information in social groups to
assist community detection or topic categorization. In contrast, the goal of this paper is to demonstrate the possibility
of perceiving group themes directly from collective social
and behavioral information.
Online social groups, which are established, owned and
maintained by group owners, is a feature in many social network platforms to provide interest- and niche-specific networks within the larger and more diverse global social networks. Normally, a group owner should select a category
from a predefined category list for the group under establishment, name it with a group title and label it with several words to represent the theme of the group. Then other
users can apply to or freely join the group to create, post,
comment or read contents in the group. The revealing of the

Collective social and behavioral information commonly exists in nature. There is a widespread intuitive sense that the
characteristics of these social and behavioral information are
to some extend related to the themes (or semantics) of the activities or targets. In this paper, we explicitly validate the interplay of collective social behavioral information and group
themes using a large scale real dataset of online groups, and
demonstrate the possibility of perceiving group themes from
collective social and behavioral information. We propose a
REgularized miXEd Regression (REXER) model based on
matrix factorization to infer hierarchical semantics (including both group category and group labels) from collective social and behavioral information of group members. We extensively evaluate the proposed method in a large scale real
online group dataset. For the prediction of group themes, the
proposed REXER achieves satisfactory performances in various criterions. More specifically, we can predict the category
of a group (among 6 categories) purely based on the collective
social and behavioral information of the group with the Precision@1 to be 55.16% , without any assistance from group
labels or conversation contents. We also show, perhaps counterintuitively, that the collective social and behavioral information is more reliable than the titles and labels of groups for
inferring the group categories.

Introduction
Collective social and behavioral information commonly exists in nature, e.g. groups of birds, insects and fishes coordinate their moves and speeds so that they can move together. Humans, as a typical social species, show a variety
of social and behavioral information. The synchronization
of applause in concerts, the formation of consensus in social groups, the common social attributes of the audience of
a certain movie are easily recognizable examples. There is
a widespread intuitive sense that the characteristics of these
social and behavioral information are to some extend related
to the themes (or semantics) of the activities or targets. For
example, the style of applause synchronization in piano concerts should be quite different from that in rock concerts. But
it has been difficult to evaluate this question quantitatively
since it requires a setting where various social and behavioral information happen in a shared environment. In recent
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

65

