Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Factored MCTS for Large Scale Stochastic Planning
Hao Cui and Roni Khardon

Alan Fern and Prasad Tadepalli

Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155, USA

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA

Abstract

it is useful to follow a complementary approach focusing
directly on large problems, and developing sub-optimal but
scalable algorithms. When full optimization is approachable
such approximate approaches can serve as a useful baseline.
In many cases, however, approximations can provide scalable quality solutions for online planning.
The paper makes two contributions motivated by this discussion. First, we present an experimental study on current
challenge problems and moderately larger problems exposing the above mentioned phenomenon. Second, we develop
novel online planning algorithms that combine sampling (as
in Monte Carlo tree search) with approximation through
symbolic, or algebraic, “aggregation”. In particular, we extend two algorithms, Rollout (Tesauro and Galperin 1996;
Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1996) and MCTS (Browne et al.
2012) to incorporate such approximations. The main novelty in our algorithms is in their use of the symbolic form
of a planning domain model to enable approximate but scalable simulation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work to integrate models and sampling in this manner.
Our symbolic approximation is closely related to approximating distributions by their product of marginals, and is
therefore related to other recent efforts in approximate probabilistic inference. Like that work, our algorithms are correct under some rather strong technical conditions, which
we establish. More importantly, however, they are applicable even when these conditions do not hold. As we demonstrate in the experiments, the new algorithms provide significant improvement over the state of the art when problem
size is increased in a number of benchmark domains. These
algorithms can therefore be seen as baselines for large scale
stochastic planning problems. As discussed in the paper, despite these facts, our algorithms are heuristic and they do not
always deliver the same quality performance. Identifying the
scope and applicability of the aggregate methods, and potential improvements, are important problems for future work.

This paper investigates stochastic planning problems
with large factored state and action spaces. We show
that even with moderate increase in the size of existing challenge problems, the performance of state of the
art algorithms deteriorates rapidly, making them ineffective. To address this problem we propose a family
of simple but scalable online planning algorithms that
combine sampling, as in Monte Carlo tree search, with
“aggregation”, where the aggregation approximates a
distribution over random variables by the product of
their marginals. The algorithms are correct under some
rather strong technical conditions and can serve as an
unsound but effective heuristic when the conditions do
not hold. An extensive experimental evaluation demonstrates that the new algorithms provide significant improvement over the state of the art when solving large
problems in a number of challenge benchmark domains.

Introduction
Stochastic planning research has made significant progress
in recent years in terms of algorithms developed, the type
of problems solved, and their scale. The current best approaches use the idea of online planning to optimize the
action choice in the current state of the Markov decision
process at each time step. Indeed, the two strongest systems in the last two probabilistic planning competitions are
based on the online algorithms RTDP (real time dynamic
programming) and UCT (a variant of MCTS, Monte Carlo
tree search) (Kolobov et al. 2012; Keller and Eyerich 2012).
Symbolic dynamic programming, the other main approach,
aims to achieve scalability via structured forms of dynamic
programming (with or without online planning) (Hoey et al.
1999; Feng, Hansen, and Zilberstein 2002).
In this paper, however, we argue that the focus on optimization algorithms in recent research is at odds with scalability. If we use exactly the same type of challenge problems
as used in existing work, but increase problem size even
moderately, then the performance of the algorithms deteriorates rapidly, making them ineffective. Thus, despite the
great advances and algorithmic insights, the largest solvable
problems are still rather small. We therefore propose that

Background
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman 1994) is
specified by {S, A, T, R, γ}, where S is a finite state space,
A is a finite action space, T (s, a, s0 ) = p(s0 |s, a) defines the
transition probabilities, R : S × A → R is the immediate reward of taking action a in state s, and γ is the discount factor.
A policy π : S → A is a mapping from a state s to an action

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3261

