Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Joint Anaphoricity Detection and Coreference Resolution
with Constrained Latent Structures
Emmanuel Lassalle

Pascal Denis

Alpage Project-team
INRIA & Univ. Paris Diderot
Sorbonne Paris Cité, F-75205 Paris
emmanuel.lassalle@ens-lyon.org

Magnet Team
INRIA Lille - Nord Europe
Avenue Heloı̈se, F-59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq
pascal.denis@inria.fr

Abstract

2011) propose a ranking approach wherein, for each mention taken in the order of the text, the decision to link it to a
previous mention and to classify it as discourse-new is taken
jointly. In this approach, the decision is local to the mention
and the previous context, but crucially does not take into account the next mentions in the document. Other approaches
simply use the output of an anaphoricity classifier as feature for the coreference model (Bengtson and Roth 2008;
Durrett, Hall, and Klein 2013).

This paper introduces a new structured model for learning
anaphoricity detection and coreference resolution in a joint
fashion. Specifically, we use a latent tree to represent the full
coreference and anaphoric structure of a document at a global
level, and we jointly learn the parameters of the two models using a version of the structured perceptron algorithm.
Our joint structured model is further refined by the use of
pairwise constraints which help the model to capture accurately certain patterns of coreference. Our experiments on the
CoNLL-2012 English datasets show large improvements in
both coreference resolution and anaphoricity detection, compared to various competing architectures. Our best coreference system obtains a CoNLL score of 81.97 on gold mentions, which is to date the best score reported on this setting.

In this paper, we employ latent trees to represent the
full coreference and anaphoricity structure of a document.
We extend latent tree models (Yu and Joachims 2009;
Fernandes, dos Santos, and Milidiú 2012; Chang, Samdani,
and Roth 2013; Björkelund and Kuhn 2014) by introducing
two kinds of edges: the first ones encode coreference links,
while the second ones represent discourse-new elements.
Basically, a latent coreferent tree links together the mentions
that make up the same entity. We restrict the shape of latent
trees by allowing only one “backward link” per mention so
as to be able to define a coherent structure when introducing discourse-new links. This also allows us to compute the
structure easily from a weighted graph using a greedy “BestFirst” algorithm. Our main contribution is to provide the first
system that learns coreference resolution and anaphoricity
detection both in a joint and global fashion. The model is
joint in that parameters for the two models are estimated together, so that changes in the anaphoricity detection model
directly affect the estimation of the coreference resolution
parameter (and vice versa). The model is global in that parameters are learned in a way that minimizes a loss that is
defined at the document level. We additionally define a set of
must-link and cannot-link constraints on the structure, which
helps the model on certain types of coreference links.

Introduction
Resolving coreference in a text, that is, partitioning mentions
(noun phrases, verbs, etc) into referential entities, is a challenging task in NLP leading to many different approaches
(Ng 2010). Anaphoricity detection, on the other hand,
consists in deciding whether a mention is anaphoric (aka
discourse-old) or non-anaphoric (discourse-new).1 This
task is strongly related to coreference resolution and has
been mainly addressed as a preliminary task to solve, leading to pipeline architectures (Ng and Cardie 2002a; Ng
2004; Denis and Baldridge 2008).
An important drawback of pipelined models is that errors
tend to propagate from anaphoricity detection to coreference resolution, hence ultimately hurting the performance
of the downstream system. In order to avoid error propagation, (Denis and Baldridge 2007) propose a joint inference
scheme using Integrer Linear Programming (ILP) to maximize the scores of two models. In this case, inference is
performed jointly but the two models are still trained independently. (Poon and Domingos 2008) perform joint learning using using Markov Logic Networks, but sampling techniques are needed to perform inference. (Rahman and Ng

Our experiments on the English CoNLL-2012 datasets
compare pipeline vs. joint models and local vs. global versions of them, always obtaining better coreference results
with joint models. More precisely, the CoNLL score systematically improves as one goes from pipeline to joint models
as well as from local to global models. The constrained version of our global joint model obtains the best results overall,
and achieves performance that is well above the state-of-theart. At the same time, we observe that anaphoricity detection
also largely improves in the global joint model.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this paper, we slightly overload these terms by taking an
non-anaphor to denote the first mention of an entity (in the order of
the text), and an anaphor any mention that is not.

2274

