Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Solving Uncertain MDPs with Objectives that
Are Separable over Instantiations of Model Uncertainty
Yossiri Adulyasak†, Pradeep Varakantham, Asrar Ahmed, Patrick Jaillet‡
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
† Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART), Massachusetts Institute of Technology
‡Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
a.yossiri@gmail.com, pradeepv@smu.edu.sg, asrar.ahmed@gmail.com, jaillet@mit.edu
Abstract

Leach, and Dean 2000; Nilim and Ghaoui 2005; Iyengar
2004) has predominantly focussed on the maximin objective, i.e., compute the policy which maximizes the minimum
value across all instantiations of uncertainty. Such an objective yields conservative policies (Delage and Mannor 2010),
as it is primarily assumes that worst case can be terminal.
The second thread (Trevizan, Cozman, and de Barros 2007;
Regan and Boutilier 2009; Xu and Mannor 2009; Ahmed
et al. 2013) focusses on the minimax objective, i.e., compute the policy that minimizes the maximum regret (difference from optimal for that instantiation) over all instantiations of uncertainty. Regret objective addresses the issue
of conservative policies and can be considered as an alternate definition of robustness. However, it is either applicable
for only reward uncertain MDPs (Regan and Boutilier 2009;
Xu and Mannor 2009) or is limited in applicability to small
problems in the general case of reward and transition uncertain MDPs (Ahmed et al. 2013).
The third thread of research (Chen and Bowling 2012;
Delage and Mannor 2010) has focussed on percentile measures that are based on the notions of value at risk and conditional value at risk. Informally, percentile measures are
viewed as softer notions of robustness where the goal is to
maximize the value achieved for a fixed confidence probability. On the contrary, the CPM objective introduced in this
work maximises the confidence probability for achieving a
fixed percentage of optimal. Informally, CPM can be viewed
as a softer notion of regret as percentile measures are viewed
as softer notions of robustness.
Finally, focussing on maximizing expected reward objective, the fourth thread of research (Strens 2010; Poupart et
al. 2006; Wang et al. 2012) has focussed on Bayesian Reinforcement Learning. The second objective of interest in this
paper is similar to expected reward maximisation and the research presented here is complementary and can potentially
be used to improve scalability of Bayesian RL while providing quality bounds. Unlike the focus on history dependent
stationary (infinite horizon) policies in Bayesian RL, we focus on Markovian non-stationary policies for finite horizon
decision making.
Similar to other existing representations for uncertain
MDPs, we specify the uncertain transition and reward models as sets of possible instantiations of the transition and reward models. There are two key advantages to using such

Markov Decision Problems, MDPs offer an effective mechanism for planning under uncertainty. However, due to unavoidable uncertainty over models, it is difficult to obtain an
exact specification of an MDP. We are interested in solving
MDPs, where transition and reward functions are not exactly
specified. Existing research has primarily focussed on computing infinite horizon stationary policies when optimizing
robustness, regret and percentile based objectives. We focus
specifically on finite horizon problems with a special emphasis on objectives that are separable over individual instantiations of model uncertainty (i.e., objectives that can be expressed as a sum over instantiations of model uncertainty):
(a) First, we identify two separable objectives for uncertain
MDPs: Average Value Maximization (AVM) and Confidence
Probability Maximisation (CPM).
(b) Second, we provide optimization based solutions to compute policies for uncertain MDPs with such objectives. In particular, we exploit the separability of AVM and CPM objectives by employing Lagrangian dual decomposition (LDD).
(c) Finally, we demonstrate the utility of the LDD approach
on a benchmark problem from the literature.

1

Introduction

For a multitude of reasons, ranging from dynamic environments to conflicting elicitations from experts, from insufficient data to aggregation of states in exponentially large
problems, researchers have previously highlighted the difficulty in exactly specifying reward and transition models in Markov Decision Problems. Motivated by this difficulty, there have been a wide variety of models, objectives and algorithms presented in the literature: namely
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with Imprecise Transition Probabilities (White and Eldeib 1994), Bounded parameter MDPs (Givan, Leach, and Dean 2000), robustMDPs (Nilim and Ghaoui 2005; Iyengar 2004), reward uncertain MDPs (Regan and Boutilier 2009; Xu and Mannor
2009), uncertain MDPs (Bagnell, Ng, and Schneider 2001;
Trevizan, Cozman, and de Barros 2007; Ahmed et al. 2013)
etc. We broadly refer to all the above models as uncertain
MDPs in the introduction.
Existing research can be divided into multiple threads
based on the objectives employed. The first thread (Givan,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3454

