Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Real-Time Symbolic Dynamic Programming for Hybrid MDPs
Luis G. R. Vianna

Leliane N. de Barros

Scott Sanner

IME - USP
São Paulo, Brazil

IME - USP
São Paulo, Brazil

NICTA & ANU
Canberra, Australia

Abstract
Recent advances in Symbolic Dynamic Programming (SDP)
combined with the extended algebraic decision diagram
(XADD) have provided exact solutions for expressive subclasses of ﬁnite-horizon Hybrid Markov Decision Processes
(HMDPs) with mixed continuous and discrete state and action parameters. Unfortunately, SDP suffers from two major
drawbacks: (1) it solves for all states and can be intractable
for many problems that inherently have large optimal XADD
value function representations; and (2) it cannot maintain
compact (pruned) XADD representations for domains with
nonlinear dynamics and reward due to the need for nonlinear constraint checking. In this work, we simultaneously address both of these problems by introducing real-time SDP
(RTSDP). RTSDP addresses (1) by focusing the solution and
value representation only on regions reachable from a set of
initial states and RTSDP addresses (2) by using visited states
as witnesses of reachable regions to assist in pruning irrelevant or unreachable (nonlinear) regions of the value function.
To this end, RTSDP enjoys provable convergence over the set
of initial states and substantial space and time savings over
SDP as we demonstrate in a variety of hybrid domains ranging from inventory to reservoir to trafﬁc control.

Figure 1: Nonlinear reward function for the R ESERVOIR M AN AGEMENT domain: graphical plot (left); XADD representation (right): blue ovals are internal nodes, pink rectangles are terminal nodes, true branches are solid lines and f alse are dashed.

An XADD representation of the reward function of R ESER VOIR M ANAGEMENT is shown in Figure 1.
Problem 1 - R ESERVOIR M ANAGEMENT (Yeh 1985;
Mahootchi 2009).
In this problem, the task is to manage
a water supply reservoir chain made up of k reservoirs each
with a continuous water level Li . The draini and no-draini
actions determine whether water is drained from reservoir i
to the next. The amount of drained water is linear on the
water level, and the amount of energy produced is proportional to the product of drained water and water level. At
every iteration, the top reservoir receives a constant spring
replenishment plus a non-deterministic rain while the bottom reservoir has a part of its water used for city purposes.
For example, the water level of the top reservoir, L1 , at the
next iteration is:

Introduction
Real-world planning applications frequently involve continuous resources (e.g. water, energy and speed) and can be
modelled as Hybrid Markov Decision Processes (HMDPs).
Problem 1 is an example of an HMDP representing the
R ESERVOIR M ANAGEMENT problem, where the water levels are continuous variables. Symbolic dynamic programming (SDP) ((Zamani, Sanner, and Fang 2012)) provides an
exact solution for ﬁnite-horizon HMDPs with mixed continuous and discrete state and action parameters, using the
eXtended Algebraic Decision Diagram (XADD) representation. The XADD structure is a generalisation of the algebraic decision diagram (ADD) (Bahar et al. 1993) to compactly represent functions of both discrete and continuous
variables. Decision nodes may contain boolean variables
or inequalities between expressions containing continuous
variables. Terminal nodes contain an expression on the continuous variables which could be evaluated to a real number.

⎧
⎪
if rain ∧ drain1
: L1 + 1000 − 0.5L1
⎪
⎪
⎨if ¬rain ∧ drain
: L1 + 500 − 0.5L1
1

L1 =
⎪
if
rain
∧
¬drain
: L1 + 1000
1
⎪
⎪
⎩if ¬rain ∧ ¬drain : L + 500
1
1

(1)

A nonlinear reward is obtained by generating energy and
there is a strong penalty if any reservoir level is outside the
nominal minimum and maximum levels.


Rdraini (Li ) =

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

if 50 ≤ Li ≤ 4500 : 0.008 · L2i
else
: −300

Unfortunately, SDP solutions for HMDPs suffer from two
major drawbacks: (1) the overhead of computing a complete

3402

