Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Touchless Telerobotic Surgery – Is It Possible at All?
Tian Zhou, Maria E. Cabrera and Juan P. Wachs*
School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University. West Lafayette, IN
{zhou338, cabrerm, jpwachs}@purdue.edu

This type of solution, when applied to robotic surgery, has
the potential to allow surgeons to operate as if they were
physically engaged when doing in-situ surgery. By relying
on touchless interfaces, the system can incorporate more
natural gestures that are similar to instinctive hand
movements, thus enhancing the user experience, which is a
trending topic in the area of AI User Experience (AIUX).
(Chaudhary, Raheja, Das, & Raheja, 2013).

Abstract
This paper presents a comprehensive evaluation among
touchless, vision-based hand tracking interfaces (Kinect and
Leap Motion) and the feasibility of their adoption into the
surgical theater compared to traditional interfaces.

Background
Teleoperated robot-assisted surgery (RAS) is becoming
more popular in certain types of surgical procedures due to
its dexterity, precision, high-resolution, accurate motion
planning and execution capabilities, compared to
traditional minimally invasive surgery which relies on
hindered laparoscopic control. The most widely adopted
system based on this paradigm is the daVinci robot (2014),
in which the surgeon manipulates joysticks in a master
console using 3D imaging for guidance. Then robotic arms
mimic the surgeon’s movements on the patient’s side.
Some of the drawbacks of this system are related with the
user experience, since the surgeon has to retrain in order to
learn how to operate cumbersome interfaces and in the
process some of the intuitive hand gestures related with in
situ surgery are lost.
Some research has been devoted to incorporate touchless
interfaces in the surgical scenario (Hartmann & Schlaefer,
2013). Some of the advantages of working with touchless
interfaces have to do with allowing more natural gestures,
as well as maintaining asepsis which cannot be said for
more traditional interfaces such as keyboards or mouse
(Schultz, Gill, Zubairi, Huber, & Gordin, 2003). One of the
obvious drawbacks of such interfaces is the loss of tactile
information. In this regard, there have been attempts to
compensate this loss by leveraging on sensory substitution,
where information is provided through sound and visual
cues (Bach-y-Rita & W. Kercel, 2003). Other attempts
relate with touchless feedback through air or ultrasound
(Okamura, Verner, Yamamoto, Gwilliam, & Griffiths,
2011; Sodhi, Poupyrev, Glisson, & Israr, 2013).

Figure 1. System Overview

System Overview
The implementation of the system is based on the Taurus
robot (see Figure 1) which can hold instruments, make
incisions and transfer parts. Taurus can be controlled using
a combination of hand and foot gestures. The gestures are
captured through optical cameras (Kinect & Leap motion)
and are further compared to traditional interfaces such as
keyboards and haptic controllers (Omega & Hydra).
Upon user’s selection, each interface then goes through a
gesture segmentation process to extract the information
that will actually be used to control Taurus. Then a
registration process takes place by using a foot pedal as a
clutch to select the origin of the user space.
Using the continous trajectory performed by the user, a
discrete trajectory is generated in the robot space, using an
algorithm to perform a piece-wise linear transformation,
and then converted to suitable robotic commands through
inverse kinematics. Once the action is executed feedback is
provided to the user in the form of bar graphs and sound
cues, related to the amount of force applied to the tooltip.

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4228

