Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

UT Austin Villa 2014: RoboCup 3D Simulation League
Champion via Overlapping Layered Learning
Patrick MacAlpine and Mike Depinet and Peter Stone
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78701, USA
{patmac, msd775, pstone}@cs.utexas.edu
Abstract

drawback of increasing the size of the search space, however, is an increase in the dimensionality and thus possibly
the difficulty of what is being learned.

Layered learning is a hierarchical machine learning paradigm
that enables learning of complex behaviors by incrementally
learning a series of sub-behaviors. A key feature of layered
learning is that higher layers directly depend on the learned
lower layers. In its original formulation, lower layers were
frozen prior to learning higher layers. This paper considers
an extension to the paradigm that allows learning certain behaviors independently, and then later stitching them together
by learning at the “seams” where their influences overlap.
The UT Austin Villa 2014 RoboCup 3D simulation team, using such overlapping layered learning, learned a total of 19
layered behaviors for a simulated soccer-playing robot, organized both in series and in parallel. To the best of our knowledge this is more than three times the number of layered behaviors in any prior layered learning system. Furthermore, the
complete learning process is repeated on four different robot
body types, showcasing its generality as a paradigm for efficient behavior learning. The resulting team won the RoboCup
2014 championship with an undefeated record, scoring 52
goals and conceding none. This paper includes a detailed experimental analysis of the team’s performance and the overlapping layered learning approach that led to its success.

1

This paper considers an extension to the layered learning paradigm, known as overlapping layered learning, that
allows learning certain behaviors independently, and then
later stitching them together by learning at the “seams”
where their influences overlap. Overlapping layered learning aims to provide a middle ground between reductions in
the search space caused by freezing previously learned layers and the increased dimensionality of concurrent layered
learning. Additionally, for complex tasks where it is hard
learning one subtask in the presence of another, it reduces
the dimensionality of the parameter search space by focusing only on parts responsible for subtasks working together.
The UT Austin Villa 2014 RoboCup 3D simulation team,
using overlapping layered learning, learned a total of 19 layered behaviors for a simulated soccer-playing robot, organized both in series and in parallel. To the best of our knowledge this is more than three times the number of layered behaviors in any prior layered learning system. Furthermore,
the complete learning process is repeated on four different
heterogeneous robot body types, showcasing its generality
as a paradigm for efficient behavior learning. The resulting
team won the RoboCup 2014 championship with an undefeated record, scoring 52 goals and conceding none.

Introduction

Task decomposition is a popular approach for learning complex control tasks when monolithic learning (trying to learn
the complete task all at once) is difficult or intractable (Singh
1992; Whitehead, Karlsson, and Tenenberg 1993; Whiteson
et al. 2005). Layered learning (Stone 2000) is a hierarchical
task decomposition machine learning paradigm that enables
learning of complex behaviors by incrementally learning a
series of sub-behaviors. A key feature of layered learning
is that higher layers directly depend on the learned lower
layers. In its original formulation, lower layers were frozen
prior to learning higher layers. This can be restrictive, however, as freezing lower layers limits the combined behavior search space over all layers. Concurrent layered learning (Whiteson and Stone 2003) reduced this restriction in the
search space by introducing the possibility of learning some
of the behaviors simultaneously by “reopening” learning at
the lower layers while learning the higher layers. A potential

Primary contributions of this paper are twofold. First, we
introduce and motivate general scenarios for using the overlapping layered learning paradigm. Second, we provide a detailed description and analysis of our machine learning approach, incorporating overlapping layered learning, to create
a large and complex control system that was a core component of the 2014 3D simulation league championship team.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 specifies and motivates the overlapping layered learning paradigm while contrasting it with traditional and concurrent layered learning. In Section 3 we introduce the
RoboCup 3D simulation domain this research takes place in.
Section 4 details the overlapping layered learning approach
of the 2014 UT Austin Villa team and in Section 5 we provide detailed analysis of its performance. Section 6 discusses
related work while Section 7 concludes.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2842

