Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Neural Probabilistic Model for Context Based Citation Recommendation
Wenyi Huang† , Zhaohui Wu‡ , Chen Liang† , Prasenjit Mitra†‡ , C. Lee Giles†‡
†

Information Sciences and Technology, ‡ Computer Sciences and Engineering
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
{harrywy,laowuz}@gmail.com
{cul226,pmitra,giles}@ist.psu.edu

Abstract

pers. Intuitively, the semantics of the cited documents should
be close to the citation contexts. As shown in Fig. 1, words in
red, such as “PageRank,” “hyperlink,” and “node ranking,”
should be semantically related to the cited paper. In addition,
since all these words are used to describe the same citation,
the semantics of these words should also be similar. This
motivates us to learn the semantic embeddings for words in
the citation contexts and cited documents and to recommend
citations based on the semantic distance.

Automatic citation recommendation can be very useful
for authoring a paper and is an AI-complete problem
due to the challenge of bridging the semantic gap between citation context and the cited paper. It is not always easy for knowledgeable researchers to give an accurate citation context for a cited paper or to find the
right paper to cite given context. To help with this problem, we propose a novel neural probabilistic model that
jointly learns the semantic representations of citation
contexts and cited papers. The probability of citing a
paper given a citation context is estimated by training
a multi-layer neural network. We implement and evaluate our model on the entire CiteSeer dataset, which
at the time of this work consists of 10,760,318 citation contexts from 1,017,457 papers. We show that the
proposed model significantly outperforms other stateof-the-art models in recall, MAP, MRR, and nDCG.

Introduction
Citations are crucial for assignments of academic credit.
Proper citations also help support claims in one’s own work.
However, with the growth in the number of research publications, researchers might find it hard to find appropriate and
necessary work to cite. A citation recommendation engine
can help check the completeness of citations when authoring a paper and find prior work related to the topic under
investigation and to find missing relevant citations.
Most citation recommendation models fall into two
categories: global recommendation (McNee et al. 2002;
Strohman, Croft, and Jensen 2007; Nallapati et al. 2008;
Bethard and Jurafsky 2010; Kataria, Mitra, and Bhatia 2010;
Kucuktunc et al. 2012; Ren et al. 2014) which recommends
a list of references for a given manuscript, and local recommendation (Tang and Zhang 2009; He et al. 2010; 2011;
Huang et al. 2012b) which recommends citations for a particular context where a citation should be made. In this paper, we will focus on the latter: the local citation recommendation (or context-based recommendation).
A citation context c is defined as a sequence of words that
appear around a particular citation. Usually a citation context contains words that describe or summarize the cited pa-

Figure 1: Examples for citation contexts and the cited paper.
We propose to learn the distributed semantic representations of the words and the cited documents. Using the distributed representations of words and documents, we train a
neural network model that estimates the probability of citing
a paper given a citation context. The neural network model
will tune the distributed representations of words and documents so that the semantic similarity between the citation
context and the cited paper will be high. The model also ensures that key words used for citing similar documents will
have high semantic similarity.
To evaluate our model, we conducted an experiment on
a snapshot of the entire CiteSeer (Giles, Bollacker, and
Lawrence 1998) dataset at Oct. 20131 . Our model outperformed other state-of-the-art models by achieving a recall@10 of 35.37%, a mean average precision of 18.35%, a
MRR score of 0.1843, and an nDCG score of 0.2566.
The major contributions of this work are:
1
The dataset is publicly available at http://refseer.ist.psu.edu/
data/.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2404

