Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

XPath for DL Ontologies
Egor V. Kostylev

Juan L. Reutter

Domagoj Vrgoč

University of Oxford

PUC Chile

PUC Chile

Abstract

share the same structure with DL knowledge bases: they use
unary and binary predicates (that is, concepts and roles in
DL terminology) to represent graph nodes and edges. While
the idea of using graph queries in knowledge bases is not
new (see e.g., (Calvanese et al. 2000)), we are only starting to understand how such queries can be fine tuned for
various ontology languages. So far the specific research on
this topic has primarily been concerned with the class of
regular path queries (RPQs; see e.g. (Barceló 2013)), one
of the most basic graph query languages. We now know
how to evaluate such queries over various description logics (Calvanese, Eiter, and Ortiz 2007), how to deal with
some of their extensions (Bienvenu, Ortiz, and Šimkus 2013;
Bienvenu et al. 2014) and how to solve their containment
problem in the presence of DL constraints (Calvanese, Ortiz, and Šimkus 2011).
There are of course many other languages for querying
graph and semi-structured data, the most notable amongst
them being XPath. Originally designed to extract data from
XML trees (XPath 2.0 2010), XPath has recently been
adapted to work over graph databases (Libkin, Martens,
and Vrgoč 2013) and was shown to retain good evaluation properties while at the same time being more powerful than RPQs and many of their extensions. Moreover,
XPath also subsumes navigational graph querying features
of SPARQL 1.1 (Harris and Seaborne 2013), such as property paths, and other commercial graph query languages (see
e.g., Neo4j (Robinson, Webber, and Eifrem 2013)). Therefore we can view XPath as a unifying formalism containing all of the usual querying primitives for graph data. It is
worthwhile noting that connections between XML and DLs
have been explored before (Calvanese, De Giacomo, and
Lenzerini 1999), however this work did not consider querying knowledge bases, but it instead concentrated on reasoning about their structural properties.
To get an impression of the type of queries one can ask in
XPath consider the following: ‘Can I fly from city A to city
B making stops only in cities with UNESCO World Heritage Sites which are endangered?’ If we assume that our
ontology is modelled in a natural way (by having a binary
predicate representing direct flights, another one connecting
cities with UNESCO sites, and one unary predicate signifying if a site is endangered) this query cannot be expressed
by RPQs, but can be expressed using XPath. Additionally,

Applications of description logics (DLs) such as ontologybased data access (OBDA) require understanding of how
to pose database queries over DL knowledge bases. While
there have been many studies regarding traditional relational
query formalisms such as conjunctive queries and their extensions, little attention has been paid to graph database queries,
despite the fact that graph databases have essentially the
same structure as knowledge bases. In particular, not much is
known about the interplay between DLs and XPath. The latter is a powerful formalism for querying semistructured data:
it is in the core of most practical query languages for XML
trees, and it is also gaining popularity in theory and practice
of graph databases. In this paper we make a step towards
coupling knowledge bases and graph databases by studying
how to answer powerful XPath-style queries over simple DLs
like DL-Lite and EL. We start with adapting the definition of
XPath to the DL context, and then proceed to study the complexity of evaluating XPath queries over knowledge bases.
Results show that, while query answering is undecidable for
the full XPath, by carefully tuning the shape of negation allowed in the queries we can arrive at XPath fragments that
have a potential to be used in practice.

Introduction
Satisfiability and model checking have long been two central
problems in the knowledge representation community. However new applications of description logics (DLs for short)
and their practical counterpart the Web Ontology Language
(OWL) (Motik et al. 2012), such as ontology-based data access (OBDA), are forcing us to develop algorithms solving
more complex data manipulation and extraction tasks, and
in particular, require understanding how to answer databasestyle queries over knowledge bases that are specified by DLs
(Glimm et al. 2013).
The literature on knowledge bases usually considers relational queries, mostly focusing on conjunctive queries (CQs)
and their extensions with union (Calvanese et al. 2007; Artale et al. 2009), forms of negation (Rosati 2007; GutiérrezBasulto et al. 2013), and aggregates (Calvanese et al. 2008;
Kostylev and Reutter 2013). Yet arguably the most relevant to DLs database paradigm is graph databases, as these
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1525

