Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi-View Point Registration via Alternating Optimization∗
Junchi Yan12 , Jun Wang5 , Hongyuan Zha34 , Xiaokang Yang1 , Stephen M. Chu2
yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn, j.wang@alibaba-inc.com, zha@cc.gatech.edu, xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn, schu@cn.ibm.com
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China
2
IBM Research – China, Shanghai, 201203, China
3
Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University, Shanghai, 200062, China
4
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, 30332, USA
5
Institue of Data Science and Technology, Alibaba Group, Seattle, WA, 98101, USA
Abstract

eters and correspondences among a set of views with potential performance improvements. Fig.1 gives some exemplar results of the proposed multi-view registration method
which is applied on real images, where the conventional
two-view registration methods often produce unsatisfactory
results due to various reasons, such as local occlusions and
large transformations, among others.
Despite of the empirical success of two-view point registration methods, the extension to multi-view registration
remains as an open problem (Sharp, Lee, and Wehe 2004;
Pooja and Govindu 2010). As a straightway matching strategy based on two-view solution, performing pairwise registration sequentially over all views hardly works well (Pulli
1999). Another potential scheme to reuse the two-view registration techniques is repeating the two-view registration on
each pair of views and then aligning the pairwise alignment
results to derive the final solution. However, this strategy
suffers two major limitations: i) different orders of pairwise
registration may result in non-unique correspondences; ii)
the registration error by the local noise of a pairwise alignment, in an extreme case, may propagate along the pairwise
registration sequence and would be further accumulated if
no extra information is available to dismiss the noise.
It is generally recognized that additional information from
multi-view can help improve the alignment than the case
when only a pair of views is given. To address the above issues and leverage multi-view data, we design a novel multiview registration algorithm via an alternative optimization
procedure. We transform the objective function to a concave
one over iteration efficiently, which can be minimized by a
global optimizer, preventing a local optimum in the sequential cycle of registration process. Extensive empirical studies
corroborate the effectiveness of our method that generates
more accurate and consistent aligning results.

Multi-view point registration is a relatively less studied problem compared with two-view point registration. Directly applying pairwise registration often leads
to matching discrepancy as the mapping between two
point sets can be determined either by direct correspondences or by any intermediate point set. Also, the local
two-view registration tends to be sensitive to noises. We
propose a novel multi-view registration method, where
the optimal registration is achieved via an efficient and
effective alternating concave minimization process. We
further extend our solution to a general case in practice
of registration among point sets with different cardinalities. Extensive empirical evaluations of peer methods on
both synthetic data and real images suggest our method
is robust to large disturbance. In particular, it is shown
that our method outperforms peer point matching methods and performs competitively against graph matching
approaches. The latter approaches utilize the additional
second-order information at the cost of exponentially
increased run-time, thus usually being less efficient.

Introduction
Point matching or registration is a fundamental research
topic in computer vision and pattern recognition since many
applications rely on accurate geometric model acquisition,
including object recognition, localization, tracking, appearance and texture analysis, virtual reality, among others (Lian
and Zhang 2012; Tsin and Kanade 2004; Chui and Rangarajan 2003; Zhang 1994; Myronenko and Song 2010). As a
basic form, two-view point registration generally consists
of two subproblems: i) finding correspondence from two
views; ii) estimating the pose transformation. However, the
key challenge is a typical chicken-and-egg problem: two
subproblems are interlocked, and the overall optimization
is highly non-convex. In practice, data acquisition often involves obtaining either intensity or depth data of an object
from more than two view points (Dorai et al. 1998). Hence,
multi-view point matching or registration has attracted more
attention recently because it involves more matching param-

Related Work
In this section, we provide a structured view on previous
work concerning point registration and a more broad topic
i.e. finding point correspondence.
Application scenario: multi-view vs. two-view There is
extensive work for two-view registration. For instance, given
a rough initial registration, the iterative closest point (ICP)
method iterates between finding the point correspondence
via nearest neighbor method and updating the transforma-

∗
The work is partially supported by NSF DMS-1317424, NSFC
61129001/F010403 and 61025005/F010403.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3834

