Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Computing Explanations in Argumentation
Xiuyi Fan and Francesca Toni
{x.fan09,f.toni}@imperial.ac.uk
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, UK

Abstract

conventional, depicted as a directed graph with nodes being
arguments in A and arcs being attacks in R):

Argumentation can be viewed as a process of generating explanations. However, existing argumentation semantics are
developed for identifying acceptable arguments within a set,
rather than giving concrete justifications for them. In this
work, we propose a new argumentation semantics, related admissibility, designed for giving explanations to arguments in
both Abstract Argumentation and Assumption-based Argumentation. We identify different types of explanations defined
in terms of the new semantics. We also give a correct computational counterpart for explanations using dispute forests.

AO ^=
G
==
==
=
BO ^= CO ^=
==
==
==
==
=
=
F
E
D

A: Choose ic.
B: Why not jh?
D: Because it is not quiet.
C: Why not ritz?
E: But ritz is not cheap (neither is jh).
F : Also, ritz is fully booked.
G: London has good public transport.

We can see that D, E and F defend A. Hence, together,
they fully justify A. However, E by itself or D and F together also justify A. On the other hand, although G is a
piece of valid information, it has nothing to do with A.
Hence, if one is interested in explaining A, G should not
be included in the explanation.

Introduction
Through an arguing process, argumentation has a unique advantage in transparently explaining the procedure and the results of reasoning. Given a topic, the process of arguing can
be viewed as identifying related information and generating
an explanation for the topic, usually through some fictitious
proponent and opponent debate game. Hence, arguing for an
argument can be deemed to explain it.
Many argumentation semantics have been proposed in the
literature. However, existing semantics are designed to answer the question: Given a set of arguments, which subsets
are “good”? They are less useful in directly answering the
question: Given a set of arguments, why is a particular argument “good”? Although this question can be answered with
“because it belongs to a good set”, such answer does not
provide a relevant explanation for the argument in question.
We illustrate the motivation of our work with an
argumentation-based decision making problem adapted
from (Fan and Toni 2013), modelled in Abstract Argumentation (AA) (Dung 1995):
Example 1. An agent needs to decide on accommodation
in London, amongst three options: Imperial College Student Accommodation (ic), the John Howard Hotel (jh), and
the Ritz Hotel (ritz). The two main criteria for deciding are
whether accommodation is cheap and quiet. The agent believes that ic is cheap and quiet, jh is neither, and ritz is only
quiet. Also, it believes that ritz is fully booked and that London has good public transport. The decision to choose ic can
be represented by the following AA framework hA, Ri (as

We propose a new argumentation semantics, related admissibility, specifically for generating relevant explanations.
We define it in the context of AA as well as Assumptionbased Argumentation (ABA) (Dung, Kowalski, and Toni
2009). We choose AA because it is arguably the most widely
used argumentation framework, with great simplicity. We
choose ABA as a representative of structured argumentation
frameworks (Besnard et al. 2014). It is also known that ABA
is an instance of AA (Dung, Mancarella, and Toni 2007) and
it admits AA as an instance (Toni 2012). Both AA and ABA
are well studied with readily usable results.
We identify different types of explanations, all defined in
terms of related admissibility. As an illustration, in Example 1, amongst explanations for A, {A, E} and {A, D, F }
are compact, as each of the two gives sufficient reasons for
A; whereas {A, D, F, E} is verbose, in that it includes all
reasons for A. We use dispute forests, composed of dispute
trees (Dung, Kowalski, and Toni 2009), as the basis for the
computation of (different types of) explanations.
This paper extends (Fan and Toni 2014) in several ways,
in particular by considering ABA as well as AA.

Background
Abstract Argumentation (AA) frameworks (Dung 1995)
are pairs hA, Ri, consisting of a set of abstract arguments,
A, and a binary attack relation, R.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1496

