Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Kernel Density Estimation for Text-Based Geolocation
Mans Hulden

Miikka Silfverberg

Jerid Francom

University of Colorado Boulder
mans.hulden@colorado.edu

University of Helsinki
miikka.silfverberg@helsinki.fi

Wake Forest University
francojc@wfu.edu

Abstract

(2012), which uses a grid that adaptively shrinks in size so
that each cell accommodates roughly the same number of
training documents. In this work we address the data sparsity problem through smoothing out relevant features on a
geodesic grid by kernel density estimation, while maintaining the grid model. We show that kernel density estimation offers consistent and robust results compared with completely discretized models. The amount of bookkeeping is
also minimal compared with many other methods to handle
grid data sparsity.
The paper is laid out as follows: first, we examine the basic geolocation of text documents using Naive Bayes and
Kullback-Leibler divergence, and also introduce our adaptation of kernel density estimation to these methods. In the
following sections we present the data and the details behind our experiments for geolocation using the U.S. G EO T EXT data set and a global W ORLD T WEETS data set. This
is followed by the results and discussion.

Text-based geolocation classifiers often operate with a
grid-based view of the world. Predicting document location of origin based on text content on a geodesic grid
is computationally attractive since many standard methods for supervised document classification carry over
unchanged to geolocation in the form of predicting a
most probable grid cell for a document. However, the
grid-based approach suffers from sparse data problems
if one wants to improve classification accuracy by moving to smaller cell sizes. In this paper we investigate an
enhancement of common methods for determining the
geographic point of origin of a text document by kernel
density estimation. For geolocation of tweets we obtain
a improvements upon non-kernel methods on datasets
of U.S. and global Twitter content.

Introduction
Text-based geolocation has received much attention recently. This is partly attributable to the availability of large
geotagged datasets through Wikipedia and Twitter, which
allows the evaluation of possibilities of geolocating a document solely through its text content.
The problem of geolocating a document has often been
approached as a supervised classification problem where
the task is to associate a document with a discrete cell of
the earth’s surface, given some previous training data for
which the coordinates are known. Many standard classification approaches such as Naive Bayes can be directly
adapted to address the problem of placing a document of unknown origin on a geodesic grid. The grid-based approach
has also been shown to be quite competitive (Serdyukov,
Murdock, and Van Zwol 2009; Wing and Baldridge 2011;
Roller et al. 2012) with other more complex models, such
as ones based on topic modeling (Eisenstein et al. 2010;
Eisenstein, Ahmed, and Xing 2011) and more involved feature engineering (Han, Cook, and Baldwin 2012). However,
discretizing the world into fixed-size bins entails a tradeoff between accuracy and the amount of data available—
the smaller and potentially more accurate the grid becomes,
the more acute is the data sparsity problem for each cell.
This has been partly addressed by work such as Roller et al.

In the current work we discretize the earth’s surface into
square cells C that come in various sizes depending on the
experiment; 10◦ × 10◦ , 5◦ × 5◦ , 2◦ × 2◦ , 1◦ × 1◦ , and
0.5◦ × 0.5◦ .
Under this model, we treat geolocating a text document as
a classification task where the object is to place an unknown
text document in the most appropriate cell ĉ ∈ C. In our
experiments, the features we use for classification are simply the individual words in a document. Although we only
use words, there is in principle no reason why additional
features, linguistic and non-linguistic (Eriksson et al. 2010;
Youn, Mark, and Richards 2009), could not be integrated in
the methods described below.
We briefly look at two popular approaches for classifying
documents on a grid—Naive Bayes and Kullback-Leibler
divergence—and discuss our adaptation of these to use kernel density estimates. Other classification methods can naturally be used. However, given the large number of classes in
the task (e.g. 259,200 for 0.5◦ × 0.5◦ granularity), simpler
methods such as Naive Bayes are more practicable.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Since the Twitter platform started providing information
about the geographic location of tweeters based on self-

Geolocation on a geodesic grid

Applications

145

