Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Efficient Bounds in Heuristic Search Algorithms
for Stochastic Shortest Path Problems
Eric A. Hansen and Ibrahim Abdoulahi
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
Mississippi State University
Mississippi State, MS 39762
hansen@cse.msstate.edu, ia91@msstate.edu

Abstract

Both strategies are based on the insight that if the initial
cost-to-go function is an admissible heuristic (that is, if it underestimates the optimal cost-to-go function), then an asynchronous value iteration algorithm that only updates states
that are reachable from the start state under a greedy policy is guaranteed to converge to the optimal cost-to-go function in the limit, without necessarily evaluating the entire
state space. Given this guarantee of eventual convergence,
the question we address in this paper is how to detect convergence to an -optimal solution after a finite number of
steps, that is, how to detect convergence in practice.
The original RTDP algorithm does not include a convergence test (Barto, Bradtke, and Singh 1995). The first
heuristic search algorithm for SSP problems to include a
test for convergence to an -optimal policy is the LAO* algorithm (Hansen and Zilberstein 2001). However, its test
for convergence relies on bounds that are as expensive to
compute as exact policy evaluation, and its approach has
not been used in subsequent algorithms; it is even omitted
in some implementations of LAO*. Bonet and Geffner describe several related algorithms, including HDP (2003a),
LRTDP (2003b), and LDFS (2006), that adopt a similar
strategy as LAO*, with the addition of a labeling technique
that accelerates convergence. But the algorithms do not attempt to detect convergence to an -optimal policy. Instead,
they test for convergence to an -consistent cost-to-go function, which means they test whether the Bellman residual
(the largest change in state value in a given iteration) is less
than some  > 0. Although this convergence test is much
more efficient than the one proposed for LAO*, it does not
provide a genuine error bound. In fact, it does not guarantee
that a policy found by this approach will reach the goal state.
Another approach to testing for convergence is to compute both lower and upper bounds, and test whether the
gap between the bounds is less than . This approach
has been implemented in extensions of RTDP (McMahan,
Likhachev, and Gordon 2005; Smith and Simmons 2006;
Sanner et al. 2009) and LAO* (Warnquist, Kvarnström, and
Doherty 2010), and it has the advantage that it provides
meaningful error bounds. It also has the advantage that if
the upper-bound function is computed in such a way that it
is a monotone upper bound, a greedy policy with respect
to a monotone upper-bound function is guaranteed to be
proper (McMahan, Likhachev, and Gordon 2005). A draw-

Fully observable decision-theoretic planning problems
are commonly modeled as stochastic shortest path
(SSP) problems. For this class of planning problems,
heuristic search algorithms (including LAO*, RTDP,
and related algorithms), as well as the value iteration
algorithm on which they are based, lack an efficient
test for convergence to an -optimal policy (except in
the special case of discounting). We introduce a simple
and efficient test for convergence that applies to SSP
problems with positive action costs. The test can detect
whether a policy is proper, that is, whether it achieves
the goal state with probability 1. If proper, it gives error bounds that can be used to detect convergence to an
-optimal solution. The convergence test incurs no extra overhead besides computing the Bellman residual,
and the performance guarantee it provides substantially
improves the utility of this class of planning algorithms.

Introduction
Fully observable decision-theoretic planning problems are
commonly modeled as stochastic shortest path (SSP) problems. For this class of problems, actions can have probabilistic outcomes, and the objective is to find a conditional plan,
or policy, that reaches a goal state from a start state with
minimum expected cost. Classic dynamic programming and
linear programming methods solve such problems for the
entire state space. By contrast, several algorithms developed
in the AI community use heuristic search to focus computation on relevant states, and can find a conditional plan while
evaluating only a fraction of the state space.
There are two broad strategies for using heuristic search
in solving SSP problems. Real-time dynamic programming
(RTDP) uses trial-based search methods that generalize realtime heuristic search techniques (Barto, Bradtke, and Singh
1995; Bonet and Geffner 2003b; McMahan, Likhachev, and
Gordon 2005; Smith and Simmons 2006; Sanner et al.
2009). Another strategy employs systematic search methods
that generalize techniques for traditional AND/OR graph
search (Hansen and Zilberstein 2001; Bonet and Geffner
2003a; 2006; Warnquist, Kvarnström, and Doherty 2010).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3283

