Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Kickback Cuts Backprop’s Red-Tape:
Biologically Plausible Credit Assignment in Neural Networks
David Balduzzi

Hastagiri Vanchinathan

Joachim Buhmann

david.balduzzi@vuw.ac.nz
Victoria University of Wellington

hastagiri@inf.ethz.ch
ETH Zurich

jbuhmann@inf.ethz.ch
ETH Zurich

Abstract

– and the problem that it solves – credit assignment. This paper revisits the credit assignment problem and takes a fresh
look at the signaling architecture that underlies Backprop.

Error backpropagation is an extremely effective algorithm
for assigning credit in artificial neural networks. However,
weight updates under Backprop depend on lengthy recursive
computations and require separate output and error messages
– features not shared by biological neurons, that are perhaps
unnecessary. In this paper, we revisit Backprop and the credit
assignment problem.
We first decompose Backprop into a collection of interacting learning algorithms; provide regret bounds on the performance of these sub-algorithms; and factorize Backprop’s error signals. Using these results, we derive a new credit assignment algorithm for nonparametric regression, Kickback, that
is significantly simpler than Backprop. Finally, we provide
a sufficient condition for Kickback to follow error gradients,
and show that Kickback matches Backprop’s performance on
real-world regression benchmarks.

Outline. Our starting point is to decompose Backprop into
local learning algorithms, Theorem 1. Nodes under Backprop are modeled as agents that minimize their losses. Backprop ensures that nodes cooperate, towards the shared goal
of minimizing the output layer’s error, by gluing together
their loss functions using recursively computed error signals.
Reformulating Backprop as local learners immediately
suggests modifying the signaling architecture (the glue)
whilst keeping the learners. In this paper, we aim to simplify
Backprop’s error signals.
Theorem 2 lays the groundwork, by providing a regret
bound for local learners that holds for any scalar feedback
– and not just the error signals used by Backprop.
The next step is to show that, when a neural network
has 1-dimensional outputs (e.g. nonparametric regression),
Backprop’s error signals factorize into two components,
Theorem 3. The first component is a scalar error computed
at the output layer that is analogous to a neuromodulatory
signal; the second is a complicated sum over paths to the
output layer that has no biological analog.
Our proposed algorithm, Kickback, modifies Backprop by
truncating the second component. Kickback is not gradient
descent on the output error. Nevertheless, Theorem 4 provides a simple sufficient condition, coherence, for Kickback
to follow the error gradient.
It turns out that many of the components of Kickback have
close neurophysiological analogs. We discuss Kickback’s
biological significance by relating it to a recently developed,
discrete-time model neuron (Balduzzi and Besserve 2012).
Finally, we present experiments demonstrating that Kickback matches Backprop’s performance on standard benchmark datasets.

Introduction
The discovery of error backpropagation was hailed as a
breakthrough because it solved the main problem of distributed learning – the spatial credit assignment problem
(Werbos 1974; Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986).
Decades later, Backprop is the workhorse underlying most
deep learning algorithms, and a major component of the
state-of-the-art in supervised learning.
Since Backprop’s introduction, there has been tremendous progress improving the performance of neural networks. An enormous amount of effort has been expended
exploring the effects of: the activation functions of nodes;
network architectures (e.g. number of layers and number of
nodes); regularizers such as dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014);
modifications to accelerate gradient descent; and unsupervised methods for pre-training to find better local optima.
However, it was known from the start that Backprop is not
biologically plausible (Crick 1989). Implementing Backprop requires that neurons produce two distinct signals –
outputs and errors – whereas only one has been observed
in cortex (Lamme and Roelfsema 2000; Roelfsema and van
Ooyen 2005).
It is therefore remarkable that almost no attempts have
been made to rethink the core algorithm – backpropagation

Synopsis. Our contribution is twofold. Firstly, we provide
a series of simple, fundamental theorems on Backprop, one
of the most heavily used learning algorithms. In particular,
Theorem 1 suggests that ideas from multi-agent learning and
mechanism design have a role to play in deep learning.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

485

