Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Spatio-Spectral Exploration Combining In Situ and Remote Measurements
David R. Thompson

David Wettergreen and Greydon Foil

Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
4800 Oak Grove Dr.
Pasadena, CA 91109
david.r.thompson@jpl.nasa.gov

The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{dsw,gfoil}@ri.cmu.edu

Michael Furlong

Anatha Ravi Kiran

Intelligent Robotics Group
NASA Ames Research Center
Naval Air Station, Moffett Field
Mountain View, CA 94035
furlong@gmail.com

Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
4800 Oak Grove Dr.
Pasadena, CA 91109
ravi.kiran@jpl.nasa.gov

Abstract

Wagstaff et al. 2013) or informative path and observation
planning based on active learning or spatial experimental design (Thompson, Wettergreen, and Peralta 2011).
This work broadens adaptive exploration in two important directions. Most prior approaches to informative observation planning assume measurements at each location
are scalar or uncorrelated with each other (e.g. Low, Dolan,
and Khosla 2008 for a typical example). Here we address
high-dimensional spectrometer data having strong correlations across dimensions. We also account for previous measurements of the explored area at different spatial and/or
wavelength resolutions. This is important because, literalism aside, robotic space exploration seldom takes place in a
vacuum; preparatory remote sensing almost always precedes
the in situ traverse. These remote data inform, and largely
prescribe, the exploration objectives. Such partnerships play
to the strengths of both platforms: orbital measurements can
identify investigation sites, and in situ sensors can provide
more unambiguous interpretations.
We focus on the case of Visible to Shortwave Infrared
(VSWIR) spectroscopy (Green et al. 1998; Plaza et al.
2009). In our scenario, a field robot refines a low-resolution
orbital image using an in situ VSWIR reflectance spectrometer. VSWIR spectroscopy is a useful test case because of
its ubiquity in terrestrial and planetary exploration. It contributes greatly to our understanding of mineralogy, atmospheric composition, and on Earth, agriculture, commerce,
and the biosphere. However, orbital sensors have large pixel
sizes (often 30m or more) so small localized features can go
undetected. In situ sensing can complement these data by revealing pure signals from subpixel features. In-situ sensors
also provide improved spectral resolution and signal to noise
ratios (SNRs) which make them helpful for validating bulk
properties of larger targets.
The paper defines a novel spatio-spectral exploration objective. Here the robot accumulates a spectral library that

Adaptive exploration uses active learning principles to
improve the efficiency of autonomous robotic surveys.
This work considers an important and understudied
aspect of autonomous exploration: in situ validation
of remote sensing measurements. We focus on highdimensional sensor data with a specific case study of
spectroscopic mapping. A field robot refines an orbital
image by measuring the surface at many wavelengths.
We introduce a new objective function based on spectral unmixing that seeks pure spectral signatures to accurately model diluted remote signals. This objective reflects physical properties of the multi-wavelength data.
The rover visits locations that jointly improve its model
of the environment while satisfying time and energy
constraints. We simulate exploration using alternative
planning approaches, and show proof of concept results
with the canonical spectroscopic map of a mining district in Cuprite, Nevada.

Introduction
A growing body of AI research tries to make robots more
effective partners during remote exploration and survey. As
rover traverse distance increases, it becomes increasingly
important to incorporate science data into rover navigational
and science activity planning (Thompson, Wettergreen, and
Peralta 2011). Formalizing this process can enable rover autonomy that improves data collection during the long periods when the rover is out of touch with ground control
(Wettergreen et al. 2008). By incorporating remote sensing into the automated science assessment, autonomous explorers can be more resilient to disruptions or opportunities, acting as a more informed proxy for the remote science team. Typical approaches involve detection and measurement of discrete features of interest (Estlin et al. 2006;
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3679

