Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Verifying and Synthesising Multi-Agent Systems
against One-Goal Strategy Logic Specifications
Petr Čermák and Alessio Lomuscio

Aniello Murano

Imperial College London, UK

Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Italy

Abstract

zinger, and Piterman 2010; Mogavero, Murano, and Vardi
2010) have however pointed out significant limitations of
ATL when used in a MAS setting. One of these is the syntactic impossibility of referring explicitly to what particular
strategies a group of agents ought to use when evaluating the
realisability of temporal properties in a MAS. Being able to
do so would enable us to express typical MAS properties, including strategic game-theoretic considerations for a group
of agents in a cooperative or adversarial setting.
In response to this shortcoming, Strategy logic (S L), a
strict extension of any logic in the ATL hierarchy, has recently been put forward (Mogavero, Murano, and Vardi
2010). In S L, strategies are explicitly referred to by using
first-order quantifiers and bindings to agents. Sophisticated
concepts such as Nash equilibria, which cannot be expressed
in ATL, can naturally be encoded in S L.
Given this, a natural and compelling question that arises is
whether automatic and efficient verification methodologies
for MAS against S L specifications can be devised. The answer to this is negative in general: model checking systems
against S L specifications is N ON E LEMENTARY S PACE HARD (Mogavero et al. 2014), thereby hindering any concrete application on large systems. It is therefore of interest
to investigate whether computationally attractive methodologies can be put forward for fragments of S L. The only
contributions we are aware of in this regard are (Čermák et
al. 2014; Huang and Meyden 2014), where model checking
MAS against a memoryless fragment of S L combined with
epistemic modalities was studied. Although a tool was released, memoryless strategies severely constrain the expressivity of the formalism.
To overcome this difficulty, we here put forward a technique for the verification and synthesis of MAS against specifications given in One-Goal Strategy Logic, or S L [1 G ], an
expressive variant of S L. We claim there are several advantages of choosing this setting. Firstly, and differently from
full S L, strategies in S L [1 G ] are behavioural (Mogavero et
al. 2014). A consequence of this is that they can be synthesised automatically, as we show later. Secondly, S L [1 G ],
in the perfect recall setting we here consider, retains considerable expressiveness and is strictly more expressive than
any ATL variant, including ATL *. Thirdly, the complexity
of the model checking problem is the same as that for ATL *,
thereby making its verification attractive.

Strategy Logic (S L) has recently come to the fore as a useful
specification language to reason about multi-agent systems.
Its one-goal fragment, or S L [1 G ], is of particular interest as
it strictly subsumes widely used logics such as ATL *, while
maintaining attractive complexity features. In this paper we
put forward an automata-based methodology for verifying
and synthesising multi-agent systems against specifications
given in S L [1 G ]. We show that the algorithm is sound and
optimal from a computational point of view. A key feature
of the approach is that all data structures and operations on
them can be performed on BDDs. We report on a BDD-based
model checker implementing the algorithm and evaluate its
performance on the fair process scheduler synthesis.

1

Introduction

A concern in the deployment of autonomous multi-agent
systems (MAS) is the limited availability of efficient techniques and toolkits for their verification. The problem is
compounded by the fact that MAS require ad-hoc techniques
and tools. This is because, while reactive systems are typically specified purely by temporal properties, MAS are instead described by statements expressing a number of typical AI concepts including knowledge, beliefs, intentions,
and abilities.
Some progress in this direction has been achieved in the
past decade. For example, several efficient techniques are
now available for the verification of MAS against temporalepistemic languages (Meyden and Shilov 1999; Raimondi
and Lomuscio 2005; Kouvaros and Lomuscio 2013; Meski
et al. 2014). Some of these have been implemented into
fully-fledged model checkers (Gammie and van der Meyden
2004; Kacprzak et al. 2008; Lomuscio, Qu, and Raimondi
2009).
Less attention has so far been given to the verification
of properties expressing cooperation and enforcement (Lomuscio and Raimondi 2006; Kacprzak and Penczek 2005).
While the underlying logics have been thoroughly investigated at theoretical level (Bulling and Jamroga 2014), tool
support is more sketchy and typically limited to alternatingtime temporal logic (ATL) (Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002). A number of recent papers (Chatterjee, HenCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2038

