Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Hybrid Models with Guarded Transitions
Pedro Santana∗ , Spencer Lane∗ , Eric Timmons∗ , Brian Williams∗ , Carlos Forster+
∗

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MERS
32 Vassar St. Room 32-224, Cambridge, MA 02139, {psantana,slane,etimmons,williams}@mit.edu
+
Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica
Pç. Mal. Eduardo Gomes, 50. Vl. das Acácias, 12228-900-São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil, forster@ita.br

Abstract

state can be governed by potentially distinct sets of difference or differential equations, therefore giving rise to a
multiple-model system. Another feature of PHA is that discrete mode transitions are guarded, i.e., the probability of
their occurrence depends on the continuous states and inputs to the system. For example, the switched RC circuit
in Figure 1 can be modeled as a simple PHA with guarded
transitions. The discrete mode represents whether the circuit
is charging or discharging; the continuous state is the output voltage; and the input to system comes from the voltage
source. Our results in Section 5 indicate that being able to
handle stochastic guarded transitions is essential to improve
the accuracy of hybrid inference algorithms, for these guards
shed additional light on hidden mode transitions.

Innovative methods have been developed for diagnosis,
activity monitoring, and state estimation that achieve
high accuracy through the use of stochastic models involving hybrid discrete and continuous behaviors. A
key bottleneck is the automated acquisition of these hybrid models, and recent methods have focused predominantly on Jump Markov processes and piecewise autoregressive models. In this paper, we present a novel algorithm capable of performing unsupervised learning of
guarded Probabilistic Hybrid Automata (PHA) models,
which extends prior work by allowing stochastic discrete mode transitions in a hybrid system to have a functional dependence on its continuous state. Our experiments indicate that guarded PHA models can yield significant performance improvements when used by hybrid state estimators, particularly when diagnosing the
true discrete mode of the system, without any noticeable impact on their real-time performance.

1

Introduction

In the field of dynamical systems, we refer to a model as
being hybrid if its behavior combines features of continuous and discrete state dynamics (van der Schaft and Schumacher 2000; Goebel, Sanfelice, and Teel 2009). For example, modern electronic circuits switch transistors on and off
in order to control the flow of current, an inherently continuous quantity, across different components. Estimation
and control involving hybrid models have proven valuable
for a range of tasks involving complex behavior, in which
accuracy is often paramount. Such real-world examples include target tracking (Blom and Bar-Shalom 1988), monitoring of aircraft at airports (Seah and Hwang 2009), fault
diagnosis for space explorers (Hofbaur and Williams 2002;
Blackmore et al. 2007), and control in degraded modes (Santana, Borges, and Ishihara 2010), among many others.
Probabilistic Hybrid Automata (PHA) (Hofbaur and
Williams 2002; 2004) constitute a hybrid model class that
can represent a large number of engineered systems. In a
PHA, one refers to the discrete state as the mode of the automaton, which is usually hidden. Depending on its mode,
the dynamics of the continuous portion of the automaton’s

Figure 1: Switched RC circuit.
Effective methods have been developed to perform inference on Jump Markov Linear Systems (JMLS) (Blom
and Bar-Shalom 1988; Mazor et al. 1998; Doucet, Gordon, and Krishnamurthy 2001; Hwang, Balakrishnan, and
Tomlin 2006; Seah and Hwang 2009), a particular type of
PHA with unguarded, purely stochastic mode transitions.
There has been significant effort in the scientific community to automate the acquisition of JMLS (Logothetis and
Krishnamurthy 1999; Henry 2002; Balakrishnan et al. 2004;
Blackmore et al. 2007) and Piecewise Affine Autoregressive
with Exogenous input (PWARX) models (Nakada, Takaba,
and Katayama 2005; Juloski, Weiland, and Heemels 2005;
Paoletti et al. 2007; Baptista, Ishihara, and Borges 2011),
for the manual specification of such models can be quite a
challenging and time-consuming task for even small-scale
systems. Both types of model follow a similar high-level
procedure when being learned from data. The first step is
to determine which discrete mode was responsible for gen-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1847

