Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Loss-Calibrated Monte Carlo Action Selection
Ehsan Abbasnejad

Justin Domke

Scott Sanner

ANU & NICTA
ehsan.abbasnejad@anu.edu.au

NICTA & ANU
justin.domke@nicta.com.au

NICTA & ANU
scott.sanner@nicta.com.au

Abstract
Bayesian decision-theory underpins robust decisionmaking in applications ranging from plant control to
robotics where hedging action selection against state
uncertainty is critical for minimizing low probability
but potentially catastrophic outcomes (e.g, uncontrollable plant conditions or robots falling into stairwells).
Unfortunately, belief state distributions in such settings are often complex and/or high dimensional, thus
prohibiting the efficient application of analytical techniques for expected utility computation when real-time
control is required. This leaves Monte Carlo evaluation as one of the few viable (and hence frequently
used) techniques for online action selection. However,
loss-insensitive Monte Carlo methods may require large
numbers of samples to identify optimal actions with
high certainty since they may sample from high probability regions that do not disambiguate action utilities. In this paper we remedy this problem by deriving an optimal proposal distribution for a loss-calibrated
Monte Carlo importance sampler that bounds the regret
of using an estimated optimal action. Empirically, we
show that using our loss-calibrated Monte Carlo method
yields high-accuracy optimal action selections in a fraction of the number of samples required by conventional
loss-insensitive samplers.

Figure 1: Motivation for loss-calibration in Monte Carlo action selection. (Top) Utility u(θ) for actions a1 and a2 as a
function of state θ. (Middle) A belief state distribution p(θ)
for which the optimal action arg maxa∈{a1 ,a2 } Ep [u(θ, a)]
should be computed. (Bottom) A potential proposal distribution q(θ) for importance sampling to determine the optimal
action to take in p(θ).
belief distribution p(θ) may be complex (e.g., highly multimodal) and/or high-dimensional thus prohibiting the application of analytical methods to evaluate the EU integral
of (1). Practitioners often resort to the use of Monte Carlo
methods to compute an approximate (but unbiased) expectation using n samples from p(θ):

Introduction

n

1X
[u(θ i , a)],
n i=1

Bayesian decision-theory (Gelman et al. 1995; Robert 2001;
Berger 2010) provides a formalization of robust decisionmaking in uncertain settings by maximizing expected utility. Formally, a utility function u(θ, a) quantifies the return
of performing an action a ∈ A = {a1 , . . . , ak } in a given
state θ. When the true state is uncertain and only a belief
state distribution p(θ) is known, Bayesian decision-theory
posits that an optimal control action a should maximize the
expected utility (EU)
ˆ
U(a) = E[u(θ, a)] = u(θ, a)p(θ)dθ.
(1)
where by definition, the optimal action a∗ is
a∗ = arg max U(a).
a

θ i ∼ p.

(3)

Unfortunately, naı̈ve application of Monte Carlo methods
for optimal action selection often proves to be inefficient
as we illustrate in Figure 1. At the top we show two utility functions for actions a1 and a2 as a function of univariate state θ on the x-axis. Below this, in blue, we show
the known state belief distribution p(θ). Here, it turns out
that U(a1 ) > U(a2 ). Unfortunately, if we sample from p(θ)
to compute a Monte Carlo expected utility for each of a1
and a2 , we find ourselves sampling frequently in the region
where u(θ, a1 ) and u(θ, a2 ) are very close, but where suboptimal a2 is marginally better than a1 .
An intuitive remedy to this problem is provided by an importance sampling approach (see e.g. (Geweke 1989)) where
we sample more heavily in regions as indicated by distribution q(θ) and then reweight the Monte Carlo expectation to
provide an unbiased estimate of U(a). Formally, the theory

(2)

In real-world settings such as robotics (Thrun 2000), the
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3447

