Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

From Classical to Consistent Query Answering under Existential Rules
Thomas Lukasiewicz1
2

Maria Vanina Martinez2

Andreas Pieris3

Gerardo I. Simari2

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
Departamento de Ciencias e Ingenierı́a de la Computación, Universidad Nacional del Sur and CONICET, Argentina
3
Institute of Information Systems, Vienna University of Technology, Austria

thomas.lukasiewicz@cs.ox.ac.uk, {mvm,gis}@cs.uns.edu.ar,
pieris@dbai.tuwien.ac.at
Abstract

al. 2010), is the most widely accepted semantics for querying inconsistent ontologies. The AR semantics is based on
the idea that an answer is considered to be valid if it can
be inferred from each of the repairs of the extensional data
set D, i.e., the ⊆-maximal consistent subsets of D. Obtaining the set of consistent answers under the AR semantics
is known to be a hard problem, even for very simple languages (Lembo et al. 2010). For this reason, several other
semantics have been recently developed with the aim of
approximating the set of consistent answers (Lembo et al.
2010; Bienvenu 2012; Lukasiewicz, Martinez, and Simari
2012; Bienvenu and Rosati 2013).
It is widely accepted that the variety of ontologies underlying practical applications requires a good understanding of
the computational complexity of inconsistency-tolerant semantics. In this work, we are interested in the AR semantics.
The complexity of query answering under the AR semantics (and also under several other semantics) when the ontology is described using one of the central DLs is rather well
understood. The data and combined complexity were studied in (Rosati 2011) for a wide spectrum of DLs, while the
work (Bienvenu 2012) identifies cases for simple ontologies
(within the DL-Lite family) for which tractable data complexity results can be obtained.
Although the AR semantics has been thoroughly studied
for several key DLs, little is known when the ontology is described using existential rules, that is, formulas of the form
∀X ϕ(X) → ∃Y p(X, Y), and negative constraints of the
form ∀X ϕ(X) → ⊥, where ⊥ denotes the truth constant
false. An exception are the works (Lukasiewicz, Martinez,
and Simari 2012; 2013), where the data complexity of the
AR semantics is studied for several classes of existential
rules enriched with negative constraints. Notice that existential rules are also known as tuple-generating dependencies
(TGDs) and Datalog± rules (Calı̀ et al. 2010); henceforth,
for brevity, we adopt the term TGDs.
Our main goal in this work is to perform an in-depth analysis of the combined complexity of query answering under
the main decidable classes of TGDs, enriched with negative
constraints, focusing on the AR semantics. Let us recall that
the main (syntactic) conditions on TGDs that guarantee the
decidability of CQ answering are guardedness (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Kifer 2013), stickiness (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Pieris
2012) and acyclicity. Another important fragment of TGDs,

Querying inconsistent ontologies is an intriguing new
problem that gave rise to a flourishing research activity
in the description logic (DL) community. The computational complexity of consistent query answering under
the main DLs is rather well understood; however, little
is known about existential rules. The goal of the current work is to perform an in-depth analysis of the complexity of consistent query answering under the main
decidable classes of existential rules enriched with negative constraints. Our investigation focuses on one of
the most prominent inconsistency-tolerant semantics,
namely, the AR semantics. We establish a generic complexity result, which demonstrates the tight connection
between classical and consistent query answering. This
result allows us to obtain in a uniform way a relatively
complete picture of the complexity of our problem.

Introduction
An ontology is an explicit specification of a conceptualization of an area of interest. One of the main applications of
ontologies is in ontology-based data access (OBDA) (Poggi
et al. 2008), where they are used to enrich the extensional
data with intensional knowledge. In this setting, description logics (DLs) and rule-based formalisms such as existential rules are popular ontology languages, while conjunctive queries (CQs) form the central querying tool. In real-life
applications, involving large amounts of data, it is possible
that the data are inconsistent with the ontology. Inconsistencies of this kind may result from automated procedures such
as data integration and ontology matching. Since standard
ontology languages adhere to the classical FOL semantics,
inconsistencies are nothing else than logical contradictions.
Thus, the classical inference semantics fails terribly when
faced with an inconsistency, since everything follows from
a contradiction. This demonstrates the need for developing
inconsistency-tolerant semantics for ontological reasoning.
There has been a recent and increasing focus on the development of such semantics for query answering purposes.
Consistent query answering, first developed for relational
databases (Arenas, Bertossi, and Chomicki 1999) and then
generalized as the AR semantics for several DLs (Lembo et
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1546

