Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Robot Learning Manipulation Action Plans by
“Watching” Unconstrained Videos from the World Wide Web
Yezhou Yang

Yi Li

Cornelia Fermüller

Yiannis Aloimonos

University of Maryland
yzyang@cs.umd.edu

NICTA, Australia
yi.li@nicta.com.au

University of Maryland
fer@umiacs.umd.edu

University of Maryland
yiannis@cs.umd.edu

Abstract

Kyriazis, and Argyros 2011). The acquisition of grasp information from video (without 3D information) is still considered very difficult because of the large variation in appearance and the occlusions of the hand from objects during
manipulation.
Our premise is that actions of manipulation are represented at multiple levels of abstraction. At lower levels the
symbolic quantities are grounded in perception, and at the
high level a grammatical structure represents symbolic information (objects, grasping types, actions). With the recent
development of deep neural network approaches, our system
integrates a CNN based object recognition and a CNN based
grasping type recognition module. The latter recognizes the
subject’s grasping type directly from image patches.
The grasp type is an essential component in the characterization of manipulation actions. Just from the viewpoint
of processing videos, the grasp contains information about
the action itself, and it can be used for prediction or as a feature for recognition. It also contains information about the
beginning and end of action segments, thus it can be used to
segment videos in time. If we are to perform the action with
a robot, knowledge about how to grasp the object is necessary so the robot can arrange its effectors. For example, consider a humanoid with one parallel gripper and one vacuum
gripper. When a power grasp is desired, the robot should
select the vacuum gripper for a stable grasp, but when a precision grasp is desired, the parallel gripper is a better choice.
Thus, knowing the grasping type provides information for
the robot to plan the configuration of its effectors, or even
the type of effector to use.
In order to perform a manipulation action, the robot also
needs to learn what tool to grasp and on what object to perform the action. Our system applies CNN based recognition modules to recognize the objects and tools in the video.
Then, given the beliefs of the tool and object (from the output of the recognition), our system predicts the most likely
action using language, by mining a large corpus using a
technique similar to (Yang et al. 2011). Putting everything
together, the output from the lower level visual perception
system is in the form of (LeftHand GraspType1 Object1 Action RightHand GraspType2 Object2). We will refer to this
septet of quantities as visual sentence.
At the higher level of representation, we generate a symbolic command sequence. (Yang et al. 2014) proposed a

In order to advance action generation and creation in robots
beyond simple learned schemas we need computational tools
that allow us to automatically interpret and represent human
actions. This paper presents a system that learns manipulation action plans by processing unconstrained videos from
the World Wide Web. Its goal is to robustly generate the sequence of atomic actions of seen longer actions in video in
order to acquire knowledge for robots. The lower level of the
system consists of two convolutional neural network (CNN)
based recognition modules, one for classifying the hand grasp
type and the other for object recognition. The higher level
is a probabilistic manipulation action grammar based parsing module that aims at generating visual sentences for robot
manipulation. Experiments conducted on a publicly available unconstrained video dataset show that the system is able
to learn manipulation actions by “watching” unconstrained
videos with high accuracy.

Introduction
The ability to learn actions from human demonstrations is
one of the major challenges for the development of intelligent systems. Particularly, manipulation actions are very
challenging, as there is large variation in the way they can
be performed and there are many occlusions.
Our ultimate goal is to build a self-learning robot that is
able to enrich its knowledge about fine grained manipulation
actions by “watching” demo videos. In this work we explicitly model actions that involve different kinds of grasping,
and aim at generating a sequence of atomic commands by
processing unconstrained videos from the World Wide Web
(WWW).
The robotics community has been studying perception
and control problems of grasping for decades (Shimoga
1996). Recently, several learning based systems were reported that infer contact points or how to grasp an object from its appearance (Saxena, Driemeyer, and Ng 2008;
Lenz, Lee, and Saxena 2014). However, the desired grasping type could be different for the same target object, when
used for different action goals. Traditionally, data about the
grasp has been acquired using motion capture gloves or hand
trackers, such as the model-based tracker of (Oikonomidis,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3686

