Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning to Mediate Perceptual
Differences in Situated Human-Robot Dialogue
Changsong Liu and Joyce Y. Chai
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan 48824
{cliu, jchai}@cse.msu.edu
Abstract

Computational approaches to referential grounding often
consist of two key components (Gorniak and Roy 2004;
Siebert and Schlangen 2008; Liu, Fang, and Chai 2012). The
first component addresses formalisms and methods that connect linguistic terms (e.g., red, left) to the lower level numerical features (e.g., rgb vectors) captured in the robot’s
representation of the perceived environment. We call this
component the word grounding models. The second component extracts all the linguistic terms from a referring expression and combines their grounding models together to
identify referents. For example, given a referring expression
“the big blue bottle to the left of the red box”, it will recognize that the intended referent has several attributes (e.g.,
color is blue, size is big, type is bottle) and it is to the left
of another object. Then it will combine all relevant sensors’
inputs and apply the corresponding word grounding models
to identify the referent that most likely satisfies the referring
expression.
Many previous works on referential grounding have focused on the first component, i.e., exploring how to learn and
ground individual linguistic terms to low level physical attributes (e.g., Roy 2002; Barnard et al. 2003; Roy 2005). Although different algorithms have been applied for the second
component (Liu, Fang, and Chai 2012; Liu et al. 2014), little
attention has been paid to the question how to intelligently
combine different attributes to ground references. However,
this is an important question for human-robot dialogue since
the human and the robot have mismatched representations of
the shared environment. For example, the robot may not recognize any bottle, or may see something blue but not a bottle. Furthermore, the robot’s perception of blue may be very
different from the human’s perception of blue. How should
the robot utilize these different attributes? What part of its
own perception should the robot trust the most when there is
potential mismatch with the human’s perception?
To address these questions, we have been investigating
computational approaches that will allow the robot to learn
and mediate perceptual differences during human-robot dialogue. The idea is that, by interacting with its human partner
(e.g., through dialogue), the robot should be able to assess
its perceptual differences from its human partner. In particular, the robot should be able to learn what dimension(s) of
its own perception (e.g., recognition of objects or colors)
are more reliable, namely more aligned with the human’s

In human-robot dialogue, although a robot and its human
partner are co-present in a shared environment, they have
significantly mismatched perceptual capabilities (e.g., recognizing objects in the surroundings). When a shared perceptual basis is missing, it becomes difficult for the robot
to identify referents in the physical world that are referred
to by the human (i.e., a problem of referential grounding).
To overcome this problem, we have developed an optimization based approach that allows the robot to detect and
adapt to perceptual differences. Through online interaction
with the human, the robot can learn a set of weights indicating how reliably/unreliably each dimension (e.g., object
type, object color, etc.) of its perception of the environment
maps to the human’s linguistic descriptors and thus adjust
its word models accordingly. Our empirical evaluation has
shown that this weight-learning approach can successfully
adjust the weights to reflect the robot’s perceptual limitations.
The learned weights, together with updated word models, can
lead to a significant improvement for referential grounding in
future dialogues.

Introduction
A new generation of robots have emerged in recent years to
serve as humans’ assistants and companions (Christensen,
Kruijff, and Wyatt 2010). To allow humans to better interact with these robots, techniques to support situated humanrobot dialogue become crucial. Unlike traditional spoken
dialogue systems (McTear 2002) and conversational interfaces (Johnston et al. 2002; Chai et al. 2004), one significant challenge in situated human-robot dialogue is that the
robot needs to perceive and make sense of the shared environment simultaneously during conversation. The robot’s
representation of the shared world is often limited by its
preceptual (e.g., computer vision algorithms) and reasoning (i.e., inference algorithms) capabilities. Therefore, although co-present, humans and robots do not share a joint
perceptual experience. The lack of a shared pereptual basis
will jeopadize referential communication between the human and the robot. It will become more difficult for the robot
to identify referents in the physical world that are referred to
by the human, i.e., a problem of referential grounding.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2288

