Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Generalization Analysis for Game-Theoretic Machine Learning
Haifang Li1,∗ , Fei Tian2,∗ , Wei Chen3,† , Tao Qin3 , Zhi-Ming Ma1 , Tie-Yan Liu3
1

Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China
2
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, P.R.China
3
Microsoft Research, Building 2, No. 5 Danling Street, Beijing, P.R.China
lihaifang@amss.ac.cn, tianfei@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {wche,taoqin}@microsoft.com
mazm@amt.ac.cn, tie-yan.liu@microsoft.com

Abstract

their services or products) in response to the mechanism (or
more accurately the signals they receive since the mechanism is invisible to them). Take sponsored search as an example. When a user submits a query to the search engine (the
platform), the search engine runs an auction to determine a
ranked list of ads based on the bid prices reported by the advertisers (the agents). If the user clicks on (gives feedback
to) an ad, the search engine will charge the corresponding
advertiser a certain amount of money. After a few rounds of
auctions, the search engine will provide the advertisers with
some signals on the auction outcome, e.g., the average rank
positions of their ads, the numbers of clicks, and the total
payments. Based on such signals, the advertisers may adjust
their bidding behaviors to be better off in the future.
It is clear that the mechanism plays a central role in the
aforementioned dynamic system. It determines the satisfaction of the users, the payoffs of the agents, and the revenue of
the platform. Therefore, how to optimize the mechanism becomes an important research topic. In recent years, a number
of research works (Lahaie and Pennock 2007; Radlinski et
al. 2008; Zhu et al. 2009a; 2009b; Medina and Mohri 2014;
He et al. 2014; Tian et al. 2014) have used machine learning
to optimize the mechanism. These works could be categorized into three types.

For Internet applications like sponsored search, cautions need to be taken when using machine learning
to optimize their mechanisms (e.g., auction) since selfinterested agents in these applications may change their
behaviors (and thus the data distribution) in response to
the mechanisms. To tackle this problem, a framework
called game-theoretic machine learning (GTML) was
recently proposed, which first learns a Markov behavior
model to characterize agents behaviors, and then learns
the optimal mechanism by simulating agents’ behavior
changes in response to the mechanism. While GTML
has demonstrated practical success, its generalization
analysis is challenging because the behavior data are
non-i.i.d. and dependent on the mechanism. To address
this challenge, first, we decompose the generalization
error for GTML into the behavior learning error and
the mechanism learning error; second, for the behavior learning error, we obtain novel non-asymptotic error
bounds for both parametric and non-parametric behavior learning methods; third, for the mechanism learning error, we derive a uniform convergence bound based
on a new concept called nested covering number of the
mechanism space and the generalization analysis techniques developed for mixing sequences.

1

• Some researchers assume that the agents are fully rational
and investigate the Nash (or dominant-strategy) equilibrium of the mechanism. For example, (Medina and Mohri
2014) proposes a machine learning framework to optimize the second-price auction in sponsored search in the
single-slot setting. In this case, the dominant strategy for
fully rational advertisers is to truthfully reveal their valuations through the bid prices and therefore their bidding
behaviors have no dynamics.

Introduction

Many Internet applications, such as sponsored search and
crowdsourcing, can be regarded as dynamic systems that involve multi-party interactions. Specifically, users arrive at
the system at random with their particular needs; agents provide products or services that could potentially satisfy users’
needs; and the platform employs a mechanism to match
agents with users. Afterwards, users may give feedback to
the platform about their satisfactions; the platform extracts
revenue and may provide agents with some signals as their
performance indicator. Since both the information reported
by the agents and the mechanism will affect the payoff of the
agents, self-interested agents may strategically adjust their
behaviors (e.g., strategically report the information about

• Some researchers assume that the behaviors of the agents
are i.i.d. and independent of the mechanism, and optimize
the mechanisms based on historical behavior data. For example, (Zhu et al. 2009a) and (Zhu et al. 2009b) apply machine learning algorithms to optimize the first-price auction based on the advertisers’ historical bidding data.

∗
The work was done when the first two authors were interns at
Microsoft Research.
†
Corresponding author: Wei Chen wche@microsoft.com
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Some other researchers believe that the behaviors of the
agents are neither fully rational nor i.i.d., instead, they
are dependent on the mechanism through a data-driven
Markov model. For example, (He et al. 2013) and (Tian

2089

