Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Goal-Based Model of Personality for Planning-Based Narrative Generation
Julio César Bahamón, Camille Barot, and R. Michael Young
North Carolina State University, Liquid Narrative Research Group
Campus Box 8206, Raleigh NC 27695-8206, USA
{jcbahamo, cbarot}@ncsu.edu, young@csc.ncsu.edu
http://go.ncsu.edu/juliobahamon

Abstract

A number of researchers have also worked on the operationalization of personality models, in particular the FFM,
to create richer and more expressive characters (e.g., (Doce
et al. 2010)). Even though these models create characters
that can adjust to changing situations and express emotion,
they do not fully address character personality as an integral
part of a story generation process. Specifically, they do not
address the issue of the construction of the story to support
the expression of a character’s personality. In contrast, our
work focuses on the story as a whole and in particular the
construction of a story that supports choices made by characters as a means for an author to express their personality.

We present an approach to incorporate interesting and
compelling characters in planning-based narrative generation. The approach is based on a computational
model that utilizes character actions to portray these as
having distinct and well-defined personalities.

Well-developed characters have features that enable them to
significantly enhance the believability and quality of a story.
In this paper we present a computational model aimed at
facilitating the inclusion of compelling characters in narratives that are automatically generated by a planning-based
system. In this model, personality is operationalized as behavior that results from choices made by a character in the
course of a story. This operationalization uses the taxonomy
defined in the Five-Factor Model (FFM) (Goldberg 1990)
and results from behavioral psychology that link behavior to
personality traits (Mehl, Gosling, and Pennebaker 2006).
The model focuses on the role that actions performed by
characters play over the course of a narrative in the construction of the mental model of the story that the audience forms
when experiencing it. In this model, the mechanism that
generates the story is designed to ensure that the story structure and its contents promote the existence of choices for
character’s actions and make such existence evident to the
audience by including contrasting options available to the
character. The actions that characters perform are chosen by
an intelligent mechanism that ensures their consistency with
the personality traits assigned to the character by a human
author prior to story generation.

Model Overview
We posit that the choices made by characters at points where
a story could branch into multiple alternatives can be used
in narrative generation to enable the perception of specific
personality traits. An audience that is made aware of the existence of multiple potential choices available to a character
will form an opinion of the character’s personality based on
their perception of the available choices, the choice selection, and the events that provide a context to the choice.
The model we propose uses a declarative approach to enable the portrayal of personality traits with enough detail to
elicit a predictable attribution of personality traits from the
audience. In this model, character properties inform the selection of the actions they perform in the course of a story.
The action selection mechanism reasons about the effects of
a character’s actions upon other story characters to gauge
whether they produce behavior consistent with the character’s personality traits. The mechanism also ensures that the
story structure promotes the presence of contrasting choices,
making their existence clear to the audience.
We use a plan-based story representation similar to that
utilized in IPOCL; however, we extend it to incorporate elements specific to the action-selection mechanism described
here. We begin by making a distinction between the representation of general elements of the story world and that of
elements directly related to the actions of characters:

Related Work
The use of AI planners to generate stories goes back to
systems such as Tale-Spin (Meehan 1977) and UNIVERSE
(Lebowitz 1984). More recently, the IPOCL planning algorithm by Riedl and Young (2010) focused on character
intentionality by identifying goals that explain a character’s actions. Other approaches have centered on characters’
immediate reactions to events (e.g., (Mairesse and Walker
2007)) and systems that direct the interaction among semiautonomous characters (e.g., (Assanie 2002)).

Definition 1 (Character Name). A character name is a
unique constant symbol that represents a story agent.
Definition 2 (Character Value). A character value is a tuple hc, gi where c is a character name and g is a literal used

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4142

