Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Semantic Representation
Lenhart Schubert
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627-0226

Abstract

intuitively whether a putative semantic interpretation of a
given sentence (in context) really does capture its semantic
content. The following desiderata seem to me like natural
ones, falling into both categories (and all of them have been
considered explicitly or tacitly by various researchers at various times).

In recent years, there has been renewed interest in
the NLP community in genuine language understanding and dialogue. Thus the long-standing issue of how
the semantic content of language should be represented is reentering the communal discussion. This paper provides a brief “opinionated survey” of broadcoverage semantic representation (SR). It suggests multiple desiderata for such representations, and then outlines more than a dozen approaches to SR–some longstanding, and some more recent, providing quick characterizations, pros, cons, and some comments on implementations.

• Language-like expressivity of the semantic representation (SR): All languages allow for the devices familiar
from first-order logic: predicates + connectives + quantifiers + equality. But they allow more, including: generalized quantifiers (most men who smoke), intensional
predicates (believe, intend, resemble), predicate and sentence modification (very, gracefully, nearly, possibly),
predicate and sentence reification (Birds evolved from
dinosaurs, Beauty is subjective, That exoplanets exist is
now certain), and reference to events or situations (Many
children had not been not vaccinated against measles;
this situation caused sporadic outbreaks of the disease).

Introduction
There are signs of a resurgence of interest in genuine language understanding within NLP and AI. These signs include various challenges that can be viewed as scaled-back
versions of the Turing Test, in particular RTE (Recognizing Textual Entailment) (Dagan, Glicksman, and Magnini
2006), COPA (Choice of Plausible Alternatives) (Roemmele, Bejan, and Gordon 2011), WSC (Winograd Schema
Challenge) (Levesque, Davis, and Morgenstern 2012), and
the Aristo Challenge (Clark 2015), as well as a recent ACL
workshop on Semantic Parsing (Artzi, Kwiatkowski, and
Berant 2014), and applications such as natural language
(NL) dialogue with robots (Eliasson 2007; Howard, Tellex,
and Roy 2013) and semantics-guided MT (Jones et al. 2012).
Thus the long-standing issue of how the semantic content
of language should be represented is reentering the communal discussion. The focus here will be on broad-coverage
semantic representation.

High expressivity is sometimes claimed to be undesirable,
on the grounds that it is an obstacle to efficient inference.
That is a reasonable stance for designers of specialized
systems that simply don’t require high expressivity. But
it is unreasonable on two counts for a general semantic
representation (which is our focus here): One is that efficient inference methods for expressively limited subsets
of an expressively rich representation are easily embedded within the richer representation (as specialized reasoning subsystems); the other is that the richer representation will enable inferences that are not possible at all, or
at best much more cumbersome, in a restricted representation. An analogous, equally unreasonable restriction in
programming language design would be to prohibit recursion, runtime computation of iteration bounds, and backward branching, as a way of assuring efficient execution.
Much power would be lost in doing so.

Desiderata
In a sense, for a representation to be meaningful to a computer, it need only have the right computational properties, given the tasks the computer is performing. But that
is not enough. As builders of potentially very large, complex systems dependent on symbolic representations, we
also have to be concerned with the naturalness of the representations from our perspective. It should be easy to see

• Ease of transduction between surface structure and SR,
irrespective of the domain (i.e., modular, easily understood, easily edited representations of the transductions);
Richard Montague’s work (Dowty 1979) revealed a beautiful, direct correspondence between phrase structure and
meaning structure, one that accounts for entailments (or
their absence) even in intensional contexts. It would be
astounding if this correspondence, which is the basis of

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4132

