Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Intelligent Agents for Rehabilitation and
Care of Disabled and Chronic Patients∗
Sarit Kraus
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel 92500
sarit@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

mands. In particular, serious games – games designed for a
primary purpose other than pure entertainment – can be used
in this effort (Rego, Moreira, and Reis 2010). For example,
there are automated systems that are used to train cognitive functions and memory, and to diagnose and combat dementia (Imbeault, Bouchard, and Bouzouane 2011; Marin,
Navarro, and Lawrence 2011); and there are games for physiotherapy and occupational therapy (Gamberini et al. 2008;
Moreira et al. 2013; Lange et al. 2012). Furthermore, these
training and diagnostic systems can be used over the internet in order to provide assistance to patients in their homes,
which is of great benefit both to the patients and their home
care providers. Others tried to build social robots (Tapus et
al. 2007; Fasola and Mataric 2013; Pineau et al. 2003) that
will assist in caring for the elderly and people with disabilities. However, currently, the success of using games and
other software for care and rehabilitation is limited, with
limited impact on the overwhelming demands for health and
rehabilitation services. This is because serious games and
most other software for care and rehabilitation lack involvement of the health care staff. Indeed, much better results
are obtained when there is a human trainer in the loop with
whom the patients form good relationships (Hall et al. 2010;
Shirk and Karver 2003). However, adding humans to the
loop makes the computer-based treatment much more expensive and decreases the effectiveness of computerized or
remote treatment.
We suggest that advancements in intelligent agent technology provide new opportunities for augmenting existing
environments to include support for patients in order to compensate for the lack of direct human intervention. While we
strongly believe that human trainers and specialists should
be involved in computerized rehabilitation and care in some
capacity, we propose that intelligent agents can reduce the
need for human involvement and facilitate the use and acceptance of computer systems in rehabilitation and care.
There are four required capabilities for an agent in the
health care domain when interacting with a patient:

The number of people with disabilities is continuously increasing. Providing patients who have disabilities with the rehabilitation and care necessary to allow them good quality of life creates overwhelming demands for health and rehabilitation services. We suggest that advancements in intelligent agent technology
provide new opportunities for improving the provided
services. We will discuss the challenges of building an
agent for the health care domain and present four capabilities that are required for an agent in the health care
domain: planning, monitoring, intervention and encouragement. We will discuss the importance of personalizing all of them and the need to facilitate cooperation between the automated agent and the human care givers.
We will review recent technology that can be used toward the development of agents that can have these capabilities and their promise in automating services such
as physiotherapy, speech therapy and cognitive training.

Introduction
The number of people with disabilities is continuously increasing (Bickenbach 2011). This is the result of population growth, the aging of the population, the prolonging of
life enabled by medical advancements, the survival of extremely premature babies, and the emergence of chronic
diseases (Lakdawalla, Bhattacharya, and Goldman 2004;
Seeman et al. 2010). Indeed, the most common causes of
impairment and disability are chronic diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, and cancer (Murray and Lopez 2013). Traditional causes such as
trauma, injury and congenital defects are also major contributors to disability. Providing patients who have disabilities with the rehabilitation and care necessary to allow
them good quality of life creates overwhelming demands for
health and rehabilitation services.
Much research and industrial efforts have been invested in
the development of computer systems to respond to these de∗

A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the
AAMAS 2014 workshop “Towards Better and more Affordable
Healthcare: Incentives, Game Theory, and Artificial Intelligence”.
This work is supported in part by the ERC Advanced Grant
#267523.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Planning: The intelligent agents should build a personalized dynamic training or care program for each patient.
Monitoring: The agent should monitor the patient’s activities and identify problematic activities as well as successes. The activities can be part of the training program

4032

