Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Sparse Combined Regression-Classification Formulation for Learning a
Physiological Alternative to Clinical Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Scores
Sarah M. Brown

Andrea Webb and Rami S. Mangoubi

Jennifer G. Dy

Charles Stark Draper Laboratory
Cambridge, MA
awebb,mougoubi@draper.com

Northeastern University
Boston, MA
jdy@ece.neu.edu

Northeastern University
Charles Stark Draper Laboratory
brown@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

based on patient self-reports after a time consuming and
expensive process, so a more objective, easier to administer
diagnostic tool is sought. Although definitive physiological
bases have yet to be characterized well enough to build
a test, prior work has demonstrated that measurements of
peripheral physiology can be used to predict diagnostic class
assigned by the clinician (Orr, Metzger, and Pitman 2002;
Webb et al. 2013; Pitman et al. 1987). We seek to advance
this line of work by producing a score which provides a
finer degree of granularity, necessary for treatment planning
and monitoring.
The ultimate goal is a parsimonious but generalizable feature set and a function for synthesizing them into a single
score that can assist in the diagnostic process. The problem
at hand is somewhat circular; the gold standard for diagnosis is the clinical score, but the motivation for an alternate
score is the weaknesses in that score. This requires a careful
construction of the problem for learning and creates a more
urgent need for a collaboration between an AI researcher
and the domain experts – black box application of machine
learning tools would provide an inadequate result for this
important societal challenge.
Technically, this goal resembles two well studied machine
learning tasks: feature selection and regression. As we understand the context of the problem however, we find that
subtleties in the data available for learning and additional
contextual problems motivate a novel formulation of the
problem. For a well defined task and data that meets underlying distribution assumptions, an algorithm’s relative performance can be reliably distilled to a single quantity. For
a real world problem, including research questions in other
disciplines, this is more challenging. Carefully constructing performance measures suited to the unique application
area is an imperative step toward enabling the insights provided by the solution to have an impact in the application
area (Wagstaff 2012).
To advance the state of the art in PTSD diagnosis, our
solution should be a parsimonious, generalizable, and diagnostically valid model. We will refer to these as solution
desiderata. Next we describe the specific experimental protocol we will use to develop a physiological PTSD score. We
use the context of this experiment, expert knowledge about
current diagnostic procedures, and the solution desiderata
to formulate an application-specific technical problem in

Current diagnostic methods for mental pathologies, including
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), involve a cliniciancoded interview, which can be subjective. Heart rate and skin
conductance, as well as other peripheral physiology measures, have previously shown utility in predicting binary diagnostic decisions. The binary decision problem is easier, but
misses important information on the severity of the patients
condition. This work utilizes a novel experimental set-up
that exploits virtual reality videos and peripheral physiology
for PTSD diagnosis. In pursuit of an automated physiologybased objective diagnostic method, we propose a learning
formulation that integrates the description of the experimental data and expert knowledge on desirable properties of a
physiological diagnostic score. From a list of desired criteria,
we derive a new cost function that combines regression and
classification while learning the salient features for predicting physiological score. The physiological score produced
by Sparse Combined Regression-Classification (SCRC) is assessed with respect to three sets of criteria chosen to reflect design goals for an objective, physiological PTSD score:
parsimony and context of selected features, diagnostic score
validity, and learning generalizability. For these criteria, we
demonstrate that Sparse Combined Regression-Classification
performs better than more generic learning approaches.

Introduction
Prevalence rates of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
(PTSD) in veterans returning from Iraq varies from
4 − 18% (Richardson, Frueh, and Acierno 2010) and
costs related to treatment for PTSD and depression in
this population is estimated to be $923 million (Kilmer
et al. 2011). Like other mental pathologies, PTSD is
currently defined by behavioral symptoms as interpreted
by a clinician (American Psychiatric Association 2013).
For PTSD, a structured clinical interview is the current
gold standard diagnostic tool. To diagnose, a clinician
codes the patient’s responses to questions that each address
one of three categories of symptoms, counts the number
of expressed symptoms per category and combines in a
predetermined fashion to produce a clinical score, then
compares the score to a threshold to reach a final diagnosis
(healthy or PTSD). The clinical interview provides a score
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1700

