Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

CrowdWON: A Modelling Language for
Crowd Processes Based on Workflow Nets
David Sánchez-Charles and Victor Muntés-Mulero
CA Labs, CA Technologies, Barcelona (Spain).
{David.Sanchez, Victor.Muntes}@ca.com

Marc Solé

Jordi Nin

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya BarcelonaTech,
Barcelona (Spain).
msole@ac.upc.edu

Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC),
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya - BarcelonaTech,
Barcelona (Spain).
{nin@ac.upc.edu

Abstract

propose mechanisms to express collaboration patterns in a
visual way, their expressive power is still not sufficient to
describe the variety of current crowdsourcing processes. Just
as an example, none of the visual workflow languages used
for crowdsourcing allow users to define the complete workflow behind a continuously open competition such as those
in Threadless2 and Innocentive3 , in an easy way.
Recent research (Sun et al. 2014) shows the interest of industry on increasing the participation of in-house workers in
crowdsourcing processes. In many of these applications, requesters need to express restrictions on the characteristics of
individual workers. Unfortunately, previous workflow languages used in crowdsourcing cannot express usual rules on
workers such as allowing to solve a task to only those individuals who contributed in a previous task of a process.
Besides, processes in crowdsourcing may change dynamically depending on worker skillsets or deadline. Authors
in (Kulkarni, Can, and Hartmann 2012), discuss the need
for continuously adapting workflows depending on the context. Another important concern is compliance with deadlines (van der Aalst, Rosemann, and Dumas 2007) (Mason
and Watts 2009). To our knowledge, none of the workflow
languages for crowdsourcing presented in the literature allows for expressing these usual requirements accurately.
In this paper, we define CrowdWON, a graphical modelling tool suitable for describing crowdsourcing processes
using petri net extensions. Our main contributions are:

Although crowdsourcing has been proven efficient as a
mechanism to solve independent tasks for on-line production, it is still unclear how to define and manage
workflows in complex tasks that require the participation and coordination of different workers. Despite
the existence of different frameworks to define workflows, we still lack a commonly accepted solution that is
able to describe the most common workflows in current
and future platforms. In this paper, we propose CrowdWON, a new graphical framework to describe and monitor crowd processes, the proposed language is able to
represent the workflow of most well-known existing applications, extend previous modelling frameworks, and
assist in the future generation of crowdsourcing platforms. Beyond previous proposals, CrowdWON allows
for the formal definition of adaptative workflows, that
depend on the skills of the crowd workers and/or process deadlines. CrowdWON also allows expressing constraints on workers based on previous individual contributions. Finally, we show how our proposal can be used
to describe well known crowdsourcing workflows.

1

Introduction

According to massolution (Massolution 2013), there was a
continuous growth of crowd-based companies from 2009
to 2012. Analogously, the crowdfunding market has also
grown significantly (Thorpe 2013). In general, trends seem
to indicate that industrial interest in crowdsourcing will continue increasing in the near future. Although business processes may require to solve complex tasks, crowdsourcing is
mainly used to solve independent tasks. Previous work such
as (Bernstein et al. 2010) shows that finding the proper combination of tasks to solve a complex problem using crowdsourcing is not straightforward. In fact, designing proper
workflows is one of the major issues in crowdsourcing according to employees of the crowd-based company CrowdFlower1 (Kittur et al. 2012). Although some previous works

• We propose a flexible language that allows defining workflows for a large variety of scenarios, including open competitions.
• We propose the first graphical language for crowdsourcing platforms able to express sophisticated restrictions on
the workers participating in a task.
• We propose a language that allows to define dynamic
workflows that adapt to the status of the process; in particular, it adapts to deadlines and worker profiles.
Our modelling language makes it easier to define busi-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.crowdflower.com

2
3

1284

http://www.threadless.com
http://www.innocentive.com

