Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Stackelberg Game Approach for Incentivizing Participation
in Online Educational Forums with Heterogeneous Student Population
Rohith D. Vallam and Priyanka Bhatt and Debmalya Mandal and Y. Narahari
Department of Computer Science and Automation,
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, 560012, India
{rohithdv, priyanka.bhatt, hari}@csa.iisc.ernet.in, debmalya.mandal@gmail.com

Abstract

OEF Details

Increased interest in web-based education has spurred the proliferation of online learning environments. However, these
platforms suffer from high dropout rates due to lack of sustained motivation among the students taking the course. In an
effort to address this problem, we propose an incentive-based,
instructor-driven approach to orchestrate the interactions in
online educational forums (OEFs). Our approach takes into
account the heterogeneity in skills among the students as well
as the limited budget available to the instructor. We first analytically model OEFs in a non-strategic setting using ideas
from lumpable continuous time Markov chains and compute
expected aggregate transient net-rewards for the instructor and
the students. We next consider a strategic setting where we
use the rewards computed above to set up a mixed-integer linear program which views an OEF as a single-leader-multiplefollowers Stackelberg game and recommends an optimal plan
to the instructor for maximizing student participation. Our
experimental results reveal several interesting phenomena including a striking non-monotonicity in the level of participation of students vis-a-vis the instructor’s arrival rate.

Course

Class

Term

Strength

Forum
(Piazza)
Duration

2012

72

2014

38

Jan 21
to
May 1
Mar 1
to
May 1

Figure 1: Impact of incentives on participation of students in
OEFs recorded in a real-world experiment.
Mazzolini and Maddison 2003). The objective of our work
is to propose an instructor-driven approach to orchestrate the
activities of OEFs by designing optimal incentives to enhance student-instructor participation in these OEFs.
Incentive design plays an important role in encouraging
participation among students in these educational forums.
As part of a case study, we analysed the data collected from
two online educational forums which were part of the Game
Theory (E1 254) in the Department of Computer Science
and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, for two different
terms. The primary difference between these two terms was
that there were no incentives offered to students participating
in the Spring 2012 term while in the Spring 2014 term, students were offered incentives (a certain percentage of marks
based on the reward points accumulated by the student) to
participate actively to open-ended (or discussion type) questions posted on the Piazza forum associated with the course.
We observed an increased participation of students in the
incentive-based course than when there were no incentives
offered (See Figure 1) which is an indication of importance
of appropriate incentives in driving up the participation levels in the course.
Modelling incentives for improving the participation levels has also recently been studied by (Ghosh and Kleinberg
2013) where they formulate an incentive-based approach to
modulate the activities of the online educational forums and
recommend optimal behaviour for the instructor needed to
drive up the participation from the student population. We
pursue this direction further and non-trivially extend their
instructor-driven approach to a more realistic setting of heterogeneous students and a budget-limited instructor. On-

Introduction
With the explosive growth of the Internet, the area of
education has undergone a massive transformation in
terms of how students and instructors interact in a classroom. Online learning environments now constitute a very
important part of any academic course. Further, online education has attracted the interest of the research community
due to the immense popularity of the massive open online
courses (MOOCs) offered by platforms like Coursera, edX,
Udacity, etc. As of January 17, 2014, Coursera students
voiced themselves in 590,000 discussion threads in the education forums for a total of 343,014,912 minutes of learning across 571 courses (Coursera 2014). However, empirical studies have repeatedly shown that the dropout rates in
the online courses are very high (Fowler 2013) mainly due
to a lack of sustained motivation among the enrolled students. An important, but often under-utilized component of
an online classroom is the online educational forum (OEF)
where students and instructors discuss various administrative and technical aspects of the course (Andresen 2009;
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1043

