Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Scalable and Interpretable Data Representation
for High-Dimensional, Complex Data
Been Kim∗ , Kayur Patel† , Afshin Rostamizadeh† and Julie Shah∗
beenkim@csail.mit.edu, rostami@google.com, kayur@google.com, julie a shah@csail.mit.edu
∗Massachusetts Institute of Technology, †Google

Abstract
The majority of machine learning research has been focused on building models and inference techniques with
sound mathematical properties and cutting edge performance. Little attention has been devoted to the development of data representation that can be used to improve
a user’s ability to interpret the data and machine learning models to solve real-world problems. In this paper,
we quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate an efficient,
accurate and scalable feature-compression method using latent Dirichlet allocation for discrete data. This
representation can effectively communicate the characteristics of high-dimensional, complex data points. We
show that the improvement of a user’s interpretability
through the use of a topic modeling-based compression technique is statistically significant, according to
a number of metrics, when compared with other representations. Also, we find that this representation is scalable — it maintains alignment with human classification accuracy as an increasing number of data points are
shown. In addition, the learned topic layer can semantically deliver meaningful information to users that could
potentially aid human reasoning about data characteristics in connection with compressed topic space.

Figure 1: A portion of the analysis report using the data representation studied in this work. Each data point is compressed using topic-based feature compression. Zoomed in
(top left), where a pie chart inside of a red square indicates
incorrectly classified data points. The document ID number
and true labels are also shown as texts. The top 10 words
within each color-coded topic are shown at the top right. The
bottom shows reports in a bird’s-eye view.

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) is a powerful tool that can provide
solutions for a number of real-world problems. However,
doing so often requires more effort from the user than a
simple “plug-and-play” approach. When incorporating machine learning in order to perform data classification tasks,
one of the challenges a user may encounter is investigating individual data points and their characteristics, which is
often an iterative process. For example, investigating misclassified data points may be necessary to diagnose the reasons for poor performance. This investigation may involve
comparing the similarity of the misclassified data point to
data points in its true cluster and other clusters and only becomes more challenging when the user is presented with a
large, high-dimensional data set (e.g., multiple paged complex legal documents).
Methods to improve a user’s ability to interpret, evaluate and debug ML models have received little attention in

the ML research community, especially with regard to domains with complex, high-dimensional features. There are
domains that are naturally visualizable, such as pictures and
videos; however, the majority of domains where ML could
be useful do not exhibit this beneficial characteristic. This
task becomes more daunting and time consuming at the very
least as the number of documents grows. To fully harness the
power of ML in the context of real-world problems, we need
to provide solutions for this significant hindrance in the use
of ML.
This work investigates an efficient, accurate and scalable
representation of high-dimensional, complex data points
that aid human reasoning when working with ML models. We quantitatively and qualitatively verify a feature
compression-based data representation that allows users to
efficiently and accurately identify data characteristics, even
with an increasing number of data points. This representa-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1763

