Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

R1SVM: A Randomised Nonlinear Approach to
Large-Scale Anomaly Detection
Sarah M. Erfani∗† , Mahsa Baktashmotlagh† , Sutharshan Rajasegarar†
Shanika Karunasekera∗† , Chris Leckie∗†
∗

†
NICTA Victoria Research Laboratory
Department of Computing and Information Systems,
The University of Melbourne, Australia

Abstract

while reducing training and testing time by up to two orders
of magnitude.
A key challenge in anomaly detection is how to characterise the distribution of “normal” (i.e., non-anomalous)
data. This is particularly challenging when the process that
generated the normal data has an unknown, potentially complex underlying distribution. 1SVM approaches have had
considerable success in addressing this modelling task by
using a kernel function to implicitly map the data from the
input space to a higher dimensional feature space, in which
a relatively simple model such as a hyperplane (Schölkopf
et al. 2001), hypersphere (Tax and Duin 2004) or hyperellipsoid (Wang, Yeung, and Tsang 2006; Rajasegarar et al.
2010) can be used to characterise normal observations.
A practical limitation of 1SVM approaches is their computational and memory complexity for training. In a dataset
with n records, each with d dimensions, training using a
nonlinear kernel requires O(dn2 ) computational complexity, as well as O(dn2 ) memory complexity for the kernel
matrix (Tax and Duin 2004). This limits the utility of 1SVM
in applications involving large datasets. While training can
be performed on a smaller sample of the training data, this
can reduce the accuracy of the 1SVM due to the sparse sampling of the underlying distribution, particularly in applications that involve high dimensional input spaces.
Recently, there has been significant progress in using randomised features in conjunction with linear algorithms to
reveal nonlinear patterns in data. In particular, a nonlinear,
randomised variant of component analysis methods such as
Principal Component Analysis (RPCA) and Canonical Correlation Analysis (RCCA) has been proposed (Lopez-Paz et
al. 2014). These randomised variants have been applied to
the tasks of regression and classification of large datasets,
and exhibited significant savings in computation time while
incurring little or no loss in accuracy.
In this paper, we propose a novel application of randomised methods by deriving a highly scalable algorithm
for anomaly detection based on training a linear one-class
SVM using randomised, nonlinear features. By using randomised features rather than finding a set of optimised support vectors, we can substantially reduce the cost of training
our one-class SVM. We provide extensive empirical testing
to show that our randomised 1SVM method achieves substantial improvement in both computational complexity and

The problem of unsupervised anomaly detection arises in a
wide variety of practical applications. While one-class support vector machines have demonstrated their effectiveness as
an anomaly detection technique, their ability to model large
datasets is limited due to their memory and time complexity
for training. To address this issue for supervised learning of
kernel machines, there has been growing interest in random
projection methods as an alternative to the computationally
expensive problems of kernel matrix construction and support vector optimisation. In this paper we leverage the theory
of nonlinear random projections and propose the Randomised
One-class SVM (R1SVM), which is an efficient and scalable
anomaly detection technique that can be trained on largescale datasets. Our empirical analysis on several real-life and
synthetic datasets shows that our randomised 1SVM algorithm achieves comparable or better accuracy to deep autoencoder and traditional kernelised approaches for anomaly detection, while being approximately 100 times faster in training and testing.

Introduction
Unsupervised anomaly detection (also known as outlier detection) plays a significant role in a variety of applications, such as fraud detection, network intrusion detection
and fault diagnosis. One-class Support Vector Machines
(1SVMs) (Schölkopf et al. 2001; Tax and Duin 2004) have
proven to be a very effective unsupervised learning method
to construct highly accurate classifiers for anomaly detection. However, 1SVMs are often impractical for use on
very large datasets due to the computational and memory complexity of their underlying optimisation problem
during training (Vapnik 1998; Vishwanathan, Smola, and
Murty 2003; Bengio and LeCun 2007). Recently, there has
been growing interest in randomised approaches to improve
the efficiency of kernel methods for supervised learning of
SVMs (Rahimi and Recht 2007; 2009). In this paper, we
build on the theory of nonlinear random projections in order to accelerate the training of 1SVMs, and propose a
new form of anomaly detector called Randomised One-class
SVM (R1SVM). We show that R1SVM can achieve comparable or better accuracy than an existing 1SVM method,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

432

