Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Interactive Narrative Planning in The Best Laid Plans
Stephen G. Ware

R. Michael Young and Phillip Wright

Christian Stith

North Carolina State University
Department of Computer Science
890 Oval Drive
Raleigh, NC 27695, USA

Clemson University
Digital Production Arts
100 McAdams Hall
Clemson, SC 29634, USA

University of New Orleans
Department of Computer Science
2000 Lakeshore Drive
New Orleans, LA 70148, USA

Abstract

town guard attacks the goblin for robbing the weapons merchant. Play returns to Make Your Plan mode, and the goblin
must now find a way around the town guard. And so on.
The Best Laid Plans is a small but non-trivial virtual environment containing 9 characters, 15 locations, and 17 items.
Agents can take 10 different kinds of actions and cast four
kinds of spells. The scope of this environment was designed
to allow players to complete a game in about 15 minutes.

The Best Laid Plans is an interactive narrative video
game that uses cognitive-inspired fast planning techniques to generate stories with conflict during play.
Players alternate between acting out a plan and seeing
that plan thwarted by non-player characters. The Glaive
narrative planner combines causal-link-based computational models of narrative with the speed of fast heuristic search techniques to adapt the story each time the
player attempts a new plan.

Architecture
The game has a simple client/server architecture which decouples the virtual environment from the interactive narrative controller. The client is the 3D virtual world and interface, which was created with the Unity 3D game engine.
The client prompts the player for plans and visualizes them
as they unfold. The server generates and adapts the game’s
story during play. It was created with Java 1.7 and communicates with the client via a TCP socket.
When Make Your Plan mode ends, the client sends the
player’s intended plan for the goblin to the server using
the syntax of the Planning Domain Definition Language, or
PDDL. The server responds with the story that should actually be visualized, which can include actions by other characters. Every time some agent completes an action in Watch
Your Story Unfold mode, the client notifies the server so that
it can update its model of the game’s current state.
The Best Laid Plans is freely available to play and modify:

About The Best Laid Plans
The Best Laid Plans is an interactive narrative point-andclick adventure game. Players take on the role of a hapless
goblin minion in service to the skeletal Dark Overlord. The
goblin is tasked with visiting the local village to retrieve a
bottle of hair tonic and return with it to the Overlord’s tower.
Play alternates between two modes. In Make Your Plan
mode, the player acts out a sequence of actions to obtain
the hair tonic and return to the tower. Non-player characters (NPCs) do not act in this mode, allowing the player to
explore many possible ways of completing the mission.
Once the player has acted out a complete plan to fetch the
hair tonic, play changes to Watch Your Story Unfold mode.
Now the player watches the goblin execute the plan, but in
this mode the non-player characters will act to thwart the
goblin. When the player’s plan is thwarted, play returns to
Make Your Plan mode and prompts the player for a new plan.
The game alternates between these modes until the goblin
successfully reaches the tower with the hair tonic in hand.
For example, in Make Your Plan mode the player acts out
a simple plan to walk to the village, purchase the hair tonic
from the potion shop, and walk home. Then, during Watch
Your Story Unfold mode as the goblin is walking home, a
bandit blocks his path, kills the goblin, and takes the hair
tonic. Play returns to Make Your Plan mode at the moment
before the goblin’s death, and the player must now find a
way around the bandit. The player decides to return to the
village, steal a weapon from the weapons merchant, and use
it to fight his way past the bandit. But as the player is watching this new plan unfold, after stealing the weapon, the angry

http://liquidnarrative.csc.ncsu.edu/blp/
The client/server architecture makes it easy to test a variety of different interactive narrative control techniques. The
next section describes how the Glaive planner is used in the
default version of the game.

Narrative Planning
Narrative planning is a branch of classical planning which
imposes additional constraints on its solutions to meet a
standard of narrativity (Young et al. 2014). The Glaive narrative planner (Ware and Young 2014) leverages two computational models of narrative which are inspired by narrative
theory and cognitive science and based on causal reasoning.
Riedl and Young (2010) describe agent intentionality as
an extension of partial-order causal-link (POCL) planning
(Weld 1994). Each action in an intentional planning domain

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4313

