Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Generating Event Causality Hypotheses through Semantic Relations
Chikara Hashimoto∗ , Kentaro Torisawa† , Julien Kloetzer‡ , Jong-Hoon Oh§
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan
{∗ ch, † torisawa, ‡ julien, § rovellia}@nict.go.jp

Abstract
Event causality knowledge is indispensable for intelligent natural language understanding. The problem is
that any method for extracting event causalities from
text is insufficient; it is likely that some event causalities
that we can recognize in this world are not written in a
corpus, no matter its size. We propose a method of hypothesizing unseen event causalities from known event
causalities extracted from the web by the semantic relations between nouns. For example, our method can hypothesize deploy a security camera→avoid crimes from
deploy a mosquito net→avoid malaria through semantic relation A PREVENTS B. Our experiments show that,
from 2.4 million event causalities extracted from the
web, our method generated more than 300,000 hypotheses, which were not in the input, with 70% precision.
We also show that our method outperforms a state-ofthe-art hypothesis generation method.

1

Figure 1: Hypothesis candidate generation.
Take noun pair a mosquito net and malaria, which bears the
A PREVENTS B relation, for example. The noun pair constitutes a plausible event causality, e.g., deploy a mosquito
net→avoid malaria. Other noun pairs of the A PREVENTS
B relation, e.g., a security camera and crimes, also constitute plausible event causalities, e.g., deploy a security camera→avoid crimes. Thus, our method replaces a noun pair
(the nouns of the cause and effect phrases) of a given event
causality with other noun pairs of the same semantic relation
to generate event causality hypothesis candidates (Figure 1).
Hypothesis candidates are ranked by our hypothesis classifier, which checks their plausibility as event causalities. Then we train it using labeled data and features that
have been developed for event causality extraction tasks
(Hashimoto et al. 2014) (Section 2.2).
In short, our method conducts a generate-and-test search
for plausible event causality hypotheses; generating a large
number of hypothesis candidates using semantic relations
and event causalities extracted from the web, and testing
them using the hypothesis classifier.
Our experiments show that, using about 2.4 million event
causalities extracted from the web by Hashimoto et al.
(2014)’s method as a source, our method generated a large
number of unseen plausible hypotheses (with 70% precision) that were not included in the source event causalities: 347,093 hypotheses whose noun pairs were not in the
source (Section 3.1) and 302,350 hypotheses whose phrase
pairs were not in the source (Section 3.2). These results
indicate that our method can synthesize a large volume of
unseen yet plausible event causality knowledge from many

Introduction

Event causality knowledge, e.g., deploy a mosquito
net→avoid malaria, enhances natural language understanding systems like future event prediction (Radinsky, Davidovich, and Markovitch 2012), why-question answering (Oh
et al. 2013), and future scenario generation (Hashimoto et
al. 2014). In this paper, A→B represents event causality that
basically means that “if A happens, the probability of B increases.” We discuss our position on causality below.
Many methods have been proposed that extract event
causalities from corpora (Torisawa 2006; Abe, Inui, and
Matsumoto 2008; Chambers and Jurafsky 2008; 2009; Riaz
and Girju 2010; Do, Chan, and Roth 2011; Radinsky, Davidovich, and Markovitch 2012; Hashimoto et al. 2012; 2014).
However, methods that hypothesize plausible event causalities that are not written in corpora have not been fully explored so far, even though human beings can do it easily.
In this paper, we propose a method of generating plausible
event causality hypotheses (hypotheses, in short) from other
event causalities extracted from the web. We assume that if
a noun pair bears a semantic relation and constitutes plausible event causality, other noun pairs of the same semantic
relation tend to constitute a plausible event causality, too.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2396

