Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Doubly Robust Covariate Shift Correction
Sashank J. Reddi

Barnabás Póczos

Alex Smola

Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
sjakkamr@cs.cmu.edu

Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
bapoczos@cs.cmu.edu

Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
alex@smola.org

Abstract

portance sampling in the following manner:
Rp [f ] = Ex∼p(x) Ey|x (`(y, f (x)))
Z
p(x)
=
q(x)Ey|x `(y, f (x))dx
q(x)
= Ex∼q(x) Ey|x [β(x)`(y, f (x))] ,

Covariate shift correction allows one to perform supervised
learning even when the distribution of the covariates on the
training set does not match that on the test set. This is
achieved by re-weighting observations. Such a strategy removes bias, potentially at the expense of greatly increased
variance. We propose a simple strategy for removing bias
while retaining small variance. It uses a biased, low variance
estimate as a prior and corrects the final estimate relative to
the prior. We prove that this yields an efficient estimator and
demonstrate good experimental performance.

(1)

p(x)
q(x) and ` is a loss function. Correspond0

where β(x) :=
ingly, empirical averages with respect to X and X can
be reweighted, see, e.g., (Quiñonero-Candela et al. 2008;
Cortes et al. 2008) and the references therein for further details. While estimator based on Equation (1) is unbiased, it
tends to increase the variance of the empirical averages considerably by weighting the observations by β.
This issue is particularly exacerbated when the weights
are large. As a rule of thumb the effective sample size of
2
2
a reweighted dataset is meff := kβ(X)k1 / kβ(X)k2 where
β(X) is the vector of weights β(x1 ), . . . , β(xm ). This quantity naturally arises, e.g., for a weighted average of Gaussian
random variables, while deriving Chernoff bounds using the
weights β(X) (Gretton et al. 2008), or in the particle filtering context (Doucet, de Freitas, and Gordon 2001). To gain
better intuition for meff , consider the case where p = q. In
this case, we have high effective sample size (meff = m).
Whereas in the undesirable case of a single observation having very high weight, meff ≈ 1. Hence, meff is a good indicator of the effect of β(x) on variance of the weighted
empirical averages.
Thus, while one might obtain an unbiased estimator via
Equation (1), it becomes nearly useless when the effective
sample size is small relative to the original sample size.
This situation is frequently observed in practice insofar as
we encounter cases where simple covariate shift correction
not only fails to improve generalization performance on the
test set but, in fact, leads to estimates that perform worse
than simply minimizing the empirical risk on the training
data (i.e., unweighted estimation). Moreover, in many cases
the solutions of the biased and the unbiased risk estimates
are closer than what the distributions p and q would suggest.
Figure 1 shows an example of such a scenario.
The situation described above is often encountered in
practice — covariate shift correction fails to improve matters due to high variance while the unweighted solution performs reasonably well. This raises the question of how we

Introduction
Covariate shift is a common problem when dealing with real
data. Quite often the experimental conditions under which a
training set is generated are subtly different from the situation in which the system is deployed. For instance, in cancer diagnosis the training set may have an overabundance of
diseased patients, often of a specific subtype endemic in the
location where the data was gathered. Likewise, due to temporal changes in user interest the distribution of covariates in
advertising systems is nonstationary. This requires increasing the weight of data related to, e.g., ‘Gangnam style’, when
processing historic data logs.
A common approach to addressing covariate shift is to
reweight data such that the reweighted distribution matches
the target distribution. Briefly, suppose we observe X :=
{x1 , . . . , xm } drawn iid from q(x), typically with associated
labels Y := {y1 , . . . , ym } drawn from p(y|x). This constitutes the ‘training set’. However, we need to find a minimizer
fp∗ of risk Rp — defined in Equation (1) — with regard to
p(y|x)p(x), for which we only have iid draws of the covariates X 0 := {x01 , . . . x0m0 }. Note that simply minimizing the
empirical risk on the training data leads to a biased estimate
(since training set corresponds to samples from q(x)p(y|x)).
If p and q are known, this problem can be addressed via imCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2949

