Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Sequence Labeling Approach to Deriving Word Variants
Jennifer D’Souza
Human Language Technology Research Institute
University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75083-0688
jennifer.l.dsouza@utdallas.edu

Abstract

approach to the task of word variant derivation by suffixation. We present our work in the following sections beginning with the experimental data creation process, followed
by details on our adopted approach, and concluding with an
evaluation of the approach.

This paper describes a learning-based approach for automatic derivation of word variant forms by the suffixation process. We employ the sequence labeling technique, which entails learning when to preserve, delete,
substitute, or add a letter to form a new word from a
given word. The features used by the learner are based
on characters, phonetics, and hyphenation positions of
the given word. To ensure that our system is robust to
word variants that can arise from different forms of
a root word, we generate multiple variant hypothesis
for each word based on the sequence labeler’s prediction. We then filter out ill-formed predictions, and create clusters of word variants by merging together a word
and its predicted variants with other words and their
predicted variants provided the groups share a word in
common. Our results show that this learning-based approach is feasible for the task and warrants further exploration.

Data
We created a bag-of-words1 dataset for this project using a
corpus of about 400,000 clinical notes. The bag-of-words
was then organized into word groups so that each group
contained all the words that were derivational variants of
each other. To do this, WordNet (Miller 1995) was queried
for the synsets of each word in the bag. On obtaining the
synsets of a word, each synset-form was queried for its
derivational word variant list, which if not empty was retrieved. Further pruning of the bag-of-words was carried
out to remove all words without any derivational variants.
Our final dataset, organized as groups of words, contained
12,057 unique words and a total of 4609 word groups.
Three example groups from WordNet are listed below.

Introduction

(1) pharmacy, pharmaceutic, pharmacist, pharmaceutical
(2) pathological, pathologist, pathology, pathologic
(3) digestion, digest, digester, digestive, digestible

An automatic word variant derivation component as part of
lexicon builder tools assuages the otherwise tedious manual effort of populating variants of each word in the lexicon. Related work (Lu et al. 2012) in this direction, have
developed an automatic word variant derivation component
by following a purely rule-based approach. In general, while
rule-based approaches are credited as being highly precise,
since their applicability is restricted to only seen patterns,
their coverage remains a limiting factor. As language is everevolving, especially in certain domains like the medical domain, incorporating machine learning-based methods either
as a standalone or in a hybrid architecture together with rulebased approaches seems a worthwhile next step to enable
further development of this task.
The word variant derivation task by suffixation can be described as follows. Given a word, to determine its unchangeable beginning portion (loosely, the base), identifying any
remaining ending as replaceable (loosely, the suffix), and potential candidate suffixes for replacement or for appending
to the base resulting in valid derived words (e.g., happ-iness
from happ-y). In this work, we propose a learning-based

Our Learning-Based Approach
Our preliminary approach to automatic word variant derivation by suffixation is similar to the nonstandard word normalization tasks described in Pennell and Liu (2010) and
Liu et al. (2011).

Word Variant Derivation by Sequence Learning
We treat the problem as a multi-class classification task.
For each letter, a decision is made whether or not to preserve, delete, or substitute the letter; and if the variant word
is hypothesized to have more letters, to add a new letter to
the original word. This transformation process of a word to
its variants is learned automatically through a sequence labeling framework that integrates character-, phonetic-, and
hyphenation information.2 We used DirecTL+ (Jiampoja1

Filtered to retain only the words found in the SNOMED clinical terminology, WordNet, or in the online Webster’s dictionary.
2
Additional details are available at http://www.hlt.utdallas.edu/
∼jld082000/derivation/

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4152

