Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Discriminative Feature Grouping
Lei Han1 and Yu Zhang1,2∗

1

2

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
The Institute of Research and Continuing Education, Hong Kong Baptist University (Shenzhen)

Other extensions of the group lasso, e.g., (Kim and Xing
2010; Jenatton et al. 2010), aim to learn from the given
tree structured information among features. However, those
methods require the feature groups to be given as a priori information. That is, they can utilize the given feature groups
to obtain solutions with group sparsity, but lack the ability
of learning the feature groups.
Feature grouping techniques, which ﬁnd the groups of
highly correlated features automatically from data, thus have
been proposed to address this issue. These techniques help
gain additional insights to understand and interpret data,
e.g., ﬁnding co-regulated genes in microarray analysis (Dettling and Bühlmann 2004). Feature grouping techniques assume that the features with identical coefﬁcients form a feature group. The elastic net (Zou and Hastie 2005) is a representative feature grouping approach, which combines the
1 and 2 norms to encourage highly correlated features to
have identical coefﬁcients. The fused Lasso family, including the fused Lasso (Tibshirani et al. 2005), graph based
fused Lasso (Kim and Xing 2009), and generalized fused
Lasso (GFLasso) (Friedman et al. 2007), uses some fused
regularizers to directly force the feature coefﬁcients of each
pair of features to be close based on the 1 norm. Recently,
the OSCAR method (Bondell and Reich 2008), which combines a 1 norm and a pairwise ∞ norm on each pair of
features, has shown good performance in learning feature
groups. Moreover, some extensions of OSCAR have also
been proposed (Shen and Huang 2010; Yang et al. 2012;
Jang et al. 2013) to further reduce the estimation bias.
However, when there exist some similar but still different
feature groups, we ﬁnd that empirically all the existing feature grouping methods tend to fuse those groups together as
one group, thus leading to impaired learning performance.
Figure 1(a) shows an example, where G1 and G2 are similar but different feature groups, and they are easy to be
mis-fused by existing feature grouping methods. In many
real-world applications with high-dimensional data, e.g., microarray analysis, the phenomena that feature groups with
similar but different feature coefﬁcients appear frequently.
For example, by using the method in (Jacob, Obozinski, and
Vert 2009), the averaged coefﬁcients of each feature group
among the given 637 groups, which correspond to the biological gene pathways, in the breast cancer data is shown in
Figure 1(b) and we can observe that there are a lot of feature

Abstract
Feature grouping has been demonstrated to be promising in learning with high-dimensional data. It helps reduce the variances in the estimation and improves the
stability of feature selection. One major limitation of existing feature grouping approaches is that some similar
but different feature groups are often mis-fused, leading to impaired performance. In this paper, we propose
a Discriminative Feature Grouping (DFG) method to
discover the feature groups with enhanced discrimination. Different from existing methods, DFG adopts a
novel regularizer for the feature coefﬁcients to tradeoff between fusing and discriminating feature groups.
The proposed regularizer consists of a 1 norm to enforce feature sparsity and a pairwise ∞ norm to encourage the absolute differences among any three feature coefﬁcients to be similar. To achieve better asymptotic property, we generalize the proposed regularizer
to an adaptive one where the feature coefﬁcients are
weighted based on the solution of some estimator with
root-n consistency. For optimization, we employ the alternating direction method of multipliers to solve the
proposed methods efﬁciently. Experimental results on
synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that the
proposed methods have good performance compared
with the state-of-the-art feature grouping methods.

Introduction
Learning with high-dimensional data is a challenge especially when the size of the data is not very large. Sparse modeling, which selects only a relevant subset of the features,
has thus received increasing attention. Lasso (Tibshirani
1996) is one of the most popular sparse modeling methods
and has been well studied in the literature. However, in the
presence of highly correlated features, Lasso tends to select
only one or some of those features, leading to unstable estimations and impaired performance. To address this issue, the
group lasso (Yuan and Lin 2006) has been proposed to select
groups of features by using the 1 /2 regularizer. As extensions of the group lasso, several methods are proposed to
learn from overlapping groups (Zhao, Rocha, and Yu 2009;
Jacob, Obozinski, and Vert 2009; Yuan, Liu, and Ye 2011).
∗

Both authors contribute equally.
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2631

