Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Representation Discovery for MDPs Using Bisimulation Metrics
Sherry Shanshan Ruan, Gheorghe Comanici, Prakash Panangaden, and Doina Precup
School of Computer Science
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
{sherry, gcoman, prakash, dprecup}@cs.mcgill.ca

Algorithm 1 Partition declustering

Solving large sequential decision problems modeled as
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) requires representing
the state space by approximations such as state aggregation,
linear function approximation or kernel-based methods. In
this work, we are mainly interested in state aggregation in
which the state space is partitioned into disjoint subsets and
values are associated with each partition. Our goal is to construct a partition incrementally in such a way as to provide a
good approximation to the true value function.
One approach for this problem is to use bisimulation relations (Givan, Dean, and Greig 2003) or their relaxation as
bisimulation metrics (Ferns, Panangaden, and Precup 2004).
Generally speaking, two states are bisimilar if one can simulate all the transitions of the other and the next state distributions are the same over bisimulation classes. Bisimulation
metrics are a quantitative analogue of bisimulation relations,
in the sense that they assign a non-negative value to all pairs
of states to represent distance between them. These metrics
are particularly attractive because they allow quantifying the
approximation error for any state space partitioning, or more
generally, any linear function approximator (Comanici and
Precup 2012). However, bisimulation metric computation is
very expensive. Indeed, (Ferns and Precup 2014) show that
computing the metric amounts to solving an MDP resulting
from a coupling of the state space with itself, and such a
coupling has size quadratic in the number of states.
In this work, we tackle this problem by proposing a significant improvement in the computation of bisimulation metrics. Our first contribution is a construct of an iteratively
improving sequence of state space partitions which converges in the limit to the bisimulation relation. We prove
that after each iteration, the error of the value function computed over this partition (compared to the true optimal value
function) is bounded. We define P
a partition B as a basis
{φi }m
such
that
φ
∈
{0,
1}
and
i
i=1
i φi (s) = 1, ∀ state s ∈
state space S. Then the partition procedure is described in
Algorithm 1 where P a is associated with the policy choosing action a deterministically. The algorithm has complexity
P
O( φ∈Bn−1 (φT φ)|Bφ ||A| + |Bn |2 |Bn−1 |2 log |Bn−1 ||A|)

Given a partition Bn , n ≥ 1
Bn+1 ← ∅
for all φ ∈ Bn do
Bφ ← ∅
for all s with φ(s) = 1 do
for all φ0 ∈ Bφ do
choose s0 with φ0 (s0 ) = 1
if ∀a, ∀φ00 ∈ Bn−1 , (P a φ00 )(s) = (P a φ00 )(s0 )
then φ0 (s) ← 1
end for
if φ0 (s) = 0, ∀φ0 ∈ Bφ
then add a new element φ̂ to Bφ and set φ̂(s) = 1
end for
add the elements of Bφ to Bn+1
end for

putation of the metric dn . As n approaches ∞, the update
algorithm runs in O(|A|(|S||B∼ | + |B∼ |4 log |B∼ |)), which
is an upper bound for the update at any step.
This approach can provide substantial space and computation time savings since the value function approximation at
each step is computed over partitions rather than states. We
illustrate the improvement by computing bisimulation metrics over a series of MDPs (the well-known Puddle World
problem) that increase in size but remain same in structures.
The key finding is that after some point, the number of features found is almost constant even when the state space increases, as demonstrated in the top panel of Figure 1. This is
because the complexity of the reward function and the transition system remain unchanged. The bottom panel of Figure 1
shows the runtime of computing bisimulation metrics over
partitions for up to 14 iterations of Algorithm 1. These empirical results illustrate that the computational complexity
of computing bisimulation-based representations and corresponding metrics is mostly dependent on the intrinsic complexity of the reward function and transition models.
The second contribution of our work is an algorithm
for asynchronous updates of the metric and the representation. Motivated by asynchronous approach proposed in (Comanici, Panangaden, and Precup 2012), our asynchronous
algorithm attempts to maintain the computational cost away
from the latter upper bound. Similar to the synchronous one,
the asynchronous partition algorithm generates a sequence

where the first term of the sum accounts for the construction
of Bn and the second part of the sum accounts for the comCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4202

