Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Robust Image Sentiment Analysis Using
Progressively Trained and Domain Transferred Deep Networks
Quanzeng You and Jiebo Luo

Hailin Jin and Jianchao Yang

Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14623
{qyou, jluo}@cs.rochester.edu

Adobe Research
345 Park Avenue
San Jose, CA 95110
{hljin, jiayang}@adobe.com

Abstract
Sentiment analysis of online user generated content is
important for many social media analytics tasks. Researchers have largely relied on textual sentiment analysis to develop systems to predict political elections,
measure economic indicators, and so on. Recently, social media users are increasingly using images and
videos to express their opinions and share their experiences. Sentiment analysis of such large scale visual
content can help better extract user sentiments toward
events or topics, such as those in image tweets, so that
prediction of sentiment from visual content is complementary to textual sentiment analysis. Motivated by the
needs in leveraging large scale yet noisy training data to
solve the extremely challenging problem of image sentiment analysis, we employ Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). We ﬁrst design a suitable CNN architecture for image sentiment analysis. We obtain half a
million training samples by using a baseline sentiment
algorithm to label Flickr images. To make use of such
noisy machine labeled data, we employ a progressive
strategy to ﬁne-tune the deep network. Furthermore, we
improve the performance on Twitter images by inducing domain transfer with a small number of manually
labeled Twitter images. We have conducted extensive
experiments on manually labeled Twitter images. The
results show that the proposed CNN can achieve better
performance in image sentiment analysis than competing algorithms.

Figure 1: Examples of Flickr images related to the 2012
United States presidential election.

works on using online users’ sentiments to predict boxofﬁce revenues for movies (Asur and Huberman 2010), political elections (O’Connor et al. 2010; Tumasjan et al. 2010)
and economic indicators (Bollen, Mao, and Zeng 2011;
Zhang, Fuehres, and Gloor 2011). These works have suggested that online users’ opinions or sentiments are closely
correlated with our real-world activities. All of these results
hinge on accurate estimation of people’s sentiments according to their online generated content. Currently all of these
works only rely on sentiment analysis from textual content.
However, multimedia content, including images and videos,
has become prevalent over all online social networks. Indeed, online social network providers are competing with
each other by providing easier access to their increasingly
powerful and diverse services. Figure 1 shows example images related to the 2012 United States presidential election.
Clearly, images in the top and bottom rows convey opposite
sentiments towards the two candidates.
A picture is worth a thousand words. People with different backgrounds can easily understand the main content of
an image or video. Apart from the large amount of easily
available visual content, today’s computational infrastructure is also much cheaper and more powerful to make the
analysis of computationally intensive visual content analysis feasible. In this era of big data, it has been shown that
the integration of visual content can provide us more reliable or complementary online social signals (Jin et al. 2010;
Yuan et al. 2013).
To the best of our knowledge, little attention has been paid
to the sentiment analysis of visual content. Only a few recent
works attempted to predict visual sentiment using features

Introduction
Online social networks are providing more and more convenient services to their users. Today, social networks have
grown to be one of the most important sources for people to
acquire information on all aspects of their lives. Meanwhile,
every online social network user is a contributor to such
large amounts of information. Online users love to share
their experiences and to express their opinions on virtually
all events and subjects.
Among the large amount of online user generated data, we
are particularly interested in people’s opinions or sentiments
towards speciﬁc topics and events. There have been many
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

381

