Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Circumventing Robots’ Failures by Embracing Their Faults:
A Practical Approach to Planning for Autonomous Construction
Stefan Witwicki and Francesco Mondada
Laboratoire de Systèmes Robotiques (LSRO)
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
{stefan.witwicki, francesco.mondada} @epfl.ch
Abstract
This paper overviews our application of state-of-the-art automated planning algorithms to real mobile robots performing
an autonomous construction task, a domain in which robots
are prone to faults. We describe how embracing these faults
leads to better representations and smarter planning, allowing robots with limited precision to avoid catastrophic failures
and succeed in intricate constructions.

Introduction
Along with recent algorithmic advances in planning comes
the expectation that bigger and more realistic problems can
and will be solved by autonomous agents. However, when
those agents take the form of robots interacting with the
physical world, results tend to fall short of expectations.
Faults inevitably enter into the robots’ behavior. For mobile robots that are autonomously constructing a wall, building blocks are sometimes incorrectly grasped or imprecisely
placed (Wismer et al. 2012). And one may be tempted to
blame the faults on the robot’s hardware or its low-level controllers, or to dismiss them as rare implications of imperfect
environmental conditions.
Here, we advocate a different perspective. Why not accept the robots as imperfect agents? Why not acknowledge
that, no matter the investment in expensive high-precision
sensors, regardless of the meticulous efforts spent in designing robust controllers, when we put them into complex realworld environments, robots can and will make mistakes. In
adopting this somewhat unconventional view of robots, it
becomes necessary to explore alternative approaches to the
classical application of automated planning.

Figure 1: A marXbot equipped for autonomous construction.

it is designed with three degrees of freedom (lift, rotation
around the robot, and tilt of the end-effector), and it has a
switchable magnetic device that allows the robot to grasp
and release building blocks to which we have affixed thin
metallic strips. In addition, it has two linear arrays of shortrange IR sensors mounted on the front and the bottom of the
end-effector, providing primitive vision of the object being
manipulated. By rotating the gripper to its side and moving forward with its treels, the marXbot can perform lateral
scans and align with whatever it is constructing.
Here, the task is to autonomously construct a wall (Figure 2) from a blueprint using small (6cm) cubes, This task is
made challenging by the fact that, in contrast to related work
(Wismer et al. 2012; Petersen, Nagpal, and Werfel 2011),
the construction blocks are not self aligning. Moreover, the
marXbot’s primary mode of viewing the wall is highly sensitive to lighting conditions, is imprecise outside of a very
limited range, and is prone to error due to infrared dispersion. In light of these quirks, and despite our best efforts in
designing robust controllers, faults tend to arise during the
construction process. For instance, the robot fails to align
with the wall because one block is crooked, holes appear in
the wall due to an accumulation of misalignments, or a block
is placed in a way that disturbs other blocks on the wall. Our
objective is for robots to use planning to anticipate and correct such faults, thereby preventing catastrophic failures.

Autonomous Wall Construction
Displayed in Figure 1 is the the marXbot (Bonani et al.
2010), a small mobile robot with a modular, reconfigurable
design, allowing it be optionally equipped with a variety
of different modules supporting various sensory and actuational capabilities, some of which are highlighted. These
modules are seamlessly integrated by a CAN bus connected
to an ARMv6 board running Linux. The magnetic gripper
module is particularly useful for autonomous construction;
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4298

