Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

SP-SVM: Large Margin Classifier for Data on Multiple Manifolds
Bin Shen? , Bao-Di Liu† , Qifan Wang? , Yi Fang‡ , Jan P. Allebach
?

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN. 47907, USA
College of Information and Control Engineering, China University of Petroleum, Qingdao 266580, China
‡
Department of Computer Engineering, Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, CA. 95053, USA

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN. 47907, USA
bshen@purdue.edu, thu.liubaodi@gmail.com, wang868@purdue.edu, yfang@scu.edu, allebach@ecn.purdue.edu
†

Abstract

with other approaches. Conventional SVM learns a classifier in a fully supervised manner. Given a set of labeled
data samples, it aims to find the hyperplane that separates
samples of different labels with the largest margin. Later, it
is extended to the semi-supervised fashion (Belkin, Niyogi,
and Sindhwani 2006). This semi-supervised version of SVM
tries to preserve the neighborhood relation among the unlabeled samples while searching for the separating hyperplane for those labeled samples. In this manner, both labeled
and unlabeled samples contribute to the final solution. However, it does not explore the neighborhood relation or local
structure among labeled samples, thus ignores the underlying manifold structure of labeled samples. Furthermore,
maximum margin clustering (Xu et al. 2004), which can be
viewed as an unsupervised counterpart of SVM, tries to find
hyperplane which separates the unlabeled samples with the
largest margin. Recently, with the rapidly increasing size of
data the speed of training becomes a concern for users. To
speed up the training process of SVM and deal with large
scale data, various optimization approaches are proposed,
such as Pegasos (Shalev-Shwartz, Singer, and Srebro 2007),
LIBLINEAR (Fan et al. 2008), and StreamSVM (Matsushima, Vishwanathan, and Smola 2012). With the help of
these techniques, SVM is able to cope with large scale data
in relatively short time.

As one of the most important state-of-the-art classification techniques, Support Vector Machine (SVM) has
been widely adopted in many real-world applications,
such as object detection, face recognition, text categorization, etc., due to its competitive practical performance and elegant theoretical interpretation. However,
it treats all samples independently, and ignores the fact
that, in many real situations especially when data are
in high dimensional space, samples typically lie on low
dimensional manifolds of the feature space and thus a
sample can be related to its neighbors by being represented as a linear combination of other samples on
the same manifold. This linear representation, which
is usually sparse, reflects the structure of underlying
manifolds. It has been extensively explored in the recent literature and proven to be critical for the performance of classification. To benefit from both the underlying low dimensional manifold structure and the large
margin classifier, this paper proposes a novel method
called Sparsity Preserving Support Vector Machine(SPSVM), which explicitly considers the sparse representation of samples while maximizing the margin between
different classes. Consequently, SP-SVM inherits both
the discriminative power of support vector machine and
the merits of sparsity. A set of experiments on realworld benchmark data sets show that SP-SVM achieves
significantly higher precision on recognition task than
various competitive baselines including the traditional
SVM, the sparse representation based method and the
classical nearest neighbor classifier.

In many applications such as face recognition, while the
original data samples seem in a very high-dimensional feature space, they often actually lie on lower dimensional
manifolds of the feature space (Arandjelovic et al. 2005;
Shen and Si 2010; Wu, Shen, and Ling 2014; Liu et al.
2013). A reasonable assumption is that a sample can be represented as a sparse linear combination of other samples on
the same manifold. For classification, the samples are drawn
from different classes, which are typically on different manifolds. For example, in face recognition, the face images of
the same person are on the same manifold while faces of
different people lie on different manifolds. A more subtle
assumption is that samples within the same class may still
lie on a mixture of manifolds. For example, the face images
of the same person with different facial expressions but the
same lighting condition are on one manifold, while the images with the same facial expression but different lighting
conditions are on another manifold. Because of the underlying low dimensional manifold structure, the samples usually

Introduction
Pattern classification is one of the most important problems
in machine learning, and Support Vector Machine(SVM)
(Vapnik 1963; 1998) is one of the most successful classification approaches. It has been widely used in many realworld applications, such as face recognition (Guo, Li, and
Chan 2000), object detection (Felzenszwalb et al. 2010), text
categorization (Joachims 1998), image classification (Liu et
al. 2014; Wang, Ruan, and Si 2014; Shen, Liu, and Allebach 2014), and so on. In many of these applications, SVM
is able to achieve very competitive performance compared
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2965

