Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Gazetteer-Independent Toponym Resolution
Using Geographic Word Profiles
Grant DeLozier and Jason Baldridge and Loretta London
University of Texas at Austin
Austin TX, 78712
{grantdelozier, jbaldrid}@utexas.edu
loretta.r.london@gmail.com
Abstract

of these heuristics have been shown to perform relatively
well in some text domains, despite their simplicity (Leidner
2008; Speriosu and Baldridge 2013).
There is surprisingly little research that uses machine
learning for toponym resolution. This is in large part due to
limited availability of annotated corpora. Most corpora only
contain training data for a small proportion of possible referents; e.g., Leidner’s TR-CoNLL contains 800 unique referents, while common gazetteers have 9 million unique place
referents. In dealing with this paucity of training data, one
strategy uses indirect supervision to create large amounts of
training data from links and annotations in Wikipedia, such
as those shown in Figure 1 (Speriosu and Baldridge 2013;
Santos, Anastácio, and Martins 2014). Another strategy incorporates more generalized features sets, such as certain
document metadata and population features (Lieberman,
Samet, and Sankaranarayanan 2010; Lieberman and Samet
2012; Santos, Anastácio, and Martins 2014). These systems
substantially improved upon the performance of heuristic
techniques, and they have also improved replicable comparisons with standard datasets and resources.
This paper addresses a weakness of prior toponym resolution work: explicit reliance on curated knowledge resources such as gazetteers. These are highly incomplete resources that depict only narrow portions of the total set of
place names. To reduce dependence on them, we rely on recent advances in the related task of document geolocation,
where the goal is to predict the geographic context of a much
larger span of text. Much of this work has been directed at
guessing social media users’ locations given only their observed language (Cheng, Caverlee, and Lee 2010; Eisenstein
et al. 2010; Wing and Baldridge 2011; Roller et al. 2012;
Wing and Baldridge 2014). The success of these approaches
is generally on a much coarser geographic scale than is required by TR systems, but the approaches used are applicable to TR. Crucially important to our work are regionally
specific language models. These regional language models
capture differences not just over explicitly geographic context words like Philadelphia and Midwest, but also over latently geographic words such as y’all and hockey. We use
spatial statistics over these models to flip them to a wordcentric perspective that forms the basis of our toponym resolver.
Only limited attempts have been made to use local geo-

Toponym resolution, or grounding names of places to their
actual locations, is an important problem in analysis of both
historical corpora and present-day news and web content. Recent approaches have shifted from rule-based spatial minimization methods to machine learned classifiers that use features of the text surrounding a toponym. Such methods have
been shown to be highly effective, but they crucially rely on
gazetteers and are unable to handle unknown place names or
locations. We address this limitation by modeling the geographic distributions of words over the earth’s surface: we
calculate the geographic profile of each word based on local
spatial statistics over a set of geo-referenced language models. These geo-profiles can be further refined by combining
in-domain data with background statistics from Wikipedia.
Our resolver computes the overlap of all geo-profiles in a
given text span; without using a gazetteer, it performs on par
with existing classifiers. When combined with a gazetteer,
it achieves state-of-the-art performance for two standard toponym resolution corpora (TR-CoNLL and Civil War). Furthermore, it dramatically improves recall when toponyms are
identified by named entity recognizers, which often (correctly) find non-standard variants of toponyms.

Introduction
Toponym Resolution (TR) refers to the task of automatically assigning geographic reference to place names in
text. Place names are highly ambiguous: some have hundreds of possible geographic referents (e.g. Washington is
associated with at least 64 unique geographic referents).
In addition to being highly ambiguous, most place references occur only rarely. Nonetheless, toponym resolution has far reaching applications, with uses in question
answering and information retrieval tasks (Leidner 2008;
Daoud and Huang 2013), crisis response, and social and historical research (Smith and Crane 2001; Grover et al. 2010;
Nesbit 2013).
The majority of work in TR until recent years employed
heuristic techniques for disambiguating place references.
Common approaches included selecting place references
with the highest population, selecting more administratively
prominent places, and selecting places contained in a minimal geographic area given a set of possible referents. Some
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2382

