Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Cross-Modal Image Clustering via Canonical Correlation Analysis
Cheng Jin, Wenhui Mao, Ruiqi Zhang, Yuejie Zhang, Xiangyang Xue
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{jc, 13210240099, 12210240075, yjzhang, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

visual coding and semantic mining to achieve more comprehensive multimodal feature representation. To address
the second issue, it is very interesting to develop new algorithms for fusing multimodal features and efficiently exploiting the correlations among attributes of different modalities in annotated images. To address the third issue, it is
critical to explore an appropriate clustering mechanism
with high efficiency but no sacrifice of clustering accuracy.
Based on the above observations, a novel scheme is developed in this paper to facilitate more effective crossmodal image clustering for large-scale annotated image
collections. Our scheme significantly differs from other
earlier work as follows. a) The visual feature generation
based on Locality Linear Coding (LLC) can achieve a
smaller quantization error and better coding stability. The
semantic feature generation based on a co-occurrence association network can exploit the inter-term statistical cooccurrence associations to learn the semantic feature representations. b) The multimodal feature fusion based on Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) has a strong ability to
characterize the multimodal correlations between the visual
features in images and semantic features in captions. c)
The specified accelerated hierarchical k-means clustering is
exploited to face scalability problems when scaling up to
large-scale annotated images. d) A new cross-modal image
clustering framework is built by integrating the above feature representation, fusion, and clustering mechanisms.
How to integrate multimodal features for image clustering is an open issue because it is hard to provide a base to
multiple similarities among the images which are calculated from multiple features in different modalities. The main
contribution of our work is that we effectively apply CCA
to enable cross-modal image clustering, which has provided a more reasonable base for us to integrate visual similarity with semantic similarity by determining an optimal correlated projection space. Thus such cross-modal clustering
can be treated as a bi-media multimodal mapping problem,
and modeled as a correlation distribution over multimodal
feature representations, where the most important task is
creating the multimodal association between visual and
semantic features and measuring the degree to which they
are related. We have obtained very positive results in our
experiments to demonstrate our observations.

A new algorithm via Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA)
is developed in this paper to support more effective crossmodal image clustering for large-scale annotated image collections. It can be treated as a bi-media multimodal mapping
problem and modeled as a correlation distribution over multimodal feature representations. It integrates the multimodal
feature generation with the Locality Linear Coding (LLC)
and co-occurrence association network, multimodal feature
fusion with CCA, and accelerated hierarchical k-means clustering, which aims to characterize the correlations between
the inter-related visual features in images and semantic features in captions, and measure their association degree more
precisely. Very positive results were obtained in our experiments using a large quantity of public data.1

Introduction
With the massive explosion of annotated image data on the
Web, methods to seamlessly handle the complex structures
of image data to achieve more efficient organization and
management have become an important research focus
(Datta et al. 2008; Rasiwasia et al. 2010). Usually, an annotated image is exhibited in a multimodal form, that is,
both semantic and visual. Thus, integrating multimodal information sources to enable cross-modal image clustering
has been the core component. However, due to the semantic gap, there may be significant differences and independence among visual images and textual captions, which
leads to the huge difficulty and uncertainty in making full
use of the relations between the visual features (in images)
and semantic features (in captions) (Fan et al. 2012).
To achieve effective cross-modal image clustering, three
inter-related issues should be addressed simultaneously: 1)
the valid coding and discovery of valuable multimodal features to characterize visual images and textual captions
more reasonably, 2) multimodal feature fusion to identify
better multimodal correlations between the visual features
in images and semantic features in captions, and 3) appropriate clustering methods to speed up the cross-modal clustering process. To address the first issue, it is very important to leverage large-scale annotated images for robust
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

151

