Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Strategy-Proof and Efficient Kidney Exchange Using a Credit Mechanism
Chen Hajaj

John P. Dickerson

Avinatan Hassidim

Bar-Ilan University
chen.hajaj@biu.ac.il

Carnegie Mellon University
dickerson@cs.cmu.edu

Bar-Ilan University
avinatan@cs.biu.ac.il

Tuomas Sandholm

David Sarne

Carnegie Mellon University
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Bar-Ilan University
sarned@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

ing donors to needy patients. A person in need of a kidney may have one or more healthy donors with two healthy
kidneys who are willing but unable to donate a kidney to
that person, typically due to a medical incompatibility like
a blood or tissue type mismatch. These incompatible donorpatient pairs can exchange donors with other pairs, through
cycles or chains of exchanges, in such a way that each involved pair’s donor gives to a (medically compatible) patient
of another pair. Recommending a “good” set of swaps is thus
the basic kidney exchange problem.
In recent years, numerous multi-transplant center kidney
exchanges have been fielded around the world, where donorpatient pairs from different transplant centers can switch
donors. Multi-center kidney exchange programs are run
through clearinghouses that recommend a matching from the
full set of donor-patient pairs.
Transplant centers have different incentives than patients
and donors. Performing an organ transplant surgery is typically very profitable to a center. Thus, centers may have
incentive to only reveal some subset of their donor-patient
pairs to the clearinghouse, and match other pairs internally at
their center.3 Such strategic behavior is rampant: today most
transplant centers not only hide their easy-to-match pairs,
but all their internally matchable pairs (Stewart et al. 2013).
It has also been shown to reduce the overall efficiency of
kidney exchange in theory (Ashlagi and Roth 2014).
While most prior work on mechanism design for kidney
exchange has focused on static models, in this paper we consider a more realistic multi-period dynamic model. For this
dynamic model, we study how to construct a mechanism that
makes it a dominant strategy for each center to reveal its
pairs truthfully, and hence maximizes the number of pairs
in the central pool from which the clearinghouse will construct a global matching. Our contributions in this work are
the following. First, we design a credit-based strategy-proof
matching mechanism for the dynamic model that considers
the incentives of the different transplant centers. The mechanism is efficient and guarantees long-term individual rationality (IR). Our results apply not only to matching via
2-cycles—a restriction present in some kidney exchange papers: our matchings can also include cycles of any length
and altruist-initiated chains, which is important at least in

We present a credit-based matching mechanism for dynamic
barter markets—and kidney exchange in particular—that is
both strategy proof and efficient, that is, it guarantees truthful
disclosure of donor-patient pairs from the transplant centers
and results in the maximum global matching. Furthermore,
the mechanism is individually rational in the sense that, in the
long run, it guarantees each transplant center more matches
than the center could have achieved alone. The mechanism
does not require assumptions about the underlying distribution of compatibility graphs—a nuance that has previously
produced conflicting results in other aspects of theoretical
kidney exchange. Our results apply not only to matching via
2-cycles: the matchings can also include cycles of any length
and altruist-initiated chains, which is important at least in kidney exchanges. The mechanism can also be adjusted to guarantee immediate individual rationality at the expense of economic efficiency, while preserving strategy proofness via the
credits. This circumvents a well-known impossibility result
in static kidney exchange concerning the existence of an individually rational, strategy-proof, and maximal mechanism.
We show empirically that the mechanism results in significant
gains on data from a national kidney exchange that includes
59% of all US transplant centers.

Introduction
In the United States alone, over 3.8 million people—roughly
1.6% of the population—have kidney disease.1 For many,
kidney disease will progress to outright kidney failure—and
with it the need for a kidney transplant. Transplant organs
can be sourced from cadavers or willing living donors. However, there is a severe supply and demand mismatch with
donor organs; in 2013, 36,395 people were added to the US
national kidney waiting list, while only 16,462 left due to
receiving a living or deceased donor kidney.2 Furthermore,
roughly half of the over 100,000 candidates on the US list
have been waiting for a kidney for more than two years.
Kidney exchange aims to reduce the transplant organ
supply-demand imbalance by making it easier to match willCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The 2012 US National Health Interview Survey (Blackwell,
Lucas, and Clarke 2014) counts patients with “weak or failing kidneys” (see their Tables 7 and 8 for methodology details).
2
http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov

3

921

Internal matches are also logistically easier to handle.

