Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Data Analysis and Optimization for (Citi)Bike Sharing
Eoin O’Mahony1 , David B. Shmoys1,2
Cornell University
Department of Computer Science1
School of Operations Research and Information Engineering2

Abstract

to put the system back in balance. This is achieved either
by trucks, as is the case in most bike-share cities, or other
bicycles with trailers, as is being tested in New York.
Operators of bike-sharing systems have limited resources
available to them, which constrains the extent to which rebalancing can occur. Hence, this domain is an exciting application for the field of computational sustainability. Based
on a close collaboration with NYC Bike Share LLC, the
operators of Citibike, we have formulated several optimization problems whose solutions are used to more effectively
maintain the pool of bikes in NYC. There is an expanding
literature on operations management issues related to bikesharing systems, but the problems addressed here are particularly suited to the complex blend of human and system
constraints that are present for Citibike. For these problems,
we shall present results utilizing different approaches: integer programming formulations that can typically be solved
(at scale) by off-the-shelf integer programming solvers, and
heuristic approaches that yield good solutions quickly.
We begin by tackling the problem of how best to use system data to plan for usage. That is, we want to place bikes
at stations to handle the surge in usage experienced during
rush-hours. We approach the issue of inferring true demand
for trips and use these amounts to better plan for system
usage. From these computations we know both when and
where bikes are needed and progress to answering the question: how do we get them there?
We focus on two very different rebalancing problems.
First, we tackle rebalancing the system during rush-hour,
developing novel methods for optimizing rebalancing resources. During rush-hour, system usage is high, rendering
large truck routes unreliable as the system state might shift
dramatically before the route is completed. Traffic is also at
its peak during rush hour, which greatly limits the ability of
trucks to move easily through the city; this motivates the use
of bike trailers instead of large trucks. The nature of the midrush balancing requires a drastically different approach than
the one used for the overnight problem. Our goal is not to
maintain system balance but to ensure that users are never
too far from either a bike or a dock. To achieve this, we formulate a clustering problem that yields stations in the city
for which rebalancing resources can be targeted.
We then tackle the problem of moving bikes around the
city overnight. Overnight the system experiences low usage

Bike-sharing systems are becoming increasingly prevalent in urban environments. They provide a low-cost,
environmentally-friendly transportation alternative for
cities. The management of these systems gives rise to
many optimization problems. Chief among these problems is the issue of bicycle rebalancing. Users imbalance the system by creating demand in an asymmetric pattern. This necessitates action to put the system
back in balance with the requisite levels of bicycles at
each station to facilitate future use. In this paper, we
tackle the problem of maintaing system balance during
peak rush-hour usage as well as rebalancing overnight
to prepare the system for rush-hour usage. We provide
novel problem formulations that have been motivated
by both a close collaboration with the New York City
bike share (Citibike) and a careful analysis of system
usage data. We analyze system data to discover the best
placement of bikes to facilitate usage. We solve routing problems for overnight shifts as well as clustering
problems for handling mid rush-hour usage. The tools
developed from this research are currently in daily use
at NYC Bike Share LLC, operators of Citibike.

1

Introduction

Bike-sharing systems are a cost effective way of promoting
a sustainable lifestyle in urban areas. The number of bikesharing systems has more than doubled since 2008 (Larsen
2013). These systems generally consist of stations where
users can take out or drop off bikes, and may return a bike
to a free dock at any station. New York City launched the
largest bike-sharing system in North America, Citibike, in
May 2013 with over 300 stations and 5000 bikes. The system has been a success with ridership approaching 40000
trips per day. With this success comes a set of management problems. Chief among these is the issue of system
imbalance; bikes become clustered in certain geographic areas which leaves other areas devoid of bikes; for example,
the traders wake up early in their East Village apartments,
rapidly deplete the supply of bikes there, and then overwhelm the capacity for docks in the Wall Street area. This
system imbalance necessitates moving bikes around the city
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

687

