Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

PD Disease State Assessment in
Naturalistic Environments Using Deep Learning
Nils Y. Hammerla

James M. Fisher

Peter Andras

Culture Lab, Digital Interaction Group
Newcastle University, UK
nils.hammerla@ncl.ac.uk

Health Education North East, UK

School of Computing and Mathematics
Keele University, UK

Lynn Rochester

Richard Walker

Thomas Plötz

Institute of Neuroscience
Newcastle University, UK

Northumbria Healthcare
NHS Foundation Trust, UK

Culture Lab, Digital Interaction Group
Newcastle University, UK

Abstract

of the condition, which may not give an adequate picture of
the daily fluctuations beyond recall by the individual. Objective, automated means to assess PD in people’s daily lives
are therefore much desired.

Management of Parkinson’s Disease (PD) could be improved significantly if reliable, objective information
about fluctuations in disease severity can be obtained
in ecologically valid surroundings such as the private
home. Although automatic assessment in PD has been
studied extensively, so far no approach has been devised
that is useful for clinical practice. Analysis approaches
common for the field lack the capability of exploiting
data from realistic environments, which represents a
major barrier towards practical assessment systems. The
very unreliable and infrequent labelling of ambiguous,
low resolution movement data collected in such environments represents a very challenging analysis setting,
where advances would have significant societal impact
in our ageing population. In this work we propose an
assessment system that abides practical usability constraints and applies deep learning to differentiate disease state in data collected in naturalistic settings. Based
on a large data-set collected from 34 people with PD
we illustrate that deep learning outperforms other approaches in generalisation performance, despite the unreliable labelling characteristic for this problem setting,
and how such systems could improve current clinical
practice.

In order to become a useful clinical tool, such automated
assessment systems have to be deployed in naturalistic, ecologically valid surroundings such as the private home. Systems based on, or evaluated in, such naturalistic settings are,
however, very rare. The reason for this apparent shortcoming
is clear: while capturing data in naturalistic environments
is straight-forward using e.g. body-worn movement sensors,
obtaining reliable labels useful for system development is
practically difficult, if not impossible, as even trained annotators would show only modest agreement with experts
(Palmer et al. 2010). In practice only unreliable and infrequent labels can be obtained in such surroundings, for example using symptom diaries kept by each participant. Instead
of addressing this issue, current systems for the assessment
of PD rely on data captured in the laboratory, where daily
life is just simulated (Hoff and others 2001), or attempt to
recreate the laboratory in the private home using e.g. movement tasks under remote supervision by a clinician (Giuffrida et al. 2009). Research on PD is missing adequate tools
that would allow data from ecologically valid surroundings
to be exploited in system development, as this problem with
its unique challenges, has received little attention from the
machine learning community. This represents a significant
barrier for practical assessment systems, overcoming which
may dramatically improve the quality of life of people affected by PD.

Introduction
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is a degenerative disorder of the
central nervous system that affects around 1% of people over
60 in industrialised countries (de Lau and Breteler 2006).
People affected by PD show a variety of motor features that
gain in severity with the progression of the disease, which
include rigidity, slowness of motion, shaking and problems
with gait [among others]. The severity and nature of these
motor features vary over the course of the day, which has
a significant impact on the quality of life of people with
PD. Management of the condition relies on tailored treatment plans that provide a specific schedule for the type and
dosage of a multitude of medications taken by each individual. Devising such treatment plans is a challenge as clinical
consultations may be infrequent and only provide a snapshot

In this paper we investigate the problem of predicting the
disease state in PD patients in naturalistic surroundings, i.e.
the daily life of individuals affected by PD. We illustrate that
assessment systems have to overcome significant challenges
in analysing large quantities of ambiguous, low-resolution
multi-variate time-series data for which only infrequent and
unreliable labels can be obtained due to practical usability
constraints. Labels are subject to various sources of noise
such as recall bias, class confusion and boundary issues and
do not capture the main source of variance in the data, as
people engage in many (unknown) physical activities that
have significant effect on the recorded sensor signals. Based

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1742

