Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploring Semantic Inter-Class Relationships (SIR)
for Zero-Shot Action Recognition
Chuang Gan1 , Ming Lin3 , Yi Yang2 , Yueting Zhuang4 and Alexander G. Hauptmann3
1

2

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
3
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
4
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China
ganchuang1990@gmail.com, linming04@gmail.com,
yiyang@cs.cmu.edu, yzhuang@zju.edu.cn, alex@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract

that exactly match the target action. Zero-shot learning addresses this problem by providing an alternative approach
that does not require any positive exemplars. Instead, a user
may provide other forms of side information, such as visual class hierarchy (Mensink et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2009)
or attributes (Farhadi et al. 2009; Lampert, Nickisch, and
Harmeling 2009). Then a transfer function is applied at test
time for the unseen class, e.g., its position in the class hierarchy or an attributes-to-class mapping. As discussed in
(Liu, Kuipers, and Savarese 2011), obtaining class hierarchy relationships between verbs/actions is much more difficult than discovering relationships between nouns/objects,
due to the fact that verbs do not have the same well-built
ontological relationships as nouns, such as WordNet. Thus,
Liu et al. (Liu, Kuipers, and Savarese 2011) proposed to
recognize actions by a piece of well-structured attribute
lists, which is probably the first attempt to recognize actions only using texts. The attributes are consist of human
readable properties that are shared across different classes.
As discussed in object categorization (Farhadi et al. 2009;
Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009), action recognition (Liu, Kuipers, and Savarese 2011) and multimedia event
recognition (Liu et al. 2013), the ability of characterizing objects and actions by attributes is not only helpful for recognizing available objects, actions and events, but also powerful for recognizing classes that have never been seen before.

Automatically recognizing a large number of action categories from videos is of significant importance for
video understanding. Most existing works focused on
the design of more discriminative feature representation, and have achieved promising results when the positive samples are enough. However, very limited efforts were spent on recognizing a novel action without any positive exemplars, which is often the case
in the real settings due to the large amount of action
classes and the users’ queries dramatic variations. To
address this issue, we propose to perform action recognition when no positive exemplars of that class are provided, which is often known as the zero-shot learning. Different from other zero-shot learning approaches,
which exploit attributes as the intermediate layer for
the knowledge transfer, our main contribution is SIR,
which directly leverages the semantic inter-class relationships between the known and unknown actions followed by label transfer learning. The inter-class semantic relationships are automatically measured by continuous word vectors, which learned by the skip-gram
model using the large-scale text corpus. Extensive experiments on the UCF101 dataset validate the superiority of our method over fully-supervised approaches
using few positive exemplars.

Introduction

Although promising for the above applications, attributebased representation suffers from several drawbacks. Firstly,
generating semantic attributes is tedious and unreasonable
for many visual concepts, especially for actions. For example, to recognize the action walking, they need to define attributes such as arm pendulum-like motion and translation
motion are positive, but the attributes like torso up-down motion and torso twist are negative. However, describing these
scenes to a computer would require a lengthy textual description but still might not capture the full nuance. In addition, the description template designed in (Liu, Kuipers, and
Savarese 2011) is static, making it difficult to scale up to a
variety of ad-hoc actions. Therefore, in their experiments,
action classes are restricted to a few simple ones such as
walk and jump forward, in the clean and lab-generated video
datasets such as the KTH dataset (Laptev et al. 2008) and the
Weizmann dataset (Blank et al. 2005). It remains unclear

Recent studies in computer vision and multimedia have
explored the action recognition in the real world videos
and made significant progress over the last decade. In literature, reliable low-level features such as STIP (Laptev
et al. 2008), Mosift (Chen and Hauptmann 2009), dense
trajectory (Wang et al. 2011) and improved dense trajectory (Wang, Schmid, and others 2013), combined with a
modern learning algorithm such as support vector machines
(SVM), have achieved promising recognition results.
To obtain good performances in action recognition, existing approaches require sufficient positive exemplars to
train a series of action classifiers, i.e. one for each action. However, due to the large number of action classes,
a main challenge is to gather adequate positive exemplars
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3769

