Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Improved Lower Bound for
Bayesian Network Structure Learning
Xiannian Fan and Changhe Yuan
Graduate Center and Queens College
City University of New York
365 Fifth Avenue, New York 10016
{xfan2@gc, change.yuan@qc}.cuny.edu
Abstract

Existing approaches (Fan, Yuan, and Malone 2014) achieve
this objective only indirectly; they use independence tests to
create an undirected graph, and then use graph partition algorithms to create a partition by minimizing the correlation
between the variables in different groups.
This work introduces a more direct partition approach.
Since the goal is to reduce the cycles between different
groups of the partition, we should put variables that have
more cycles between them in the same group. We will
show that the cycles introduced in the static k-cycle conflict
heuristic are originated from the potentially optimal parent
sets (POPS) of the variables. We therefore identify groups of
variables with more cycles based on information extracted
from all or some of the POPS. Empirical results show that
the new partition method can significantly improve the efficiency and scalability of heuristic search-based structure
learning algorithms.

Several heuristic search algorithms such as A* and
breadth-first branch and bound have been developed
for learning Bayesian network structures that optimize
a scoring function. These algorithms rely on a lower
bound function called static k-cycle conflict heuristic
in guiding the search to explore the most promising
search spaces. The heuristic takes as input a partition
of the random variables of a data set; the importance of
the partition opens up opportunities for further research.
This work introduces a new partition method based on
information extracted from the potentially optimal parent sets (POPS) of the variables. Empirical results show
that the new partition can significantly improve the efficiency and scalability of heuristic search-based structure learning algorithms.

Introduction
This paper considers the problem of learning an optimal
Bayesian network structure for given data and scoring function. Several heuristic search algorithms have been developed for solving this problem by formulating the problem
as a shortest path problem (Yuan and Malone 2013), e.g.,
A* (Yuan, Malone, and Wu 2011), breadth-first branch and
bound (BFBnB) (Malone et al. 2011), and anytime Window A* (Malone and Yuan 2013). Most of these algorithms
need a lower bound function in estimating the quality of a
search path so that they can prune paths that are guaranteed
to lead to suboptimal solutions and focus on exploring the
most promising search spaces.
A lower bound function called static k-cycle conflict
heuristic (Yuan and Malone 2012) has demonstrated excellent performance when used by the search algorithms to
solve many benchmark data sets. It takes as input a partition of the random variables of a data set, and computes
the heuristic value of a path by enforcing the acyclicity constraint between the variables within each group and relaxing
the acyclicity between different groups. The partition has a
significant impact on the tightness of the heuristic. According to Yuan and Malone (2012), a good grouping method
should reduce the number of directed cycles between different groups and enforce acyclicity as much as possible.

Background
This section provides an overview of Bayesian network
structure learning, the shortest-path formulation, and the kcycle conflict heuristic.

Bayesian Network Structure Learning
A Bayesian network (BN) consists of a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) in which the vertices correspond to a set of random variables V = {X1 , ..., Xn } and a set of conditional
probability distributions P (Xi |P Ai ), where all parents of
Xi are referred to as P Ai . The joint probability over all variables factorizes as the product of the conditional probability
distributions.
We consider the problem of learning a network structure
from a discrete dataset D = {D1 , ..., DN }, where Di is
an instantiation of all the variables in V. A scoring function s measures the goodness of fit of a network structure to
D (Heckerman 1998). The goal is to find a structure which
optimizes the score. We only require that the scoring function is decomposable
P(Heckerman 1998); that is, the score of
a network s(N ) = i si (P Ai ). The si (P Ai ) values are often called local scores. Many commonly used scoring functions, such as MDL (Lam and Bacchus 1994) and BDe (Buntine 1991; Heckerman, Geiger, and Chickering 1995), are
decomposable.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3526

