Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Faster Core Constraint Generation Algorithm for Combinatorial Auctions
Benedikt Bünz

Sven Seuken

Benjamin Lubin

Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
buenz@cs.stanford.edu

Department of Informatics
University of Zurich
seuken@ifi.uzh.ch

Information Systems Department
Boston University School of Management
blubin@bu.edu

Abstract

However, as has been pointed out in the literature
(Ausubel and Milgrom 2006), there are numerous issues
with VCG, most notably that it may result in arbitrarily low
revenue to the seller. This not only creates a strong disincentive for sellers to use VCG, but also opens the possibility
that collusive collections of bidders may be able to come together with an outside offer that is more attractive than that
in VCG, undermining the VCG-based regime. This observation has led to considerable interest in core-selecting combinatorial auctions (Ausubel and Milgrom 2002; Milgrom
2007; Day and Milgrom 2008), which offer a principled way
to ensure that revenue in the auction is guaranteed to be high
enough to avoid such incentives towards collusion.
However, solving this economic problem has created a
computational one, as the naı̈ve formulation of the pricing
problem requires computing the optimal allocation for all 2n
coalitions to describe the core polytope. The state-of-the art
approach is to use constraint generation to consider only the
most valuable coalitions, which leads to a moderate number of constraints in expectation (Day and Raghavan 2007).
Nevertheless, run-time is still a limiting factor in practice.

Computing prices in core-selecting combinatorial auctions is a computationally hard problem. Auctions with
many bids can only be solved using a recently proposed
core constraint generation (CCG) algorithm, which may
still take days on hard instances. In this paper, we
present a new algorithm that significantly outperforms
the current state of the art. Towards this end, we first
provide an alternative definition of the set of core constraints, where each constraint is weakly stronger, and
prove that together these constraints define the identical polytope to the previous definition. Using these
new theoretical insights we develop two new algorithmic techniques which generate additional constraints in
each iteration of the CCG algorithm by 1) exploiting
separability in allocative conflicts between participants
in the auction, and 2) by leveraging non-optimal solutions. We show experimentally that our new algorithm
leads to significant speed-ups on a variety of large combinatorial auction problems. Our work provides new insights into the structure of core constraints and advances
the state of the art in fast algorithms for computing core
prices in large combinatorial auctions.

1.1

1

Introduction

Overview of Results

In this paper, we propose several novel methods for speeding up the core pricing algorithm by reducing the number
of CCG iterations in the algorithm, and thus the number of
NP-hard problems that need to be solved. We offer:
1. Limits on the effectiveness of an existing heuristic.
2. Theoretical results that enable stronger and more precise
core constraints.
3. Two algorithmic ideas that generate additional constraints
in each CCG iteration by exploiting separability in allocative conflicts between participants and by leveraging nonoptimal solutions.
4. Experimental results, showing that our main algorithm
significantly outperforms the current state of the art.

Combinatorial auctions (CAs) have found application in
many real-world domains, including procurement auctions
(Sandholm 2007), TV advertising auctions (Goetzendorff et
al. 2014) and government spectrum auctions (Cramton 2013;
Ausubel and Baranov 2014). CAs are attractive, as they can
produce efficient outcomes even when bidders have complex
preferences on bundles of heterogeneous items. However,
the construction of such auctions requires myriad design decisions, even if we limit the scope to sealed bid mechanisms.
First, a potential design must include a reasonable bidding
language for participants to use; many have been proposed
in the literature, e.g., XOR, OR*, etc. (Nisan 2006). Next, a
means for solving the NP-hard winner-determination problem must be obtained (Sandholm 2002). Finally, the design must specify a payment mechanism. The classic answer
to this latter question is the well-known VCG mechanism,
where agents pay the externality they impose on all other
agents (Vickrey 1961; Clarke 1971; Groves 1973).

1.2

Related Work

This paper directly extends the earlier work of Day and
Raghavan (2007), where they propose to use constraint generation to concisely codify the pricing problem in coreselecting CAs. We also include more recent advances, proposed by Day and Cramton (2012), where core prices are
chosen that minimize the L2 metric to VCG.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

827

