Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Support Consistency of Direct Sparse-Change Learning in Markov Networks
Song Liu

Taiji Suzuki

Masashi Sugiyama

song@sg.cs.titech.ac.jp
Tokyo Institute of Technology

s-taiji@is.titech.ac.jp
Tokyo Institute of Technology

sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
University of Tokyo

Abstract

Ganapathi, and Koller 2007; Meinshausen and Bühlmann
2006; Ravikumar, Wainwright, and Lafferty 2010) solve a
node-wise lasso program to identify the neighborhood of
each single node.
One naive approach to learning changes in MNs is to apply these methods to two MNs separately and compare the
learned models. However, such a two-step approach does not
work well when the MNs themselves are dense (this can happen even when the change in MNs is sparse). A recent study
(Zhang and Wang 2010) adopts a neighbourhood selection
procedure to learn sparse changes between Gaussian MNs
via a fused-lasso type regularizer (Tibshirani et al. 2005).
However, no theoretical guarantee was given on identifying changes. Furthermore, extension of the above mentioned
methods to general non-Gaussian MNs is hard due to the
computational intractability of the normalization term.
To cope with these problems, an innovative algorithm has
been proposed recently (Liu et al. 2014). Its basic idea is to
model the changes between two MNs P and Q as the ratio
between two MN density functions p(x) and q(x), and the
ratio p(x)/q(x) is directly estimated in one-shot without estimating p(x) and q(x) themselves (Sugiyama, Suzuki, and
Kanamori 2012). Since parameters in the density ratio model
represent the parametric difference between P and Q, sparsity constrains can be directly imposed for sparse change
learning. Thus, the density-ratio approach can work well
even when each MN is dense as long as the change is sparse.
Furthermore, the normalization term in the density-ratio approach can be approximately computed by the straightforward sample average and thus there is no computational
bottleneck in using non-Gaussian MNs. Experimentally, the
density-ratio approach was demonstrated to perform excellently. However, its theoretical properties have not been explored yet.
The ability of recovering a sparsity pattern via a sparse
learning algorithm has been studied under the name of support consistency or model consistency (Wainwright 2009;
Zhao and Yu 2006), that is, the support of the estimated parameter converges to the true support. Previous works for successful structure recovery are available
for `1 -regularized maximum (pseudo-)likelihood estimators
(Ravikumar, Wainwright, and Lafferty 2010; Yang et al.
2012). However, Liu et al.’s density ratio estimator brought
us a new question: what is the sparsistency of identifying

We study the problem of learning sparse structure changes
between two Markov networks P and Q. Rather than fitting
two Markov networks separately to two sets of data and figuring out their differences, a recent work proposed to learn
changes directly via estimating the ratio between two Markov
network models. Such a direct approach was demonstrated
to perform excellently in experiments, although its theoretical properties remained unexplored. In this paper, we give
sufficient conditions for successful change detection with respect to the sample size np , nq , the dimension of data m,
and the number of changed edges d. More specifically, we
prove that the true sparse changes can be consistently identi2
fied for np = Ω(d2 log m 2+m ) and nq = Ω(n2p /d), with an
exponentially decaying upper-bound on learning error. Our
theoretical guarantee can be applied to a wide range of discrete/continuous Markov networks.

Introduction
Learning changes in interactions between random variables
plays an important role in many real-world applications. For
example, genes may regulate each other in different ways
when external conditions are changed. The number of daily
flu-like symptom reports in nearby hospitals may become
correlated when a major epidemic disease breaks out. EEG
signals from different regions of the brain may be synchronized/desynchronized when the patient is performing different activities. Identifying such changes in interactions helps
us expand our knowledge on these real-world phenomena.
In this paper, we consider the problem of learning changes
between two undirected graphical models. Such a model,
also known as a Markov network (MN) (Koller and Friedman 2009), expresses interactions via the conditional independence between random variables. Among many types of
MNs, we focus on pairwise MNs, whose joint distribution
can be factorized over single or pairwise random variables.
The problem of learning structure of MN itself has been
thoroughly investigated in the last decade. The graphical
lasso method (Banerjee, El Ghaoui, and d’Aspremont 2008;
Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2008) learns a sparse precision (inverse covariance) matrix from data by using the
`1 -norm, while the neighborhood regression methods (Lee,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2785

