Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Integrating Features and Similarities: Flexible Models
for Heterogeneous Multiview Data
Wenzhao Lian, Piyush Rai, Esther Salazar, Lawrence Carin
ECE Department, Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
{wenzhao.lian,piyush.rai,esther.salazar,lcarin}@duke.edu

psychopathological conditions in people, or to predict the
missing data in one or more views (e.g., predicting missing
fMRI data, leveraging other views). Likewise, in a multidomain recommender system (Zhang, Cao, and Yeung 2010;
Pan et al. 2011; Shi, Larson, and Hanjalic 2014), for a set of
users, we have multiple, partially observed ordinal-valued
rating matrices for domains such as movies, books, and electronic appliances, along with a binary-valued matrix of click
behavior on movies, and user-user similarities. The goal here
could be to predict the missing ratings in each domain’s rating matrix, leveraging information in all the sources.

Abstract
We present a probabilistic framework for learning with
heterogeneous multiview data where some views are
given as ordinal, binary, or real-valued feature matrices,
and some views as similarity matrices. Our framework
has the following distinguishing aspects: (i) a uniﬁed
latent factor model for integrating information from diverse feature (ordinal, binary, real) and similarity based
views, and predicting the missing data in each view,
leveraging view correlations; (ii) seamless adaptation
to binary/multiclass classiﬁcation where data consists of
multiple feature and/or similarity-based views; and (iii)
an efﬁcient, variational inference algorithm which is especially ﬂexible in modeling the views with ordinalvalued data (by learning the cutpoints for the ordinal
data), and extends naturally to streaming data settings.
Our framework subsumes methods such as multiview
learning and multiple kernel learning as special cases.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework on
several real-world and benchmarks datasets.

When the eventual goal is only doing classiﬁcation or
clustering on such multiview data, one direct procedure is to
represent each view (feature/kernel based) as a kernel matrix and apply multiple kernel learning methods (Gönen and
Alpaydın 2011; Kumar, Rai, and Daumé III 2011). However,
such an approach may be inappropriate when data is missing
in one or more views, resulting in kernel matrices with missing entries, for which most of these methods are unsuitable.
Moreover, these methods lack a proper generative model for
each view, and therefore cannot be used for the task of understanding the data (e.g., learning latent factors), modeling
speciﬁc feature types (e.g., ordinal), or predicting the missing data in each view (multiview matrix completion).

Introduction
Many data analysis problems involve heterogeneous data
with multiple representations or views. We consider a general problem setting, where data in some views may be
given as a feature matrix (which, in turn, may be ordinal, binary, or real-valued), while in other views as a kernel or similarity matrix. Each view may also have a signiﬁcant amount of missing data. Such a problem setting is
frequently encountered in diverse areas, ranging from cognitive neuroscience (Salazar et al. 2013) to recommender
systems (Zhang, Cao, and Yeung 2010; Pan et al. 2011;
Shi, Larson, and Hanjalic 2014). Consider a problem from
cognitive neuroscience (Salazar et al. 2013), where data collected from a set of people may include ordinal-valued response matrices on multiple questionnaires, real-valued feature matrices consisting of fMRI/EEG data, and one or more
similarity matrices computed using single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) measurements. There could also be missing observations in each view. The eventual goal could be to
integrate these diverse views to learn the latent traits (factors) of people, or learn a classiﬁer for predicting certain

We present a probabilistic framework for modeling such
heterogeneous multiview data with potentially missing data
in each view. We then show a seamless adaptation of this
framework for binary/multiclass classiﬁcation for data having multiple feature- and/or similarity-based views. Our
framework learns a view-speciﬁc latent matrix for each
feature/similarity-based view, and combines these latent matrices via a set of structured-sparsity driven factor analysis models (Virtanen et al. 2012) to learn a global lowdimensional representation of the data. The view-speciﬁc latent matrices can be used for matrix completion for each
view, whereas the global representation can be combined
with speciﬁc objectives to solve problems such as classiﬁcation or clustering of the multiview data. Our framework
also consists of an efﬁcient, variational inference algorithm,
which is appealing in its own right by providing a principled way to learn the cutpoints for data in the ordinal-valued
views, which can be useful for the general problem of modeling ordinal data, such as in recommender systems.

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2757

