Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Large-Scale Dynamic Discrete Choice Models of Spatio-Temporal
Preferences with Application to Migratory Pastoralism in East Africa
Stefano Ermon

Yexiang Xue

Russell Toth

Bistra Dilkina

Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Cornell University
yexiang@cs.cornell.edu

University of Sydney
russell.toth@sydney.edu.au

Georgia Tech
bdilkina@cc.gatech.edu

Richard Bernstein

Theodoros Damoulas

Patrick Clark

Steve DeGloria

Cornell University
rab38@cornell.edu

NYU CUSP
td47@nyu.edu

USDA Research Service
pat.clark@ars.usda.gov

Cornell University
sdd4@cornell.edu

Andrew Mude

Christopher Barrett

Carla P. Gomes

International Livestock Research Institute
a.mude@cgiar.org

Cornell University
cbb2@cornell.edu

Cornell University
gomes@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract

choice process of agents in the system. This is particularly
true when we wish to analyze behavioral responses under
as-yet unobserved states of the world, such as under alternative policy regimes or climate change. However specifying
and fitting suitable models in settings with complex spatiotemporal aspects raises important research challenges, including the “curse of dimensionality” associated with handling large state spaces, and capturing the agents’ preferences.
We tackle these issues specifically in the context of migratory pastoralism in the Borena plateau, Ethiopia, which
is an exemplar of both the technical aspects of the problem
we have in mind, and a setting with crucial policy relevance.
Migratory pastoralists manage and herd livestock as their
primary occupation. They face uncertainty over shocks to
resource availability from drought and climate change, conflict, and disease. During semi-annual dry seasons they must
migrate from their home villages to remote pastures and waterpoints, which can be modeled as selection amongst a discrete set of camp sites.
In this movement choice problem the pastoralists face a
key tradeoff: they want to locate at the most abundant resource points (measured by observable water and forage),
but movement (measured by distance) carries energy costs.
Scouting out resource abundance on an ongoing basis also
carries effort costs. How they balance these factors affects
their response to changes that affect resource abundance
(climate change, resource degradation and renewal, waterpoint maintenance), and distance (creation of new waterpoints, land use restrictions). A suitably fitted model of individual preferences over movements yields a number of opportunities for policy-relevant simulation analyses. Policymakers regularly face decisions over land use controls (e.g.,
zoning for housing, farmland, parkland), waterpoint maintenance (many of the waterpoints in the system are man-made
and require ongoing investment) and herd re-stocking after

Understanding spatio-temporal resource preferences is
paramount in the design of policies for sustainable development. Unfortunately, resource preferences are often unknown to policy-makers and have to be inferred
from data. In this paper we consider the problem of
inferring agents’ preferences from observed movement
trajectories, and formulate it as an Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) problem . With the goal of informing policy-making, we take a probabilistic approach
and consider generative models that can be used to
simulate behavior under new circumstances such as
changes in resource availability, access policies, or climate. We study the Dynamic Discrete Choice (DDC)
models from econometrics and prove that they generalize the Max-Entropy IRL model, a widely used probabilistic approach from the machine learning literature.
Furthermore, we develop SPL-GD, a new learning algorithm for DDC models that is considerably faster than
the state of the art and scales to very large datasets.
We consider an application in the context of pastoralism in the arid and semi-arid regions of Africa, where
migratory pastoralists face regular risks due to resource
availability, droughts, and resource degradation from
climate change and development. We show how our approach based on satellite and survey data can accurately
model migratory pastoralism in East Africa and that it
considerably outperforms other approaches on a largescale real-world dataset of pastoralists’ movements in
Ethiopia collected over 3 years.

Introduction
A useful and important tool in developing sensible policies
for productive land use and environmental conservation is a
set of micro-behavioral models that accurately capture the
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

644

