Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Relating Romanized Comments to News Articles
by Inferring Multi-Glyphic Topical Correspondence
Goutham Tholpadi, Mrinal Kanti Das, Trapit Bansal, Chiranjib Bhattacharyya
Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru, INDIA 560004
{gtholpadi,mrinal,trapit,chiru}@csa.iisc.ernet.in

Abstract

(2) Several languages are simultaneously used in multilingual communities (e.g. there are more than 20 official languages in India (Wikipedia 2014)) but linguistic tools are
available mainly for Hindi. Users comment in different languages, and even use different scripts for the same language.
We call such comments as multi-glyphic comments. For
example, in Dainik Jagran, a popular Hindi newspaper, we
observe that around 19% of the comments are in English,
34% are in Hindi, and more than 46% are in romanized
Hindi (Rohin).
Figure 1 shows examples of comments made on a Hindi
news article, highlighting the topical nuances and the problem of romanized text. As far as we know, there are no freely
available machine translation systems that can handle romanized texts for the languages considered in this work. Due
to lack of labeled data, supervised methods are hard to apply. In the recent past, it has been observed that topic models
can be useful for modeling correspondence between article
and comments (Das, Bansal, and Bhattacharyya 2014). In
this paper we explore a hierarchical Bayesian approach for
modeling multi-glyphic correspondence.

Commenting is a popular facility provided by news sites. Analyzing such user-generated content has recently attracted research interest. However, in multilingual societies such as India, analyzing such user-generated content is hard due to several reasons: (1) There are more than 20 official languages
but linguistic resources are available mainly for Hindi. It is
observed that people frequently use romanized text as it is
easy and quick using an English keyboard, resulting in multiglyphic comments, where the texts are in the same language
but in different scripts. Such romanized texts are almost unexplored in machine learning so far. (2) In many cases, comments are made on a specific part of the article rather than
the topic of the entire article. Off-the-shelf methods such as
correspondence LDA are insufficient to model such relationships between articles and comments. In this paper, we extend the notion of correspondence to model multi-lingual,
multi-script, and inter-lingual topics in a unified probabilistic
model called the Multi-glyphic Correspondence Topic Model
(MCTM). Using several metrics, we verify our approach and
show that it improves over the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Analyzing comments on news articles can be cast as modeling correspondence between two sets of variables. Supervised methods do not scale due to unavailability of labeled
datasets and rapid growth in unlabeled datasets. Unsupervised methods based on topic models are more appropriate,
e.g. correspondence has been explored earlier for images–
tags (Blei and Jordan 2003), and articles–comments (Das,
Bansal, and Bhattacharyya 2014).
The motivation for this work stems from the problem of
analyzing comments in multilingual environments such as in
India. This is a hard problem due to several reasons:
(1) There are several nuances to the relationship between
comments and articles. While many comments are related to
the general topic of the article (general comments), some
comments relate to a specific part of the article (specific
comments). In many cases, comments talk about things unrelated to the article. Sometimes, the comment may seem
close to topic of the article but was actually made with malicious intent to spam. We call such comments irrelevant comments.

Contributions. In this paper, we develop the notion of
multi-glyphic correspondence, i.e. comments in multiple
languages and multiple scripts relating to an article in a
single language and single script. To model specific correspondence, we apply multiple topic vectors (MTV) with a
stick-breaking prior (SBP) following Das, Bansal, and Bhattacharyya (2014). The challenge in modeling topical correspondence across languages/scripts is that the source of
multi-linguality is only through comments which are small,
and noisy. Existing models assume that the proportion over
topics is the same for all comments on an article, which is
hardly true and conflicts with the modeling choice of MTV.
We address this issue for some languages by incorporating an additional multi-lingual comparable corpus. When
such corpora are not available (e.g. for romanized text), we
show that introducing model sparsity helps. To address irrelevant comments, we use two types of correspondence:
global correspondence when comments relate to a global
topic outside the article, and null correspondence when the
comment is not related to any news article at all. Thus
the complete model addresses multi-glyphic comment correspondence and topical correspondence in a unified man-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

311

