Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Transfer Feature Representation via Multiple Kernel Learning
Wei Wang1 , Hao Wang1,2 , Chen Zhang1 , Fanjiang Xu1
1. Science and Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory
2. State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
weiwangpenny@gmail.com

Abstract

between domains while preserving the important properties
(e.g., variance or geometry) of data. According to whether
the feature representation is linear or nonlinear, these methods can be classified into two categories. The first category
explores a linear transformation as a bridge for information
transfer between domains. For example, Geodesic Flow Kernel (GFK) (Gong et al. 2012) integrates an infinite number of linear subspaces to learn domain invariant feature
representation. Joint Distribution Adaptation (JDA) (Long
et al. 2013) constructs cross-domain feature subspace under Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Jolliffe 1986). In
(Wang et al. 2014), a shared Mahalanobis distance is optimized based on information theory. Although these methods can be optimized efficiently, they may lose the capability to capture the high order statistics and the underlying structures of complex data spaces. The second category
explores a nonlinear transformation. Specifically, a heuristic nonlinear map (Daumé III 2007) is constructed in the
supervised case. Maximum Mean Discrepancy Embedding
(MMDE) (Pan, Kowok, and Yang 2008) learns a nonparametric kernel matrix by preserving the data variance. However, these methods are limited to the transductive setting
and the optimization is computationally expensive. To overcome the drawbacks above, the nonlinear method Transfer
Component Analysis (TCA) (Pan et al. 2011) applies the
empirical kernel map (Schölkopf, Smola, and GengMüller
1998) of a single predefined kernel function and learns some
transfer components. It is shown that the performance of
TCA heavily depends on the choice of the single kernel.
Recently, Multiple Kernel Learning (MKL), which bases
Support Vector Machine (SVM) or other kernel methods on combinations of kernels, emphasizes the need of
learning multiple kernels instead of fixing a single kernel in the literature (Bach, Lanckriet, and Jordan 2004;
Lin, Liu, and Fuh 2011; Kim, Magnani, and Boyd 2006;
Rakotomamonjy et al. 2008). Although these methods are
shown to achieve improved performance and flexibility, they
are not explicitly developed for domain adaptation. When
training and test data are drawn from different domains, the
distribution difference will make the optimal kernels learnt
in source domain invalid in target domain.
In this paper, we make great efforts to alleviate the limitations discussed above and propose a novel Transfer Feature
Representation (TFR) algorithm. TFR selects a convex com-

Learning an appropriate feature representation across
source and target domains is one of the most effective solutions to domain adaptation problems. Conventional cross-domain feature learning methods rely on
the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) induced
by a single kernel. Recently, Multiple Kernel Learning (MKL), which bases classifiers on combinations
of kernels, has shown improved performance in the
tasks without distribution difference between domains.
In this paper, we generalize the framework of MKL
for cross-domain feature learning and propose a novel
Transfer Feature Representation (TFR) algorithm. TFR
learns a convex combination of multiple kernels and
a linear transformation in a single optimization which
integrates the minimization of distribution difference
with the preservation of discriminating power across
domains. As a result, standard machine learning models trained in the source domain can be reused for the
target domain data. After rewritten into a differentiable
formulation, TFR can be optimized by a reduced gradient method and reaches the convergence. Experiments
in two real-world applications verify the effectiveness
of our proposed method.

Introduction
Conventional supervised learning has been successfully applied to various fields based on the assumption that there
are plenty of labeled training samples following the same
distribution of test samples. However, in many real-world
applications, label information is expensive or even impossible to be obtained in a target domain. In this case, one may
turn to collect labeled data from a related but different domain, i.e., source domain, as prior knowledge. Apparently,
classifiers trained only in source domain cannot be directly
reused in target domain due to the distribution difference.
Recently, there is an increasing interest in developing feature
representation methods (Long et al. 2012; Long et al. 2013;
Saenko et al. 2010; Pan, Kowok, and Yang 2008; Pan et
al. 2011) for knowledge transfer between domains (Caruana
1997; Pan and Yang 2010).
Generally, the key challenge in cross-domain feature
learning is to explicitly minimize the distribution difference
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3073

