Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Improving Microblog Retrieval from Exterior Corpus by
Automatically Constructing a Microblogging Corpus
Wenting Tu, David Cheung, and Nikos Mamoulis
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
E-mail: {wttu, dcheung, nikos}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
A large-scale training corpus consisting of microblogs
belonging to a desired category is important for highaccuracy microblog retrieval. Obtaining such a large-scale
microblgging corpus manually is very time and laborconsuming. Therefore, some models for the automatic retrieval of microblogs from an exterior corpus have been proposed. However, these approaches may fail in considering
microblog-specific features. To alleviate this issue, we propose a methodology that constructs a simulated microblogging corpus rather than directly building a model from the
exterior corpus. The performance of our model is better since
the microblog-special knowledge of the microblogging corpus is used in the end by the retrieval model. Experimental
results on real-world microblogs demonstrate the superiority
of our technique compared to the previous approaches.

1

Figure 1: Automatically constructing a microblogging corpus by
selecting a set of PCUsers.

with the use of the exterior corpus. We exploit a known characteristic of current microblogging platforms: for a given
category, typically there exists a group of users whose microblogs belong exclusively to this category. Twitter, one
of the world’s largest microblogging platform, contains examples supporting this observation: The user @BBCWorld
always post microblogs related to news events (news microblogs); The user @Stock Predict from Twitter always
post their opinions to stock movements (investor-opinion
microblogs); The user @8joke from Twitter always post joke
microblogs; The user @Discount LA from Twitter always
post advertisement microblogs. Similar examples also can
be found in other microblogging platforms (e.g., SinaWeibo)
and on other categories (e.g., product comments). We propose a framework to take use the exterior corpus and previous approaches to identify these users rather than directly
build the microblog retrieval model. Then, we use their posts
to construct a microblogging corpus; this corpus is finally
used to build a target-special model for the microblog retrieval task. Our experiments on real-world microblogs and
an exterior corpus show that the microblog retrieval model
of our method can obtain better retrieval performance than
the ones built by previous approaches embedded in our
framework.

Introduction

The lack of a good microblogging corpus for microblog retrieval can be alleviated by using an exterior corpus instead,
which contains non-microblog documents that are specific
to the desired category. For example, we could use as a
corpus a set of news articles posted by newspapers (which
can be easily crawled) instead of news microblogs to train
a classifier for retrieving news microblogs. Still, the exterior corpus may not be effective because of the differences
in the language patterns between non-microblogs and microblogs. Transfer learning theory has recently been used
for improving microblog retrieval from an exterior corpus.
For example, OCHI (Feng et al. 2011) improves microblog
retrieval using an exterior corpus by designing a domainadapted similarity metric between the exterior corpus and
microblog documents. Still, traditional transfer learning relies only on transferable or shared knowledge from the exterior corpus to the microblogging documents; i.e., many
microblog-special language features (e.g., special notations,
such as #hashtags# and @someone, transpositions, etc.)
cannot be utilized. Thus, transfer learning that only relies on
common or transferred knowledge could be inadequate. Our
work attempts to improve microblog retrieval, by automatically constructing a corpus consisting of real microblogs,

2

Our methodology

Our objective is to use an exterior corpus (e.g. an corpus of
news articles) De to build a model for retrieving microblogs
that belong to a special category ` (e.g., `=news). The key
step is to identify a group of users, called PCUsers, who
post microblogs that belong to category `. Our microblogging corpus is then simulated by their posts and be used to
train the retrieval model.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4212

