Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

High Confidence Off-Policy Evaluation
Philip S. Thomas1,2
1

Georgios Theocharous1

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh1,3

2

Adobe Research, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 3 INRIA Lille
{phithoma,theochar,ghavamza}@adobe.com

Abstract

Our approach is straightforward—for each trajectory,
we use importance sampling to generate an importance
weighted return, which is an unbiased estimate of the expected return of the evaluation policy (Precup, Sutton, and
Singh 2000). These importance weighted returns can be used
by a concentration inequality (Massart 2007) to get a confidence bound on the expected return. The primary challenge of this approach is that the importance weighted returns have high variance and a large possible range, both of
which loosen the bounds produced by existing concentration
inequalities. We therefore derive a novel modification of an
existing concentration inequality that makes it particularly
well suited to this setting.
In the rest of this paper we explain how to generate the
unbiased estimates, describe existing concentration inequalities, derive our new concentration inequality, and provide
supporting empirical studies that show both the necessity of
high confidence off-policy evaluation methods and the viability of our approach.

Many reinforcement learning algorithms use trajectories collected from the execution of one or more policies to propose a new policy. Because execution of a
bad policy can be costly or dangerous, techniques for
evaluating the performance of the new policy without
requiring its execution have been of recent interest in industry. Such off-policy evaluation methods, which estimate the performance of a policy using trajectories collected from the execution of other policies, heretofore
have not provided confidences regarding the accuracy
of their estimates. In this paper we propose an off-policy
method for computing a lower confidence bound on the
expected return of a policy.

Introduction
In this paper we show how trajectories generated by some
policies, called behavior policies, can be used to compute
the confidence that the expected return of a different policy,
called the evaluation policy, will exceed some lower bound.
This high confidence off-policy evaluation mechanism has
immense implications in industry, where execution of a new
policy can be costly or dangerous if it performs worse than
the policy that is currently being used. There are many applications that are hindered by such safety concerns, including news recommendation systems (Li et al. 2010), patient
diagnosis systems (Hauskrecht and Fraser 2000), neuroprosthetic control (Thomas et al. 2009; Pilarski et al. 2011), automatic Propofol administration (Moore et al. 2010), and lifetime value optimization in marketing systems (Silver et al.
2013). In our experiments we show how our algorithm can
be applied to a digital marketing problem where confidence
bounds are necessary to motivate the potentially risky gamble of executing a new policy.
Although the off-policy evaluation problem has been
solved efficiently in the multi-arm bandit case (Li et al.
2011), it is still an open question for sequential decision
problems. Existing methods for estimating the performance
of the evaluation policy using trajectories from behavior
policies do not provide confidence bounds (Maei and Sutton
2010; Liu, Mahadevan, and Liu 2012; Mandel et al. 2014).

Preliminaries
Let S and A denote the state and action spaces, rt ∈
[rmin , rmax ] be the bounded reward at time t, and γ ∈ [0, 1]
be a discount factor.1 We denote by π(a|s, θ) the probability (density) of taking action a in state s when using policy parameters θ ∈ Rnθ , where nθ is a positive integer—
the dimension of the policy parameter space. A trajectory of
length T is an ordered set of states (observations), actions,
and rewards: τ = {s1 , a1 , r1 , s2 , a2 , r2 , . . . , sT , aT , rT }.
We define the (normalized and discounted) return of a trajectory to be

P
T
t−1
γ
r
− R−
t
t=1
R(τ ) :=
∈ [0, 1],
R+ − R−
where R− and R+ are upper and lower bounds on
PT
t−1
rt . In the absence of domain-specific knowledge,
t=1 γ
the loose bounds R− = rmin (1 − γ T )/(1 − γ) and R+ =
rmax (1 − γ T )/(1 − γ) can be used. Let
ρ(θ) := E [R(τ )|θ]
1

Although we use MDP notation, by replacing states with observations, our results carry over to POMDPs with reactive policies.

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3000

