Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Audit Games with Multiple Defender Resources
Jeremiah Blocki1 , Nicolas Christin1 , Anupam Datta1 , Ariel D. Procaccia1 , Arunesh Sinha2
1

Carnegie Mellon University, USA; {arielpro@cs., jblocki@cs., danupam@, nicolasc@}cmu.edu
2
University of Southern California, USA; aruneshs@usc.edu

one of n potential violations (referred to as targets). The defender’s optimal strategy is a randomized auditing policy—a
distribution over targets such that when the attacker best responds the defender’s utility is maximized. The novel ingredient of the audit games model is a punishment level, chosen
by the defender, which specifies how severely the adversary
will be punished if he is caught. The defender may try to
set a high punishment level in order to deter the adversary.
However, punishment is not free. The defender incurs a cost
for punishing, e.g. punishments such as suspension or firing of violators require maintaining resources for hiring and
training of replacements. Blocki et al. (2013) provide an efficient algorithm for computing an optimal strategy for the
defender to commit to.
While this work distills the essence of the defender’s
dilemma in auditing situations, it is too restricted to inform
real-world audit strategies. In typical audit settings, the defender has multiple resources using which she can audit a
subset of the targets (not just one target). Furthermore, each
resource may be restricted in the targets that it can audit.
For example, some organizations follow hierarchical audit
strategies in which a manager is only required to audit potential violations committed by her direct reports. Similarly,
specialized audits are common, for example, employing disjoint audit resources to detect finance-related and privacyrelated violations.
Our Contributions. We present a generalized Stackelberg
audit game model that accounts for multiple audit resources
where each resource is restricted to audit a subset of all potential violations, thus enabling application to the practical
auditing scenarios described above. Our main theoretical
result is a fully polynomial time approximation scheme (FPTAS) to compute an approximate solution to the resulting
non-convex optimization problem.
To arrive at this FPTAS, we begin with a simple fixed
parameter tractable (FPT) algorithm that reduces the nonconvex optimization problem to a linear programming problem by fixing the punishment parameter at a discrete value.
Since we perform a linear search over all possible discrete
values of the punishment parameter over a fixed range in increasing intervals of size , we get an FPT algorithm once
the bit precision is fixed.
Next we present an optimization transformation that reduces the number of variables in the optimization problem

Abstract
Modern organizations (e.g., hospitals, social networks, government agencies) rely heavily on audit to detect and punish
insiders who inappropriately access and disclose confidential
information. Recent work on audit games models the strategic interaction between an auditor with a single audit resource
and auditees as a Stackelberg game, augmenting associated
well-studied security games with a configurable punishment
parameter. We significantly generalize this audit game model
to account for multiple audit resources where each resource is
restricted to audit a subset of all potential violations, thus enabling application to practical auditing scenarios. We provide
an FPTAS that computes an approximately optimal solution
to the resulting non-convex optimization problem. The main
technical novelty is in the design and correctness proof of
an optimization transformation that enables the construction
of this FPTAS. In addition, we experimentally demonstrate
that this transformation significantly speeds up computation
of solutions for a class of audit games and security games.

1

Introduction

Modern organizations (e.g., hospitals, banks, social networks, search engines) that hold large volumes of personal
information rely heavily on auditing for privacy protection.
These audit mechanisms combine automated methods with
human input to detect and punish violators. Since human
audit resources are limited, and often not sufficient to investigate all potential violations, current state-of-the-art audit tools provide heuristics to guide human effort (Fairwarning 2011). However, numerous reports of privacy breaches
caused by malicious insiders bring to question the effectiveness of these audit mechanisms (Ponemon Institute 2011;
2012).
Recent work on audit games by Blocki et al. (2013) approaches a piece of this problem using game-theoretic techniques. Their thesis is that effective human audit resource allocation and punishment levels can be efficiently computed
by modeling the audit process as a game between an auditor and auditees. At a technical level, their audit game
model augments a well-studied Stackelberg security games
model (Tambe 2011) with a configurable punishment parameter. The auditor (henceforth called the defender) can audit
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

791

