Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Nonstationary Gaussian Process Regression
for Evaluating Clinical Laboratory Test Sampling Strategies
Thomas A. Lasko
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA
tom.lasko@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract

sampling the physiologic function (van Walraven and Raymond 2003; Bates et al. 1998). But if the goal of testing
is to monitor a patient’s physiologic state, then undersampling can cause us to miss significant changes in that state,
with subsequent delays in appropriate treatment and adverse
clinical outcomes.
Moreover, understanding implicit sampling strategies is
important in retrospective analysis, where the goal is to investigate patterns residing in data collected over the course
of routine clinical care. For example, if we want to retrospectively model a physiologic parameter as a continuous
function over time, the accuracy of our model will depend
on how we handle any potential dependence between the
samples’ timing and the parameter that they are monitoring.
In this paper we investigate the sampling strategies implicit in sequences of laboratory test measurements, as well
as the effect that those strategies have on the accuracy of our
inferred models. To do this, we introduce a new method for
inferring a nonstationary Gaussian process from a finite set
of observations by explicitly modeling the volatility of the
function over time as a step in the inference. The volatility
function is used to create a warping that transforms the observations into a space in which the latent physiologic function is stationary and can be modeled with standard methods.
We define volatility more precisely below, but it can be
thought of as the rate at which a measurement made at a particular time goes stale. A high volatility implies a high information rate provided by the latent physiologic function, and
we will use volatility and information rate interchangably.
We validate our methods against synthetic data and
demonstrate the accuracy and limitations of recovering both
the latent physiologic function and the volatility function under various sampling strategies. We then introduce the use of
volatility functions to retrospectively evaluate the sampling
strategies of hundreds of real sequences from four common
laboratory tests against the actual behavior of the clinical
variables being observed.

Sampling repeated clinical laboratory tests with appropriate timing is challenging because the latent physiologic function being sampled is in general nonstationary. When ordering repeated tests, clinicians adopt various simple strategies that may or may not be well suited
to the behavior of the function. Previous research on this
topic has been primarily focused on cost-driven assessments of oversampling. But for monitoring physiologic
state or for retrospective analysis, undersampling can be
much more problematic than oversampling. In this paper we analyze hundreds of observation sequences of
four different clinical laboratory tests to provide principled, data-driven estimates of undersampling and oversampling, and to assess whether the sampling adapts to
changing volatility of the latent function. To do this,
we developed a new method for fitting a Gaussian process to samples of a nonstationary latent function. Our
method includes an explicit estimate of the latent function’s volatility over time, which is deterministically related to its nonstationarity. We find on average that the
degree of undersampling is up to an order of magnitude
greater than oversampling, and that only a small minority are sampled with an adaptive strategy.

Introduction
Appropriately timing repeated observations of a clinical laboratory test is challenging because the physiologic function
being sampled is in general nonstationary. The nonstationarity implies that optimally timing the next sample can depend
on understanding the function’s recent past and guessing at
its near future. Current clinical testing practice is often based
on simple rules of thumb, with details that vary by clinician.
Generally, if a doctor wants to monitor the value of a test
over time, he will repeat the test at a standard interval felt appropriate for that particular test. If the previous observation
was outside the reference range for healthy patients, or if the
doctor has reason to believe that the physiologic parameter
under test is likely to be unstable (because, for example, the
patient has started a particular medication), then the doctor
may schedule the test at a shorter interval.
Historically, research into repeat testing strategies has emphasized the cost-driven question of whether we are over-

Nonstationary Gaussian Process Regression
Gaussian process regression is a Bayesian nonparametric
method that models a set of time-dependent observations
y = {y1 , . . . , yn } made at times t = {t1 , . . . , tn } by inferring a distribution P(f (t)|y, t) over all functions y = f (t)
that could have produced the observations. The topic is a

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1777

