Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Game-Theoretic Approach for Non-Cooperative Planning
Jaume Jordán and Eva Onaindia
Universitat Politècnica de València
Departamento de Sistemas Informáticos y Computación
Camino de Vera s/n. 46022 Valencia, Spain
{jjordan,onaindia}@dsic.upv.es

Abstract

in coalitional resource game scenarios (Dunne et al. 2010),
among others.
On the other hand, game-theoretic non-cooperative MAP
approaches aim, in general, at finding a Nash Equilibrium joint plan out of the individual plans of the agents.
’Pure’ game-theoretic approaches, like (Bowling, Jensen,
and Veloso 2003) and (Larbi, Konieczny, and Marquis 2007)
perform a strategic analysis of all possible agent plans
and define notions of equilibria by analyzing the relationships between different solutions in game-theoretic terms.
In (Bowling, Jensen, and Veloso 2003), MAP solutions are
classified according to the agents’ possibility of reaching
their goals and the paths of execution (combinations of local
plans). Similarly, satisfaction profiles in (Larbi, Konieczny,
and Marquis 2007) are defined by the level of assurance of
reaching the agent’s goals. A different approach using bestresponse was proposed to solve congestion games and to
perform plan improvement in general MAP scenarios from
an available initial joint plan (Jonsson and Rovatsos 2011).
Game-theoretic approaches that evaluate every strategy of
every agent against all other strategies are ineffective for
planning, since even if plan length is bounded polynomially,
the number of available strategies is exponential (Nissim and
Brafman 2013). However, in environments where cooperation is not allowed or calculating an initial joint plan is not
possible, game-theoretic approaches are useful. Take, for instance, the modeling of a transportation network, sending
packets through the Internet or a network traffic, where individuals need to evaluate routes in the presence of the congestion resulting from the decisions made by themselves and
everyone else (Easley and Kleinberg 2010). In this sense, we
argue that game-theoretic reasoning is a valid approach for
this specific type of planning problems, among others.
In this paper, we present a novel game-theoretic noncooperative model to MAP with self-interested agents that
solves the following problem. We consider a group of agents
where each agent has one or several plans that achieve one
or more goals. Executing a particular plan reports a benefit to the agent depending on the number of goals achieved,
makespan of the plan or cost of the actions. Agents operate in a common environment, what may provoke interactions between the agents’ plans and thus preventing a concurrent execution. Each agent is willing to execute the plan
that maximizes its benefit but it ignores which plan the other

When two or more self-interested agents put their plans
to execution in the same environment, conflicts may
arise as a consequence, for instance, of a common utilization of resources. In this case, an agent can postpone the execution of a particular action, if this punctually solves the conflict, or it can resort to execute a
different plan if the agent’s payoff significantly diminishes due to the action deferral. In this paper, we present
a game-theoretic approach to non-cooperative planning
that helps predict before execution what plan schedules
agents will adopt so that the set of strategies of all agents
constitute a Nash equilibrium. We perform some experiments and discuss the solutions obtained with our
game-theoretical approach, analyzing how the conflicts
between the plans determine the strategic behavior of
the agents.

Introduction
Multi-agent Planning (MAP) with self-interested agents is
the problem of coordinating a group of agents that compete to make their strategic behavior prevail over the others’: agents competing for a particular goal or the utilization of a common resource, agents competing to maximize
their benefit or agents willing to form coalitions with others
in order to achieve better their own goals or preferences. In
this paper, we focus on game-theoretic MAP approaches for
self-interested agents.
Brafman et al (Brafman et al. 2009) introduce the
Coalition-Planning Game (CoPG), a game-theoretic approach for self-interested agents which have personal goals
and costs but may find it beneficial to cooperate with each
other provided that the coalition formation helps increase
their personal net benefit. In particular, authors propose a
theoretical framework for stable planning in acyclic CoPG
which is limited to one goal per agent. Following the line
of CoPG, the work in (Crosby and Rovatsos 2011) presents
an approach that combines heuristic calculations in existing
planners for solving a restricted subset of CoPGs. In general, there has been a rather intensive research on cooperative self-interest agents as, for example, for modeling the behavior of planning agents in groups (Hadad et al. 2013) and
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1357

