Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Efficient Benchmarking of
Hyperparameter Optimizers via Surrogates
Katharina Eggensperger and Frank Hutter
University of Freiburg
{eggenspk, fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Holger H. Hoos and Kevin Leyton-Brown
University of British Columbia
{hoos, kevinlb}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract

programming (Hutter et al. 2009). Here, however, we focus
on the special case of hyperparameter optimization.
One obstacle to further progress in hyperparameter optimization is a paucity of reproducible experiments and
empirical studies. The hyperparameter optimization library
HPOlib (Eggensperger et al. 2013) represents a first step towards alleviating this problem, by offering a unified interface
to different optimizers and benchmarks that makes it easier
to reuse previous benchmarks and to systematically compare
different approaches.
However, experiments with interesting real-world hyperparameter optimization benchmarks often remain infeasible
in many cases. The first (mundane, but often significant) obstacle is to get someone else’s research code working on
one’s own system—including resolving dependencies and
acquiring required software licenses—and to use the appropriate input data. Furthermore, some code requires specialized
hardware; most notably, general-purpose graphics processing units (GPGPUs) have become a standard requirement
for the effective training of modern deep learning architectures (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). Finally, the
computational expense of comprehensive hyperparameter
optimization experiments can be prohibitive for research
groups lacking access to large compute clusters. These problems represent a considerable barrier to the sound evaluation of new hyperparameter optimization algorithms on the
most challenging and interesting hyperparameter optimization benchmarks, such as deep belief networks (Bergstra et
al. 2011), convolutional neural networks (Snoek, Larochelle,
and Adams 2012; Bergstra, Yamins, and Cox 2013), and combined model selection and hyperparameter optimization in
machine learning frameworks (Thornton et al. 2013).
Given this large overhead for studying complex hyperparameter optimization benchmarks, researchers have used
simple synthetic test functions, such as the Branin function,
to compare hyperparameter optimization algorithms (Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012). While such functions are
cheap to evaluate, they are not representative of real hyperparameter optimization problems. In contrast to the response
surfaces of the latter, these synthetic test functions are smooth
and often have unrealistic shapes. Furthermore, they only in-

Hyperparameter optimization is crucial for achieving peak performance with many machine learning algorithms; however,
the evaluation of new optimization techniques on real-world
hyperparameter optimization problems can be very expensive. Therefore, experiments are often performed using cheap
synthetic test functions with characteristics rather different
from those of real benchmarks of interest. In this work, we
introduce another option: cheap-to-evaluate surrogates of real
hyperparameter optimization benchmarks that share the same
hyperparameter spaces and feature similar response surfaces.
Specifically, we train regression models on data describing a
machine learning algorithm’s performance depending on its
hyperparameter setting, and then cheaply evaluate hyperparameter optimization methods using the model’s performance
predictions in lieu of running the real algorithm. We evaluated a wide range of regression techniques, both in terms of
how well they predict the performance of new hyperparameter
settings and in terms of the quality of surrogate benchmarks
obtained. We found that tree-based models capture the performance of several machine learning algorithms well and
yield surrogate benchmarks that closely resemble real-world
benchmarks, while being much easier to use and orders of
magnitude cheaper to evaluate.

Introduction
The performance of many machine learning methods depends crucially on hyperparameter settings and thus on the
method used to set these hyperparameters. Recently, sequential model-based Bayesian optimization methods have been
shown to outperform more traditional methods for this problem (such as grid search and random search) and to rival—
and in some cases surpass—human domain experts in finding good hyperparameter settings (Snoek, Larochelle, and
Adams 2012; Thornton et al. 2013; Bergstra, Yamins, and
Cox 2013). Similar successes have been achieved by general algorithm configuration methods on a wide range of
problems, such as tuning combinatorial problem solvers for
Boolean satisfiability (Hutter et al. 2007) and mixed integer
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1114

