Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Online Bandit Learning for a Special Class of Non-convex Losses
Lijun Zhang1 and Tianbao Yang2 and Rong Jin3 and Zhi-Hua Zhou1
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Department of Computer Science, the University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
{zhanglj, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu, rongjin@cse.msu.edu

Abstract

Saha and Tewari 2011; Agarwal, Dekel, and Xiao 2010).
A major limitation of the previous work is that most of
them are restricted to convex losses. The drawback of using convex losses has been revealed by several recent studies. In (Calauzènes, Usunier, and Gallinari 2012), the authors show it is impossible to find any convex loss that is
calibrated with the standard evaluation metrics for ranking.
Similarly, for multi-label learning, no convex loss is consistent with the popular ranking loss (Gao and Zhou 2011). The
success of deep learning also indicates the significance of
using non-convex losses (Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006).
The resurge of non-convex losses in machine learning
motives us to investigate online bandit learning with nonconvex loss functions. In particular, we consider the following learning protocol.
• At the t-th round, the learner submits a point xt ∈ Rd with
kxt k2 ≤ 1, and simultaneously an oblivious adversary
selects a vector ut and a non-increasing scalar function
ft : R 7→ R that assesses the consistency between the
ground truth ut and the answer xt by ft (x>
t ut ).
• Instead of revealing the loss function ft (hut , ·i) directly,
the adversary only provides the learner ct ∈ R whose
expectation is the cost ft (u>
t xt ), i.e.,
Et−1 [ct ] = ft (u>
(1)
t xt ),
where Et−1 [·] is the expectation conditioned on the randomness until round t − 1.
Notice that the above protocol generalizes many machine
learning tasks. Taking the online classification as an example, we can set ut = yt zt , where zt ∈ Rd is an instance,
yt ∈ {±1} is the assigned class label, and ft (·) can be any
loss function such as the ramp loss (Ertekin, Bottou, and
Giles 2011).
We emphasize that in our setting both ut and ft (·) are
unknown to the learner. More importantly, unlike most online learning that assume the loss function to be convex, in
this study, ft (·) can be non-convex. This relaxation makes
our problem significantly more challenging than most online learning problems, including the traditional online bandit learning. Following the convention in online learning, our
goal is to generate a sequence of answer vectors x1 , . . . , xT ,
that leads to a small regret defined below
T
T
X
X
regret =
ft (u>
x
)
−
min
ft (u>
t
t
t x).

In online bandit learning, the learner aims to minimize
a sequence of losses, while only observing the value of
each loss at a single point. Although various algorithms
and theories have been developed for online bandit
learning, most of them are limited to convex losses. In
this paper, we investigate the problem of online bandit
learning with non-convex losses, and develop an efficient algorithm with formal theoretical guarantees. To
be specific, we consider a class of losses which is a
composition of a non-increasing scalar function and a
linear function. This setting models a wide range of supervised learning applications such as online classification with a non-convex loss. Theoretical analysis shows
2/3
e
that our algorithm achieves an O(poly(d)T
) regret
bound when the variation of the loss function is small.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work in
online bandit learning that does not rely on convexity.

Introduction
Online decision-making has become a popular learning
paradigm in many disciplines such as Artificial Intelligence,
Economics and Control Theory (Saha and Tewari 2011). At
each round of online learning, the learner chooses a decision from a given set, and an adversary responds with a loss
function that decides the cost of decisions. The performance
of an online learning algorithm is measured by the regret,
which is the difference between the total cost of the decisions it chooses, and the cost of the optimal decision chosen in hindsight. According to the amount of information
revealed to the learner, online learning can be classified into
two categories (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2006): i) full information setting where the learner observes the entire cost
function, and ii) bandit setting where only the cost of the
selected action is available.
In the past decades, there have been tremendous progresses made in online bandit learning, ranging from multiarmed bandit (Robbins 1952; Auer et al. 2003), online
linear optimization with bandit feedback (Awerbuch and
Kleinberg 2004; Dani, Kakade, and Hayes 2008; Abernethy,
Hazan, and Rakhlin 2008), to online convex optimization
with bandit feedback (Flaxman, Kalai, and McMahan 2005;
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

t=1

3158

kxk2 ≤1

t=1

