Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Tri-Role Topic Model for Domain-Specific Question Answering
Zongyang Ma

Aixin Sun

Quan Yuan

Gao Cong

School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
{zma4, qyuan1}@e.ntu.edu.sg
{axsun, gaocong}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Stack Overflow and MedHelp are examples of domainspecific community-based question answering (CQA)
systems. Different from CQA systems for general topics (e.g., Yahoo! Answers, Baidu Knows), questions and
answers in domain-specific CQA systems are mostly in
the same topical domain, enabling more comprehensive
interaction between users on fine-grained topics. In such
systems, users are more likely to ask questions on unfamiliar topics and to answer questions matching their
expertise. Users can also vote answers based on their
judgements. In this paper, we propose a Tri-Role Topic
Model (TRTM) to model the tri-roles of users (i.e., as
askers, answerers, and voters, respectively) and the activities of each role including composing question, selecting question to answer, contributing and voting answers. The proposed model can be used to enhance CQA
systems from many perspectives. As a case study, we
conducted experiments on ranking answers for questions on Stack Overflow, a CQA system for professional
and enthusiast programmers. Experimental results show
that TRTM is effective in facilitating users getting ideal
rankings of answers, particularly for new and less popular questions. Evaluated on nDCG, TRTM outperforms
state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: The tri-roles of a user and the activities
flow, for professional and enthusiast programmers, has over
2 million registered users and more than 7 million questions
as at Apr 2014, according to Wikipedia. Users who have
questions which require professional knowledge are more
likely to source for help in domain-specific CQA systems,
because these systems enable comprehensive interaction between users on fine-grained domain-specific topics. However, there is a lack of study on the formal modeling of users’
activities in a unified framework. In this study, we consider
and model users’ activities with their tri-roles (i.e., asker,
answerer, and voter) in a probabilistic framework at topic
level. A topic-level modeling for users’ activities benefits
many applications in CQA such as ranking answers for questions, and expert finding.
Illustrated in Figure 1, in a typical domain-specific CQA
system like Stack Overflow, users may perform activities as
three roles.

Introduction
In community-based question answering (CQA) systems for
general topics (e.g., Yahoo! Answers, Baidu Knows), users
may ask questions of any topic, e.g., “What is Paris famous
for?”. To answer this question, no much professional knowledge is needed. In domain-specific CQA systems (e.g., Stack
Overflow, MedHelp), professional knowledge is required to
answer questions like “How does ruby on rails handle requests?” from Stack Overflow, and “How do I know when
skipped heart beats are dangerous?” from MedHelp. While
a lot of studies have been carried out on CQA for general
topics (Xu, Ji, and Wang 2012; Li, Shen, and Grant 2012;
Dror et al. 2011). There are limited studies on domainspecific CQA systems.
Domain-specific CQA systems have recently attracted a
lot of users and accumulated a large number of domainspecific questions and answers. For example, Stack Over-

• Asker. To ask a question of unfamiliar topics, a user composes the question and waits for answers to this question.
• Answerer. If a user believes that she has the knowledge to
answer this question, she contributes an answer. Note that,
there is an implicit question selection activity where an
answerer performs a self-assessment whether she has the
knowledge to answer this question. The question selection
activity is indicated by the dotted line in Figure 1.
• Voter. In CQA systems, users are often allowed to vote for
the answers to a question, based on their judgements.
Note that, a user may perform the three roles (i.e., asker,
answerer, or voter) simultaneously across different questions
in a CQA system.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

224

