Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Unsupervised Framework of Exploring Events on Twitter:
Filtering, Extraction and Categorization
Deyu Zhou and Liangyu Chen

Yulan He

School of Computer Science and Engineering
Southeast University, China
d.zhou@seu.edu.cn, cly1cn@126.com

School of Engineering and Applied Science
Aston University, UK
y.he@cantab.net

Abstract

and Meyers 2005). Recently there has been much interest in
event extraction from Twitter. Ritter et al. (2012) presented
a system called TwiCal to extract and categorize events from
Twitter. They relied on a sequence labeler trained from annotated data to extract event phrases from Twitter. In (Abdelhaq, Sengstock, and Gertz 2013), a system called EvenTweet
was constructed to extract localized events from a stream of
tweets in real-time. The extracted events are described by
start time, location and a number of related keywords.
Compared to newswire text, the social stream data such
as tweets have the following characteristics:
• Fragmented and Noisy. Social media messages are often
short, contain a large number of irregular and ill-formed
words, and evolve rapidly over time. Comparing to formal
text such news articles, it is more challenging to process
fragmented and noisy messages. Also, most social media
messages are not event-related.
• Wide Variety. Social media data are produced continuously by a large and uncontrolled number of users. As
such, it is not possible to know the event types a priori
and hence violates the use of existing event extraction approaches which either rely on manually-defined linguistic
patterns representing expert knowledge to extract events
or make use of corpora annotated with event-specific information such as actors, date, place, etc., to learn event
extraction patterns.
• Redundancy. For most newsworthy events, there may be
high volume of redundant messages referring to the same
event.
The aforementioned characteristics of social stream data
pose new challenges but also provide opportunities to explore unsupervised approaches for event extraction and categorisation based on the redundancy property of event-related
tweets. In this paper, we propose a general unsupervised
framework to explore events from tweets. It consists of two
steps, filtering, extraction and categorization. In the filtering
step, a keyword lexicon built from news articles published
in the same period as tweets is used to filter out non-eventrelated tweets. Then, an unsupervised Bayesian model called
Latent Event & Category Model (LECM) is employed to extract and categorize structured representation of events from
the event-related tweets. The model extends the previously
proposed Latent Event Model (LEM) (Zhou, Chen, and He

Twitter, as a popular microblogging service, has become a
new information channel for users to receive and exchange
the most up-to-date information on current events. However,
since there is no control on how users can publish messages
on Twitter, finding newsworthy events from Twitter becomes
a difficult task like “finding a needle in a haystack”.
In this paper we propose a general unsupervised framework
to explore events from tweets, which consists of a pipeline
process of filtering, extraction and categorization. To filter
out noisy tweets, the filtering step exploits a lexicon-based
approach to separate tweets that are event-related from those
that are not. Then, based on these event-related tweets, the
structured representations of events are extracted and categorized automatically using an unsupervised Bayesian model
without the use of any labelled data. Moreover, the categorized events are assigned with the event type labels without
human intervention. The proposed framework has been evaluated on over 60 millions tweets which were collected for one
month in December 2010. A precision of 70.49% is achieved
in event extraction, outperforming a competitive baseline by
nearly 6%. Events are also clustered into coherence groups
with the automatically assigned event type label.

Introduction
With the increasing popularity of social media, social networking sites such as Twitter have become an important
source of event information. As reported in (Petrovic et al.
2013), even 1% of the public stream of Twitter contains
around 95% of all the events reported in the newswire. Twitter appears to cover nearly all newswire events, with some
sports related events being only reported in Twitter because
these events have value for a short period of time or to a very
restricted audience. Therefore, it is crucial to extract events
from the social streams such as tweets.
Previous research in event extraction has focused largely
on news articles. Event extraction techniques typically rely
on the detection of event “triggers” with their arguments for
slot filling in event frames. Classical approaches to event extraction can be roughly categorized into three classes, pattern based (Tanev, Piskorski, and Atkinson 2008), machine
learning based (Piskorski et al. 2008) and a hybrid combining the previous two categories (Grishman, Westbrook,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2468

