Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning to Recommend Quotes for Writing
Jiwei Tan and Xiaojun Wan∗ and Jianguo Xiao
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
{tanjiwei, wanxiaojun, xiaojianguo}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

There has long been a popular belief in “good luck;” but,
like many other popular notions, it is gradually giving way.
The conviction is extending that diligence is the mother
of good luck; in other words, that a man’s success in life
will be proportionate to his efforts, to his industry, to his
attention to small things.

In this paper, we propose and address a novel task of
recommending quotes for writing. Quote is short for
quotation, which is the repetition of someone else’s
statement or thoughts. It is a common case in our writing when we would like to cite someone’s statement,
like a proverb or a statement by some famous people,
to make our composition more elegant or convincing.
However, sometimes we are so eager to make a citation of quote somewhere, but have no idea about the
relevant quote to express our idea. Because knowing or
remembering so many quotes is not easy, it is exciting
to have a system to recommend relevant quotes for us
while writing. In this paper we tackle this appealing AI
task, and build up a learning framework for quote recommendation. We collect abundant quotes from the Internet, and mine real contexts containing these quotes
from large amount of electronic books, to build up a
dataset for experiments. We explore the particular features of this task, and propose a few useful features to
model the characteristics of quotes and the relevance of
quotes to contexts. We apply a supervised learning to
rank model to integrate multiple features. Experiment
results show that, our proposed approach is appropriate
for this task and it outperforms other recommendation
methods.

Figure 1: A snippet of quote usage in literature.

to support our viewpoint, but have no idea about the relevant
quote to express our idea. Even though we have the help of
search engine today, it is hard to find the keywords to search
if we do not have an impression of the quotes we need. As
shown in Figure 1, the real idea the author wants to express
is the sentence following the quote. We can see that the author’s expression and the quote have different word usages,
for example, “effort” versus “diligence”, and “success” versus “good luck”. Can we build an AI system to recommend
relevant quotes for us according to the contexts while we
are writing? In this paper we aim to tackle this appealing AI
task. There are several websites in the Internet that specially
collect and provide quotes for users. However, as far as we
know, there is no attempt to recommend relevant quotes for
people while writing.
In this paper, we propose and define the quote recommendation task. Given a snippet of context, a quote recommendation system should recommend quotes which are relevant
with the context. The word “relevant” means semantic relatedness or expressing similar idea. The task is very challenging because contexts and quotes are usually short, and it
is less likely that they share some keywords. Moreover, the
meaning of words used in quotes may be different from common cases, by means of metaphor and so on. In the example
of Figure 1, besides the different words used, the mother of
good luck has a latent meaning of “the source of good luck”,
which makes the task more interesting and challenging.
We explore the particular features of the quote recommendation task, and propose to leverage a learning to rank framework to address this task. We investigate three groups of features for the task: quote-based features, relevance-based features and context-based features. Quote-based features reflect the particular features of quote data; relevance-based
features model the relevance between quotes and contexts

Introduction
When we are writing articles, it is a common case that
we want to cite someone else’s statement, like a proverb
or a saying by some famous people. The cited content is
called quotation, or quote for short, meaning the repetition
of someone else’s statement or thoughts. As citing this kind
of famous sayings can make our composition more elegant
or convincing, the occurrence of quote is common in writing
language. Figure 1 is a snippet in (Smiles 1875) showing the
quote usage in the writing. The famous saying of Benjamin
Franklin, diligence is the mother of good luck, is cited in the
article to prove the importance of hard work. However, making an elegant quote in writing is not an easy job. Because
knowing or remembering so many quotes is not easy, many
times we are so eager to make a citation of quote somewhere
∗

Xiaojun Wan is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2453

