Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Structured Embedding via Pairwise Relations
and Long-Range Interactions in Knowledge Base
Fei Wu and Jun Song

Yi Yang

Xi Li

College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University, China

Centre for Quantum Computation
and Intelligent Systems
University of Technology, Sydney

College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University, China

Zhongfei Zhang

Yueting Zhuang

Department of Information Science
and Electronic Engineering
Zhejiang University, China

College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University, China

Abstract

Bengio et al. 2006; Bengio 2008). A similar algorithm is utilized to represent concepts as vectors and relations as matrices in Linear Relation Embedding (LRE) (Paccanaro 2000;
Paccanaro and Hinton 2001) which maps entities into a lowdimensional space by imposing the constraint that relations
in this low-dimensional space are modeled by linear operations. In other words, entities are modeled by real-valued
vectors and relations by matrices. Parameters of both entities
and relations are learnt during training. It has been shown
that encoding knowledge graph in distributed embeddings
improves the performance.
For examples, Figure 1 illustrates a family tree via a
knowledge graph, where entities (family members) and their
pairwise relations (i.e., wife and daughter) are encoded. In
this paper, structured embedding is employed to map all of
entities in the knowledge graph to their continuous vectors,
and the pairwise relations are represented as matrixes.
Given a triplet (h, r, t), the embeddings of the entities
and the relations are denoted with the same letter in boldface characters in this paper (i.e., h,r,t). Structured Embeddings (SE) (Bordes et al. 2011) embeds entities h and
t into Rd and relation r into two matrices L1 ∈ Rd×d
and L2 ∈ Rd×d such that the dissimilarly (measured by
l1 distance) between L1 · h and L2 · t is less than that of
the corrupted triples. The basic idea of structured embeddings (Bordes et al. 2011) is that when two entities belong
to one triplet, their individual embeddings should be close
to each other in a subspace that depends on their assigned
relation. A semantic matching energy function is devised
via a neural network and utilized in (Bordes et al. 2012;
2014) to map all of entities and relations into a same relatively low-dimensional embedding vector space, where the
plausible triplets of a multi-relational graph are assigned
low energies (i.e. high probabilities). Since entities and relations all share the same kind of representation, the usual
conceptual difference between entities and relation are diminished. Another more expressive embedding approach is
Neural Tensor Networks (NTN) proposed in (Socher et al.
2013). NTN replaces the traditional linear neural network
layer with a bilinear tensor layer that directly mediates the

We consider the problem of embedding entities and relations of knowledge bases into low-dimensional continuous vector spaces (distributed representations). Unlike most existing approaches, which are primarily efficient for modelling pairwise relations between entities,
we attempt to explicitly model both pairwise relations
and long-range interactions between entities, by interpreting them as linear operators on the low-dimensional
embeddings of the entities. Therefore, in this paper we
introduces path ranking to capture the long-range interactions of knowledge graph and at the same time preserve the pairwise relations of knowledge graph; we call
it structured embedding via pairwise relation and longrange interactions (referred to as SePLi). Comparing
with the-state-of-the-art models, SePLi achieves better
performances of embeddings.

Introduction
A knowledge graph such as Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008),
WordNet (Miller 1995), and Yago (Suchanek, Kasneci, and
Weikum 2007) is a multi-relational graph consisting of entities as nodes and relations as different types of labelled
edges. An instance of the labelled edge is a triplet of one fact
(head entity, relation, tail entity) (abbreviated as (h, r, t))
which indicates that there exists a pairwise relation of name
relation between the entities head entity and tail entity (e.g.,
(Paris, capital of, France)). In the past decade, great advance
is achieved to embed elements of a knowledge graph into a
continuous space (distributed representation) while preserving the intrinsic structures of the original graph.
The distributed representation of the words in a continuous space has been used in Natural Language Processing (NLP) via the framework of language models where
an embedding per word is learnt in an unsupervised learning fashion rather than merely one-hot representation of a
word (Xu and Rudnicky 2000; Bengio Y, P, and C 2003;
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1663

