Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Empirical Study on the Practical Impact of Prior Beliefs over Policy Types
Stefano V. Albrecht

Jacob W. Crandall

Subramanian Ramamoorthy

The University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
s.v.albrecht@sms.ed.ac.uk

Masdar Institute of Science and Technology
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirate
crandall@masdar.ac.ae

Edinburgh, United Kingdom
s.ramamoorthy@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

To illustrate this idea, imagine you are playing a game of
Rock-Paper-Scissors against a stranger. Our experience tells
us that there is a specific set of policies which the other player
could be using, such as “play previous action of opponent”,
“play action that would have won in last round”, etc. The idea,
then, is to compare the predictions of these policies with the
observed actions of the player, and to plan our own actions
with respect to those policies which most closely match the
player’s actions. There is a growing body of work showing
that this method can quickly learn effective behaviours while
maintaining great flexibility as to the kinds of agents it can
coordinate with (Albrecht and Ramamoorthy 2013; Barrett,
Stone, and Kraus 2011; Bowling and McCracken 2005).
A central component of this method is the posterior belief,
which often takes the form of a probability distribution describing the relative likelihood that the agents use any of the
considered policies, based on their past actions. Consequently,
much research focused on the computation of posterior beliefs and convergence guarantees (Albrecht and Ramamoorthy 2014; Gmytrasiewicz and Doshi 2005).
The posterior belief is complemented by the prior belief,
which describes the subjective likelihood of policies before
any actions are observed. However, in contrast to posterior
beliefs, there are currently no systematic studies on the impact
of prior beliefs in the AI literature, and it is common to use
uniform priors in experiments. A reason for this may be the
fact that beliefs can change rapidly after a few observations,
which could suggest that prior beliefs have negligible effect.
On the other hand, there is a substantial body of work in
the game theory literature arguing the importance of prior
beliefs over policies, or types, e.g. (Dekel, Fudenberg, and
Levine 2004; Kalai and Lehrer 1993; Jordan 1991). However,
these works are of a theoretical nature, in the sense that they
are interested in the impact of prior beliefs on equilibrium
attainment. In contrast, our interest is in the practical impact
of prior beliefs, i.e. payoff maximisation. Moreover, the game
theory literature on this subject almost always assumes that
all players use the same Bayesian reasoning over types, while
we make no such assumption.
Thus, we are left with the following questions: Do prior
beliefs have an impact on the long-term payoff maximisation of the considered method? If so, how? And, importantly,
can we automatically compute prior beliefs with the goal of
improving the long-term performance?

Many multiagent applications require an agent to learn
quickly how to interact with previously unknown other
agents. To address this problem, researchers have studied
learning algorithms which compute posterior beliefs over
a hypothesised set of policies, based on the observed actions of the other agents. The posterior belief is complemented by the prior belief, which specifies the subjective
likelihood of policies before any actions are observed. In
this paper, we present the first comprehensive empirical
study on the practical impact of prior beliefs over policies
in repeated interactions. We show that prior beliefs can
have a significant impact on the long-term performance
of such methods, and that the magnitude of the impact
depends on the depth of the planning horizon. Moreover, our results demonstrate that automatic methods can
be used to compute prior beliefs with consistent performance effects. This indicates that prior beliefs could be
eliminated as a manual parameter and instead be computed automatically.

1

Introduction

Much research in AI has focused on innovative applications
such as adaptive user interfaces, robotic elderly assistance,
and autonomous trading agents. A key technological challenge in these applications is that an agent (virtual or physical)
has to be able to learn quickly how to interact effectively with
previously unknown other agents. For example, an adaptive
user interface should be able to adapt effectively within minutes rather than hours. However, users may change frequently
and we may not necessarily know how they behave.
Unfortunately, current methods for multiagent learning do
not solve this challenge because they require long learning
periods, often in the order of thousands of trials even for the
simplest tasks (e.g. Claus and Boutilier 1998). A common
approach to accelerate the learning process is to introduce
assumptions about the behaviour of other agents, but this may
severely limit the applicability of the method. To address this
limitation, researchers have studied learning systems which
can utilise multiple sets of assumptions rather than relying
on one set of assumptions. The basic idea is to filter out bad
assumptions based on the agents’ observed behaviours.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1988

