Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Embedded Unsupervised Feature Selection
Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Huan Liu
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University, USA
{suhang.wang, jiliang.tang, huan.liu}@asu.edu

Abstract

which enables feature selection to be embedded in the classification (or regression) problem. As most data is unlabeled and it is very expensive to label the data, unsupervised feature selection attracts more and more attentions
in recent years (Wolf and Shashua 2005; He et al. 2005;
Boutsidis et al. 2009; Yang et al. 2011; Qian and Zhai 2013;
Alelyani et al. 2013).
Without label information to define feature relevance, a
number of alternative criteria have been proposed for unsupervised feature selection. One commonly used criterion
is to select features that can preserve the data similarity or
manifold structure constructed from the whole feature space
(He et al. 2005; Zhao and Liu 2007). In recent years, applying sparse learning in unsupervised feature selection has attracted increasing attention. These methods usually generate
cluster labels via clustering algorithms and then transform
unsupervised feature selection into sparse learning based supervised feature selection with these generated cluster labels such as Multi-cluster feature selection (MCFS) (Cai
et al. 2010), Nonnegative Discriminative Feature Selection
(NDFS) (Li et al. 2012), and Robust Unsupervised Feature
Selection (RUFS) (Qian and Zhai 2013).
In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised feature
selection algorithm, i.e., Embedded Unsupervised Feature
Selection (EUFS). Unlike existing unsupervised feature selection methods such as MCFS, NDFS or RUFS, which
transform unsupervised feature selection into sparse learning based supervised feature selection with cluster labels
generated by clustering algorithms, we directly embed feature selection into a clustering algorithm via sparse learning
without the transformation (see Figure 1). This work theoretically extends the current state-of-the-art unsupervised feature selection, algorithmically expands the capability of unsupervised feature selection, and empirically demonstrates
the efficacy of the new algorithm. The major contributions
of this paper are summarized next.

Sparse learning has been proven to be a powerful technique in supervised feature selection, which allows to
embed feature selection into the classification (or regression) problem. In recent years, increasing attention
has been on applying spare learning in unsupervised
feature selection. Due to the lack of label information,
the vast majority of these algorithms usually generate
cluster labels via clustering algorithms and then formulate unsupervised feature selection as sparse learning
based supervised feature selection with these generated
cluster labels. In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised feature selection algorithm EUFS, which directly
embeds feature selection into a clustering algorithm via
sparse learning without the transformation. The Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers is used to address the optimization problem of EUFS. Experimental
results on various benchmark datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed framework EUFS.

Introduction
In many real-world applications such as data mining and
machine learning, one is often faced with high-dimensional
data (Jain and Zongker 1997; Guyon and Elisseeff 2003).
Data with high dimensionality not only significantly increases the time and memory requirements of the algorithms, but also degenerates many algorithms’ performance
due to the curse of dimensionality and the existence of irrelevant, redundant and noisy dimensions(Liu and Motoda
2007). Feature selection, which reduces the dimensionality by selecting a subset of most relevant features, has been
proven to be an effective and efficient way to handle highdimensional data (John et al. 1994; Liu and Motoda 2007).
In terms of the label availability, feature selection methods
can be broadly classified into supervised methods and unsupervised methods. The availability of the class label allows
supervised feature selection algorithms (Duda et al. 2001;
Nie et al. 2008; Zhao et al. 2010; Tang et al. 2014) to effectively select discriminative features to distinguish samples from different classes. Sparse learning has been proven
to be a powerful technique in supervised feature selection
(Nie et al. 2010; Gu and Han 2011; Tang and Liu 2012a),

• Providing a way to directly embed unsupervised feature
selection algorithm into a clustering algorithm via sparse
learning instead of transforming it into sparse learning
based supervised feature selection with cluster labels;
• Proposing an embedded feature selection framework
EUFS, which selects features in unsupervised scenarios
with sparse learning; and

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

470

