Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Relational Stacked Denoising
Autoencoder for Tag Recommendation
Hao Wang, Xingjian Shi, Dit-Yan Yeung
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
hwangaz@cse.ust.hk, xshiab@connect.ust.hk, dyyeung@cse.ust.hk
the tip of their tongues, but can also make the tags used
more consistent. Consequently, both the user experience and
recommendation accuracy can be improved dramatically.
Tag recommendation methods can roughly be categorized
into three classes (Wang et al. 2012): content-based
methods, co-occurrence based methods, and hybrid
methods. Content-based methods (Chen et al. 2008;
2010; Shen and Fan 2010) utilize only the content
information (e.g., abstracts of articles, image
pixels, and music content) for tag recommendation.
Co-occurrence based methods (Garg and Weber 2008;
Weinberger,
Slaney,
and
van
Zwol
2008;
Rendle and Schmidt-Thieme 2010) are similar to
collaborative ﬁltering (CF) methods (Li and Yeung
2011). The co-occurrence of tags among items,
usually represented as an tag-item matrix, is used for
tagging. The third class of methods (Wu et al. 2009;
Wang and Blei 2011; Yang, Zhang, and Wang 2013;
Zhao et al. 2013; Bao, Fang, and Zhang 2014;
Chen et al. 2014), also the most popular and effective
ones, consists of hybrid methods. They make use of both
tagging (co-occurrence) information (the tag-item matrix)
and item content information for recommendation.
In hybrid methods, learning of item representations (also
called item latent factors in some models) is crucial
for the recommendation accuracy especially when the
tag-item matrix is extremely sparse. Recently, models
like collaborative topic regression (CTR) (Wang and Blei
2011) and its variants (Purushotham, Liu, and Kuo 2012;
Wang, Chen, and Li 2013) have been proposed and adapted
for tag recommendation to achieve promising performance.
These models use latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei,
Ng, and Jordan 2003) as the key component for
learning item representations and use probabilistic
matrix factorization (PMF) (Salakhutdinov and Mnih
2007) to process the co-occurrence matrix (tag-item
matrix). However, when using LDA, the resulting item
representations tend to be quite sparse. Consequently,
more dimensions may be needed for the representations
to be effective. Unfortunately PMF with the low-rank
assumption usually works with quite a small number of
latent dimensions, which is not in line with the nature of
LDA (or CTR). On the other hand, deep learning models
like stacked denoising autoencoder (SDAE) (Vincent et

Abstract
Tag recommendation has become one of the most important
ways of organizing and indexing online resources like
articles, movies, and music. Since tagging information
is usually very sparse, effective learning of the content
representation for these resources is crucial to accurate
tag recommendation. Recently, models proposed for tag
recommendation, such as collaborative topic regression
and its variants, have demonstrated promising accuracy.
However, a limitation of these models is that, by using
topic models like latent Dirichlet allocation as the key
component, the learned representation may not be compact
and effective enough. Moreover, since relational data exist as
an auxiliary data source in many applications, it is desirable
to incorporate such data into tag recommendation models.
In this paper, we start with a deep learning model called
stacked denoising autoencoder (SDAE) in an attempt to
learn more effective content representation. We propose a
probabilistic formulation for SDAE and then extend it to a
relational SDAE (RSDAE) model. RSDAE jointly performs
deep representation learning and relational learning in a
principled way under a probabilistic framework. Experiments
conducted on three real datasets show that both learning more
effective representation and learning from relational data are
beneﬁcial steps to take to advance the state of the art.

Introduction
Due to the abundance of online resources like articles,
movies, and music, tagging systems (Yu et al. 2014) have
become increasingly important for organizing and indexing
them. For example, CiteULike1 uses tags to help categorize
millions of articles online and Flickr2 allows users to use
tags to organize their photos. However, it is often not easy
to compose a set of words appropriate for the resources.
Besides, the large variety in phrasing styles of the users
can potentially make the tagging information inconsistent
and idiosyncratic. With such technical challenges, research
in tag recommendation (TR) (Gupta et al. 2010; Wang
et al. 2012) has gained in popularity over the past few
years. An accurate tag recommendation system not only
can save the pain of users searching for candidate tags on
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.citeulike.org
2
http://www.ﬂickr.com

3052

