Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Metric Learning Driven Multi-Task Structured
Output Optimization for Robust Keypoint Tracking
Liming Zhao, Xi Li∗ , Jun Xiao, Fei Wu, Yueting Zhuang
College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
{zhaoliming, xilizju, junx, wufei, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

new frame t+1

background features

Descriptor
Extraction

As an important and challenging problem in computer vision and graphics, keypoint-based object tracking is typically formulated in a spatio-temporal statistical learning framework. However, most existing
keypoint trackers are incapable of effectively modeling and balancing the following three aspects in a simultaneous manner: temporal model coherence across
frames, spatial model consistency within frames, and
discriminative feature construction. To address this issue, we propose a robust keypoint tracker based on
spatio-temporal multi-task structured output optimization driven by discriminative metric learning. Consequently, temporal model coherence is characterized
by multi-task structured keypoint model learning over
several adjacent frames, while spatial model consistency is modeled by solving a geometric verification
based structured learning problem. Discriminative feature construction is enabled by metric learning to ensure
the intra-class compactness and inter-class separability.
Finally, the above three modules are simultaneously optimized in a joint learning scheme. Experimental results
have demonstrated the effectiveness of our tracker.

features of a tracklet

a tracklet
Original keypoint feature space

build K tasks
task 1

…

task k

…

task K
features of a tracklet

multi-task
models
…

...

…
...

Multi-task
Structured
Output
Learning

Metric Learning

1

template

frame 1, … , t-K+1, … … , t-1 , t

feature mapping
Robust Object Model
Multi-task
Structured
Prediction

background features

Discriminative feature space

Figure 1: Illustration of our tracking approach.
representation, a variety of keypoint descriptors are proposed to encode the local invariance information on object
appearance, for example, SIFT (Lowe 2004) and SURF (Bay
et al. 2008). To further speed up the feature extraction
process, a number of binary local descriptors emerge, including BRIEF (Calonder et al. 2010), ORB (Rublee et
al. 2011), BRISK (Leutenegger, Chli, and Siegwart 2011),
FREAK (Alahi, Ortiz, and Vandergheynst 2012), etc. Since
the way of feature extraction is handcrafted and fixed all the
time, these keypoint descriptors are usually incapable of effectively and flexibly adapting to complex time-varying appearance variations as tracking proceeds.
In general, statistical modeling is cast as a trackingby-detection problem, which seeks to build an object locator based on discriminative learning such as randomized decision trees (Lepetit and Fua 2006; Özuysal et al.
2010) and boosting (Grabner, Grabner, and Bischof 2007;
Guo and Liu 2013). However, these approaches usually generate the binary classification output for object tracking, and
thus ignore the intrinsic structural or geometrical information (e.g., geometric transform across frames) on object localization and matching during model learning. To address
this issue, Hare et al. (Hare, Saffari, and Torr 2012) propose
a structured SVM-based keypoint tracking approach that incorporates the RANSAC-based geometric matching information into the optimization process of learning keypointspecific SVM models. As a result, the proposed tracking approach is able to simultaneously find correct keypoint correspondences and estimate underlying object geometric transforms across frames. In addition, the model learning pro-

Introduction

Due to the effectiveness and efficiency in object motion
analysis, keypoint-based object tracking (Lucas and Kanade
1981; Santner et al. 2010; Maresca and Petrosino 2013;
Nebehay and Pflugfelder 2014) is a popular and powerful
tool of video processing, and thus has a wide range of applications such as augmented reality (AR), object retrieval,
and video compression. By encoding the local structural information on object appearance (Li et al. 2013), it is generally robust to various appearance changes caused by several
complicated factors such as shape deformation, illumination
variation, and partial occlusion (Mikolajczyk and Schmid
2005; Bouachir and Bilodeau 2014). Motivated by this observation, we focus on constructing effective and robust keypoint models to well model the intrinsic spatio-temporal
structural properties of object appearance in this paper.
Typically, keypoint model construction consists of keypoint representation and statistical modeling. For keypoint
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3864

