Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Sampling Representative Users from Large Social Networks
Jie Tang†] , Chenhui Zhang†] , Keke Cai‡ , Li Zhang‡ , Zhong Su‡
†

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
‡
IBM, China Research Lab
jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn, zh.sherlock@gmail.com, {caikeke, lizhang, suzhong}@cn.ibm.com
]

Abstract

theoretical studies on the problem of sampling representative users (SRU). Unlike influence maximization, in which
the goal is to find a set of nodes (users) in a social network
who can maximize the spread of influence (Richardson and
Domingos 2002; Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003), the
objective of sampling representative users is to identify a
few “average” users who can statistically represent the characteristics of all users (Landauer 1997). Another type of related work is social influence analysis. Anagnostopoulos et
al. (2008) and Singla and Richardson (2008) propose methods to qualitatively measure the existence of influence. Crandall et al. (2008) studies the correlation between social similarity and influence. Tang et al. (2009) presents a method for
measuring the strength of such influence. The problem of
sampling representative users from social networks is also
relevant to graph sampling (Leskovec and Faloutsos 2006;
Maiya and Berger-Wolf 2010; 2011; Ugander et al. 2013).
However, most existing works focus on studying the network topology and ignore the topic information. Sun et
al. (2013) aims to find representative users from the information spreading perspective and Ahmed et al. (2013) studies the network sampling problem in the dynamic environment. Papagelis et al. (2013) presents a sampling-based algorithm to efficiently explore a user’s ego network respecting its structure and to quickly approximate quantities of
interest. However, the problem itself is different from that
sampling representative users for the whole network.

Finding a subset of users to statistically represent the
original social network is a fundamental issue in Social
Network Analysis (SNA). The problem has not been
extensively studied in existing literature. In this paper,
we present a formal definition of the problem of sampling representative users from social network. We
propose two sampling models and theoretically prove
their NP-hardness. To efficiently solve the two models,
we present an efficient algorithm with provable approximation guarantees. Experimental results on two datasets
show that the proposed models for sampling representative users significantly outperform (+6%-23% in terms
of Precision@100) several alternative methods using
authority or structure information only. The proposed
algorithms are also effective in terms of time complexity. Only a few seconds are needed to sampling 300
representative users from a network of 100,000 users.
All data and codes are publicly available.1

Introduction
In social networks, a small subset of users (e.g., opinion leaders) usually plays an important role in influencing the social dynamics (behavior and structure). For example, in HCI, for conducting surveys and collecting user
feedbacks, selecting representative users is always a key issue (Landauer 1997). On the other hand, in a social network,
users may have different representative degrees from different aspects (topics). For example, iPhone fans may have a
high representative degree on some fashion products, while
housewives have a high representative degree on cooking or
children’s products. One interesting question is: can we design an algorithm to automatically sampling representative
users for different topics from large social networks?
Despite several relevant studies, such as those on social influence analysis (Anagnostopoulos, Kumar, and Mahdian 2008; Crandall et al. 2008; Singla and Richardson
2008; Tang et al. 2009), influence maximization (Kempe,
Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Chen, Wang, and Yang 2009;
Scripps, Tan, and Esfahanian 2009), and opinion leader finding (Goyal, Bonchi, and Lakshmanan 2008), there are few

Problem and Our Solution. We use an example from a
coauthor network to clearly demonstrate the motivation of
this work. In Figure 1, the left figure shows a coauthor network and attributes (or interests) of each researcher. For example, George has a higher interest degree (0.9) on topic
“database” than the degree (0.1) on “data mining”. The right
figure shows the output of topic-based representative users,
highlighted with rectangles, where “Ada” and “Frank” are
identified as the representative authors on topic “data mining” and “George” and “Eve” are representative users on the
“database” topic. The weighted directed edge between the
representative user and another user indicates how likely the
selected user represents the other user. For example, on topic
“data mining”, “Ada” has a higher representative degree for
“Eve” than “Bob”. The problem of sampling representative
users from large networks is fundamental for many social
network mining tasks. For example, in existing literature,

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

304

