Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Parallel Gaussian Process Regression for Big Data:
Low-Rank Representation Meets Markov Approximation
Kian Hsiang Low∗ and Jiangbo Yu∗ and Jie Chen§ and Patrick Jaillet†

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore∗
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology, Republic of Singapore§
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA†
{lowkh, yujiang}@comp.nus.edu.sg∗ , chenjie@smart.mit.edu§ , jaillet@mit.edu†
Abstract

Lázaro-Gredilla et al. 2010; Quiñonero-Candela and Rasmussen 2005; Snelson and Ghahramani 2005) of the full-rank
GP (FGP) model are well-suited for modeling slowly-varying
functions with large correlation and can use all the data for
predictions. But, they require a relatively high rank to capture
small-scale features/patterns (i.e., of small correlation) with
high fidelity, thus losing their computational advantage. (b) In
contrast, localized regression and covariance tapering methods (e.g., local GPs (Park, Huang, and Ding 2011) and compactly supported covariance functions (Furrer, Genton, and
Nychka 2006)) are particularly useful for modeling rapidlyvarying functions with small correlation. However, they can
only utilize local data for predictions, thereby performing
poorly in input regions with little/no data. Furthermore, to accurately represent large-scale features/patterns (i.e., of large
correlation), the locality/tapering range has to be increased
considerably, thus sacrificing their time efficiency.
Recent sparse GP regression methods (Chen et al. 2013;
Snelson and Ghahramani 2007) have unified approaches from
the two families described above to harness their complementary modeling and predictive capabilities (hence, eliminating
their deficiencies) while retaining their computational advantages. Specifically, after approximating the FGP (in particular,
its covariance matrix) with a low-rank representation based
on the notion of a support set of inputs, a sparse covariance matrix approximation of the resulting residual process
is made. However, this sparse residual covariance matrix
approximation imposes a fairly strong conditional independence assumption given the support set since the support set
cannot be too large to preserve time efficiency (see Remark 2
after Proposition 1 in Section 3). In this paper, we argue that
such a strong assumption is an overkill: It is in fact possible to
construct a more refined, dense residual covariance matrix approximation by exploiting a Markov assumption and, perhaps
surprisingly, still achieve scalability, which distinguishes our
work here from existing sparse GP regression methods utilizing low-rank representations (i.e., including the unified
approaches) described earlier. As a result, our proposed residual covariance matrix approximation can significantly relax
the conditional independence assumption (especially with
larger data; see Remark 1 after Proposition 1 in Section 3),
hence potentially improving the predictive performance.
This paper presents a low-rank-cum-Markov
approximation (LMA) of the FGP model (Section 3)

The expressive power of a Gaussian process (GP) model
comes at a cost of poor scalability in the data size. To
improve its scalability, this paper presents a low-rankcum-Markov approximation (LMA) of the GP model
that is novel in leveraging the dual computational advantages stemming from complementing a low-rank approximate representation of the full-rank GP based on
a support set of inputs with a Markov approximation of
the resulting residual process; the latter approximation is
guaranteed to be closest in the Kullback-Leibler distance
criterion subject to some constraint and is considerably
more refined than that of existing sparse GP models utilizing low-rank representations due to its more relaxed
conditional independence assumption (especially with
larger data). As a result, our LMA method can trade
off between the size of the support set and the order of
the Markov property to (a) incur lower computational
cost than such sparse GP models while achieving predictive performance comparable to them and (b) accurately
represent features/patterns of any scale. Interestingly,
varying the Markov order produces a spectrum of LMAs
with PIC approximation and full-rank GP at the two extremes. An advantage of our LMA method is that it is
amenable to parallelization on multiple machines/cores,
thereby gaining greater scalability. Empirical evaluation
on three real-world datasets in clusters of up to 32 computing nodes shows that our centralized and parallel
LMA methods are significantly more time-efficient and
scalable than state-of-the-art sparse and full-rank GP regression methods while achieving comparable predictive
performances.

1

Introduction

Gaussian process (GP) models are a rich class of Bayesian
non-parametric models that can perform probabilistic regression by providing Gaussian predictive distributions with formal measures of the predictive uncertainty. Unfortunately, a
GP model is handicapped by its poor scalability in the size
of the data, hence limiting its practical use to small data.
To improve its scalability, two families of sparse GP regression methods have been proposed: (a) Low-rank approximate representations (Hensman, Fusi, and Lawrence 2013;
∗

Kian Hsiang Low and Jiangbo Yu are co-first authors.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2821

