Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Providing Arguments in Discussions Based on the
Prediction of Human Argumentative Behavior∗
Ariel Rosenfeld and Sarit Kraus
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel 92500
rosenfa5@cs.biu.ac.il , sarit@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

need to asses which arguments people are likely to use given
the current state of the discussion. First, we examine the
well-established Argumentation Theory (see (Walton 2009)
for an excellent summary) and its abilities to predict people’s
arguments. To date, very little investigation has been done
regarding how well the proposed theories describe human
reasoning. In this work, we present three experimental settings, with over 130 human conversations and 140 questionnaires, varying in complexity, which show the lack of predictive power of the existing Argumentation Theory. We introduce the concept of Bounded Rationality (Gigerenzer and
Selten 2002) to the Argumentation Theory using the heuristics of Relevance and show that this simple amendment can
provide the Argumentation Theory enriched predictive abilities. Second, we use Machine Learning (ML) techniques to
provide a probability distribution over all known arguments
given a partial deliberation. That is, our ML techniques provide the probability of each argument to be used next in a
given discussion. Our model achieves 76% accuracy when
predicting peoples top three argument choices given a partial deliberation. To construct our prediction model we utilize the psychological effect of confirmation bias (Nickerson 1998) and decision-making heuristics (Bonnefon et al.
2008).
Last, using the prediction model and the newly introduced heuristics of relevance, we designed and evaluated
the Predictive and Relevance based Heuristic agent (PRH).
Through extensive human studies with over 200 human
subjects, we show that the PRH agent outperforms other
agents that propose arguments based on Argumentation Theory, predicted arguments without the heuristics or only the
heuristics on both axes we examined, i.e. peoples satisfaction from agents and people’s use of the suggested arguments.

Argumentative discussion is a highly demanding task.
In order to help people in such situations, this paper
provides an innovative methodology for developing an
agent that can support people in argumentative discussions by proposing possible arguments to them. By analyzing more than 130 human discussions and 140 questionnaires, answered by people, we show that the wellestablished Argumentation Theory is not a good predictor of people’s choice of arguments. Then, we present a
model that has 76% accuracy when predicting peoples
top three argument choices given a partial deliberation.
We present the Predictive and Relevance based Heuristic agent (PRH), which uses this model with a heuristic that estimates the relevance of possible arguments
to the last argument given in order to propose possible
arguments. Through extensive human studies with over
200 human subjects, we show that peoples satisfaction
from the PRH agent is significantly higher than from
other agents that propose arguments based on Argumentation Theory, predict arguments without the heuristics
or only the heuristics. People also use the PRH agent’s
proposed arguments significantly more often than those
proposed by the other agents.

Introduction
Dialog, especially of an argumentative nature, is a highly
demanding task for humans, both mentally and emotionally,
as shown in discursive psychology research (Edwards 1997;
Krauss 2001). Creative, analytical and practical abilities are
needed to persuade or convince another person, (Sternberg
2008). An automated agent can help a human when engaging in an argumentative discussion by utilizing its knowledge and computational advantage to provide arguments to
her.
When suggesting an argument to a human user, an agent
can consider two possible approaches. First, the agent can
suggest an argument that the person has (probably) considered and is prone to use anyway. Second, it can suggest an
innovative argument that the person has (probably) not considered. In order to differ between the two approaches we

Related Work and Background
Argumentation Theory researchers have extensively studied the concept of a “good” argument and have proposed
many theories explaining how to calculate these arguments
(Walton 2009). Most of the proposed theories rely on some
fundamental notions from (Dung 1995) and expand them
in some way. These include the Bipolar Argumentation
Framework (BAF) (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex 2005b),
the Value Argumentation Framework (VAF) (Bench-Capon

∗
We would like to thank Intel Collaboration Research Institute
for Computational Intelligence for their support in this research.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1320

