Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Unsupervised Word Sense Disambiguation Using
Markov Random Field and Dependency Parser
Devendra Singh Chaplot

Pushpak Bhattacharyya

Ashwin Paranjape

Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.
Suwon, South Korea

Computer Science Department
IIT Bombay, India

Stanford University
California, US

Abstract

graph-based algorithms. Section 3 describes the methodology behind our unsupervised approach. Our algorithm is described in detail in Section 4. The thought process behind
the development of our algorithm is discussed in Section 5.
The experiments and results are presented in Section 6. Efficiency and labelling speed of the proposed system is discussed in Section 7. Section 8 describes the web interface
developed for experiments, visualization, error analysis and
optimization which shall be made open-source. Conclusions
and future work are covered in Section 9.

Word Sense Disambiguation is a difficult problem to
solve in the unsupervised setting. This is because in
this setting inference becomes more dependent on the
interplay between different senses in the context due
to unavailability of learning resources. Using two basic ideas, sense dependency and selective dependency,
we model the WSD problem as a Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) Inference Query on a Markov Random Field
(MRF) built using WordNet and Link Parser or Stanford
Parser. To the best of our knowledge this combination
of dependency and MRF is novel, and our graph-based
unsupervised WSD system beats state-of-the-art system
on SensEval-2, SensEval-3 and SemEval-2007 English
all-words datasets while being over 35 times faster.

1

2

Related Work

In recent times, many graph-based algorithms have been
proposed for unsupervised WSD. Navigli and Lapata (2007)
and Navigli and Lapata (2010) build a subgraph of the entire
lexicon containing vertices useful for disambiguation and
then use graph connectivity measures to determine the most
appropriate senses. Mihalcea (2005) and Sinha and Mihalcea (2007) construct a sentence-wise graph, where, for each
word every possible sense forms a vertex. Then graph-based
iterative ranking and centrality algorithms are applied to find
most probable sense. Agirre, López de Lacalle, and Soroa
(2014) use personalised page rank over the graphs generated
using WordNet.
A common recurrent problem in graph-based WSD algorithms is exponential complexity due to pairwise comparison of senses of all the words in the sentence. The search
space for a sentence becomes the product of total number of
possible senses of each content word. Due to this exponential search space, many sub-optimal and approximate techniques have been used. Patwardhan, Banerjee, and Pedersen (2003) use sub-optimal word-by-word greedy technique,
while approximate techniques such as Simulated Annealing (Cowie, Guthrie, and Guthrie 1992), Conceptual Density (Agirre and Rigau 1996) and approximate solutions of
equivalent problems in integer linear programming (Panagiotopoulou et al. 2012) have been tried out. Our algorithm
reduces the search space by reducing the number of edges
in the graphical model using a dependency parser, which allows us to exactly calculate the optimal solution unlike the
above methods, and thereby increasing the accuracy of the
system.

Introduction

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is an open problem,
concerned with understanding the sense of a word when
the word has multiple meanings. The problem is important
as it is useful in many other Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tasks like machine translation (Chan, Ng, and Chiang 2007), information extraction (Zhong and Ng 2012) and
question answering (Ramakrishnan et al. 2003). Due to the
difficulty in creating quality sense annotated corpora in adequate amount, there has always been significant interest in
developing unsupervised WSD algorithms.
We have built an entirely unsupervised WSD system
which requires WordNet (Miller 1995), a dependency parser
and Stanford POS Tagger (Toutanova et al. 2003) as knowledge resources. We model the WSD problem as a Maximum
A Posteriori (MAP) Inference Query on a Markov Random
Field (MRF) (Jordan and Weiss 2002), which is an undirected graphical model. Senses of words in the sentence
form the nodes of this graphical model while the edges are
determined using a dependency parser. We present our results using two different dependency parsers, Link Parser
(Sleator and Temperley 1993) and Stanford Parser (Marneffe, Maccartney, and Manning 2006).
The rest of the paper is divided into the following sections. Section 2 covers Related Work regarding knowledgebased and unsupervised WSD and previous attempts using
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2217

