Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Tartanian7: A Champion Two-Player No-Limit
Texas Hold’em Poker-Playing Program
Noam Brown, Sam Ganzfried, and Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
{nbrown, sganzfri, sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu
R over all states of private information separately for each
of the public buckets that have been previously computed.
These abstractions can be computed using any arbitrary approach, Ar . For our poker agent, we used an abstraction algorithm that had previously been demonstrated to perform
well as the Ar ’s (Johanson et al. 2013). To compute the abstraction of public information at round r̂, we compute a distance between pairs of public states based on how often the
states were grouped together using a strong base abstraction.
We then use this distance function to compute the public abstraction using a custom clustering algorithm.

Abstract
The leading approach for solving large imperfect-information
games is automated abstraction followed by running an equilibrium-finding algorithm. We introduce a distributed version of the most commonly used equilibrium-finding algorithm, counterfactual regret minimization (CFR), which enables CFR to scale to dramatically larger abstractions and
numbers of cores. The new algorithm begets constraints on
the abstraction so as to make the pieces running on different
computers disjoint. We introduce an algorithm for generating such abstractions while capitalizing on state-of-the-art abstraction ideas such as imperfect recall and the earth-mover’sdistance similarity metric. Our techniques enabled an equilibrium computation of unprecedented size on a supercomputer
with a high inter-blade memory latency. Prior approaches run
slowly on this architecture. Our approach also leads to a significant improvement over using the prior best approach on
a large shared-memory server with low memory latency. Finally, we introduce a family of post-processing techniques
that outperform prior ones. We applied these techniques to
generate an agent for two-player no-limit Texas Hold’em. It
won the 2014 Annual Computer Poker Competition, beating
each opponent with statistical significance.

1

Algorithm 1 Main abstraction algorithm
Inputs: number of rounds R; round where public information abstraction is desired r̂; number of public buckets C; number of desired private buckets per public bucket at round r, Br ; abstraction
algorithm used for round r, Ar
for r = 1 to r̂ − 1 do
cluster information states at round r using Ar
cluster public information states at round r̂ into C buckets (using
our custom distance function and clustering algorithm)
for r = r̂ to R do
for c = 1 to C do
cluster private information states at round r that have
public information in public bucket c into Br buckets
using abstraction algorithm Ar

Hierarchical Abstraction Algorithm

In order to enable distributed equilibrium finding, we have
developed a new abstraction algorithm that creates an information abstraction that assigns disjoint components of
the game tree to different blades so that sampling in each
blade will only access information sets that are located on
that blade. At a high level, the first stage of our hierarchical abstraction algorithm is to cluster public information at
some early point in the game (public flop boards, i.e., combinations of public flop cards, in the case of Texas Hold’em
(TH)), giving a global basis for distributing the rest of the
game into non-overlapping pieces. Then, as a second stage
our algorithm conducts clustering of information states (that
can include both public and private information) in a way
that honors the partition generated in the first stage.
The main abstraction algorithm, Algorithm 1, works as
follows. Let r̂ be the special round of the game where we
perform the public clustering. For the initial r̂ − 1 rounds,
we compute an abstraction using an arbitrary algorithm Ar
for round r. Next, the public states at round r̂ are clustered
into C buckets. Once this public abstraction has been computed, we compute abstractions for each round from r̂ to

2

Equilibrium-Finding Algorithm

To solve the abstract game, we developed a modification of
Monte Carlo CFR (MCCFR) (Lanctot et al. 2009) specifically for architectures with high inter-blade memory access
latency. It designates one blade as the “head” blade, which
is used to store the regrets and average strategies for the top
part of the game tree (preflop round in TH). The algorithm
begins by sampling private information and conducting MCCFR on the head blade. When an action sequence is reached
that transitions outside the top of the game tree (to the flop
in TH), the algorithm will send the current state to each of
the C child blades. Each child blade then samples public information from its public bucket, and continues the iteration
of MCCFR. Once all the child blades complete their part
of the iteration, their calculated values are returned to the
head blade. The head blade calculates a weighted average
of these values, weighing them by the number of choices of
public information (possible flops in TH) that they sampled
from. This ensures that the expected value is unbiased. The
head node then continues its iteration of MCCFR, repeating
the process whenever the sample exits the top part (a flop

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4270

