Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Content-Aware Point of Interest Recommendation on
Location-Based Social Networks
Huiji Gao, Jiliang Tang, Xia Hu, and Huan Liu
Computer Science and Engineering
Arizona State University
{Huiji.Gao, Jiliang.Tang, Xia.Hu, Huan.Liu}@asu.edu

Abstract

Table 1: Check-in Actions w.r.t. Content Information
Content Information Facets of Check-in Actions
POI Properties
What is this POI about?
User Interests
Am I interested?
Sentiment Indications
How good is this POI?

The rapid urban expansion has greatly extended the
physical boundary of users’ living area and developed
a large number of POIs (points of interest). POI recommendation is a task that facilitates users’ urban exploration and helps them filter uninteresting POIs for
decision making. While existing work of POI recommendation on location-based social networks (LBSNs)
discovers the spatial, temporal, and social patterns of
user check-in behavior, the use of content information
has not been systematically studied. The various types
of content information available on LBSNs could be related to different aspects of a user’s check-in action, providing a unique opportunity for POI recommendation.
In this work, we study the content information on LBSNs w.r.t. POI properties, user interests, and sentiment
indications. We model the three types of information
under a unified POI recommendation framework with
the consideration of their relationship to check-in actions. The experimental results exhibit the significance
of content information in explaining user behavior, and
demonstrate its power to improve POI recommendation
performance on LBSNs.

recommendation in spatial, temporal, social, and content
aspects (Gao and Liu 2014). Typical location-based social
networking sites, e.g., Foursquare1 , Yelp2 , and Facebook
Places3 , allow users to “check in” at POIs with mobile devices like smartphones, and leave tips and share that experience with their online friends, resulting in a “W4 ” (i.e.,
who, when, where, and what) information layout, corresponding to four distinct information layers. While prior
work of POI recommendation on LBSNs mostly focuses
on investigating the spatial, temporal, and social layers in
terms of spatial-temporal patterns (Gao et al. 2013; Cheng
et al. 2013), social-spatial properties (Scellato et al. 2011;
Gao, Tang, and Liu 2012), etc., the use of content information has not been systematically studied, thus missing the
potential effect of content information in its recommendation efforts on LBSNs.
Content information on LBSNs could be related to a
user’s check-in action, providing a unique opportunity for
POI recommendation. For example, by observing a POI’s
description as “vegetarian restaurant”, we infer that the
restaurant serves “vegetarian food” and users who check-in
at this POI might be interested in the vegetarian diet. This is
an example of POI Properties. By observing a user’s comment on a Mexican restaurant discussing its spicy food, we
observe the User Interests in spicy food. If the comment
is actually a compliment, e.g., “Best spicy food ever!”, we
could infer both the user’s Sentiment Indications and her interests. These three types of content information, i.e., POI
properties, User Interests, and Sentiment Indications, are
all related to a user’s check-in actions and provide conceptual interpretations to three facets of her check-in actions, as
listed in Table 1.
In recommender systems, user interests and target proper-

Introduction
The rapid growth of cities has developed an increasing number of points of interest (POIs), e.g., restaurants, stores, hotels, providing us with more opportunities to experience life
than ever before. Generally, people are willing to explore the
city and neighborhood in their daily life, and decide “where
to go” according to their personal interests w.r.t. the various choices of POIs. In the meantime, how to efficiently
make a satisfying decision among the large number of POIs
becomes a tough problem for a user, usually referred to as
“choice paralysis” (Bensoussan and Fleisher 2012). POI recommendation is a task that aims to address such a problem
by helping users filter out uninteresting POIs and reduce
their decision making time (Ye et al. 2011).
With the development of location-based social networks
(LBSNs), POI recommendation on LBSNs has recently attracted much attention as the latter provides an unprecedented opportunity to study human mobile behavior for POI

1

http://foursquare.com
http://www.yelp.com
3
http://www.facebook.com/about/location
2

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1721

