Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

“Is It Rectangular?” Using I Spy as an Interactive,
Game-Based Approach to Multimodal Robot Learning
†*

Natalie Parde, ‡ Michalis Papakostas, ‡ Konstantinos Tsiakas, and † Rodney D. Nielsen
†

‡

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas Arlington and NCSR Demokritos
*
natalie.parde@unt.edu | http://students.cse.unt.edu/∼npp0016

Abstract
Training robots about the objects in their environment requires a multimodal correlation of features extracted from
visual and linguistic sources. This work abstracts the task
of collecting multimodal training data for object and feature
learning by encapsulating it in an interactive game, I Spy,
played between human players and robots. It introduces the
concept of the game, briefly describes its methodology, and
finally presents an evaluation of the game’s performance and
its appeal to human players.

from natural language and learns based on the successes
and failures of these hypotheses. The work in I Spy primarily builds upon that of (Vogel, Raghunathan, and Jurafsky 2010), by learning and utilizing features extracted from
players’ natural-language object descriptions within the context of an interactive, dialogue-based, human-robot game.
In doing this, the system builds multimodal feature models
comprised of visual feature vectors correlated to a set of keywords drawn from descriptions from players, functioning at
its deepest level as a multimodal interactive learning system.

Introduction

Approach

As interactive robots become increasingly ubiquitous in a diverse array of applications, it is important to develop methods with which they can learn about the world around them.
One way to do this is to create mappings between visual
and linguistic input in order to build models of new objects
and features in their environment. Although this can be done
by simply and successively presenting new pairings of images and text descriptions to robots (Holzapfel, Neubig, and
Waibel 2008), doing so is not particularly exciting for human
participants. This work proposes to embed the tedious process of multimodal data collection in an interactive, visionand dialogue-based game—specifically, in a robotic variant
of the traditional guessing game, I Spy.

The I Spy game developed in this work is characterized by
two phases: (1) an initial learning phase, and (2) a gaming
phase. In the initial learning phase, the robot begins with an
entirely empty knowledge base. To learn about an object, it
captures a series of images of the object from different angles and distances. A human user also describes the object
to the robot, and the robot extracts linguistic features (content keywords) from the human’s description and associates
those features with visual features (texture, shape, and color)
extracted from the images of the object.
In the gaming phase, the robot is placed in front of a set
of objects. The robot captures one or more images of the
gamespace, isolates and segments the individual objects in
the gamespace, and extracts each object’s visual features.
It uses this visual information to return associated learned
features, which are then used by the decision-making module to determine which features to query the player about. It
automatically generates questions regarding features chosen
by the decision-making module (e.g., “Is it rectangular?” or
“Does it have a stem?”), and uses the player’s answers to
update its belief probabilities until it is confident enough to
guess the target object.

Background
Previously, the use of an “I Spy” or “20 Questions” format as a means of improving robot vision was explored in
(Vogel, Raghunathan, and Jurafsky 2010), which focused
on asking “yes” or “no” questions to improve vision-based
knowledge of hard-coded object categories and attributes.
Moreover, the recent work of (Krause et al. 2014) tackles
the concept of “one-shot” learning, where a robot learns to
recognize an object via an image and a natural-language object description. Several systems have achieved large-scale
success in conceptual learning based on natural-language
input: the Never-Ending Language Learner (NELL) (Carlson et al. 2010) continuously extracts information from the
web to construct beliefs, and IBM’s Watson (Ferrucci et al.
2010) generates hypotheses based on information extracted

Methods
I Spy performs a number of tasks drawn from natural language processing (NLP), computer vision, and machine
learning, which are summarized here. Briefly, the robot uses
NLP to extract keywords from users’ object descriptions,
correlate co-occurring keywords with one another and with
IDs representing the learned objects, and automatically generate questions based on keywords. It uses computer vision

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4190

