Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Sample-Targeted Clinical Trial Adaptation
Ognjen Arandjelović
Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics
Deakin University, Australia

Abstract

The financial impact is another major issue – both the increase in the duration of a trial and the number of participants result in additional cost to an already expensive
process. In response to these challenges, the use of adaptive trials has emerged as a potential solution (Fisher 1998;
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2010;
Hung, Wang, and ONeill 2006). The key idea underlying
the concept of an adaptive trial design is that instead of
fixing the parameters of a trial before its onset, greater
efficiency can be achieved by adjusting them as the trial
progresses (Chow and Chan 2011). For example, the trial
sample size (e.g. the number of participants in a trial),
treatment dose or frequency, or the duration of the trial
may be increased or decreased depending on the accumulated evidence (Cui, Hung, and Wang 1999; Nissen 2006;
Lang 2011).

Clinical trial adaptation refers to any adjustment of the
trial protocol after the onset of the trial. The main goal
is to make the process of introducing new medical interventions to patients more efficient by reducing the cost
and the time associated with evaluating their safety and
efficacy. The principal question is how should adaptation be performed so as to minimize the chance of distorting the outcome of the trial. We propose a novel
method for achieving this. Unlike previous work our
approach focuses on trial adaptation by sample size
adjustment. We adopt a recently proposed stratification framework based on collected auxiliary data and
show that this information together with the primary
measured variables can be used to make a probabilistically informed choice of the particular sub-group a
sample should be removed from. Experiments on simulated data are used to illustrate the effectiveness of our
method and its application in practice.

Method overview The method for trial adaptation we describe in this paper has been influenced by recent work on
the analysis of imperfectly blinded clinical trials (Arandjelović 2012a; 2012b). Its key contribution was to introduce the idea of trial outcome analysis by patient sub-groups
which comprise trial participants matched by the administered intervention (treatment or control) and their responses
to an auxiliary questionnaire in which the participants are
asked to express their belief regarding their assignment intervention in the closed-form. This framework was shown to
be suitable for robust inference in the presence of “unblinding” (Arandjelović 2012a; Haahr and Hróbjartsson 2006).
The method proposed in the present paper emerges from the
realization that the same framework can be used for trial
adaptation by providing information which can be used to
make a statistically informed selection of the trial participants which can be dropped from the trial before its completion, without significantly affecting the trial outcome. Thus,
the proposed approach falls under the category of trial adaptations by “amending sample size”, in contrast to “dose finding” or “response adapting” methods which dominate previous work (Lang 2011).
In (Arandjelović 2012a) it was shown that the analysis of
a trial’s outcome should be performed by aggregating evidence provided by matched participant sub-groups, where
two sub-groups are matched if they contain participants
who were administered different interventions but nonetheless had the same responses in the auxiliary questionnaire.

Introduction
Robust evaluation is a crucial component in the process
of introducing new medical interventions. Amongst others,
these include newly developed medications, novel means
of administering known treatments, new screening procedures, diagnostic methodologies, physio-therapeutical manipulations, and many others. Such evaluations usually take
on the form of a controlled clinical trial (or a series thereof),
the framework widely accepted as best suited for a rigourous
statistical analysis of the effects of interest (Meinert 1986;
Piantadosi 1997; Friedman, Furberg, and DeMets 1998) (for
a related discussion and critique also see (Penston 2005)).
Driven both by legislating bodies, as well as the scientific
community and the public, the standards that the assessment
of novel interventions are expected to meet continue to rise.
Generally, this necessitates trials which employ larger sample sizes and which perform assessment over longer periods of time. A series of practical challenges emerge as a
consequence. Increasing the number of individuals in a trial
can be difficult because some trials necessitate that participants meet specific criteria; volunteers are also less likely
to commit to participation over extended periods of time.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1693

