Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Optimizing the CVaR via Sampling
Aviv Tamar, Yonatan Glassner, and Shie Mannor
Electrical Engineering Department
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 32000
{avivt, yglasner}@tx.technion.ac.il, shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract

Prashanth and Ghavamzadeh 2013), there is a strong incentive to develop more general CVaR optimization algorithms.
In this work, we propose a CVaR optimization approach
that is applicable when θ also controls the distribution of X.
The basis of our approach is a new formula that we derive
for the CVaR gradient ∂Φ(θ)
in the form of a conditional
∂θ
expectation. Based on this formula, we propose a samplingbased estimator for the CVaR gradient, and use it to optimize
the CVaR by stochastic gradient descent.
In addition, we analyze the bias of our estimator, and use
the result to prove convergence of the stochastic gradient
descent algorithm to a local CVaR optimum. Our method
allows us to consider CVaR optimization in new domains.
As an example, we consider a reinforcement learning application, and learn a risk-sensitive controller for the game
of Tetris. To our knowledge, CVaR optimization for such a
domain is beyond the reach of existing approaches. Considering Tetris also allows us to easily interpret our results, and
show that we indeed learn sensible policies.
We remark that in certain domains, CVaR is often not
maximized directly, but used as a constraint in an optimization problem of the form maxθ Eθ [R] s.t. Φ(θ) ≥ b.
Extending our approach to such problems is straightforward, using standard penalty method techniques (see, e.g.,
Tamar, Di Castro, and Mannor, 2012, and Prashanth and
Ghavamzadeh, 2013, for a such an approach with a varianceconstrained objective), since the key component for these
methods is the CVaR gradient estimator we provide here.
Another appealing property of our estimator is that it naturally incorporates importance sampling, which is important
when α is small, and the CVaR captures rare events.

Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) is a prominent risk
measure that is being used extensively in various domains. We develop a new formula for the gradient of the
CVaR in the form of a conditional expectation. Based
on this formula, we propose a novel sampling-based estimator for the gradient of the CVaR, in the spirit of the
likelihood-ratio method. We analyze the bias of the estimator, and prove the convergence of a corresponding
stochastic gradient descent algorithm to a local CVaR
optimum. Our method allows to consider CVaR optimization in new domains. As an example, we consider
a reinforcement learning application, and learn a risksensitive controller for the game of Tetris.

1

Introduction

Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR; Rockafellar and Uryasev,
2000) is an established risk measure that has found extensive use in finance among other fields. For a random payoff
R, whose distribution is parameterized by a controllable parameter θ, the α-CVaR is defined as the expected payoff over
the α% worst outcomes of Z:
Φ(θ) = Eθ [ R| R ≤ να (θ)] ,
where να (θ) is the α-quantile of R. CVaR optimization aims
to find a parameter θ that maximizes Φ(θ).
When the payoff is of the structure R = fθ (X), where
fθ is a deterministic function, and X is random but does
not depend on θ, CVaR optimization may be formulated as
a stochastic program, and solved using various approaches
(Rockafellar and Uryasev 2000; Hong and Liu 2009; Iyengar and Ma 2013). Such a payoff structure is appropriate for
certain domains, such as portfolio optimization, in which
the investment strategy generally does not affect the asset
prices. However, in many important domains, for example
queueing systems, resource allocation, and reinforcement
learning, the tunable parameters also control the distribution of the random outcomes. Since existing CVaR optimization methods are not suitable for such cases, and due
to increased interest in risk-sensitive optimization recently
in these domains (Tamar, Di Castro, and Mannor 2012;

Related Work Our approach is similar in spirit to the
likelihood-ratio method (LR; Glynn, 1990), that estimates
the gradient of the expected payoff. The LR method has
been successfully applied in diverse domains such as queueing systems, inventory management, and financial engineering (Fu 2006), and also in reinforcement learning (RL;
Sutton and Barto, 1998), where it is commonly known
as the policy gradient method (Baxter and Bartlett 2001;
Peters and Schaal 2008). Our work extends the LR method
to estimating the gradient of the CVaR of the payoff.
Closely related to our work are the studies of Hong and
Liu (2009) and Scaillet (2004), who proposed perturbation

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2993

