Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Eigenvalues Ratio for Kernel Selection of Kernel Methods
Yong Liu and Shizhong Liao
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
{yongliu,szliao}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

leave-one-out cross-validation (LOO) are widely used empirical estimates of generalization error, but they require
training the algorithm many times, which unavoidably incurs high computational burdens. For the sake of efficiency,
some approximate KCV and LOO methods are given: such
as generalized cross-validation (Golub, Heath, and Wahba
1979), span bound (Chapelle et al. 2002), influence function
(Debruyne, Hubert, and Suykens 2008) and Bouligand influence function (Liu, Jiang, and Liao 2014). Kernel target
alignment (KTA) (Cristianini et al. 2001) is another popular used empirical estimate, which is used to quantify the
similarity between the kernel matrix and the label matrix.
Several related criteria were also proposed, such as centered kernel target alignment (CKTA) (Cortes, Mohri, and
Rostamizadeh 2010) and feature space-based kernel matrix
evaluation (FSM) (Nguyen and Ho 2008). Although KTA,
CKTA and FSM are widely used, the connection between
these estimates and the generalization error of some special
algorithms, such as SVM, LSSVM and KRR, has not established, hence the kernels chosen by these estimates may
not guarantee good generalization performance for these algorithms (Liu, Jiang, and Liao 2013). Minimizing theoretical estimate bounds of generalization error is an alternative to kernel selection. The widely used theoretical estimates usually introduce some measures of the complexity of
the hypothesis space, such as VC dimension (Vapnik 2000),
radius-margin bound (Vapnik 2000), maximal discrepancy
(Bartlett, Boucheron, and Lugosi 2002), Rademacher complexity (Bartlett and Mendelson 2002), compression coefficient (Luxburg, Bousquet, and Schölkopf 2004), eigenvalues
perturbation (Liu, Jiang, and Liao 2013), spectral perturbation stability (Liu and Liao 2014a), kernel stability (Liu and
Liao 2014b) and covering number (Ding and Liao 2014).
Unfortunately, for most of these measures, it is difficult to
estimate their specific values (Nguyen and Ho 2007), hence
hard to use them for kernel selection in practice. Moreover,
most of these measures
usually have slow convergence rates
√
of order O (1/ n) at most.

The selection of kernel function which determines the mapping between the input space and the feature space is of crucial importance to kernel methods. Existing kernel selection
approaches commonly use some measures of generalization
error, which are usually difficult to estimate and have slow
convergence rates. In this paper, we propose a novel measure,
called eigenvalues ratio (ER), of the tight bound of generalization error for kernel selection. ER is the ratio between the
sum of the main eigenvalues and that of the tail eigenvalues of
the kernel matrix. Different from most of existing measures,
ER is defined on the kernel matrix, so it can be estimated easily from the available training data, which makes it usable for
kernel selection. We establish
 tight ER-based generalization
error bounds of order O n1 for several kernel-based methods under certain general conditions, while for most
 of existing measures, the convergence rate is at most O √1n . Finally, to guarantee good generalization performance, we propose a novel kernel selection criterion by minimizing the derived tight generalization error bounds. Theoretical analysis
and experimental results demonstrate that our kernel selection criterion is a good choice for kernel selection.

Introduction
Kernel methods, such as SVM (Steinwart and Christmann
2008), least squares support vector machine (LSSVM)
(Suykens and Vandewalle 1999) and kernel ridge regression (KRR) (Saunders, Gammerman, and Vovk 1998), have
demonstrated great success in solving many machine learning and pattern recognition problems. These methods implicitly map data points from the input space to some feature space in which even relatively simple algorithms can
deliver very impressive performance. The feature mapping
is provided intrinsically via the choice of a kernel function.
Therefore, for a kernel method to perform well, the kernel
function plays a very crucial role.
Kernel selection is to select the optimal kernel by minimizing some kernel selection criterion that is usually defined via the estimate of the generalization error (Bartlett,
Boucheron, and Lugosi 2002). The estimate can be empirical or theoretical. The k-fold cross-validation (KCV) and

In this paper, we propose a novel measure, called eigenvalues ratio (ER), for deriving a tight bound of generalization error for kernel selection. ER is the ratio between the
sum of the main eigenvalues and that of the tail eigenvalues
of the kernel matrix. Unlike most of existing measures, our
measure is defined on the kernel matrix that can be estimated

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2814

