Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Initializing Bayesian Hyperparameter Optimization via Meta-Learning
Matthias Feurer and Jost Tobias Springenberg and Frank Hutter
{feurerm,springj,fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Computer Science Department, University of Freiburg
Georges-Köhler-Allee 52
79110 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract

Hyperparameter optimization is a crucial step in the process
of applying machine learning algorithms in practice. Finding good hyperparameter settings manually is often a timeconsuming, tedious process requiring many ad-hoc choices
by the practitioner. As a result, much recent work in machine
learning has focused on the development of better hyperparameter optimization methods (Hutter, Hoos, and LeytonBrown 2011; Bergstra et al. 2011; Snoek, Larochelle, and
Adams 2012; Bergstra and Bengio 2012).
Recently, Sequential Model-based Bayesian Optimization
(SMBO, see, e.g., Brochu, Cora, and de Freitas (2010) for
an overview) has emerged as a successful hyperparameter
optimization method in machine learning. SMBO has been
conclusively shown to yield better performance than both
grid and random search and matched or outperformed the
state-of-the-art performance for several challenging machine
learning problems (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012;
Bergstra et al. 2011; Bergstra, Yamins, and Cox 2013). It
has also enabled AutoWEKA (Thornton et al. 2013), which

performs combined algorithm selection and hyperparameter
optimization in the space of algorithms defined by the WEKA
package (Hall et al. 2009).
However, as a generic function optimization framework,
SMBO requires a substantial number of evaluations to detect high-performance regions when started on a new optimization problem. The resulting overhead is computationally
infeasible for expensive-to-evaluate machine learning algorithms. A promising approach to combat this problem is to
apply meta-learning (Brazdil et al. 2008) to the hyperparameter search problem. The key concept behind meta-learning
for hyperparameter search is to suggest good configurations
for a novel dataset based on configurations that are known
to perform well on similar, previously evaluated, datasets.
We follow this strategy to yield a simple and effective initialization procedure that applies generically to all variants
of SMBO; we refer to the resulting SMBO approach with
meta-learning-based initialization as MI-SMBO. Importantly,
MI-SMBO does not require any adaptation of the underlying
SMBO procedure. It is hence easy to implement and can be
readily applied to off-the-shelf hyperparameter optimizers.
We empirically studied the impact of our meta-learningbased initialization procedure on two SMBO variants, using
a comprehensive suite of 57 classification datasets and 46
metafeatures. First, we applied our method to a combined algorithm selection and hyperparameter (CASH) optimization
problem on this benchmark: choosing between three classifiers from the prominent scikit-learn package (Pedregosa et
al. 2011) and simultaneously optimizing their hyperparameters. Second, to demonstrate the generality of our approach,
we applied MI-SMBO to the lower-dimensional problem
of optimizing the 2 hyperparameters of a support vector
machine (SVM) on the same datasets. We found that for
the lower-dimensional problem our MI-Spearmint variant of
Spearmint (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012) (a stateof-the-art approach for low-dimensional hyperparameter optimization) yielded mild improvements. For the more challenging CASH problem our MI-SMAC variant of the SMBO
method SMAC (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011) (a
state-of-the-art approach for CASH optimization) yielded
substantial improvements, significantly outperforming the
previous state of the art for this problem.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

This paper is an improved and extended version of a previous
workshop submission (Feurer, Springenberg, and Hutter 2014)

Model selection and hyperparameter optimization is crucial in
applying machine learning to a novel dataset. Recently, a subcommunity of machine learning has focused on solving this
problem with Sequential Model-based Bayesian Optimization
(SMBO), demonstrating substantial successes in many applications. However, for computationally expensive algorithms
the overhead of hyperparameter optimization can still be prohibitive. In this paper we mimic a strategy human domain
experts use: speed up optimization by starting from promising
configurations that performed well on similar datasets. The
resulting initialization technique integrates naturally into the
generic SMBO framework and can be trivially applied to any
SMBO method. To validate our approach, we perform extensive experiments with two established SMBO frameworks
(Spearmint and SMAC) with complementary strengths; optimizing two machine learning frameworks on 57 datasets. Our
initialization procedure yields mild improvements for lowdimensional hyperparameter optimization and substantially
improves the state of the art for the more complex combined
algorithm selection and hyperparameter optimization problem.

Introduction

1128

