Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Concurrent PAC RL
Zhaohan Guo and Emma Brunskill
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh PA, 15213
United States

Abstract

environment, whereas we consider the different problem of
one agent / decision maker simultaneously acting in multiple environments. The critical distinction here is that the
actions and rewards taken in one task do not directly impact
the actions and rewards taken in any other task (unlike multiagent settings) but information about the outcomes of these
actions may provide useful information to other tasks, if the
tasks are related.
One important exception is recent work by Silver et al.
(2013) on concurrent reinforcement learning when interacting with a set of customers in parallel. This work nicely
demonstrates the substantial benefit to be had by leveraging
information across related tasks while acting jointly in these
tasks, using a simulator built from hundreds of thousands of
customer records. However, this paper focused on an algorithmic and empirical contribution, and did not provide any
formal analysis of the potential benefits of concurrent RL in
terms of speeding up learning.
Towards a deeper understanding of concurrent RL and the
potential advantages of sharing information when acting in
parallel, we present new algorithms for concurrent reinforcement learning and provide a formal analysis of their properties. More precisely, we draw upon literature on Probably
Approximately Correct (PAC) RL (Kearns and Singh 2002;
Brafman and Tennenholtz 2002; Kakade 2003), and bound
the sample complexity of our approaches, which is the number of steps on which the agent may make a sub-optimal
decision, with high probability. Interestingly, when all tasks
are identical, we prove that simply by applying an existing
state-of-the-art single task PAC RL algorithm, MBIE (Strehl
and Littman 2008), we can obtain, under mild conditions, a
linear improvement in the sample complexity, compared to
learning in each task with no shared information. We next
consider a much more generic situation, in which the presented tasks are sampled from a finite, but unknown number of discrete state–action MDPs, and the identity of each
task is unknown. Such scenarios can arise for many applications in which an agent is interacting with a group of people in parallel: for example, Lewis (Lewis 2005) found that
when constructing customer pricing policies for news delivery, customers were best modeled as being one of two (latent) types, each with distinct MDP parameters. We present
a new algorithm for this setting and prove that under fairly
general conditions, that if any two distinct MDPs differ in

In many real-world situations a decision maker may
make decisions across many separate reinforcement
learning tasks in parallel, yet there has been very little
work on concurrent RL. Building on the efficient exploration RL literature, we introduce two new concurrent
RL algorithms and bound their sample complexity. We
show that under some mild conditions, both when the
agent is known to be acting in many copies of the same
MDP, and when they are not the same but are taken
from a finite set, we can gain linear improvements in the
sample complexity over not sharing information. This is
quite exciting as a linear speedup is the most one might
hope to gain. Our preliminary experiments confirm this
result and show empirical benefits.

The ability to share information across tasks to speed
learning is a critical aspect of intelligence, and an important
goal for autonomous agents. These tasks may themselves involve a sequence of stochastic decisions: consider an online
store interacting with many potential customers, or a doctor
treating many diabetes patients, or tutoring software teaching algebra to a classroom of students. Here each task (customer relationship management, patient treatment, student
tutoring) can be modeled as a reinforcement learning (RL)
problem, with one decision maker performing many tasks in
parallel. In such cases there is an opportunity to improve outcomes for all tasks (customers, patients, students) by leveraging shared information across the tasks.
Interestingly, despite these compelling applications, there
has been almost no work done on concurrent reinforcement
learning. There has been a number of papers (e.g. (Evgeniou
and Pontil 2004; Xue et al. 2007)) on supervised concurrent
learning (referred to as multi-task learning). In this context,
multiple supervised learning tasks, such as classification, are
run in parallel, and information from each is used to speed
learning. When the tasks themselves involve sequential decision making, like reinforcement learning, prior work has
focused on sharing information serially across consecutive
related tasks, such as in transfer learning (e.g. (Taylor and
Stone 2009; Lazaric and Restelli 2011)) or online learning
across a set of tasks (Brunskill and Li 2013). Note that multiagent literature considers multiple agents acting in a single
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2624

