Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Fast Gradient Descent for Drifting Least Squares
Regression, with Application to Bandits
Nathan Korda

Prashanth L.A. and Rémi Munos

MLRG, University of Oxford, UK.

INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, Team SequeL, FRANCE.

Pn
−1
T
That θ̂n =PĀ−1
n b̄n , where Ān = n
i=1 xi xi and
n
−1
b̄n = n
i=1 xi yi , is well-known. Assuming that the
features xi evolve in a compact subset D of Rd , the complexity of solving (1) with the above approach is O(d2 ),
where the inverse of Ān is computed iteratively using the
Sherman-Morrison lemma. Using the Strassen algorithm or
the Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm gives a complexity of
O(d2.807 ) and O(d2.375 ) respectively. In addition, there is
an order O(d2 n) complexity for computing Ān .
Unlike the traditional gradient descent (GD) setting where
the pairs (xn , yn ) are samples drawn from some unknown
joint probability distribution, we assume that the samples,
xn , are chosen by a higher level learning algorithm, and the
problem is to find a good enough approximation to θ∗ for its
purposes, given these non-i.i.d. samples. This poses a new
difficulty in applying GD schemes directly, and we outline
two well-known solutions to this problem in the following.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the classic SGD algorithm operates by maintaining an iterate θn that is updated as follows:
Choose a random sample (xin , yin ), where in is picked uniformly at random in {1, . . . , n} and update
T
θn = θn−1 + γn (yin − θn−1
xin )xin ,
(2)
(The sequence of stepsizes γn is chosen in advance, see assumption (A4) below for details.) The complexity of each
iteration above is O(d), while traditional approaches giving the exact solution, such as using the Sherman-Morrison
lemma, incur a cost of at least O(d2 ) per iteration. We shall
refer to SGD applied to our setting as fOLS-GD (fast Online
Least Squares - Gradient Descent).
Unlike previous works which analyse the above SGD
algorithm in a batch setting, we consider a drifting least
squares setting. In particular, at each instant n, the SGD update is required to track the minimiser θ̂n of the function
Fn (·), as n increases. The practical advantage of such an
approach is to replace the costly inversion of the Ān matrix
with an efficient iterative scheme. However, from a theoretical standpoint, fOLS-GD has to grapple with the drift error,
kθ̂n − θ̂n−1 k2 , that accumulates with time.
Under a minimum eigenvalue assumption on the matrices
Ān , we find that ordinary SGD is sufficient to mitigate the
effects of drift in θ̂n . In this case, we provide bounds both in
expectation and in high probability on the approximation error θn − θ̂n , where θn is the fOLS-GD iterate at instant n (see

Abstract
Online learning algorithms require to often recompute least
squares regression estimates of parameters. We study improving the computational complexity of such algorithms by using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) type schemes in place
of classic regression solvers. We show that SGD schemes efficiently track the true solutions of the regression problems,
even in the presence of a drift. This finding coupled with an
O(d) improvement in complexity, where d is the dimension
of the data, make them attractive for implementation in the
big data settings. In the case when strong convexity in the
regression problem is guaranteed, we provide bounds on the
error both in expectation and high probability (the latter is often needed to provide theoretical guarantees for higher level
algorithms), despite the drifting least squares solution. As an
example of this case we prove that the regret performance
of an SGD version of the PEGE linear bandit algorithm is
worse than that of PEGE itself only by a factor of O(log4 n).
When strong convexity of the regression problem cannot be
guaranteed, we investigate using an adaptive regularisation.
We make an empirical study of an adaptively regularised,
SGD version of LinUCB in a news article recommendation
application, which uses the large scale news recommendation dataset from Yahoo! front page. These experiments show
a large gain in computational complexity and a consistently
low tracking error.

Introduction
Often in learning algorithms an unknown parameter must be
estimated from data arriving sequentially in pairs, (xn , yn ).
We consider settings where the points xn are chosen by a
higher level algorithm and the outputs yn satisfy the dynamics yn = xTn θ∗ + ξn , where ξn is i.i.d., zero-mean noise,
and θ∗ is the unknown parameter (the flow diagram, Fig. 1,
illustrates this setting). Typically, in such cases an ordinary
least squares (OLS) estimate is used for θ∗ , and finding this
estimate is often the most computationally intensive part of
the higher level algorithm. The solution to the least squares
regression problem is defined as
)
(
n
1X
T
2
(yi − θ xi ) .
(1)
θ̂n = arg min Fn (θ) :=
2 i=1
θ
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2708

