Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Semantic Lexicon Induction from Twitter
with Pattern Relatedness and Flexible Term Length
Ashequl Qadir

Pablo N. Mendes, Daniel Gruhl and Neal Lewis

University of Utah
50 S Central Campus Drive
Salt Lake City, Utah 84112
asheq@cs.utah.edu

IBM Research Almaden
650 Harry Road
San Jose, California 95120
pnmendes,dgruhl,nrlewis@us.ibm.com

Abstract

tweets (Gimpel et al. 2011; Foster et al. 2011). Specialpurpose language parsers exist (e.g., (McClosky and Charniak 2008)), but do not often adapt well to other text genres,
domains or natural languages. As a result, lexicon induction approaches that are dependent on lexico-syntactic context patterns (e.g., (Riloff and Jones 1999; Thelen and Riloff
2002)) are less flexible and more susceptible to upstream
errors. Moreover, previous work that limits their learning
scopes to single nouns or head nouns (Thelen and Riloff
2002), inherently limits their effectiveness for multiword
terms. For example, “nugget” is not generally considered a
F OOD item, but “chicken nugget” clearly is. Likewise, while
“game” is considered a S PORT E VENT, other phrases like
“blame game” or “waiting game” are not. Many terms may
also consist of other parts-of-speech (e.g., “falls asleep frequently” is a M EDICAL S YMPTOM). This emphasizes the
need for strategies that are able to discover meaningful multiword terms, and are not confined within the scope of learning terms with specific parts-of-speech only.
Other approaches have used N-gram based context patterns and learned multiword terms. But many limited their
scopes to either title-case N-grams, bigrams that already exist in WordNet (Murphy and Curran 2007) or multiword lexemes from Wikipedia article names (Kolb 2008). As a result, informally written longer phrases like “hide n go seek”,
which refers to a C HILDREN ’ S G AME or “mac and cheese”
referring to a F OOD D ISH are beyond their learning scopes.
We present a novel semantic lexicon induction approach
that is more flexible and accurate than previous work. Our
approach is rooted on the ability to extract and prioritize Ngram context patterns that are semantically related to the
categories. It does not depend on syntactic dependencies in
a sentence, and is able to discover and classify multiword
terms without restrictions on their lexical features. Curran
(2004) also observed that not all patterns are equally reliable. For example “I ate ()”1 in “I ate pizza” is a more reliable pattern for learning F OOD terms, than the pattern“I
want ()” in “I want pizza”. But unlike Curran (2004) who
used only verb contexts (e.g., “wear” for C LOTHES) and
required a target word to be syntactically tied as the subject, direct object or indirect object to a verb, we hypoth-

With the rise of social media, learning from informal text has
become increasingly important. We present a novel semantic lexicon induction approach that is able to learn new vocabulary from social media. Our method is robust to the idiosyncrasies of informal and open-domain text corpora. Unlike previous work, it does not impose restrictions on the lexical features of candidate terms – e.g. by restricting entries to
nouns or noun phrases – while still being able to accurately
learn multiword phrases of variable length. Starting with a
few seed terms for a semantic category, our method first explores the context around seed terms in a corpus, and identifies context patterns that are relevant to the category. These
patterns are used to extract candidate terms – i.e. multiword
segments that are further analyzed to ensure meaningful term
boundary segmentation. We show that our approach is able to
learn high quality semantic lexicons from informally written
social media text of Twitter, and can achieve accuracy as high
as 92% in the top 100 learned category members.

Introduction
For many Natural Language Processing tasks (e.g., Information Extraction, Sentiment Analysis), understanding the
meaning of a phrase is profoundly important. Semantic lexicons allow us to associate an “is-a” relation between a semantic category and its members (e.g., “burger” is a F OOD
and “football” is a S PORT), and sits at the heart of many
business analytic tools. Although there exist knowledge resources like WordNet (Miller 1995), building such resources
require extensive human effort, making it difficult to keep
up with neologism (e.g., “cronut”, a F OOD term, did not exist before 2010). Additionally, increasing popularity of social media over the last decade has given rise to new challenges when knowledge needs to be acquired from informally written text. For example, in Twitter microblogging
platform, it is common to use informal or abbreviated words
like “bball” to mean “basketball” which is a S PORT, or
“cod” to refer to “Call of Duty”, which is a V IDEO G AME.
One of the prominent characteristics of social media text
is informal writing style and often unconventional grammar.
General-purpose language parsers and parts-of-speech taggers have been found to perform poorly when applied on

1
Henceforth, we use this construction to indicate context patterns where “()” indicates an empty slot that can be filled by a term.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2432

