Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An EBMC-Based Approach to Selecting Types for Entity Filtering
Jiwei Ding, Wentao Ding, Wei Hu and Yuzhong Qu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{jiweiding,wentaoding}@outlook.com, {whu,yzqu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Let us take an answer set to the question “chess players
who died in the same place they were born in” as an example. The resulted entity collection consists of 45 chess
players, each of which has at least 13 Yago types.
To the best of our knowledge, the most commonly used
approach in faceted search is to count values in terms of
their occurrence frequency, which means to rank types by
their coverage rate in our problem. The following list shows
a group of filters generated by this approach.
ChessPlayer (44)
Contestant (44)
Player (44)
Rival (19)
Intellectual (18)
However, we argue that this group of filters are not good
enough. Although it covers most of entities in the collection,
some types like “Player” is not suitable for filtering, since it
covers too many entities. Furthermore, the overlap between
types is not considered in this approach, e.g., “Contestant”
and “Player”, which is another main cause to this drawback.
Some approaches are proposed to reduce the overlap between selected types, such as Maximum Marginal Relevance
(MMR) (Carbonell and Goldstein 1998), but they still cannot avoid selecting types like “ChessPlayer”, which covers almost all of the entities. Some other approaches (Hearst
2006; Cheng and Qu 2009) also provide their solutions, but
all of them suffer from a serious drawback, that is, they cannot provide sensible types, in other words, users cannot decide how close in perception the entity they want is relevant
to a type. For example, the filter “ChessOlympiadCompetitors (16)” is more sensible than “Intellectual (18)”.
In this paper, we use the Budgeted Maximum Coverage
(BMC) model (Khuller, Moss, and Naor 1999) to achieve
an integral optimization for the coverage quality of selected
types, which increases the coverage rate and reduces the
overlap at the same time. To decrease the influence of the
selected types covering too many or too few entities, we design a cost function on candidate types based on the coverage rates of types. Furthermore, we define the Extended
Budgeted Maximum Coverage (EBMC) optimization problem and propose an EBMC-based approach, which enhances
the BMC-based approach by incorporating the relevance between entities and types. In our implemented method, we
leverage the type hierarchy to measure the relevance of an

The quantity of entities in the Linked Data is increasing
rapidly. For entity search and browsing systems, filtering is very useful for users to find entities that they are
interested in. Type is a kind of widely-used facet and
can be easily obtained from knowledge bases, which
enables to create filters by selecting at most K types of
an entity collection. However, existing approaches often fail to select high-quality type filters due to complex overlap between types. In this paper, we propose
a novel type selection approach based upon Budgeted
Maximum Coverage (BMC), which can achieve integral
optimization for the coverage quality of type filters. Furthermore, we define a new optimization problem called
Extended Budgeted Maximum Coverage (EBMC) and
propose an EBMC-based approach, which enhances the
BMC-based approach by incorporating the relevance
between entities and types, so as to create sensible type
filters. Our experimental results show that the EBMCbased approach performs best comparing with several
representative approaches.

Introduction
Along with the rapid growth of the Linked Data, many Web
search and browsing activities are centered on entities. General users often use entity search or browsing systems, such
as Libra Academic Search (Nie et al. 2007) and Falcons
(Cheng and Qu 2009), to look for entities that they are interested in. However, it might be difficult for users to find the
entities they want when search results contain large amount
of entities. Therefore, entity filtering is demanded by users
to ease their tasks.
Faceted search systems provide filters in different facets
for interactive search and browsing (Sah and Wade 2013).
Since type can be seen as an important facet (Tonon et al.
2013), a group of filters can be created by selecting values
in this facet. In many publicly-accessible knowledge bases
such as DBpedia and Yago, entities are associated with multiple types. The number of types related to the whole entity
collection can be very large, while the number of filters in
a group is limited to a positive integer K. How to select at
most K types to make up a group of filters in entity search
or browsing systems is worth studying.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

88

