Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Parallelized Hitting Set Computation for Model-Based Diagnosis
Dietmar Jannacha , Thomas Schmitza , Kostyantyn Shchekotykhinb
a

TU Dortmund, Germany
Alpen-Adria Universität Klagenfurt, Austria
{firstname.lastname}@tu-dortmund.de, kostya@ifit.uni-klu.ac.at
b

Abstract

To focus the search, (Reiter 1987) relied on conflicts,
which are subsets of the system’s components that expose
an unexpected behavior given the inputs and the observations. The set of diagnoses for a system corresponds to the
minimal hitting set of the conflicts. To determine the hitting sets, a breadth-first procedure was proposed leading to
the construction of a hitting set tree (HS-tree), where the
nodes are labeled with conflicts and the edges are labeled
with elements of the conflicts. The breadth-first principle ensures that the generated diagnoses contain no superfluous elements. Techniques like conflict re-use and tree pruning help
to further reduce the search effort.
The most costly operation during tree construction in
many application settings is to check if a new node is a
diagnosis for the problem and, if not, to calculate a new
conflict for the node using a “theorem prover” call (Reiter
1987). When applying MBD, e.g., to diagnose a specification of a Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP), we would
need to determine at each node if a relaxed version of the
CSP – we assume some constraint definitions to be faulty –
has a solution. If not, a method like Q UICK X PLAIN (Junker
2004) could be used to find a minimal conflict, which, in
turn, requires a number of relaxations of the original CSP
to be solved. In practice, the overall diagnosis running time
mainly depends on how fast a consistency check can be
done, since during this time, the HS algorithm has to wait
and cannot expand further nodes. However, today’s desktop
computers and even mobile phones and tablets have multiple
cores. Therefore, if the calculations are done sequentially,
most of the processing power remains unused.
In this work, we address application scenarios like the
ones mentioned above in which (a) the conflicts are generated “on-demand” and are not available before the diagnosis
step and (b) where we are interested in finding all minimal
diagnoses, which corresponds to a (worst case) scenario that
is common in many of the applications mentioned above. In
particular, we propose to parallelize the HS-tree construction
process to better utilize the potential of modern computer architectures.

Model-Based Diagnosis techniques have been successfully
applied to support a variety of fault-localization tasks both
for hardware and software artifacts. In many applications, Reiter’s hitting set algorithm has been used to determine the
set of all diagnoses for a given problem. In order to construct the diagnoses with increasing cardinality, Reiter proposed a breadth-first search scheme in combination with different tree-pruning rules. Since many of today’s computing
devices have multi-core CPU architectures, we propose techniques to parallelize the construction of the tree to better utilize the computing resources without losing any diagnoses.
Experimental evaluations using different benchmark problems show that parallelization can help to significantly reduce the required running times. Additional simulation experiments were performed to understand how the characteristics of the underlying problem structure impact the achieved
performance gains.

Introduction
Model-Based Diagnosis (MBD) is a principled and domainindependent way of determining the possible reasons why a
system does not behave as expected (de Kleer and Williams
1987; Reiter 1987). MBD was initially applied to find
faults in hardware artifacts like electronic circuits. Later
on, due to its generality, the principle was applied to a
number of different problems including the diagnosis of
VHDL and Prolog programs, knowledge bases, ontologies, process descriptions and Java programs or spreadsheet programs (Friedrich, Stumptner, and Wotawa 1999;
Console, Friedrich, and Dupré 1993; Felfernig et al. 2004;
Friedrich and Shchekotykhin 2005; Mateis et al. 2000;
Jannach and Schmitz 2014; Felfernig et al. 2009).
MBD approaches rely on an explicit description of the analyzed system. This includes the system’s components, their
interconnections, and their normal “behavior”. Given some
inputs and expected outputs for the system, a diagnosis task
is initiated when there is a discrepancy between what is expected and observed. The task then consists in finding minimal subsets of the components, i.e., diagnoses, which, if assumed to be faulty, explain the observed outputs.

Reiter’s Theory of Diagnosis
A formal characterization of model-based diagnosis based
on first-order logic is given in (Reiter 1987) and can be summarized as follows.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1503

