Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Stable Model Counting and Its Application
in Probabilistic Logic Programming
Rehan Abdul Aziz, Geoffrey Chu, Christian Muise and Peter Stuckey
National ICT Australia, Victoria Laboratory ∗
Department of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne

in(Y ), reach(X), edge(X, Y ). The first rule says that s itself is reachable if it is in the subgraph. The second rule is
the inductive case, specifying that a node Y is reachable if
it is in the subgraph and there is a reachable node X that
has an edge to it. Additionally, say there are arbitrary constraints in our problem, e.g., only consider subgraphs where
a certain y is also reachable from s etc. This can be done
using the integrity constraint: ← ¬reach(y). The number
of stable models of this program is equal to the number of
solutions of the problem.
There are at least two approaches to counting the stable models of a logic program. The first is to translate a
given logic program to a propositional theory such that there
is a one-to-one correspondence between the propositional
models of the translated program and the stable models of
the original program, and use SAT model counting (Gomes,
Sabharwal, and Selman 2008). We show that this approach
does not scale well in practice since such translations, if
done a priori, can grow exponentially with the input size.
The second approach is to use an answer set programming
(ASP) solver like CLASP (Gebser et al. 2007) or DLV (Leone
et al. 2006) and enumerate all models. This approach is extremely inefficient since model counting algorithms have
several optimizations like caching and dynamic decomposition that are not present in ASP solvers. This motivates
us to build a stable model counter that can take advantage
of state-of-the-art ASP technology which combines partial
translation and lazy unfounded set (Van Gelder, Ross, and
Schlipf 1988) detection. However, we first show that it is
not correct to naively combine partial translation and lazy
unfounded set detection with SAT model counters due to the
aforementioned optimizations in model counters. We then
suggest two approaches to properly integrate unfounded set
propagation in a model counter.
We show that we can apply our algorithms to solve probabilistic logic programs (Raedt and Kimmig 2013). Consider
the probabilistic version of the above problem, also called
the graph reliability problem (Arora and Barak 2009). In
this version, each node can be in the subgraph with a certain probability 1 − p, or equivalently, fail with the probability p. We can model this by simply attaching probabilities to the in variables. We can model observed evidence
as constraints. E.g., if we have evidence that a certain node
y is reachable from s, then we can model this as the unary

Abstract
Model counting is the problem of computing the number of models that satisfy a given propositional theory.
It has recently been applied to solving inference tasks
in probabilistic logic programming, where the goal is to
compute the probability of given queries being true provided a set of mutually independent random variables, a
model (a logic program) and some evidence. The core of
solving this inference task involves translating the logic
program to a propositional theory and using a model
counter. In this paper, we show that for some problems
that involve inductive definitions like reachability in a
graph, the translation of logic programs to SAT can be
expensive for the purpose of solving inference tasks. For
such problems, direct implementation of stable model
semantics allows for more efficient solving. We present
two implementation techniques, based on unfounded
set detection, that extend a propositional model counter
to a stable model counter. Our experiments show that
for particular problems, our approach can outperform a
state-of-the-art probabilistic logic programming solver
by several orders of magnitude in terms of running time
and space requirements, and can solve instances of significantly larger sizes on which the current solver runs
out of time or memory.

1

Introduction

Consider the counting version of graph reachability problem: given a directed graph, count the number of subgraphs
in which node t is reachable from node s (Valiant 1979).
This problem can be naturally modeled as a logic program under stable model semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz
1988). Let us say that the input is given by two predicates:
node(X) and edge(X, Y ). For each node, we can introduce a decision variable in that models whether the node
is in the subgraph. Furthermore, we can model reachability (reach) from s as an inductive definition using the following two rules: reach(s) ← in(s) and reach(Y ) ←
∗
NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented
by the Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital
Economy and the Australian Research Council through the ICT
Centre of Excellence program.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3468

