Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Using Social Relationships to Control Narrative Generation
Julie Porteous and Fred Charles and Marc Cavazza
School of Computing, Teesside University
Middlesbrough, United Kingdom
{j.porteous,f.charles,m.o.cavazza}@tees.ac.uk

Abstract

Technical Overview

Narrative generation represents an application domain
for AI planning where plan quality is related to properties such as shape of plan trajectory. In our work we
have developed a plan-based approach to narrative generation that uses character relationships as a key determinant in controlling plan shape (relationships are
key in genres such as serial dramas and soaps). Our
approach is implemented in a demonstration Interactive Narrative, called N ETWORK ING, set in the medical drama genre. The system features a user-friendly
mechanism for specifying relationships between virtual
characters, via a social network and real-time visualisation of generated narratives on a 3D stage.

Our approach uses social relationships for declarative control during generation as detailed below and shown in Fig 1:

Introduction

Narrative generation uses a plan-based decomposition approach where narrative situations are used as pseudolandmarks to control generation (Porteous, Charles, and
Cavazza 2013). The key function of social relationships
between virtual characters specified in the social network
is to determine action relevance during narrative generation. For example, if characters have positive relationships, such as friend then they are more likely to support, discuss and arbitrate, whereas characters with negative relationships are more likely to confront and argue
(as illustrated in Fig. 1 which contrasts the action spreadmalicious-gossip, selected when the characters’ relationship
is extreme-antagonist, with show-appreciation-treatmentadvice, selected when they are friend). An additional function of social relationships is to change the possibility of different situations occurring in the narrative due to the propagation of the effects of selected actions.
The domain model is composed of narrative actions that
characterize the genre (e.g. conflicts over diagnosis, treatment, professional rivalries, romance). Similarly, narrative
goals are characteristic of the genre, relating to resolution of
situations arising out of themes such as pressures of work
and medical conflicts. In total, the N ETWORK ING domain
model has a cast of 10 doctors, 5 nurses, 3 patients and close
to 100 narrative actions (approx. 25,000 ground instances).

Specification of Social Network
To facilitate the use of social networks for declarative specification in narrative generation a classification of relationships was developed that balanced usability (usable number
of relationship types) with an acceptable degree of narrative
change (in terms of inter-narrative distance resulting from
relationship change). The resulting classification had 12 categories, including professional-rival and secretly-dating.

Narrative Generation

Narrative generation for Interactive Storytelling (IS) is an
emerging application area for AI planning, with most approaches being plan-based since initially proposed by Young
(2000). However, narrative domains differ from other benchmarks since the criteria used to assess plan quality tends to
relate to aspects such as plan trajectory shape and the ability
to generate diverse sets of narratives, rather than optimality.
We observed that in some narrative genres, e.g. serial dramas and soap operas, social relationships and conflict play
an important role, as does repetition of elementary narrative
elements, yet diversity is achieved via constantly changing
relationships between characters and the situations that naturally arise out of this. We explored a similar mechanism in
narrative generation and have developed an approach which
enables social relationships to be used as the key determinants of narrative shape and diversity.
Our approach is implemented in the N ETWORK ING system (Network for Interactive Narrative Generation), an Interactive Narrative set in the medical drama domain. The
system features a visual interface–a social network–which
enables the setting of relationships between virtual characters, generation of narratives based on the specification and
narrative visualisation in real-time on a 3D stage. Our social
network interface represents a novel mechanism for interaction in narrative but one that, given the ubiquity of social
networks, we anticipate users will find engaging.

Narrative Diversity
Results of experiments reported in (Porteous, Charles, and
Cavazza 2013), obtained across hundreds of runs of the system measured in terms of real-time performance and story

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4311

