Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Vectorization of Deep Convolutional
Neural Networks for Vision Tasks
Jimmy SJ. Ren

Li Xu

Lenovo Research & Technology
http://vcnn.deeplearning.cc
jimmy.sj.ren@gmail.com xulihk@lenovo.com

Abstract

Various infrastructures were used in scaling up deep
CNNs, including GPU (Coates et al. 2013), distributed CPU
based framework (Dean et al. 2012), FPGA (Farabet et al.
2009), etc. Though the implementation details among those
approaches differ, the core insight underlying the idea of
scaling up deep CNN is parallelization (Bengio and LeCun 2007) in which vectorization technique is the fundamental element. While the consecutive distinguished performance of GPU trained CNNs in the ImageNet visual recognition challenge (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Russakovsky et al. 2013) as well as the reported results in
many studies in the literature justify its effectiveness (Jia
et al. 2014; Sermanet et al. 2013), the published literature
did not provide sufficient insights on how the vectorization
was carried out in detail. We also found there is no previous study to answer how different degrees of vectorization
influence the performance of deep CNN, which is, however,
crucial in finding the bottlenecks and helps to scale up the
network architecture. We believe these questions form a significant research gap and the answer to these questions shall
shed some light on the design, tuning and implementation of
vectorized CNNs.
In this paper, we reinterpret the key operators in deep
CNNs in vectorized forms with which high parallelism can
be easily achieved given basic parallelized matrix-vector operators. To show the impact of the vectorization on the speed
of both model training and testing, we developed and compared six implementations of CNNs with various degrees
of vectorization. We also provide a unified framework for
both high-level and low-level vision applications including
recognition, detection, denoise and image deconvolution.
Our Matlab Vectorized CNN implementation (VCNN) will
be made publicly available on the project webpage.

We recently have witnessed many ground-breaking results in machine learning and computer vision, generated by using deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN). While the success mainly stems from the large
volume of training data and the deep network architectures, the vector processing hardware (e.g. GPU) undisputedly plays a vital role in modern CNN implementations to support massive computation. Though much
attention was paid in the extent literature to understand
the algorithmic side of deep CNN, little research was
dedicated to the vectorization for scaling up CNNs. In
this paper, we studied the vectorization process of key
building blocks in deep CNNs, in order to better understand and facilitate parallel implementation. Key steps
in training and testing deep CNNs are abstracted as matrix and vector operators, upon which parallelism can be
easily achieved. We developed and compared six implementations with various degrees of vectorization with
which we illustrated the impact of vectorization on the
speed of model training and testing. Besides, a unified
CNN framework for both high-level and low-level vision tasks is provided, along with a vectorized Matlab implementation with state-of-the-art speed performance.

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural network (CNN) has become a
keen tool in addressing large scale artificial intelligence
tasks. Though the study of CNN can be traced back to late
1980s (LeCun et al. 1989; 1990), the recent success of deep
CNN is largely attributed to the concurrent progresses of the
two technical streams. On the one hand, the new deep CNN
architecture with elements such as Dropout (Hinton et al.
2012; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), DropConnect (Wan et al. 2013), Rectified Linear Units-ReLU (Nair
and Hinton 2010) as well as new optimization strategies
(Dean et al. 2012) have empowered deep CNN with greater
learning capacity. On the other hand, the rapid advances and
democratization of high performance general purpose vector
processing hardware, typified by graphics processing unit
(GPU), unleashes the potential power of deep CNN by scaling up the network significantly.

Related Work
Efforts on speeding up CNN by vectorization starts with its
inception. Specialized CNN chip (Jackel et al. 1990) was
built and successfully applied to handwriting recognition in
the early 90s. Simard et al. (2003) simplified CNN by fusing
convolution and pooling operations. This speeded up the network and performed well in document analysis. Chellapilla
et al. (2006) adopted the same architecture but unrolled the
convolution operation into a matrix-matrix product. It has
now been proven that this vectorization approach works par-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1840

