Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

The Relative Expressiveness of Abstract
Argumentation and Logic Programming
Hannes Strass
Computer Science Institute
Leipzig University, Germany
strass@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

• for LPs, deciding the existence of supported/stable models is NP-complete (Bidoit and Froidevaux 1991; Marek
and Truszczyński 1991);

Abstract
We analyze the relative expressiveness of the two-valued semantics of abstract argumentation frameworks, normal logic
programs and abstract dialectical frameworks. By expressiveness we mean the ability to encode a desired set of two-valued
interpretations over a given propositional vocabulary A using only atoms from A. While the computational complexity
of the two-valued model existence problem for all these languages is (almost) the same, we show that the languages form
a neat hierarchy with respect to their expressiveness. We then
demonstrate that this hierarchy collapses once we allow to
introduce a linear number of new vocabulary elements.

• for ADFs, deciding the existence of models is NPcomplete (Brewka et al. 2013), deciding the existence of
stable models is ΣP
2 -complete for general ADFs (Brewka
et al. 2013) and NP-complete for the subclass of bipolar
ADFs (Strass and Wallner 2014);
• the propositional satisfiability problem is NP-complete.
In view of these almost identical complexities, we use an
alternative measure of the expressiveness of a knowledge
representation language L: “Given a set of two-valued interpretations, is there a knowledge base in L that has this
exact model set?” This notion lends itself straightforwardly
to compare different formalisms (Gogic et al. 1995):

Introduction
More often than not, different knowledge representation languages have conceptually similar and partially overlapping
intended application areas. What are we to do if faced with
an application and a choice of several possible knowledge
representation languages which could be used for the application? One of the first axes along which to compare different
formalisms that comes to mind is computational complexity:
if a language is computationally too expensive when considering the problem sizes typically encountered in practice,
then this is a clear criterion for exclusion. But what if the
available language candidates have the same computational
complexity? If their expressiveness in the computationalcomplexity sense of “What kinds of problems can the formalism solve?” is the same, we need a more fine-grained
notion of expressiveness. In this paper, we use such a
notion and study the relative expressiveness of argumentation frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995), normal logic programs
(LPs), abstract dialectical frameworks (ADFs) (Brewka and
Woltran 2010), and propositional logic (PL).
This choice of languages is largely motivated by the similar intended application domains of argumentation frameworks and abstract dialectical frameworks and the close relation of the latter to normal logic programs. We add propositional logic to have a well-known reference point. Furthermore, the computational complexity of their respective
model existence problems is the same (with one exception):
• for AFs, deciding stable extension existence is NPcomplete (Dimopoulos, Nebel, and Toni 2002);

Formalism L2 is at least as expressive as formalism L1
if and only if every knowledge base in L1 has an equivalent knowledge base in L2 .
So here expressiveness is understood in terms of realizability, “What kinds of model sets can the formalism express?”1
It is easy to see that propositional logic can express any
set of two-valued interpretations, it is universally expressive.
The same is easy (but less easy) to see for normal logic programs under supported model semantics. For normal logic
programs under stable model semantics, it is clear that not
all model sets can be expressed, since two different stable
models are always incomparable with respect to the subset relation. (However, the stable model semantics becomes
universally expressive once we allow nested expressions of
the form “not not p” in rule bodies (Lifschitz, Tang, and
Turner 1999; Lifschitz and Razborov 2006).)
To show that a language L2 is at least as expressive as a
language L1 we will mainly use two different techniques.
In the best case, we can use a syntactic compact and faithful translation from knowledge bases of L1 to those of L2 .
Compact means that the translation does not change the
vocabulary, that is, does not introduce new atoms. Faithful
means that the translation exactly preserves the models of
the knowledge base for respective semantics of the two languages. In the second best case, we assume the knowledge

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1625

In model theory, this is known as definability.

