Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Plausible Inferences from Semantic Web Knowledge by
Combining Analogical Generalization with Structured Logistic
Regression
Chen Liang & Kenneth D. Forbus
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
2133 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, 60208 USA
contact: chenliang2013@u.northwestern.edu

and learn plausible inferences. Semantic web KBs like
Freebase, WordNet, and YAGO have accumulated
considerable structured data, which is already used to
support AI tasks like question answering and information
retrieval. These KBs continue to grow rapidly.
Using semantic web KBs brings up two concerns. First,
because they can be extracted from text or collected by
crowd-sourcing, they are often incomplete and noisy.
Traditional logical inference may not be sufficiently robust
to reason over them. Second, unlike images, auditory data
or raw text, semantic web data is inherently structured.
Although statistical methods can handle uncertainty well,
most such methods are designed to work over feature
vectors, and are not able to operate over structures.
Statistical relational learning focuses on extending
statistical machine learning methods from feature vectors to
relational data. For example, Markov logic networks
(Richardson & Domingos, 2006) combine first-order logic
with Markov networks, providing the representation power
of the former and the statistical power of the latter. But it
suffers from scalability problems. Other models, like
neural networks or bilinear models, work on vector
embedding of entities (Socher et al. 2013, Wang et al. 2014).
They can achieve high prediction accuracy efficiently, but
the opacity of the models makes it hard for users to interpret
and understand their answers.
This paper describes how structured logistic regression
with analogical generalization (SLogAn) can be used to
learn plausible inferences from semantic web knowledge.
We start by summarizing the models we build upon, and
then describe our new method, covering case construction,
learning, prediction, and explanation generation. We
compare it to state-of-the-art methods on a standard triplet
classification task with two datasets, showing that it has

Abstract
Fast and efficient learning over large bodies of commonsense
knowledge is a key requirement for cognitive systems.
Semantic web knowledge bases provide an important new
resource of ground facts from which plausible inferences can
be learned. This paper applies structured logistic regression
with analogical generalization (SLogAn) to make use of
structural as well as statistical information to achieve rapid
and robust learning. SLogAn achieves state-of-the-art
performance in a standard triplet classification task on two
data sets and, in addition, can provide understandable
explanations for its answers.

Introduction
Learning is a key part of cognitive systems. Humans are fast,
efficient learners: with a few observations, we can acquire
new knowledge to reason and make predictions. Moreover,
we can also explain our reasoning to others to convince or
persuade them. These two abilities are the focus of this
work. Analogical learning has proven to be a promising
model for human learning. It has been used to learn spatial
prepositions (Lockwood et al. 2008), learn sketched
concepts (McLure et al 2015), and construct hierarchical
concepts (Liang & Forbus, 2014). Computational models of
structural alignment and structure mapping have
demonstrated the ability to learn linguistic patterns at a
similar pace to human infants. (Kuehne et al. 2000). SAGE,
which implements analogical generalization, is used as a
learning module for the Companion cognitive architecture
(Forbus et al. 2009).
Like humans, cognitive systems need knowledge and the
ability to reason with it. Hand-coding knowledge and
inference rules is not a scalable solution. Semantic web
knowledge bases are a potential resource for cognitive
systems to automatically acquire common sense knowledge
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

551

