Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

BDDs Strike Back (in AI Planning)
Stefan Edelkamp

Peter Kissmann and Álvaro Torralba

Institute of Artificial Intelligence
University of Bremen
edelkamp@tzi.de

Foundations of Artificial Intelligence
Saarland University, Saarbrücken
{kissmann,torralba}@cs.uni-saarland.de

BDD Basics

Abstract

What is a BDD? A BDD is a directed acyclic graph data
structure for a Boolean function (Wegener 2000). Nodes
are labeled with variables, edges and sinks are labeled
with 1 and 0. Redundant nodes are eliminated and the
variable ordering is the same on every path.

The cost-optimal track of the international planning
competition in 2014 has seen an unexpected outcome.
Different to the precursing competition in 2011, where
explicit-state heuristic search planning scored best, advances in the state-set exploration with BDDs showed a
significant lead. In this paper we review the outcome of
the competition, briefly looking into the internals of the
competing systems.

What do BDDs represent? BDDs are characteristic functions of planning state sets (Edelkamp 2014). Each path
from root to the 1-sink acts as the binary representation of
one state in the set. Initial and goal conditions can also be
represented as such state sets.

Introduction

How does planning with BDDs work? Planning actions
are cast as a set representation of their pre- and postconditions (transition relation). In the image symbolic
exploration checks the pre- and applies the postcondition (Edelkamp, Kissmann, and Torralba 2012a).

The deterministic part of the International Planning Competition (IPC) runs every 2-3 years. In 20141 , it included a temporal, a sequential, and an agile track, optimizing different
criteria for plans (action cost, CPU time and total-time). The
PDDL input specification language has not been changed,
but more emphasis was given to conditional effects.
Probably most exiting was the cost-optimal sequential
planning track, enforcing plans of minimal sum of action costs (see Fig. 1). The top five performing planners
were S YM BA*-2 (151 of 280 problems solved), S YM BA*1 (143), C G AMER (120), SPM&S (114), RIDA* (113),
DYNAMIC -G AMER (99). All but one of these systems exploit (reduced ordered) binary decision diagrams (BDDs) for
state-space traversal and heuristic guidance (Edelkamp and
Kissmann 2009).
While in 20082 the BDD-based planner G AMER won
the sequential optimal track, in 2011 explicit-state heuristic
search planners, especially portfolio planners took the lead3 .
Among the leading heuristics in the portfolios were LM-cut
and Merge&Shrink. Many competitors in 2014, thus, were
focused on the combination of multiple planners or heuristics. There were also new methods like flow heuristics, automated pruning via symmetries and partial-order reduction
or incremental computation of LM-cut (Chrpa, Vallati, and
McCluskey 2014). But this time, BDDs stroke back.

What is the advantage of BDDs? Firstly, BDDs can have
an advantage in space. Some polynomial-sized BDDs represent exponentially many states (Edelkamp and Kissmann 2008). Secondly, forward and backward exploration
are the same, except that the initial and goal condition as
well as the pre- and postcondition are exchanged. Thirdly,
the compact representation of many states in a smaller
structure, often results in faster runtimes.
Can BDDs execute heuristic search? Algorithms
like
BDDA* (Edelkamp and Reffel 1999) use BDDs for
the search space and for the heuristic. Symbolic PDB
heuristics (Edelkamp 2002) refer to backward unguided
exploration in abstract state spaces. Other heuristics
like Merge&Shrink also enjoy a BDD representation (Edelkamp, Kissmann, and Torralba 2012b).

Essentials of the Top IPC Performers
In the BDD-based planners of the 2014 competition, problems in (pre-) processing apparent in some of the 2011 domains have been resolved and the support of conditional
effects has been added. New partitioned ways of computing the successor set were applied (Torralba, Edelkamp, and
Kissmann 2013). Mutex (h2 ) constraints were used to simplify the problem and rule out illegal states (Torralba and
Alcázar 2013). On top of these advances, the best performers have the following ingredients.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://helios.hud.ac.uk/scommv/IPC-14
2
http://ipc.informatik.uni-freiburg.de
3
http://www.plg.inf.uc3m.es/ipc2011-deterministic

4320

