Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Modeling Eye Movements when Reading Microblogs
Maria Barrett and Anders Søgaard
Centre for Language Technology
University of Copenhagen
Njalsgade 140
DK-2300 Copenhagen S
Denmark

Abstract

3. Are my findings valid in other domanins or how can they
be adapted to become so? I will both explore other types
of text and eye tracking data from a cheap consumer eye
tracker.

This PhD project aims at a quantitative description of
reading patterns from eye movements when reading
tweets and the development of an eye movement relevance model.

The scientific contribution of the project is a deeper
understanding of cognitive processes related to microblog
reading, implementation of a subjective relevance classifier
and an an exploration of cross-domain reading differences.

Introduction
The aim of this PhD project is to study eye movements during tweet reading to gain insight into the cognitive processing of relevant and irrelevant microblogs. I will explore a
data driven method based on experimental eye tracking data
with the prospect to train a machine learning classifier to
distinguish between the eye movements of an interested and
an uninterested reader. The findings may - with some modifications - be valid in other domains and, contrary to other
measures of subjective relevance, they are scalable and accessible with little cost, once eye trackers are built into mainstream consumer products (San Agustin et al. 2009).

Eye movements in reading
Despite the subjective experience of a stable gaze, the eye
moves in rapid, ballistic movements (saccades) with as high
a velocity as 500 ◦ /s. Between the saccades the eye movements are relatively stable for 60 - 500 ms (average for reading 225 ms), which are fixations (Rayner 1998). The strong
eye-mind hypothesis proposed by Just and Carpenter (1980)
says that information processing occurs during fixation and
that fixation continues until processing is completed. Hence
features of eye movements during reading (fixation duration,
saccade length, occurrence of regressions and a number of
variations of these measures) can be used to infer momentby-moment cognitive processing of a text by a reader (Liversedge and Findlay 2000).
It is well established in psycholinguistic research that the
eyes move differently as a response to different linguistic
features. In normal reading, 85% of content words are fixated and 35% of function words are fixated (Rayner 1998),
but in tweets, many function words are omitted to fit the
message into the allowed 140 characters. Another specific
feature of tweets is the use of # as a way of tagging keywords
in the tweet and the use of @ to address or mention another
user. Tweets also contain many non-canonical abbreviations
and typos. I expect this to call for another reading pattern
than for instance the well-studied canonical text.

Research question
How do eyes move when reading tweets, and how can we
based on eye tracking data determine whether or not tweet
is relevant to the reader?
The goal of this project is threefold and best described
by the following three research questions. Each question is
approached by means of a substudy which draws on established research from its own field.
1. How do eyes move during tweet reading? An experimental study of eye movements during tweet reading will provide eye tracking data which will be analyzed to identify
special characteristics of tweet reading. I expect to use a
frame like Part-of-speech (POS) tags from the Universal
POS tagset (Petrov, Das, and McDonald 2012) or dependency trees for a quantitative comparison of tweet reading
patterns and newswire reading patterns.

Relevance and eye movements
User-generated content - like tweets - contains irrelevant
and low quality content between the interesting tweets, and
users tolerate a lot of irrelevant tweets in their personal
feeds (André, Bernstein, and Luther 2012). Relevance in relation to tweet reading is linked to the goal of entertaining or
enlightening (Kwak et al. 2010; ?). Thus it is reasonable to
say that relevance in relation to tweets equals interest. Some

2. Can relevance be inferred? I will develop a machine learning model for relevance from eye tracking data which distinguishes between eye movements of an interested and
an uninterested reader.
Copyright c 2014, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4231

