Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Nonparametric Scoring Rules
Erik Zawadzki

Sébastien Lahaie

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
epz@cs.cmu.edu

Microsoft Research
New York, NY 10011
slahaie@microsoft.com

Abstract

and Wallis 2011; Tay and Wallis 2002). In practice, the main
difficulty stems from the simple fact that, generically, the
agent cannot specify a density function in full precision with
a finite-length report. Much of the literature therefore focuses on eliciting summaries such as mean and variance, median, or quantiles, and the challenging case of correlations
in the case of multivariate data (Clemen, Fischer, and Winkler 2000; Garthwaite, Kadane, and O’Hagan 2005). Another common approach is to bin the domain and effectively
elicit a histogram (Goldstein, Johnson, and Sharpe 2008).
These interfaces can all be construed as ‘parametric’ in
the choice of summaries they choose to elicit. We propose
instead a ‘nonparametric’ approach. Our central contribution is the design and analysis of a proper scoring rule that
scores an agent’s forecast communicated in terms of a representative sample from its private density estimate. We argue
that this kind of scoring rule provides a versatile, modular
method for assessing forecasts that can complement the variety of interfaces used for eliciting summaries of densities,
and that can also serve as an interface in its own right.
Sample-based reports are extremely flexible, and this allows the forecast elicitor to offer the agent a large menu of
different interfaces that all hook into the same underlying
score. Our only requirement is that each of these interfaces
be associated with a sampling mechanism. For instance, histograms have a straightforward sampling mechanism associated with them. In a typical elicitation experiment, once
summaries are obtained, a common strategy is to then fit
a parametric density function to the summaries, which immediately lends itself to sampling (Kadane et al. 1980;
O’Hagan 1998). Another important use case is if the agent’s
belief is a posterior predictive distribution approximated via
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). In this case the agent
can directly submit its MCMC samples to our scoring mechanism.
Our sample-based scoring rule is derived as an empirical estimate of the kernel score (Eaton 1982), which in fact
defines a family of scoring rules that depend on the choice
of a kernel function. A kernel function can have several interpretations but we view it mainly as a density centered at
a point in outcome space (e.g., a Gaussian). We give conditions on the kernel that make the score strictly proper, and
relate it to a measure of divergence between probability measures known as maximum mean discrepancy (Gretton et al.

A scoring rule is a device for eliciting and assessing
probabilistic forecasts from an agent. When dealing
with continuous outcome spaces, and absent any prior
insights into the structure of the agent’s beliefs, the rule
should allow for a flexible reporting interface that can
accurately represent complicated, multi-modal distributions. In this paper, we provide such a scoring rule based
on a nonparametric approach of eliciting a set of samples from the agent and efficiently evaluating the score
using kernel methods. We prove that sampled reports
of increasing size converge rapidly to the true score,
and that sampled reports are approximately optimal. We
also demonstrate a connection between the scoring rule
and the maximum mean discrepancy divergence. Experimental results are provided that confirm rapid convergence and that the expected score correlates well with
standard notions of divergence, both important considerations for ensuring that agents are incentivized to report accurate information.

Introduction
A scoring rule is a device for eliciting and assessing probabilistic forecasts from an agent. The earliest scoring rules
were designed for probability distributions over a finite, exhaustive set of outcomes, or expectations of random variables (Savage 1971), and the theory has since been extended
to continuous outcome spaces and general statistics (Lambert, Pennock, and Shoham 2008; Matheson and Winkler
1976). The broader field of elicitation now spans several disciplines, and includes the study of user interfaces and the effectiveness of eliciting various probability summaries from
experts; for an extensive review see (O’Hagan et al. 2006).
Encouraging selfish agents to accurately report their beliefs
is a fundamental problem in multi-agent systems, and a key
building block in systems that aggregate beliefs in order to
form a consensus view of uncertain events.
In this paper we are concerned with eliciting a density
function over a continuous outcome space. Density forecasting finds application in surveys of experts on macroeconomic indicators, and in the estimation of asset and portfolio returns in finance, among other areas (Boero, Smith,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3635

