Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Spectral Clustering Using Multilinear SVD:
Analysis, Approximations and Applications
Debarghya Ghoshdastidar and Ambedkar Dukkipati
Department of Computer Science & Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore – 560012, India
email:{debarghya.g,ad}@csa.iisc.ernet.in
Abstract
Spectral clustering, a graph partitioning technique, has
gained immense popularity in machine learning in the
context of unsupervised learning. This is due to convincing empirical studies, elegant approaches involved
and the theoretical guarantees provided in the literature. To tackle some challenging problems that arose in
computer vision etc., recently, a need to develop spectral methods that incorporate multi-way similarity measures surfaced. This, in turn, leads to a hypergraph partitioning problem. In this paper, we formulate a criterion for partitioning uniform hypergraphs, and show
that a relaxation of this problem is related to the multilinear singular value decomposition (SVD) of symmetric tensors. Using this, we provide a spectral technique for clustering based on higher order affinities,
and derive a theoretical bound on the error incurred by
this method. We also study the complexity of the algorithm and use Nyström’s method and column sampling
techniques to develop approximate methods with significantly reduced complexity. Experiments on geometric grouping and motion segmentation demonstrate the
practical significance of the proposed methods.

Figure 1: (a) Kanisza figure containing 3 lines and 3 circular
arcs; (b) spectral clustering groups points using proximity;
(c) our method detects the underlying geometric structures.
set of weighted hyperedges. Thus, in these situations, hypergraph partitioning methods appear to be an obvious choice.
Though the hypergraph partitioning problem originated in
1980s (Fiduccia and Mattheyses 1982), the use of hypergraphs to encode affinities has been made popular in machine learning recently. Algorithms have been proposed in
context of subspace clustering (Agarwal et al. 2005; Elhamifar and Vidal 2013), motion segmentation (Govindu 2005;
Ochs and Brox 2012), semi-supervised learning (Zhou,
Huang, and Schölkopf 2007; Hein et al. 2013), image
segmentation (Kim et al. 2011; Ducournau et al. 2012)
etc. These works study a variety of techniques for hypergraph based clustering, which include approximating hypergraphs by graphs (Agarwal et al. 2005), defining cut formulations for hypergraphs (Hein et al. 2013), using lowrank matrix representations (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Jain
and Govindu 2013), viewing clustering as non-cooperative
game (Rota Bulo and Pelillo 2013), formulating various optimization criteria (Liu, Latecki, and Yan 2010; Ochs and
Brox 2012), using Ihara zeta functions (Ren et al. 2011) etc.
This paper focuses on a special class of hypergraphs,
called m-uniform hypergraphs, that are constructed from mary affinity relations for some m > 2. Such hypergraphs
arise naturally in geometric grouping and motion segmentation. For such hypergraphs, the affinities can be expressed
as a mth -order symmetric affinity tensor. Thus one can employ standard results related to tensor decompositions. For
instance, the cluster assignments can be extracted from nonnegative factorization of the affinity tensor (Shashua, Zass,
and Hazan 2006), or from eigenvectors of a similarity matrix, estimated by sampling columns of flattened affinity tensor (Govindu 2005). Similar decompositions have also been
used in other clustering methods (Huang et al. 2008).

Introduction
Spectral methods lead to an elegant class of methods in unsupervised learning. One of its most common form is the
spectral clustering technique, where one views clustering as
a problem of partitioning an unweighted graph so as to minimize the normalized cut. The spectral connection is that this
can be relaxed to a problem of finding the leading eigenvectors of the normalized affinity matrix (Shi and Malik 2000;
Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002). Along with the empirical success of this method, recent studies have proved its theoretical
merits (Rohe, Chatterjee, and Yu 2011).
However, the expressibility and efficiency of pairwise relationships do not suffice in a variety of applications encountered in machine learning and computer vision. For instance,
one cannot construct a suitable pairwise relations for grouping overlapping geometric figures (see Figure 1). Hence, one
is often forced to consider multi-point similarities to capture
the connection among objects. From a graph theoretic perspective, these multi-way relationships may be viewed as a
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2610

