Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Aggregating Electric Cars to Sustainable Virtual Power Plants:
The Value of Flexibility in Future Electricity Markets
Micha Kahlen and Wolfgang Ketter
Erasmus University Rotterdam
Burgemeester Oudlaan 50, The Netherlands
{kahlen,wketter}@rsm.nl

Abstract

electricity sector. According to Malhotra, Melville, and Watson this also paves the way for real-time control of energy
use for many devices. Important in that regard are electric vehicles (EV) which have storage capacities that can
contribute to solving the imbalance problem. The EVs are
charged when wind and solar sources produce energy, and
they make energy available to the grid when those energy
sources are unavailable, called vehicle-to-grid (V2G). Together they constitute a virtual power plant (VPP), which
are distributed power sources that are centrally coordinated
to support flexible energy supply. Specifically we look at
very short term (seconds to minutes) integration of demand
and supply on the operating reserve market. We combine
real-time information from electric cars about their location,
usage, and battery storage, with information from reserve
markets in an algorithm to optimally allocate EV capacity.
This algorithm, which we call FleetPower, makes an explicit
trade-off between benefits from offering cars for rental and
using them for balancing the grid in real-time which was
not considered in previous research (Vytelingum et al. 2011;
Voice et al. 2011). To the best of our knowledge this is the
first study that uses real driving, charging, and locational
data of 500 EV in 54 urban districts. The data for this study
was provided by the Daimler AG.

Electric vehicles will play a crucial role in balancing
the future electrical grid, which is complicated by many
intermittent renewable energy. We developed an algorithm that determines for a fleet of electric vehicles,
which EV at what price and location to commit to the
operating reserve market to either absorb excess capacity or provide electricity during shortages (vehicle-2grid). The algorithm takes the value of immobility into
account by using carsharing fees as a reference point. A
virtual power plant autonomously replaces cars that are
committed to the operating reserves and are then rented
out, with other idle cars to pool the risks of uncertainty.
We validate our model with data from a free float carsharing fleet of 500 electric vehicles. An analysis of expected future developments (2015, 2018, and 2022) in
operating reserve demand and battery costs yields that
the gross profits for a carsharing operator increase between 7-12% with a negligible decrease in car availability (<0.01%).

Introduction
In its World Energy Investment Outlook 2014, the International Energy Agency estimates that over the next 20 years
a cumulative investment of $53 trillion is required worldwide to limit the concentration of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere to 450 parts per million of CO2 (International
Energy Agency 2014). First concrete steps in that direction
require European Union member states to have a 30% renewable content by 2030; especially intermittent wind and
solar power is subsidized (The European Parliament and The
Council of the European Union 2009). These large scale
penetrations of volatile renewable energy sources pose a
challenge to the stability of the electrical grid as their production is inflexible to changing demand and difficult to
forecast (Kassakian and Schmalensee 2011). This complicates balancing the grid and providing sufficient energy to
consumers at all times, thereby increasing the chance of
blackouts.
Smart grids offer an information based solution that utilizes the transition from data poverty to data richness in the

Background and Literature
This section describes and explains relevant research and the
general setting of balancing renewable energy sources. First
the embedment in the trading agent literature in a sustainability context will be given. Consequently, we will describe
the operating reserve market in more detail from where the
VPP sources its revenues. Finally, we will position our research within the literature on EVs and the carsharing context.

Agent-based Sustainable Society
Previous research employed intelligent trading agents to act
on behalf of consumers in decentralized electricity markets. A prominent example is the Power Trading Agent
Competition (Power TAC) where brokers compete to attract customers and purchase electricity on their behalf (Ketter, Collins, and Reddy 2013). The realism of the platform
was demonstrated by Ketter, Peters, and Collins. Similarly
to other brokers such as defined by Urieli and Stone and

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

665

