Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Strong Temporal Planning with Uncontrollable Durations:
A State-Space Approach
Alessandro Cimatti and Andrea Micheli and Marco Roveri
Fondazione Bruno Kessler – Italy
{cimatti,amicheli,roveri}@fbk.eu

Abstract

planning, but here we allow for uncertainty only in the action
duration and we consider a dense model of time. Similarly
to conformant planning, this problem is important in practice, even if many instances do not admit a solution. We remark that synthesizing plans that are guaranteed to work under any possible contingency, is valuable in contexts where
safety must be certified.

In many practical domains, planning systems are required to
reason about durative actions. A common assumption in the
literature is that the executor is allowed to decide the duration
of each action. However, this assumption may be too restrictive for applications.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of temporal planning
with uncontrollable action durations. We show how to generate robust plans, that guarantee goal achievement despite the
uncontrollability of the actual duration of the actions. We extend the state-space temporal planning framework, integrating recent techniques for solving temporal problems under
uncertainty. We discuss different ways of lifting the total order plans generated by the heuristic search to partial order
plans, showing (in)completeness results for each of them.
We implemented our approach on top of C OLIN, a stateof-the-art planner. An experimental evaluation over several
benchmark problems shows the practical feasibility of the
proposed approach.

We make the following contributions. First, we formally
define a framework to express the uncontrollability in the
action durations: we define the strong planning problem with
temporal uncertainty, we present strong time triggered plans
(STTP) as solutions to the defined planning problem, and we
formally define the notion of validity for a given STTP.
Second, we extend forward state-space temporal planning
(FSSTP) (Coles et al. 2009; 2012a) to solve strong planning
problems with temporal uncertainty. The FSSTP framework
relies on the interplay between a discrete planner to generate
a totally ordered plan for an abstraction of the domain, and a
temporal reasoner to check the temporal consistency of the
corresponding Temporal Problem (TP). We retain the generation of abstract plans, and, to deal with uncontrollability
of action duration, we replace the solver for temporal problems with a solver for Temporal Problems with Uncertainty
(TPU) (Vidal and Fargier 1999). We consider three different ways of creating the temporal problems by lifting the
totally-ordered abstract plans. The first two cases, are both
derived from existing approaches in temporal planning: they
construct a temporal problem relying on a total order (Coles
et al. 2012a) and on a partial order (Coles et al. 2010) among
actions. Both approaches, however, are shown to be incomplete in presence of temporal uncertainty. The third case,
called Disjunctive Reordering (DR), achieves completeness
by generating a Disjunctive Temporal Problem with Uncertainty (DTPU) (Peintner, Venable, and Yorke-Smith 2007)
that takes into account all possible sets of valid reorderings
of the given abstract plan.

Introduction
Many planning domains (e.g. aerospace, logistics) require
the ability to reason about durative actions. Over the years,
the problem has received significant attention, and several
interesting approaches, implemented in various practical
planners, have been proposed (Penberthy and Weld 1994;
Younes and Simmons 2003; Coles et al. 2009; 2012a). Common assumptions are that either the duration of each action
is fixed in the domain or the plan executor is allowed to specify the start time as well as the duration of the actions. In
many practical applications, however, the duration of actions
cannot be controlled. As an example, consider a navigation
task for an exploratory rover: the duration may vary depending on unknown operational conditions (e.g. soil, available
power), and can at best be assumed to lie within a given
range. In order to properly reason in these situations, a planner must be able to take this uncontrollability into account.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of generating strong
time-triggered plans, i.e. plans where the start time of actions is predetermined, and that guarantee goal achievement
for any admissible value of uncontrollable durations. These
plans are similar to conformant plans in non-determinitic

Finally, we implemented these approaches in a planner,
built extending C OLIN (Coles et al. 2012a). Our planner is
able to process an extension of the PDDL 2.1 language that
allows for expressing domains having actions with uncontrollable duration. We carried out an experimental evaluation
on several benchmarks, both new and adapted from the 2011
international planning competition (Coles et al. 2012b).

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3254

