Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Valuation Distributions from Partial Observations
Avrim Blum∗

Yishay Mansour†

Jamie Morgenstern‡

Computer Science Department,
Carnegie Mellon University
avrim@cs.cmu.edu

Tel Aviv University
Microsoft Research, Hertzelia
mansour@tau.ac.il

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
jamiemmt@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

and on your web site; to use as market research for opening
a new web site which would be attractive to some of those
advertisers; or simply to estimate the projected revenue.
This would be a trivial task if your competitor was willing
to give you this information, but this is unlikely to happen.
Industrial espionage is illegal, and definitely not within your
expertise as a computer scientist. So, you approach this task
from the basics and consider what you might observe. At
best, you might be able to observe the outcome for a particular auction, namely the winner, but definitely not the price,
and certainly not the bids of all participants. There is, however, a way to observe more detailed information: you can
participate in a sequence of auctions and see whether or not
you win! If you lose with a bid b, you know that the winner
(and perhaps other bidders) bid more than b; if you win with
bid b, you know every other bidder bid less than b. In general,
we assume you will also observe the winner of the auction
explicitly (e.g., you can visit the webpage and view the banner ad of the auction in question). Is this a strong enough set
of tools to recover the distributions over independent but not
necessarily identical bid distributions?
If only your boss had instead given you the task of estimating the winning bid distribution in that auction, you
would be able to accomplish this easily. By inserting random bids, and observing their probability of winning, you
would be able to recover the distribution of the winning bid.
However, this was not the task you were assigned: your boss
wants the distribution of each bidder’s bids, not just those
where they win the auction.
As a first attempt, your esteemed colleague suggests a
trivial (and completely incorrect) approach (which you do
not even consider). As before, you can submit random bids,
and observe for each advertiser, how many times he wins in
auctions with your random bid. This will estimate the distribution over bids he makes in auctions he wins. However,
when we condition on a bidder i winning, we should expect
to see a sample which is skewed towards higher bids. To see
that the distribution over winning bids is a poor estimation
for the distribution over bids for each bidder, consider the
following example. Suppose you can even observe the bid of
the winner. There are n advertisers, each bidding uniformly
in [0, 1]. The distribution of the winning bid of a given advern
tiser would have an expectation of n+1
, whereas the expec1
tation of his bid is 2 ; indeed, the distribution over winning

Auction theory traditionally assumes that bidders’ valuation distributions are known to the auctioneer, such
as in the celebrated, revenue-optimal Myerson auction (Myerson 1981). However, this theory does not describe how the auctioneer comes to possess this information. Recently work (Cole and Roughgarden 2014)
showed that an approximation based on a finite sample
of independent draws from each bidder’s distribution
is sufficient to produce a near-optimal auction. In this
work, we consider the problem of learning bidders’ valuation distributions from much weaker forms of observations. Specifically, we consider a setting where there
is a repeated, sealed-bid auction with n bidders, but all
we observe for each round is who won, but not how
much they bid or paid. We can also participate (i.e., submit a bid) ourselves, and observe when we win. From
this information, our goal is to (approximately) recover
the inherently recoverable part of the underlying bid distributions. We also consider extensions where different
subsets of bidders participate in each round, and where
bidders’ valuations have a common-value component
added to their independent private values.

1

Introduction

Imagine that you get a call from your supervisor, who asks
you to find out how much various companies are bidding
for banner advertisements on a competitor’s web site. She
wants you to recover the distribution of the bids for each
one of the advertisers. Your boss might have many reasons
why she wants this information: to compare their bids there
∗

Supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants CCF-1101215, CCF-1116892, CCF-1331175, and IIS1065251.
†
Supported in part by The Israeli Centers of Research Excellence (I-CORE) program, (Center No. 4/11), by a grant from the
Israel Science Foundation (ISF), by a grant from United StatesIsrael Binational Science Foundation (BSF), and by a grant from
the Israeli Ministry of Science (MoS).
‡
Supported in part by the National Science Foundation under
grants CCF-1116892, CCF-1331175 and IIS-1065251. Partially
funded by a Simons Award for Graduate Students in Theoretical
Computer Science.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

798

