Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Representation Learning for Aspect
Category Detection in Online Reviews
Xinjie Zhou, Xiaojun Wan* and Jianguo Xiao
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
{zhouxinjie, wanxiaojun, xiaojianguo}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

{“service”, “food”, “price”, “ambience”, “anecdote
/miscellaneous”} is defined as the aspect category set for
restaurant reviews. In the sentence “Service is top notch.”,
“service” should be detected as the aspect category.
Opinion without knowing the target is of limited use (Liu,
2011). Identifying the aspect category helps to get targetdependent sentiment and contributes to aspect-specific
opinion summarization.
Previous researches have proposed several models to
address this task and SVM classification is one of the most
popular ones (Ganu et al.,2009; Kiritchenko et al 2014).
These existing methods have shown the significance of
lexical information in aspect category detection. However,
the unigram or n-gram based features usually use one-hot
representations and fail to capture semantic relations
between different words. Words that appear in the training
data cannot provide any information if it does not appear in
the test data. Associations between different words cannot
be quantitatively measured via the one-hot vectors. To
overcome the shortcomings of the existing studies, we
propose a representation learning approach for aspect
category detection.
Firstly, we propose a semi-supervised word embedding
algorithm. It captures semantic relations between words,
relations between words and aspects, and relations between
sentiment words and aspects. After obtaining the word
vectors, we average all the word vectors in a sentence as its
continuous representation (Huang et al., 2012). Different
from existing works that directly learn supervised
classifiers based on the sentence vectors (Tang et al.,
2014b), we propose to generate deeper and hybrid features
which help to boost the performance. Two different kinds
of neural networks are used for learning shared features
and aspect-specific features respectively. We get the hybrid
features by concatenating them together. The logistic
regression classifier trained on the hybrid features achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on the benchmark dataset

User-generated reviews are valuable resources for decision
making. Identifying the aspect categories discussed in a
given review sentence (e.g., “food” and “service” in
restaurant reviews) is an important task of sentiment
analysis and opinion mining. Given a predefined aspect
category set, most previous researches leverage handcrafted features and a classification algorithm to accomplish
the task. The crucial step to achieve better performance is
feature engineering which consumes much human effort and
may be unstable when the product domain changes. In this
paper, we propose a representation learning approach to
automatically learn useful features for aspect category
detection. Specifically, a semi-supervised word embedding
algorithm is first proposed to obtain continuous word
representations on a large set of reviews with noisy labels.
Afterwards, we propose to generate deeper and hybrid
features through neural networks stacked on the word
vectors. A logistic regression classifier is finally trained
with the hybrid features to predict the aspect category. The
experiments are carried out on a benchmark dataset released
by SemEval-2014. Our approach achieves the state-of-theart performance and outperforms the best participating team
as well as a few strong baselines.

Introduction
User-generated reviews play an important role in each
individual’s decision making process. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis for online reviews has become a
trending research topic in both academic and industrial
fields since early 2000 (Turney, 2002; Pang et al., 2002).
Aspect category detection is one of the opinion mining
tasks which aims to identify the aspect categories discussed
in a review sentence. A set of aspect categories are usually
predefined which makes the task become a multi-label
classification problem. For example, in SemEval-2014,
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
Xiaojun Wan is the corresponding author.

417

