Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Complexity Approach for Core-Selecting Exchange
with Multiple Indivisible Goods under Lexicographic Preferences
Etsushi Fujita

Julien Lesca

Kyushu University
Motooka 744, Fukuoka, Japan
fujita@agent.inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Paris Dauphine University
Place du Mal de Lattre de Tassigny
75775 Paris Cedex 16, France
julien.lesca@dauphine.fr

Akihisa Sonoda

Taiki Todo

Makoto Yokoo

Kyushu University
Motooka 744, Fukuoka, Japan
sonoda@agent.inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Kyushu University
Motooka 744, Fukuoka, Japan
todo@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Kyushu University
Motooka 744, Fukuoka, Japan
yokoo@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Abstract

assumed to have a single good, Gale’s Top-Trading-Cycles
(TTC) procedure is core-selecting (Ma 1994).
Another common requirement is strategy-proofness, i.e.,
each agent has no incentive to misreport her preference. To
be more precise, for each agent, submitting her true preference is a dominant strategy regardless of the submitted
preferences of other agents. Unfortunately, Sönmez (1999)
showed that when there is at least one agent who initially
owns more than one good and the agents’ preferences are
strict, as in our exchange problems, there exists no rule that
is strategy-proof and core-selecting.
In the wake of this impossibility, we tackle the incentive
issue from the theory of computational complexity. Even if
an agent is selfish and hopes to benefit by misreporting, assuming finding a beneficial misreport is hard, e.g., it requires
to solve an NP-hard problem, then, as long as its computational power is limited, it will refrain from doing such a
manipulation. Under this assumption, in a sense, showing
that finding a beneficial preference misreport under a rule is
NP-hard can substitute strategy-proofness. Such a complexity approach for incentive issues, especially in social choice,
has attracted much attention from computer scientists, and
is considered one of the main stream approaches in computational social choice literature (Pini et al. 2011).
In this paper for our exchange problems, we propose
a rule called augmented top-trading-cycles (ATTC) procedure. We show that the ATTC procedure is core-selecting
under the lexicographic preference domain. We then show
that finding a beneficial misreport under the ATTC procedure is NP-hard by a reduction from M ONOTONE -3SAT.
Finally, we consider a different type of manipulation called
splitting manipulation, and clarify its relation with preference misreporting. We show that for any splitting manipulation, there exists a corresponding preference misreport that
gives the same utility as the splitting to the manipulator.

Core-selection is a crucial property of social choice
functions, or rules, in social choice literature. It is also
desirable to address the incentive of agents to cheat by
misreporting their preferences. This paper investigates
an exchange problem where each agent may have multiple indivisible goods, agents’ preferences over sets of
goods are assumed to be lexicographic, and side payments are not allowed. We propose an exchange rule
called augmented top-trading-cycles (ATTC) procedure
based on the original TTC procedure. We first show that
the ATTC procedure is core-selecting. We then show
that finding a beneficial misreport under the ATTC procedure is NP-hard. Under the ATTC procedure, we finally clarify the relationship between preference misreport and splitting, which is a different type of manipulation.

Introduction
Designing rules/mechanisms that achieve good properties
is a central research topic in mechanism design and social
choice literature. In this paper we study exchange problems
with following properties: (i) each agent is initially endowed
with a set of indivisible goods, (ii) each agent has a strict
preference relation over the set of possible bundles of the
goods, (iii) compensation using monetary transfers is prohibited. Exchange rules must be designed so that it prescribe
the socially desirable trade of goods. Such exchange problems have many real applications, such as on-campus university housing markets (Chen and Sönmez 2002), nationwide kidney exchanges (Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver 2004),
and barter exchanges in disaster areas.
Core-selection is one of the most well-studied properties
that rules are expected to achieve. A rule is said to be coreselecting if no group of agents has an incentive to make a
cartel and trade their goods among themselves. By definition, core-selecting rules encourage agents to participate in
the rules and result in a Pareto efficient trade of goods, which
in a sense is a socially optimal outcome. When each agent is

Related Works
The exchange model we deal with in this paper is also
known as housing market (Shapley and Scarf 1974), where
each agent initially owns a single house, his/her preference

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

907

