Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

RAIN: Social Role-Aware Information Diffusion
Yang Yang†] , Jie Tang†] , Cane Wing-ki Leung‡ ,
Yizhou Sun? , Qicong Chen† , Juanzi Li† , Qiang Yang‡
]

†
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList), China
‡
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong
?
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, USA

{sherlockbourne, cane.leung}@gmail.com, ljz@keg.tsinghua.edu.cn,

jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn, yzsun@ccs.neu.edu, qyang@cse.ust.hk

Abstract

1994). Users’ social roles in turn affect the influence they
may have on other users, and hence the information diffusion process. Based on Twitter where a tweet corresponds
to a piece of information and retweeting corresponds to information diffusion, a study reveals that 25% of information diffusion is controlled by 1% of users serving the role
of structural hole spanners, who are bridges between otherwise disconnected communities in a network (Lou and Tang
2013). Another study shows that 50% of URLs on Twitter
are posted by less than 1% of users who act as opinion leaders, who are people taking central positions in a community (Wu et al. 2011). Compared with posts originated from
ordinary users, those from opinion leaders not only attracted
much more retweets (larger diffusion scales), but also have
longer lifespans (longer diffusion lengths). All these findings suggest that it is crucial to consider users’ social roles
in information diffusion modeling.

Information diffusion, which studies how information is
propagated in social networks, has attracted considerable research effort recently. However, most existing approaches do
not distinguish social roles that nodes may play in the diffusion process. In this paper, we study the interplay between
users’ social roles and their influence on information diffusion. We propose a Role-Aware INformation diffusion model
(RAIN) that integrates social role recognition and diffusion
modeling into a unified framework. We develop a Gibbssampling based algorithm to learn the proposed model using
historical diffusion data. The proposed model can be applied
to different scenarios. For instance, at the micro-level, the
proposed model can be used to predict whether an individual
user will repost a specific message; while at the macro-level,
we can use the model to predict the scale and the duration
of a diffusion process. We evaluate the proposed model on a
real social media data set. Our model performs much better
in both micro- and macro-level prediction than several alternative methods.

Social roles and diffusion are not independent of each
other in nature. To further motivate our study on social role
aware information diffusion, we present an exploratory analysis on a large social network with 200 million users and 174
million microblog messages. Each post (message) in this
network is considered a piece of information, while reposting (or retweeting in Twitter) corresponds to the diffusion
of information. We analyze how users taking three roles,
namely opinion leaders, structural hole spanners and ordinary users, influence other users’ probability of reposting a
message.

Introduction
Information diffusion, also known as diffusion of innovations, is the study of how information propagates in or between networks (Rogers 2010). Central to information diffusion is the influence of individual nodes (or users in online social networks). In representative information diffusion
models, such as the Linear Threshold (LT) model (Granovetter 1978) and the Independent Cascade (IC) model (Goldenberg, Libai, and Muller 2001), every directed link from a
user v to another user u in a given network is associated with
a non-negative weight, to reflect how much influence user v
has on user u in information diffusion.
In reality, the information diffusion process is complex,
as is the influence of one user on another. How information
may diffuse in a network is affected by the structure of the
network, in which users’ structural properties reflect their
social roles in different communities (Wasserman and Faust

Figure 1 provides the results. When an opinion leader reposts a message, the probability that her follower v will subsequently repost the message is 12 times higher than the case
where the message is reposted by an ordinary user in the first
place (corresponding to two-step flow theory (Lazarsfeld,
Berelson, and Gaudet 1944)). More interestingly, if the number of reposting opinion leaders, all followed by v, reaches
3, the probability that v will subsequently repost decreases
significantly, but keeps increasing after that. Regarding this
finding, we conjecture that 2-3 opinion leaders are sufficient
to spread a piece of information throughout a community,
making their followers unwilling to repost a message that

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

367

