Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Energy Usage Behavior Modeling in Energy Disaggregation
via Marked Hawkes Process
Liangda Li1,2 and Hongyuan Zha1,2
1

Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA

Abstract

down the entire household’s energy consumption is user behavior in energy usage(Baptista et al. 2014), which is known
to be a major factor in determining the energy consumption
in households. Such energy usage behaviors can include:
how users perform their daily routines, how they share the
usage of appliances, and users’ habits in using certain types
of appliances. Understanding such energy usage behaviors
will significantly increase the accuracy of estimating the usage time of each appliance, which consequently benefits the
energy disaggregation task.
Despite of the importance of energy usage behaviors, they
have not received enough attention in the recent literature,
especially how a user’s current energy usage behavior influences his/her or other people’s future usage behavior. Modeling such influence is important due to the following two
reasons: 1) energy usage behaviors rarely depend on the current time slots only. One’s energy usage behaviors in the previous time slots also exert a significant impact. For instance,
a user’s usage time of washing machine can be different
from day to day, but his/her sequential behaviors in clothes
washing are always similar: first using the washer, and then
the dryer. 2) under many circumstances, a user’s behavior
is not just determined by himself/herself, but influenced by
other members in the same household. For example, when
parents wake up earlier than usual in the morning, they may
also wake up their children earlier than usual. Another instance is that two household members are not able to use
the bathroom at the same time, and consequently one member has to postpone his/her usage of the bathroom. Thus,
to understand energy usage behaviors, appropriate modeling
of influence among the energy usage behaviors of different
users in the same household across different time slots is essential.
Unfortunately, the influence between energy usage behaviors is hard to model directly, since the state-of-theart smart-grid data rarely records the number of household
members, and the exact timestamp when a certain member
uses a certain appliance. Since the energy consumption of
each appliance is relies on the user behavior, we turn to modeling the relationship between the energy usages of different
appliances across different time slots, and expect that such
relationship will be able to reveal the influence between the
energy usage behaviors of different users in the same household. We want to emphasize that such relationship has so

Energy disaggregation, the task of taking a whole home
electricity signal and decomposing it into its component appliances, has been proved to be essential in energy conservation research. One powerful cue for breaking down the entire household’s energy consumption is
user’s daily energy usage behavior, which has so far
received little attention: existing works on energy disaggregation mostly ignored the relationship between
the energy usages of various appliances across different time slots. To model such relationship, we combine topic models with Hawkes processes, and propose
a novel probabilistic model based on marked Hawkes
process that enables the modeling of marked event data.
The proposed model seeks to capture the influence from
the occurrence and the marks of one usage event to the
occurrence and the marks of subsequent usage events
in the future. We also develop an inference algorithm
based on variational inference for model parameter estimation. Experimental results on both synthetic data
and three real world data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of our model, which outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches in decomposing the entire consumed energy
to each appliance. Analyzing the influence captured by
the proposed model provides further insights into numerous interesting energy usage behavior patterns.

Introduction
Energy conservation has become a critical issue in modern
society and data analysis methodology has recently been
applied to the analysis of energy consumption patterns in
households. Several prior studies (Darby 2006; Neenan and
Robinson 2009; Wytock and Kolter 2014) have shown that
consumers, i.e., household members are more likely to conserve their energy usage when provided with breakdown energy consumption records. However, such fine-grained energy consumption data is not readily available, since it requires numerous additional meters installed on individual
appliances. Therefore there has been much interest in the
data analysis problem of energy disaggregation — the task
of taking a whole-house energy signal and separating it into
its component appliances. One powerful cue for breaking
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

672

