Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Swiss-System Based Cascade Ranking for
Gait-Based Person Re-identification
Lan Wei1 , Yonghong Tian1∗ , Yaowei Wang2 , Tiejun Huang1
2

1
School of EE & CS, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Department of Electronic Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
Corresponding to: yhtian@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Human gait has been shown to be an efficient biometric measure for person identification at a distance.
However, it often needs different gait features to handle various covariate conditions including viewing angles, walking speed, carrying an object and wearing
different types of shoes. In order to improve the robustness of gait-based person re-identification on such
multi-covariate conditions, a novel Swiss-system based
cascade ranking model is proposed in this paper. Since
the ranking model is able to learn a subspace where
the potential true match is given the highest ranking,
we formulate the gait-based person re-identification as
a bipartite ranking problem and utilize it as an effective
way for multi-feature ensemble learning. Then a Swiss
multi-round competition system is developed for the
cascade ranking model to optimize its effectiveness and
efficiency. Extensive experiments on three indoor and
outdoor public datasets demonstrate that our model outperforms several state-of-the-art methods remarkably.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: The changes in covariate conditions make the gait
features less distinguishable. (a) The change of carrying condition and clothing, and (b) the change of viewing angles.
The first row of each box represents different observations
from the same subject with the second row representing the
corresponding gait feature.
including viewing angles, walking speed, carrying an object
and wearing different shoes. As shown in Fig. 1, due to the
significant changes in covariate conditions, especially viewing angle, carrying condition and clothing, the resulting gait
features of the same person differ greatly with each other.
Basically, the gait-based person re-identification problem
tends to be formulated as a distance measurement problem,
rather than a classification problem in which each person is
treated as one class. This is not only due to the variable covariant conditions mentioned above, but also because of the
difficulty of training extremely under-sampled class distribution (i.e., each person has only a few gallery sequences for
training). Also, it is not reasonable that each newly-added
subject must be re-trained every time for real world applications. Following the distance-measurement-based problem
formulation, most existing approaches focus on extracting
robust gait features. One of the most widely used gait features is Gait Energy Image (GEI) (Han and Bhanu 2006),
which is obtained by averaging silhouettes across a gait cycle. However, it has been shown to be sensitive to various
covariate conditions. To overcome this problem, a number
of variations of GEI have been proposed. The basic idea
is to select features from the most dynamic areas of human body. Yang et al. (Yang et al. 2008) propose to enhance those dynamic regions which are located by a variance analysis, and then extract enhanced GEI (EGEI) for
recognition. Bashir et. al. (Bashir, Xiang, and Gong 2009)
present a method to distinguish the dynamic and static areas of GEI by using Shannon entropy at each GEI pixel,

Introduction
In recent years, surveillance cameras have been widely deployed almost everywhere in the city. To automatically analyze the data captured from these cameras (e.g., to recognize
or search a suspicious person), some biometric technologies (e.g., face recognition) are developed and have shown
more and more important roles in public security applications and crime investigation. However, one major disadvantage of these technologies is that they can only be used
in some cooperative conditions (e.g., the front-face is mostly
available). In some uncooperative situations, these biometric
features may be obscured, preventing the effective recognition of the suspicious person. To address this problem, human gait can be used as an alternative, which is able to ascertain the identity of a person at a distance from a camera
using behavioral features. An important application of gait
recognition is person re-identification, which is defined as
the task of assigning the same identifier to all the instances
of the same object (Vezzani, Baltieri, and Cucchiara 2013).
However, gait-based person re-identification often needs different gait features to handle various covariate conditions,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1882

