Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Automatic Configuration of Sequential Planning Portfolios
Jendrik Seipp, Silvan Sievers, Malte Helmert

Frank Hutter

University of Basel
Basel, Switzerland
{jendrik.seipp,silvan.sievers,malte.helmert}@unibas.ch

University of Freiburg
Freiburg, Germany
fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract

While planning portfolios combine the complementary
strengths of existing planners on a heterogeneous set of
benchmarks, performance on a particular homogeneous type
of instances can often be improved by tuning a planner’s
parameters. Specifically, applied to highly parameterized
planning systems, automated algorithm configuration has
recently been shown to find novel planner instantiations that
are customized to yield the highest available performance on
particular types of benchmark instances (Fawcett et al. 2011;
Vallati et al. 2013).
Due to these successes, several recent lines of work
found in the Satisfiability Testing (SAT) literature use algorithm configuration to construct portfolios of a single parameterized algorithm based on algorithm selection (Rice
1976) and on parallel execution of solvers (Huberman,
Lukose, and Hogg 1997); see the works by Xu, Hoos, and
Leyton-Brown (2010), Kadioglu et al. (2010), and Hoos et
al. (2012b). However, there does not yet exist a general procedure for the problem of constructing sequential portfolios
from a highly parameterized algorithm.
In this paper, we introduce Cedalion, a conceptually simple yet effective procedure for this problem. Cedalion iteratively uses an algorithm configurator to add the hparameter
configuration, runtimei pair to the portfolio that maximizes
portfolio improvement per runtime spent. It does so by making the runtimes of the configurations in the portfolio part of
the configuration space.
After discussing background, we give a detailed description of Cedalion and show that it yields theoretical approximation guarantees. In our empirical evaluation we create sequential portfolios from the highly parameterized Fast
Downward (FD) framework for various types of planning
tasks.

Sequential planning portfolios exploit the complementary
strengths of different planners. Similarly, automated algorithm configuration tools can customize parameterized planning algorithms for a given type of tasks. Although some
work has been done towards combining portfolios and algorithm configuration, the problem of automatically generating
a sequential planning portfolio from a parameterized planner for a given type of tasks is still largely unsolved. Here,
we present Cedalion, a conceptually simple approach for this
problem that greedily searches for the hparameter configuration, runtimei pair which, when appended to the current
portfolio, maximizes portfolio improvement per additional
runtime spent. We show theoretically that Cedalion yields
portfolios provably within a constant factor of optimal for the
training set distribution. We evaluate Cedalion empirically by
applying it to construct sequential planning portfolios based
on component planners from the highly parameterized Fast
Downward (FD) framework. Results for a broad range of
planning settings demonstrate that – without any knowledge
of planning or FD – Cedalion constructs sequential FD portfolios that rival, and in some cases substantially outperform,
manually-built FD portfolios.

Introduction
Over the years the automated planning community has created a very large number of different planning algorithms,
and it is well known that none of them dominates all others
on all planning tasks. Since automatically choosing the best
planner for a given task remains a mostly unsolved problem,
many of today’s most successful planners run a sequential
portfolio of individual planners (Coles et al. 2012). For example, the winners of both the learning track and the deterministic optimization track of the 2011 International Planning Competition (IPC), PbP2 (Gerevini, Saetti, and Vallati
2011) and Fast Downward Stone Soup (FDSS) (Helmert,
Röger, and Karpas 2011), as well as the winner of the IPC
2014 deterministic satisficing track, IBaCoP (Cenamor, de
la Rosa, and Fernández 2014), are based on sequential portfolios. For a more general overview of work on sequential
portfolios in the automated planning community we refer to
Vallati (2012).

Background
In this section we discuss the existing work we base our new
algorithm on.

Automated Algorithm Configuration & SMAC
Most planning systems have several free parameters that can
be adjusted to optimize performance (e.g., solution cost or
runtime). In recent years, the AI community has developed
dedicated systems for this algorithm configuration problem
(Hutter et al. 2009; Ansótegui, Sellmann, and Tierney 2009;

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3364

