Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Scheherazade: Crowd-Powered Interactive Narrative Generation
Boyang Li and Mark O. Riedl
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
{boyangli, riedl}@gatech.edu

Abstract

does not have a model of the domain, the system uses crowdsourcing to rapidly acquire a number of linear narrative examples about typical ways in which the topic might occur.
In other words, the system collects human experiences and
learns a generalized model—a plot graph—about the topic
domain. Figure 1 shows the system architecture.
A plot graph is a representation in story generation systems that models the author-intended logical flow of events
in the virtual world as a set of precedence constraints between plot events (Weyhrauch 1997; Nelson and Mateas
2005). In our work, a plot graph is a tuple G = hE, P, M i
where E is the set of plot events, P is a set of temporal ordering constraints between events, and M is a set of unordered
mutual exclusion relations that indicate which events can
never co-occur in the same narrative experience. Mutual exclusion relations indicate branches where alternative narratives can unfold. See Figure 3 for a plot graph model of a
bank robbery.
By learning plot graphs from the collected examples, our
system can generate an interactive narrative about any topic
for which a crowd of people can generally agree on the main
events that should occur and the sequencing of the events.

Interactive narrative is a form of storytelling in which
users affect a dramatic storyline through actions by assuming the role of characters in a virtual world. This
extended abstract outlines the S CHEHERAZADE -IF system, which uses crowdsourcing and artificial intelligence to automatically construct text-based interactive
narrative experiences.

Introduction
Interactive narrative is a form of storytelling in which users
affect a dramatic storyline through actions by assuming the
role of characters in a virtual world. The simplest interactive narratives are Choose-Your-Own-Adventure books and
hypertexts in which each plot point has branching options.
More complex systems use artificial intelligence to determine available options for the user.
Prior AI-driven interactive narrative systems (see Riedl
and Bulitko (2013) for a survey) rely on an a priori known
domain model—a description of a fictional world, including
characters, objects, places, and the actions that entities can
perform to change the world. Once the domain model has
been engineered, a story generation system can tell a potentially infinite number of stories involving these characters,
places, and actions known to the system.
S CHEHERAZADE (Li et al. 2012; 2013) uses crowdsourcing to automatically learn the domain knowledge needed to
construct construct and understanding stories about everyday activities such as going to a restaurant or going to a
movie theater. The S CHEHERAZADE -IF system (Li, LeeUrban, and Riedl 2012) creates interactive narrative experiences by allowing a human user to assume the role of one
of the characters in the domain.

Plot Graph Learning
The plot graph learning process is described in detail in Li
et al. (2012) and Li et al. (2013) and summarized below.
The process begins with a user request for an interactive
narrative on a particular topic. The system generates a query
to Amazon’s Mechanical Turk to solicit example narratives
of the given topic, provided in natural language. To simplify
the complexity of natural language processing, crowd workers are asked to segment their narratives such that each sentence contains one event. Crowd workers are instructed to
use one verb per sentence and to avoid complexities such as
conditionals, compound sentences, and pronouns.
Second, the system analyzes the simplified natural language narrative examples to discover the fundamental plot
points on which people agree. Sentences from different narrative examples are clustered together according to semantic
similarity to create plot events. The simplified language use
allows clustering algorithms to discover plot events with relatively high accuracy.
Third, we identify the precedence constraints between
plot events. Crowd workers produce noisy and sometimes er-

Scheherazade-IF
The S CHEHERAZADE -IF system attempts to create a novel,
playable interactive fictions about simple, user-provided scenarios. For example, a human designer may request an interactive experience about a “bank robbery”. If the system
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4305

