Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Stochastic Blockmodeling for Online Advertising
Li Chen

Matthew Patton

Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21210
lichen.jhu1@gmail.com ∗

AOL Advertising.com
1020 Hull St
Baltimore, MD 21230
matthew.patton@teamaol.com

Keywords: Online Advertising, Graph Inference, Clustering.

special case of the latent position graph, where its latent positions are point masses. The vertices are partitioned in to K
blocks, and the edges are conditional independent Bernoulli
trials.
Definition 1. Stochastic blockmodel (SBM) Let K be the
number of block memberships. Let π be the block memberPK
ship function of length K vector such that k=1 πk = 1. Let
n
{Yi }i=1 ∼ Categorical([K], π) be the block memberships.
Let B ∈ [0, 1]K×K be a symmetric probability matrix denoting the block probabilities. Then A ∼ SBM ([n], B, π)
if

Introduction
Online advertising is market communication over the internet. This form of advertising has proven its importance in the
golden digital age. In this work, we approach the business
problem of improving the effectiveness of ad campaigns
and targeting a wider range of online audience via discovering the intrinsic structures of the websites. We introduce
a stochastic blockmodeling framework for discovering the
website structures, propose two vertex clustering algorithms
based on the Bayesian information criterion, and compare
the performance with a goodness-of-fit method and a deterministic graph partitioning method. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed algorithms on simulation and
the AOL website dataset.

Pij

= P rob(Aij = 1|Xi , Xj )
= P rob(Aij = 1|Yi , Yj ) = BYi ,Yj .

The BIC-Based Vertex Clustering Algorithms
In the classical setting for unsupervised learning, we observe independently identically distributed feature vectors
X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn , where each Xi : Ω → RD is a random
vector for some probability space Ω. Here we consider the
case when the feature vectors X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn are unobserved. Instead we observe a latent position random graph
G(X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn ) on n vertices. We intend to cluster the
vertices using the observed graph.
For stochastic blockmodels with K blocks and a known
model dimension D, (Sussman et al. 2012) and (Rohe et al.
2011) respectively have shown that adjacency spectral embedding and Laplacian spectral embedding are consistent estimates of the latent positions. The resulted embedding is a
K-mixture and D-variate Gaussian distributions asymptotically. Such results motivate us to propose a model-based
clustering approach on the embedded space of the stochastic
blockmodel. The optimal number of clusters and covariance
structure correspond to the model selection criterion by the
Bayesian information criterion (BIC). Our approach is presented in Algorithm 1. We denote the algorithms by ASE
and LAP respectively, if M is either the adjacency matrix or
the Laplacian matrix.
We compare ASE and LAP with the integrated classification likelihood (ICL) method (Daudin, Picard, and
Robin 2008), which is a likelihood maximization method for
stochastic blockmodels, and the Louvain algorithm (Blondel
et al. 2008), which optimizes graph modularity and performs
efficiently for large graphs.

Background
A graph G = (V, E) represents a collection of interacting
objects, where the objects are vertices in the vertex set V :=
{1, 2, . . . , } containing n vertices, and the interactions are
edges in the edge set E. The adjacency matrix A of the graph
G is an n × n matrix. In this work, we assume that the graph
G is undirected, unweighted, and not loopy. That implies
the adjacency matrix A is symmetric, binary and hollow. A
random graph is a graph-valued random variable: G : Ω →
n
Gn , where Gn represents the collection of all 2( 2 ) possible
graphs on the vertex set V . Associated with the adjacency
matrix A, there exists a communication probability matrix
P ∈ [0, 1]n×n , where each entry Pij denotes the probability
of edge existence between vertex i and vertex j.
One very general random graph is the latent position
graph (Hoff, Raftery, and Handcock 2002). Each vertex vi
is associated with a latent position Xi drawn independently
from some distribution F on RD . The edge probability between vertices i and j is Pij = Bernoulli(l(Xi , Xj )), where
l : RD × RD → [0, 1] is the link function. The stochastic blockmodel (Holland, Laskey, and Leinhardt 1983) is a
∗
This work was performed when the first author was a summer
intern at AOL.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4146

