Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

SAT Modulo Monotonic Theories
Sam Bayless

Noah Bayless

Holger H. Hoos

Alan J. Hu

sbayless@cs.ubc.ca
Univ. of British Columbia

nbayless@pgmini.org
Point Grey Mini Sec. School

hoos@cs.ubc.ca
Univ. of British Columbia

ajh@cs.ubc.ca
Univ. of British Columbia

Abstract

build efficient SMT solvers that support efficient reasoning for many important graph constraints, including reachability, shortest paths, minimum spanning trees, maximum
s − t flow, and geometric constraints related to convex hulls.
These properties are useful for procedural content generation tasks (e.g., terrain and puzzle synthesis for videogames).
We implement an SMT solver for these theories in our
tool M ONO SAT,1 showing order-of-magnitude speed-ups
and greatly improved scalability over the SAT solver M INI S AT 2.2 [Eén and Sörensson, 2004], the Answer Set Programming (ASP) solver CLASP [Gebser et al., 2007], and
the SMT solver Z3 [De Moura and Bjorner, 2008].

Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solvers have been successfully applied to a wide variety of difficult combinatorial problems. Many further problems can be solved by
SAT Modulo Theory (SMT) solvers, which extend SAT
solvers to handle additional types of constraints. However, building efficient SMT solvers is often very difficult. In this paper, we define the concept of a Boolean
monotonic theory and show how to easily build efficient
SMT solvers, including effective theory propagation
and clause learning, for such theories. We present examples showing useful constraints that are monotonic,
including many graph properties (e.g., shortest paths),
and geometric properties (e.g., convex hulls). These
constraints arise in problems that are otherwise difficult for SAT solvers to handle, such as procedural content generation. We have implemented several monotonic theory solvers using the techniques we present in
this paper and applied these to content generation problems, demonstrating major speed-ups over SAT, SMT,
and Answer Set Programming solvers, easily solving
instances that were previously out of reach.

1

2

Monotonic Theories

We define a Boolean monotonic predicate as follows:
Definition 1 (Boolean Monotonic Predicate) A predicate
p : {0, 1}n 7→ {0, 1} is Boolean monotonic if, and only
if, for all si :
p(. . . , si−1 , 0, si+1 . . .) → p(. . . , si−1 , 1, si+1 . . .)
We have given the definition for a positive monotonic
predicate; an analogous definition exists for the negative
case. Notice that the domain of p is restricted to Boolean values; monotonic functions over the Booleans are also known
as unate functions. A similar definition for monotonic predicates has been previously explored by [Bradley and Manna,
2008] and by [Marques-Silva, Janota, and Belov, 2013],
in the context of finding minimal models and unsatisfiable
cores. We define a Boolean monotonic theory as:

Introduction

Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solvers have been demonstrated
to be effective in solving NP-hard problems from many applications, including planning, scheduling and circuit design. SAT Modulo Theory (SMT) solvers, which extend
SAT with additional types of variables and constraints, can
handle an even broader range of problems.
As an example, consider procedural content generation,
where one might wish to generate terrain subject to shortest path constraints (e.g., to ensure that the exit from a
videogame level is at a certain minimum distance from the
entrance). SAT solvers perform poorly on shortest path constraints, motivating the development of an SMT solver for
graph properties. However, designing efficient SMT solvers
typically requires expertise and deep insight for each theory.
In this work, we identify a class of theories we call monotonic, for which we can create efficient SMT solvers either
partially or entirely automatically. We show that many common problems can be tackled using these techniques, and

Definition 2 (Boolean Monotonic Theory) A theory T
with signature Σ is Boolean monotonic if and only if:
1. The only sort in Σ is Boolean;
2. all predicates in Σ are monotonic; and
3. all functions in Σ are monotonic.
We allow both positive and negative monotonic functions
(and predicates). As is typical for SMT solvers, we consider
only decidable, quantifier-free, first-order theories. Atypically for SMT, the only sort in these theories is Boolean.
1
M ONO SAT is open-source and freely available online, at
www.cs.ubc.ca/labs/isd/Projects/monosat

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3702

