Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Interactive Query-Based Debugging of ASP Programs
Kostyantyn Shchekotykhin
Alpen-Adria University, Klagenfurt, Austria
kostyantyn.shchekotykhin@aau.at

Abstract

Gebser et al. 2008; Pontelli, Son, and El-Khatib 2009;
Oetsch, Pührer, and Tompits 2010; Janhunen et al. 2010;
Oetsch, Pührer, and Tompits 2011a; Polleres et al. 2013).
Modern ASP debugging approaches apply ASP itself to
debug ASP programs. The idea is to transform a faulty program into the special debugging program whose answer sets
explain possible causes of a fault. These explanations are
given as a set of meta-atoms D, called diagnosis, explaining
a discrepancy between the set of actual and expected answer
sets. In practice considering all possible diagnoses might
be inefficient. Therefore, irrelevant diagnoses can be filtered
out by specific integrity constraints – debugging queries.
However, in real-world scenarios it might be problematic
for a programmer to provide a complete debugging query.
Namely, in many cases a programmer can easily specify
some small number of atoms that must be true in a desired
answer set, but not a complete answer set. In this case the
debugging system might return many alternative diagnoses.
Another diagnosis selection issue is due to inability of a programmer to foresee all consequences of a diagnosis. I.e., in
some cases multiple interpretations might have the same explanation for not being answer sets. In this case the modification of a program accordingly to a selected diagnosis might
have side-effects in terms of unwanted answer sets. These
two problem are addressed by our approach which helps a
user to identify the target diagnosis Dt . The latter is the preferred explanation for a given set of atoms not being true in
an answer set, on the one hand, and is not an explanation for
unwanted interpretations, on the other.
In this paper we present an interactive query-based debugging method for ASP programs which differentiates between the diagnoses by means of additional observations (de
Kleer and Williams 1987; Shchekotykhin et al. 2012). The
latter are acquired by automatically generating a sequence
of queries to an oracle such as a user, a database, etc. Each
answer is used to reduce the set of diagnoses until the target
diagnosis is found. In order to construct queries our method
uses the fact that in most of the cases different diagnoses
explain why different sets of interpretations are not answer
sets. Consequently, we can differentiate between diagnoses
by asking an oracle whether a set of atoms must be true or
not in all/some interpretations relevant to the target diagnosis. Each set of atoms which can be used as a query is generated by the debugger automatically using discrepancies in

Broad application of answer set programming (ASP)
for declarative problem solving requires the development of tools supporting the coding process. Program
debugging is one of the crucial activities within this
process. Modern ASP debugging approaches allow efficient computation of possible explanations of a fault.
However, even for a small program a debugger might
return a large number of possible explanations and selection of the correct one must be done manually. In
this paper we present an interactive query-based ASP
debugging method which extends previous approaches
and finds the preferred explanation by means of observations. The system automatically generates a sequence of queries to a programmer asking whether a
set of ground atoms must be true in all (cautiously) or
some (bravely) answer sets of the program. Since some
queries can be more informative than the others, we
discuss query selection strategies which – given user’s
preferences for an explanation – can find the most informative query reducing the overall number of queries required for the identification of a preferred explanation.

Introduction
Answer set programming is a logic programming
paradigm (Baral 2003; Brewka, Eiter, and Truszczynski 2011; Gebser et al. 2012) for declarative problem
solving that has become popular during the last decades.
The success of ASP is based on its fully declarative semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1991) and availability of
efficient solvers, e.g. (Simons, Niemelä, and Soininen 2002;
Leone et al. 2006; Gebser et al. 2011). Despite a vast
body of the theoretical research on foundations of ASP
only recently the attention was drawn to the development
of methods and tools supporting ASP programmers. The
research in this direction focuses on a number of topics
including integrated development environments (Febbraro,
Reale, and Ricca 2011; Oetsch, Pührer, and Tompits 2011b;
Sureshkumar et al. 2007), visualization (Mikitiuk, Moseley,
and Truszczynski 2007; Cliffe et al. 2008), modeling techniques (Oetsch et al. 2011) and, last but not least, debugging
of ASP programs (Syrjänen 2006; Brain et al. 2007;
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1597

