Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

10,000+ Times Accelerated Robust Subset Selection (ARSS)
Feiyun Zhu, Bin Fan, Xinliang Zhu, Ying Wang, Shiming Xiang and Chunhong Pan
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{fyzhu, bfan, ywang, smxiang and chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, zhuxinliang2012@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Subset selection from massive data with noised information
is increasingly popular for various applications. This problem
is still highly challenging as current methods are generally
slow in speed and sensitive to outliers. To address the above
two issues, we propose an accelerated robust subset selection
(ARSS) method. Speciﬁcally in the subset selection area, this
is the ﬁrst attempt to employ the p (0 < p ≤ 1)-norm based
measure for the representation loss, preventing large errors
from dominating our objective. As a result, the robustness
against outlier elements is greatly enhanced. Actually, data
size is generally much larger than feature length, i.e. N  L.
Based on this observation, we propose a speedup solver (via
ALM and equivalent derivations) to highly
 reduce
 thecomputational cost, theoretically from O N 4 to O N 2 L . Extensive experiments on ten benchmark datasets verify that our
method not only outperforms state of the art methods, but also
runs 10,000+ times faster than the most related method.

Figure 1: Comparisons of four algorithms on Optdigit. Two
conclusions can be drawn. First, our method (ARSSour ) is
highly faster than all others; with the help of an elegant new
theorem, RRSSour is signiﬁcantly faster than the authorial algorithm RRSSNie . Second, ARSSour achieves highly promising prediction accuracies.
relies on the assumption that the data points lie in one or
multiple low-dimensional subspaces. Speciﬁcally, the Rank
Revealing QR (RRQR) (Chan 1987; Boutsidis, Mahoney,
and Drineas 2009) selects the subsets that give the best conditional sub-matrix. Unfortunately, this method has suboptimal properties, as it is not assured to ﬁnd the globally optimum in polynomial time.
Another category assumes that the samples are distributed
around centers (Frey and Dueck 2007; Liu et al. 2010). The
center or its nearest neighbour are selected as exemplars.
Perhaps, Kmeans and Kmedoids are the most typical methods (Kmedoids is a variant of Kmeans). Both methods employ an EM-like algorithm. Thus, the results depend tightly
on the initialization, and they are highly unstable for large
K (i.e. the number of centers or selected samples).
Recently, there are a few methods that assume exemplars are the samples that can best represent the whole
dataset. However, for (Yu, Bi, and Tresp 2006), the optimization is a combinatorial problem (NP-hard) (Nie et al. 2013;
Yu et al. 2008), which is computationally intractable to
solve. Besides, the representation loss is measured by the
least square measure, which is sensitive to outliers in data
(Wang et al. 2014; Zhu et al. 2014; Nie et al. 2013).
Then (Nie et al. 2013) improves (Yu, Bi, and Tresp 2006)
by employing a robust loss via the 2,1 -norm; the 1 -norm is
applied to samples, and the 2 -norm is used for features. In
this way, the side effect of outlier samples is relieved. The

Introduction
Due to the explosive growth of data (Wang, Kumar, and
Chang 2012), subset selection methods are increasingly popular for a wide range of machine learning and computer vision applications (Frey and Dueck 2007; Jenatton, Audibert,
and Bach 2011). This kind of methods offer the potential
to select a few highly representative samples or exemplars
to describe the entire dataset. By analyzing a few, we can
roughly know all. Such case is very important to summarize
and visualize huge datasets of texts, images and videos etc.
(Bien and Tibshirani 2011; Elhamifar et al. 2012b). Besides,
by only using the selected exemplars for succeeding tasks,
the cost of memories and computational time will be greatly
reduced (Garcia et al. 2012). Additionally, as outliers are
generally less representative, the side effect of outliers will
be reduced, thus boosting the performance of subsequent applications (Elhamifar et al. 2012a).
There have been several subset selection methods. The
most intuitional method is to randomly select a ﬁxed number
of samples. Although highly efﬁcient, there is no guarantee
for an effective selection. For the other methods, depending on the mechanism of representative exemplars, there are
mainly three categories of selection methods. One category
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3217

