Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Contrastive Unsupervised Word Alignment with Non-Local Features
Yang Liu and Maosong Sun
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Competence, Jiangsu 221009, China
{liuyang2011,sms}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

and hence is unavailable for most language pairs and domains.
As generative and discriminative approaches seem to be
complementary, a number of authors have tried to combine
the advantages of both in recent years (Berg-Kirkpatrick et
al. 2010; Dyer et al. 2011; Dyer, Chahuneau, and Smith
2013). They propose to train log-linear models for word
alignment on unlabeled data, which involves calculating two
expectations of features: one ranging over all possible alignments given observed sentence pairs and another over all
possible sentence pairs and alignments. Due to the complexity and diversity of natural languages, it is intractable to calculate the two expectations. As a result, existing approaches
have to either restrict log-linear models to be locally normalized (Berg-Kirkpatrick et al. 2010) or only use local features to admit efficient dynamic programming algorithms
on compact representations (Dyer et al. 2011). Although it
is possible to use MCMC methods to draw samples from
alignment distributions (DeNero, Bouchard-Cot̂é, and Klein
2008) to calculate expectations of non-local features, it is
computationally expensive to reach the equilibrium distribution. Therefore, including non-local features, which are critical for capturing the divergence between natural languages,
still remains a major challenge in unsupervised learning of
log-linear models for word alignment.
In the paper, we present a contrastive learning approach
to training log-linear models for word alignment on unlabeled data. Instead of maximizing the likelihood of loglinear models on the observed data, our approach follows
contrastive estimation methods (Smith and Eisner 2005;
Gutmann and Hyvärinen 2012) to guide the model to assign
higher probabilities to observed data than to noisy data. To
calculate the expectations of non-local features, we propose
an approximation method called top-n sampling based on
the observation that the probability mass of log-linear models for word alignment is highly concentrated. Hence, our
approach has the following advantages over previous work:

Word alignment is an important natural language processing task that indicates the correspondence between
natural languages. Recently, unsupervised learning of
log-linear models for word alignment has received considerable attention as it combines the merits of generative and discriminative approaches. However, a major
challenge still remains: it is intractable to calculate the
expectations of non-local features that are critical for
capturing the divergence between natural languages. We
propose a contrastive approach that aims to differentiate
observed training examples from noises. It not only introduces prior knowledge to guide unsupervised learning but also cancels out partition functions. Based on the
observation that the probability mass of log-linear models for word alignment is usually highly concentrated,
we propose to use top-n alignments to approximate the
expectations with respect to posterior distributions. This
allows for efficient and accurate calculation of expectations of non-local features. Experiments show that our
approach achieves significant improvements over stateof-the-art unsupervised word alignment methods.

Introduction
Word alignment is a natural language processing (NLP) task
that aims to identify the correspondence between words in
natural languages (Brown et al. 1993). Word-aligned parallel
corpora are an indispensable resource for many NLP tasks
such as machine translation and cross-lingual IR.
Current word alignment approaches can be roughly divided into two categories: generative and discriminative.
Generative approaches are often based on generative models (Brown et al. 1993; Vogel, Ney, and Tillmann 1996;
Liang, Taskar, and Klein 2006), the parameters of which
are learned by maximizing the likelihood of unlabeled data.
One major drawback of these approaches is that they are
hard to extend due to the strong dependencies between submodels. On the other hand, discriminative approaches overcome this problem by leveraging log-linear models (Liu,
Liu, and Lin 2005; Blunsom and Cohn 2006) and linear
models (Taskar, Lacoste-Julien, and Klein 2005; Moore,
Yih, and Bode 2006; Liu, Liu, and Lin 2010) to include arbitrary features. However, labeled data is expensive to build

1. Partition functions canceled out. As learning only involves observed and noisy training examples, our training
objective cancels out partition functions that comprise exponentially many sentence pairs and alignments.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2. Efficient sampling. We use a dynamic programming algorithm to extract top-n alignments, which serve as samples

2295

