Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Unifying Hierarchy of Valuations with Complements and Substitutes
Uriel Feige

Michal Feldman

Nicole Immorlica

Weizmann Institute of Science
uriel.feige@weizmann.ac.il

Tel-Aviv University
mfeldman@tau.ac.il

Microsoft Research
nicimm@gmail.com

Rani Izsak

Brendan Lucier

Vasilis Syrgkanis

Weizmann Institute of Science
ran.izsak@weizmann.ac.il

Microsoft Research
brlucier@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
vasy@microsoft.com

Abstract

valuations do not capture scenarios where certain items
produce more value when acquired in conjunction with
each other (such as a left and right shoe). Complementfree valuations are arguably more well-behaved than general combinatorial valuations in many aspects. From an
algorithmic perspective, complement-free valuations admit
constant-factor polynomial time approximation algorithms
(Feige and Vondrák 2006; Dobzinski and Schapira 2006;
Feige 2006), while general valuations are hard to approximate even to within a factor that is sub-polynomial in
the number of items (Lehmann, O’Callaghan, and Shoham
1999). From a game-theoretic perspective, simple auctions,
such as running simultaneously a single-item first-price auction for each item, induce equilibria that achieve constant
factor approximations to the optimal welfare if all valuations are complement-free (Syrgkanis and Tardos 2013;
Feldman et al. 2013; Hassidim et al. 2011; Christodoulou,
Kovács, and Schapira 2008; Bhawalkar and Roughgarden
2011). In contrast, if valuations exhibit complements, the
worst-case inefficiency grows with the number of items
(Hassidim et al. 2011).
While the theory suggests that complementarities degrade
the performance of combinatorial auctions, they arise very
naturally in many economic scenarios. A prominent example is the FCC spectrum auctions, where it is desirable to
win licenses for the same band of spectrum in adjacent geographical regions. The prevalence of complementarities in
practice calls for a better theoretical understanding of the effect of the level of complementarity on auction performance.
To this end, we introduce a new hierarchy of monotone
set functions called maximum over positive hypergraphs
(MPH), whose level captures the degree of complementarity. A new hierarchy is useful if it has a strong expressiveness
power on the one hand, and algorithmic and economic implications on the other. We show that important classes of functions are captured in low levels of our hierarchy (a detailed
exposition is deferred to Section 1.2). We then present algorithmic and economic results that illustrate the usefulness
of our hierarchy. In particular, we develop an algorithm that
approximates the welfare maximization problem to within a
factor of k + 1, where k is the degree of complementarity.
We further show that an auction that solicits bids on each
item separately and allocates each item to the highest bidder
(at a cost equals to her bid) achieves a 2k-approximation to

We introduce a new hierarchy over monotone set functions,
that we refer to as MPH (Maximum over Positive Hypergraphs). Levels of the hierarchy correspond to the degree of
complementarity in a given function. The highest level of the
hierarchy, MPH-m (where m is the total number of items)
captures all monotone functions. The lowest level, MPH-1,
captures all monotone submodular functions, and more generally, the class of functions known as X OS. Every monotone function that has a positive hypergraph representation of
rank k (in the sense defined by Abraham, Babaioff, Dughmi
and Roughgarden [EC 2012]) is in MPH-k. Every monotone function that has supermodular degree k (in the sense
defined by Feige and Izsak [ITCS 2013]) is in MPH-(k+1).
In both cases, the converse direction does not hold, even in an
approximate sense. We present additional results that demonstrate the expressiveness power of MPH-k.
One can obtain good approximation ratios for some natural optimization problems, provided that functions are required to lie in low levels of the MPH hierarchy. We present
two such applications. One shows that the maximum welfare
problem can be approximated within a ratio of k + 1 if all
players hold valuation functions in MPH-k. The other is an
upper bound of 2k on the price of anarchy of simultaneous
first price auctions.

1

Introduction

In a combinatorial auction setting, a set M of m items is
to be allocated among a set N of n buyers. Each buyer
i ∈ N has a valuation function that assigns a non-negative
real number vi (S) to every bundle of items S ⊆ M . A
well motivated objective is to find a partition of the items
X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ) among the buyers so as to maximize
the social welfare, defined as the sum of P
buyers’ valuations
from the bundles they obtain SW (X) = i∈N vi (Xi ). The
model of combinatorial auctions is highly applicable to realworld settings such as spectrum auctions and electronic advertisement markets.
Most of the existing literature on combinatorial auctions has focused on the case where buyer valuations are
complement-free. Roughly speaking, this means that the
value for the union of two bundles of items cannot exceed the sum of the values for each individual bundle. Such
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

872

