Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Heuristic Induction of Rate-Based Process Models
Pat Langley and Adam Arvay
Department of Computer Science, University of Auckland,
Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand

Abstract

a concrete model, including numeric parameters, that reproduces their trajectories over time and makes accurate predictions for new values. One can compile this model into
a set of differential equations, but it also explains observations in terms of underlying processes. This distinguishes the
paradigm from other work on modeling time series, including alternative methods for finding differential equations.
In the sections that follow, we review drawbacks of previous efforts on inductive process modeling, focusing on
their computational expense and problems with parameter
estimation. In response, we present a new approach to process model induction that adopts representational assumptions which let it carry out heuristic rather than exhaustive
search through the space of model structures, making it both
more efficient and more reliable. We also describe an implemented system that incorporates these ideas, and we report experimental studies that demonstrate its ability to identify relevant processes, handle noisy observations, and construct accurate models that relate many variables. We conclude by discussing our framework’s relation to earlier work
and proposing responses to its limitations.

This paper presents a novel approach to inductive process
modeling, the task of constructing a quantitative account of
dynamical behavior from time-series data and background
knowledge. We review earlier work on this topic, noting its
reliance on methods that evaluate entire model structures and
use repeated simulation to estimate parameters, which together make severe computational demands. In response, we
present an alternative method for process model induction
that assumes each process has a rate, that this rate is determined by an algebraic expression, and that changes due to
a process are directly proportional to its rate. We describe
RPM, an implemented system that incorporates these ideas,
and we report analyses and experiments that suggest it scales
well to complex domains and data sets. In closing, we discuss
related research and outline ways to extend the framework.

1 Background and Motivation
Reasoning about scientific domains is a high-level cognitive task that is widely viewed as requiring considerable intelligence. Over the past three decades, research on computational scientific discovery (Shrager and Langley 1990;
Džeroski and Todorovski 2007) has addressed a variety of
tasks that arise in the pursuit of knowledge. Efforts in this
paradigm are distinguished from mainstream work in data
mining and machine learning by producing content stated in
established scientific formalisms, ranging from componential models in particle physics to causal diagrams in genetics
and to reaction pathways in biochemistry.
Much of the research in this area has focused on equation discovery, which has played a key role in the history of
science and which has clear applications in many different
disciplines. However, this task often arises in the early stages
of a field’s development, before theoretical knowledge supports the creation of explanatory models that account for observations in deeper terms. The task of explanatory model
construction has received less attention from computational
researchers, but there has been some progress on this topic.
One important form of such tasks, known as inductive
process modeling (Langley et al. 2002), accepts generic
knowledge about processes that can occur in a domain and
time-series data for a number of variables. The aim is to find

2 Critique of Process Modeling Research
Research on inductive process modeling has made continual
progress since its first appearance over a decade ago (Langley et al. 2002). Advances have included adding the ability to
incorporate hierarchical knowledge (Todorovski et al. 2005),
handle missing values (Bridewell et al. 2006), combine models without losing interpretability (Bridewell et al. 2005), incorporate constraints to reduce search (Bridewell and Langley 2010), and even learn such constraints from sample
models (Bridewell and Todorovski 2007). The framework
has been applied to model construction in ecology (Asgharbeygi et al. 2006), hydrology (Bridewell et al. 2008), and
biochemistry (Langley et al. 2006). Despite this progress,
research has been hampered by three key features of the induction algorithms used to date.
The first characteristic is that, even though process models are compositional in nature, current algorithms evaluate
only complete model structures. This evaluation involves
comparing a parameterized model’s predictions with observed time series. Existing systems generate many model
structures up to a given complexity level, then parameterize and evaluate each candidate in turn. This approach does

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

537

