Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On the Diagnosis of Cyber-Physical Production Systems:
State-of-the-Art and Research Agenda
Oliver Niggemann and Volker Lohweg
inIT–Institute for Industrial IT, University of Applied Sciences OWL, 32657 Lemgo, Germany
email: {oliver.niggemann, volker.lohweg}@hs-owl.de

Abstract

System
Observations

Cyber-Physical Production Systems (CPPSs) are in the
focus of research, industry and politics: By applying
new IT and new computer science solutions, production
systems will become more adaptable, more resource efficient and more user friendly. The analysis and diagnosis of such systems is a major part of this trend: Plants
should detect automatically wear, faults and suboptimal
configurations. This paper reflects the current state-ofthe-art in diagnosis against the requirements of CPPSs,
identifies three main gaps and gives application scenarios to outline first ideas for potential solutions to close
these gaps.

Sensor
Fusion

Environment
Model

knowledge about the technical, physical, chemical or other
processes are indispensable for modelling diagnosis systems
(Glock et al. 2011).
The term “Diagnosis” summarizes all activities which
identify anomalous behavior and compute the root causes
of those anomalies. Often (Benjamins and Jansweijer 1994;
Reiter 1987; Grastien 2013), the task of diagnosis is split
into the four steps shown in figure 1: Based on the environ-

Anomaly
Detection

Introduction

The diagnosis of distributed production systems has gained
new attention due to research agendas such as Cyberphysical Production Systems (CPPSs) (Lee 2008; Rajkumar et al. 2010) or its German pendant “Industrie 4.0”. In
these agendas, a major focus is on the self-diagnosis capabilities for complex and distributed CPPSs. Typical goals of
such self-diagnosis approaches are the detection of anomalies, suboptimal energy consumptions, error causes in large
plants or wear (Christiansen et al. 2011; Isermann 2004;
Windmann et al. 2013).
All these approaches have in common that they (partially) capture the state of the environment and generate
fused environment information. More technically, an environment model is generated based on several sources such
as sensors, engineering models and experts. In many cases,
the information captured from the environment may be imprecise, incomplete or inconsistent (Li and Lohweg 2008;
Lohweg and Mönks 2010). Furthermore, signal sources may
be not reliable (Ayyub and Klir 2006). Therefore, it is necessary to apply sensor fusion concepts as a first step before any
diagnosis is computed (Mönks and Lohweg 2013). Usually
the main problems in sensor fusion can be described as follows: Too much data, poor models, bad or too many features,
and improperly analysed applications (Hall and Steinberg
JAN 2001). One major misbelief is that machine diagnosis
can be handled only based on the observed data, in reality

Hypotheses
Discrimination

Hypotheses

1

Root Causes

Symptoms

Hypotheses
Generation

Figure 1: Typical steps of a diagnosis process.
ment model computed by means of sensor fusion, anomalous or conspicuous observations are identified. These observations are called symptoms—this second step is therefore
often also called “symptom detection”.
In many cases (Peischl and Wotawa 2003; Gregson, Li,
and Fu 2003; Maier, Tack, and Niggemann 2012), the process ends here and the user is informed about the symptoms.
This is because in modern production plants, the main problem is that symptoms are overlooked due to a too high number of signals. Insofar, an anomaly detection process must
create a low amount of warnings which a user can handle
easily.
In a third step, hypotheses for the root causes are generated (Klar, Huhn, and Gruhser 2011; de Kleer et al. 2013;
Pan et al. 2012). Normally, the root cause can not be identified unambiguously—often because we lack information,
that is, not all intrinsically necessary knowledge is available
(Epistemic Uncertainty).
Therefore, in the fourth step, heuristics or additional observations are used to discriminate between the hypotheses
(Berjaga, Pallares, and Melendez 2009; Stern et al. 2013).
As a result, a root cause is disclosed to the user.
Please note that this paper neither covers the topic of acquiring the observations for CPPSs (Pethig and Niggemann

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4119

