Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Improving Multi-Step Prediction of Learned Time Series Models
Arun Venkatraman, Martial Hebert, and J. Andrew Bagnell
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
arunvenk@cs.cmu.edu, {hebert, dbagnell}@ri.cmu.edu

Abstract

step prediction error. As an example, consider fitting a simple linear dynamical system model for the multi-step error
over the time horizon T from an initial condition x0 ,

Most typical statistical and machine learning approaches to time series modeling optimize a singlestep prediction error. In multiple-step simulation, the
learned model is iteratively applied, feeding through
the previous output as its new input. Any such predictor however, inevitably introduces errors, and these
compounding errors change the input distribution for
future prediction steps, breaking the train-test i.i.d assumption common in supervised learning. We present
an approach that reuses training data to make a no-regret
learner robust to errors made during multi-step prediction. Our insight is to formulate the problem as imitation learning; the training data serves as a “demonstrator” by providing corrections for the errors made during multi-step prediction. By this reduction of multistep time series prediction to imitation learning, we establish theoretically a strong performance guarantee on
the relation between training error and the multi-step
prediction error. We present experimental results of
our method, DA D, and show significant improvement
over the traditional approach in two notably different
domains, dynamic system modeling and video texture
prediction.

A∗ = arg min
A

T
X
t=1

2

xt − At x0 2

(1)

Even this squared-loss objective is difficult to optimize in
two ways: it is non-convex in A, and though differentiable,
the matrix power derivatives are non-trivial. In comparison,
the single-step squared loss used in supervised learning,
A∗ = arg min
A

T
−1
X
t=0

2

kxt+1 − Axt k2

(2)

is more appealing to solve as it has an easy, closed form solution. Abbeel et al. propose a generalization of (1) coined
the “lagged error” criterion which penalizes deviations during forward simulation. However, as noted by the authors,
this objective is also non-linear and non-convex as the second step prediction is conditioned on the output of the first.
They propose either a simpler but still non-convex approximation (Abbeel, Ganapathi, and Ng 2005) that can be iteratively optimized or Expectation Maximization (Abbeel and
Ng 2005b) to find a local optimum to the multi-step error.
If the predictive model is differentiable, one can apply
“backpropagation-through-time” (Werbos 1990; Langford,
Salakhutdinov, and Zhang 2009). Unfortunately, such gradient methods are limited in the model classes they can consider, effectively ruling out broad classes of some of the
most effective regression algorithms including decision trees
and random forests. Moreover, such methods – even on simple linear predictive models – tend to suffer from a “gradient
collapse” and ill-conditioning (Bengio, Simard, and Frasconi 1994), where the gradient decreases exponentially in
the prediction horizon T . Finally, to our knowledge, no formal guarantees have been provided for any such optimization of multi-step predictive error. Perhaps as a result, many
approaches in the literature focus on using single-step prediction models to take advantage of techniques developed in
the statistical and machine learning communities.
In this paper, we introduce a new meta-algorithm, DATA
AS D EMONSTRATOR (DA D), for improving the multi-step
prediction capability of a time-series learner. Our contributions are:

Determining models for time series data is important in applications ranging from market prediction to the simulation
of chemical processes and robotic systems. Many supervised learning approaches have been proposed for this task,
such as neural networks (Narendra and Parthasarathy 1990),
Expectation-Maximization (Ghahramani and Roweis 1999;
Coates, Abbeel, and Ng 2008), Support Vector Regression (Müller, Smola, and Rätsch 1997), Gaussian process
regression (Wang, Hertzmann, and Blei 2005; Ko et al.
2007), Nadaraya-Watson kernel regression (Basharat and
Shah 2009), Gaussian mixture models (Khansari-Zadeh and
Billard 2011), and Kernel PCA (Ralaivola and D’Alche-Buc
2004). Common to most of these methods is that the objective being optimized is the single-step prediction loss. However, this criterion does not guarantee accurate multiple-step
simulation accuracy in which the output of a prediction step
is used as input for the next inference.
The prevalence of single-step modeling approaches is a
result of the difficulty in directly optimizing the multipleCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3024

