Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Challenges in Resource and Cost Allocation
Toby Walsh
NICTA and UNSW
Sydney, Australia

Abstract

Pareto optimal), an interesting direction is to use computation to explore the trade-off between the different notions.
Another reason to apply a computational lens to such
problems is that performance in practice may not be characterised very well by a purely theoretical worst-case analysis. The worst-case may be met very rarely. One tool that
we have used to good effect in a related area of social choice
is identifying computational phase transitions (Walsh 2009;
2010; 2011b). Hard problems may be restricted to a small
part of the parameter space. This approach has proved very
useful in a number of domains (e.g. (Cheeseman, Kanefsky, and Taylor 1991; Mitchell, Selman, and Levesque 1992;
Gent and Walsh 1994; 1996b; 1996a)). Another, related
tool that has proved useful in several closely related domains like scheduling (allocating time slots) is parameterized complexity (e.g. (Bessière et al. 2008; Walsh 2008;
Chu et al. 2013)). The worst-case may require, say, many
agents or the number of items to be unrealistically large. If
we can bound parameters describing the problem like the
number of agents, problems may be tractable.
The research proposed here lies at an exciting interface
which is opening up between optimisation, social choice and
game theory. In the past, researchers have consciously simplified models of fair division and cost allocation as a means
of making progress. By contrast, we propose here that more
complex models should be tackled head on. We have the advantage that we can now throw significant computational resources at these problems. In addition, we have the advantage of being able to design mechanisms for new (computational) markets. Many of these markets are emerging in the
internet and in mobile settings where we can (and in some
cases must) use computational agents to do the allocation.
Much of the motivation driving this proposed research
comes from the not-for-profit and public sector. In these domains, criteria like fairness are often very important, and the
transfer of money may not be possible for legal, ethical and
other reasons. Indeed, fairness is looking increasingly likely
to be a major driver of political and economic reform over
the next few decades. It is therefore very timely to explore
how computation can be used to increase fairness and efficiency. Note that there are other areas of resource allocation
like combinatorial auctions where complex and more realistic models have already been under development for some
time but fairness is not necessarily the primary concern.

Many models and mechanisms in resource and cost allocation have been developed that are simple and abstract. By
means of two case studies, I argue that it is now timely to
consider richer models for the fair division of resources and
for the allocation of costs. Such models should have features
like asynchronicity which reflect more of the true complexity of many fair division and cost allocation problems met in
the real world. I suggest that computation can be used in such
models to increase both efficiency and fairness of the allocations. As a result, we may be able to do more with fewer
resources and greater fairness.

Introduction
Resource allocation considers how to share contested resources between agents. We focus here on fair division, the
special case of resource allocation where the goal is simply
to allocate resources fairly and money is not exchanged. For
instance, we might want to share viewing slots on a large
telescope, or CPUs in a cloud server within the university.
We also consider cost allocation. This looks at how to divide
costs between agents sharing some resource in a fair way.
For instance, we might want to divide the costs of running a
smart grid between its users, or the costs of a supply chain
amongst all the customers to whom we are delivering goods.
Computation is a powerful weapon in solving fair division
and cost allocation problems. It can, as we shall argue, help
us deal with larger and more complex models than are possible to reason about manually. Computation can also be used
to improve both fairness and efficiency. There are several
notions of efficiency and fairness in the fair division literature. These include envy freeness (no agent would prefer
another’s allocation), equitability (every agent assigns the
same utility to their allocation), proportionality (each of the
n agents assigns at least n1 of their total utility to their allocation), Pareto optimality (there is no other allocation in which
one agent is better off and all the other agents are not worst
off), as well as welfare notions like utilitarian and egalitarian optimality. As many of these notions can conflict (e.g.
giving all items to one agent is Pareto optimal but not equitable, whilst throwing away all the items is equitable but not
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4073

