Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Non-Linear Regression for Bag-of-Words Data
via Gaussian Process Latent Variable Set Model
Yuya Yoshikawa

Tomoharu Iwata

Nara Institute of Science and Technology
8916-5, Takayama-cho, Ikoma-shi,
Nara, Japan
yoshikawa.yuya.yl9@is.naist.jp

NTT Communication Science
Laboratories, NTT Corporation
2-4, Hikaridai, Seika-cho,
Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan
iwata.tomoharu@lab.ntt.co.jp

Hiroshi Sawada
NTT Service Evolution Laboratories,
NTT Corporation
1-1 Hikari-no-Oka, Yokosuka-shi,
Kanagawa, Japan
sawada.hiroshi@lab.ntt.co.jp
Abstract

such regression problems in various domains, e.g. natural language processing (Cohn and Specia 2013), time series analysis (Preotiuc-Pietro and Cohn 2013), computer vision (Kapoor et al. 2009) and data mining (Lampos and Aletras 2014). The performance of the GP regression generally
depends on whether it can properly capture the covariance
structure of target variables, which is represented by kernels between input data (e.g. documents). The GP regression for BoW representation has a major weakness that the
co-occurrence of different but relevant words cannot be reflected in the kernel calculation. For example, when dealing with a problem of predicting ratings from item review
texts, ‘good’ and ‘excellent’ are semantically similar and
characteristic words for high rating reviews. Nevertheless, in
the BoW representation, the two words might not affect the
computation of the kernel value between the texts because
many kernels, e.g. linear, polynomial and Gaussian RBF kernels, evaluate kernel values based on word co-occurrences in
a document.

Gaussian process (GP) regression is a widely used
method for non-linear prediction. The performance of
the GP regression depends on whether it can properly capture the covariance structure of target variables,
which is represented by kernels between input data.
However, when the input is represented as a set of features, e.g. bag-of-words, it is difficult to calculate desirable kernel values because the co-occurrence of different but relevant words cannot be reflected in the kernel
calculation. To overcome this problem, we propose a
Gaussian process latent variable set model (GP-LVSM),
which is a non-linear regression model effective for
bag-of-words data. With the GP-LVSM, a latent vector
is associated with each word, and each document is represented as a distribution of the latent vectors for words
appearing in the document. We efficiently represent the
distributions by using the framework of kernel embeddings of distributions that can hold high-order moment
information of distributions without need for explicit
density estimation. By learning latent vectors so as to
maximize the posterior probability, kernels that reflect
relations between words are obtained, and also words
are visualized in a low-dimensional space. In experiments using 25 item review datasets, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of the GP-LVSM in prediction and visualization.

1

To overcome this weakness, we propose a Gaussian process latent variable set model (GP-LVSM), which is a nonlinear regression model effective for BoW data. Figure 1 illustrates the GP-LVSM. The GP-LVSM assumes that a latent vector is associated with each vocabulary term, and
each document is represented as a distribution of the latent vectors for words appearing in the document. By using
the framework of kernel embeddings (Smola et al. 2007),
we can effectively represent the distributions without density estimation while preserving necessary information of
distributions. In particular, the GP-LVSM maps each distribution into a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS),
and generates a regression function from a Gaussian process
with the covariance structures calculated by kernels between
documents on the RKHS. The learning of the GP-LVSM is
based on maximizing a posterior (MAP) estimation, which
is performed by updating the latent vectors for words and

Introduction

In many regression problems, the input is represented as a
set of features. A typical example of such features is bagof-words (BoW) representation, which is used for representing a document as a multiset of words appearing in
the document while ignoring the order of the words. Gaussian process (GP) regression is a widely used method for
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3129

