Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Handling owl:sameAs via Rewriting
Boris Motik, Yavor Nenov, Robert Piro and Ian Horrocks
Department of Computer Science, Oxford University
Oxford, United Kingdom
forename.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

technique for theorem proving with equality (Baader and
Nipkow 1998; Nieuwenhuis and Rubio 2001). In the OWL 2
RL setting, rewriting consists of choosing one representative
from each set of equal resources, and replacing all remaining resources in the set with the representative. Variants of
this idea have been implemented in many of the above mentioned systems, and they have been shown to be very effective on practical data sets (Kolovski, Wu, and Eadon 2010).
Although the idea of rewriting is well known, ensuring
its correctness (i.e., ensuring that the answer to an arbitrary
SPARQL query is the same with and without rewriting) is
not straightforward. In this paper we identify two problems
that, we believe, have been commonly overlooked in existing implementations. First, whenever a resource r is rewritten in the data, r must also be rewritten in the rules; hence,
the rule set cannot be assumed to be fixed during the course
of materialisation, which is particularly problematic if computation is parallelised. Second, it is a common assumption
that SPARQL queries can be efficiently evaluated over the
materialisation by rewriting them, evaluating them over the
rewritten triples, and then ‘expanding’ the answer set (i.e.,
substituting all representative resources with equal ones in
all possible ways). However, such an approach can be incorrect when SPARQL queries are evaluated under bag semantics, or when they contain builtin functions.
We address both issues in this paper and make the following contributions. In Section 3 we discuss the problems
related to owl:sameAs in more detail and show how they can
lead to both increased computation costs and incorrect query
answers. In Section 4 we present an algorithm that generalises OWL 2 RL materialisation, can also handle SWRL
rules (Horrocks et al. 2004), rewrites rules as well as data
triples, and is lock-free (Herlihy and Shavit 2008). The latter
means that at least one thread always makes progress, ensuring that the system is less susceptible to adverse thread
scheduling decisions and thus scales better to many threads.
In Section 5 we show how to modify SPARQL query processing so as to guarantee correctness. Finally, in Section 6
we present a preliminary evaluation of an implementation
of our algorithms in the open-source RDFox system. We
show that rewriting can reduce the number of materialised
triples by a factor of up to 7.8, and can reduce materialisation time by a factor of up to 31.1 on a single thread, with
the time saving being largely due to the elimination of dupli-

Rewriting is widely used to optimise owl:sameAs reasoning in materialisation based OWL 2 RL systems. We investigate issues related to both the correctness and efficiency of
rewriting, and present an algorithm that guarantees correctness, improves efficiency, and can be effectively parallelised.
Our evaluation shows that our approach can reduce reasoning
times on practical data sets by orders of magnitude.

1

Introduction

RDF (Manola and Miller 2004) and SPARQL (Harris and
Seaborne 2013) are increasingly being used to store and access semistructured data. An OWL ontology (Motik, PatelSchneider, and Parsia 2012) is often used to enhance query
answers with tuples implied by the ontology and data, and
the OWL 2 RL profile was specifically designed to allow
for tractable rule-based query answering (Motik et al. 2012).
In practice, the latter often involves using a forward chaining procedure in which the materialisation (i.e., all consequences) of the ontology and data is computed in a preprocessing step, allowing queries to be evaluated directly over
the materialised triples. This technique is used by systems
such as Owlgres (Stocker and Smith 2008), WebPIE (Urbani
et al. 2012), Oracle’s RDF store (Wu et al. 2008), OWLIM
SE (Bishop et al. 2011), and RDFox (Motik et al. 2014a).
One disadvantage of materialisation is that the preprocessing step can be costly w.r.t. both the computation and the
storage of entailed triples. This problem is exacerbated when
materialisation requires equality reasoning—that is, when
the owl:sameAs property is used to state equalities between
resources. OWL 2 RL/RDF (Motik et al. 2012, Section 4.3)
axiomatises the semantics of owl:sameAs using rules such
as hs0 , p, oi ← hs, p, oi ∧ hs, owl:sameAs, s0 i that, for each
pair of equal resources r and r0 , ‘copy’ all triples between
r and r0 . It is well known that such ‘copying’ can severely
impact both the materialisation size and time (Kolovski, Wu,
and Eadon 2010); what is less obvious is that the increase in
computation time due to duplicate derivations may be even
more serious (see Section 3).
In order to address this problem, materialisation based
systems often use some form of rewriting—a well-known
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

231

