Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

TDS+: Improving Temperature Discovery Search
Yeqin Zhang and Martin Müller
Computing Science, University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
{yeqin,mmueller}@ualberta.ca

Abstract

to position repetition rules (Berlekamp and Wolfe 1994;
Müller 1999). Like much prior work, the examples and experiments here use the game of Amazons, which combines
features of both chess and Go and is a perfect fit for the sum
game model.

Temperature Discovery Search (TDS) is a forward
search method for computing or approximating the temperature of a combinatorial game. Temperature and
mean are important concepts in combinatorial game theory, which can be used to develop efficient algorithms
for playing well in a sum of subgames. A new algorithm TDS+ with five enhancements of TDS is developed, which greatly speeds up both exact and approximate versions of TDS. Means and temperatures can be
computed faster, and fixed-time approximations which
are important for practical play can be computed with
higher accuracy than before.

9
8
7
6
5
4
3

Introduction

2

Two player games with perfect information can be analyzed by search techniques based on the minimax principle. Standard forward search techniques include alphabeta
(αβ) search (Knuth and Moore 1975), proof number search
and its many variants (Kishimoto et al. 2012), and recently,
Monte Carlo Tree Search (Browne et al. 2012). Retrograde
analysis (Bellman 1965) constructs endgame databases by
backwards search. Such databases reduce the forward search
depth needed to solve a game.
Many games of small to medium complexity have been
solved by such search methods. Effective techniques for
more complex games employ deep search which uses either
a game-specific evaluation function, or randomized simulations, or a combination. The focus of the work presented
here is on games with special combinatorial structure, which
allows powerful purely algorithmic improvements.

1
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

Figure 1: Amazons position with independent subgames
in each corner, from (Müller, Enzenberger, and Schaeffer
2004).
In Amazons, each player controls four amazons which
move like chess queens, but also shoot arrows which “burn
off” empty squares. An Amazons move is specified by the
locations involved as from − to × arrow, such as move A2–
A3×C3 for White in Figure 1. Areas that are completely surrounded by burned off squares can be viewed as subgames
which are independent from the rest of the board. In Figure 1, from (Müller, Enzenberger, and Schaeffer 2004), solid
walls of burnt off squares separate a roughly 4 × 4 region in
each corner to form a subgame that is independent from the
rest of the board. In terms of combinatorial game theory, the
overall game position can be represented as a sum of four
much simpler subgames G1 + G2 + G3 + G4 .
Algorithms for playing sum games emphasize local analysis of each subgame, since the computational complexity is
much lower than when dealing with the whole sum at once.
Two important characteristics of a subgame are its temperature, which measures the urgency of playing in a subgame,
and its mean, a score indicating the advantage of the Black
player in this subgame. By convention, for scoring purposes,
Black = Left = positive and White = Right = negative.
Classically, means and temperatures are computed

Combinatorial Game Theory
Combinatorial game theory (Berlekamp, Conway, and Guy
1982; Conway 2001) studies games which can be viewed as
a sum of independent subgames. Each move changes exactly
one subgame. The player able to make the last move overall
wins. A recent textbook covering the theory is (Siegel 2013).
The ancient Asian game of Go is a very well-studied
classical two player game. Go endgames can be mapped
to the combinatorial game model. This mapping is meaningful but not quite perfect because of problems related
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1241

