Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Solving Games with Functional Regret Estimation
Kevin Waugh†

Dustin Morrill∗

J. Andrew Bagnell†

Michael Bowling∗

waugh@cs.cmu.edu

morrill@ualberta.ca

dbagnell@ri.cmu.edu

mbowling@ualberta.ca

School of Computer Science†

Department of Computing Science∗

Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

2-21 Athabasca Hall
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2E8 Canada
Texas hold’em has 8.2 · 10160 such sequences (Johanson
2013, p. 12)). Even specialized equilibrium-finding algorithms have no hope of solving this game in its extensiveform representation. Here, much of the recent progress has
employed abstraction, grouping together similar situations
and actions based on domain knowledge (Gilpin, Sandholm,
and Sorensen 2007; Johanson 2007).
Using abstraction as a preliminary step to capture all of
the possible structure of the domain is unsatisfying. It can
place limitations on how structural features are exploited,
e.g., in extensive-form games the resulting abstraction must
be discrete and result in perfect recall. Furthermore, it requires the practitioner to have foresight as to what the learner
might face when it is actually making decisions.
In this paper, we present a new algorithm for online learning in adversarial sequential decision-making scenarios that
makes use of structural features of the domain during learning. In particular, we employ an online regressor from domain features to approximate regrets incurred by the regret
minimizing online algorithm. This simple change allows the
algorithm to employ more general forms of abstraction, and
can change and tune the abstraction to both the game and
its solution. We prove a bound on our approach relating the
accuracy of the regressor to the regret of the algorithm and
demonstrate its efficacy in a simplified poker game.

Abstract
We propose a novel online learning method for minimizing regret in large extensive-form games. The approach learns a function approximator online to estimate the regret for choosing a particular action. A noregret algorithm uses these estimates in place of the true
regrets to define a sequence of policies.
We prove the approach sound by providing a bound relating the quality of the function approximation and regret of the algorithm. A corollary being that the method
is guaranteed to converge to a Nash equilibrium in selfplay so long as the regrets are ultimately realizable by
the function approximator. Our technique can be understood as a principled generalization of existing work
on abstraction in large games; in our work, both the
abstraction as well as the equilibrium are learned during self-play. We demonstrate empirically the method
achieves higher quality strategies than state-of-the-art
abstraction techniques given the same resources.

Introduction
Online learning in sequential decision-making scenarios has
wide ranging applications (e.g., online path planning (Awerbuch and Kleinberg 2004), opponent exploitation (Southey,
Hoehn, and Holte 2009), and portfolio optimization (Hazan
et al. 2006)). While many such applications have considerable structure, often this structure is lost when formulating the application into a traditional problem specification
such as a multi-armed bandit or extensive-form game. Since
regret-minimizing algorithms usually require computational
resources and learning time that grows with the problem
representation size, losing this structure often makes the resulting problem intractable. Currently, the remedy is for the
practitioner to abstract the original domain based on structural features into a problem with a tractable representation
size (e.g., using domain knowledge to preselect a small number of likely-orthogonal choices in a multi-armed bandit).
Consider the popular testbed of poker. The human-played
game is highly-structured with a compact set of rules. Its
unstructured extensive-form game representation, however,
with nodes in the game tree for every possible sequence
of states is anything but compact (viz., two-player, no-limit

Regression Regret-Matching
Let us begin by presenting a new, yet simple, algorithm for
the standard online learning framework. Let A be the set
of N actions or experts. On each time step t ∈ [T ] ≡
{1, . . . , T }, the online algorithm chooses xt ∈ ∆A , a distribution over the experts, then observes ut , a bounded reward
vector where kut k∞ ≤ L2 . The algorithm receives reward
(xt · ut ) and then updates its prediction.
An algorithm’s external regret compares its performance
to the best expert in hindsight. To be no-regret is to have
regret grow sublinearly in T ,
Rext = max
∗

x ∈∆A

T
X

(x∗ · ut ) − (xt · ut ) ∈ o(T ).

t=1

That is, its average regret goes to zero in the worst-case.
A simple algorithm with this property is regret-matching.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2138

