Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On the Impossibility of Convex Inference in Human Computation
Nihar B. Shah

Dengyong Zhou

U.C. Berkeley
nihar@eecs.berkeley.edu

Microsoft Research
dengyong.zhou@microsoft.com

Abstract

Does the picture show a Bengal tiger ?

Human computation or crowdsourcing involves joint
inference of the ground-truth-answers and the workerabilities by optimizing an objective function, for instance, by maximizing the data likelihood based on an
assumed underlying model. A variety of methods have
been proposed in the literature to address this inference
problem. As far as we know, none of the objective functions in existing methods is convex. In machine learning and applied statistics, a convex function such as the
objective function of support vector machines (SVMs)
is generally preferred, since it can leverage the highperformance algorithms and rigorous guarantees established in the extensive literature on convex optimization. One may thus wonder if there exists a meaningful
convex objective function for the inference problem in
human computation. In this paper, we investigate this
convexity issue for human computation. We take an axiomatic approach by formulating a set of axioms that
impose two mild and natural assumptions on the objective function for the inference. Under these axioms, we
show that it is unfortunately impossible to ensure convexity of the inference problem. On the other hand, we
show that interestingly, in the absence of a requirement
to model “spammers”, one can construct reasonable objective functions for crowdsourcing that guarantee convex inference.

1

Yes
No

Figure 1: An example of a binary-choice task.
Shah et al. 2014; Matsui et al. 2013; Piech et al. 2013;
Chen et al. 2013). These algorithms infer the true solutions to the tasks and the worker abilities by minimizing
some carefully designed function that captures these parameters and their dependence on the observed responses. We
shall call this function the “objective function”. For example, it is typical to assume a generative model and take a
maximum likelihood estimation. In such a case, the objective function is the negative-likelihood or the negativelog-likelihood of the data obtained from the workers, and
Expectation-Maximization (EM) style optimization procedures are often employed to minimize this function (Dawid
and Skene 1979; Whitehill et al. 2009; Welinder et al. 2010;
Raykar et al. 2010; Liu, Peng, and Ihler 2012; Zhou et al.
2012; Chen et al. 2013).
To the best our knowledge, none of the objective functions
in the literature for the inference problem in human computation is convex, and there are no generic guarantees available regarding obtaining a global optimum. Inspired by the
extremely successful machine learning algorithms which are
developed with convex objective functions (such as support
vector machines (SVMs) (Vapnik 1998)), we investigate if
there exists a meaningful convex objective function for the
inference problem in human computation. Convex functions have appealing properties, and convex problems have
been studied extensively in the literature, with high performance algorithms and rigorous guarantees available for very
generic settings. It is thus of interest to investigate ‘reasonable’ models for human computation that ensure convexity
in inference, thereby providing the ability to take advantage
of this vast body of literature.
In this paper, we investigate the problem of convexity in

Introduction

Human computation (or crowdsourcing) involves humans
performing tasks which are generally difficult for computers to perform. Since humans may not have perfect abilities and sometimes may not even have good intentions, machine learning and statistical inference algorithms are typically employed to post-process the data obtained from the
human workers in order to infer the true answers (Dawid
and Skene 1979; Whitehill et al. 2009; Welinder et al. 2010;
Raykar et al. 2010; Karger, Oh, and Shah 2011; Wauthier
and Jordan 2011; McCreadie, Macdonald, and Ounis 2011;
Luon, Aperjis, and Huberman 2012; Zhou et al. 2012;
Liu, Peng, and Ihler 2012; Shah et al. 2013; Bachrach et al.
2012; Kamar, Hacker, and Horvitz 2012; Vempaty, Varshney, and Varshney 2013; Salek, Bachrach, and Key 2013;
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1291

