Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Modelling Individual Negative Emotion
Spreading Process with Mobile Phones
Zhanwei Du,Yongjian Yang, Chuang Ma, Yuan Bai
Jilin University
Changchun, 130012 PRC
zwdu@acm.org, yyj@jlu.edu.cn,machuangstu@163.com, baiyuan722@163.com

Abstract

life. Besides, it is generally expensive and difficult for us
to track many people’s communication and mood everyday
(Bolger, Davis, and Rafaeli 2003). Thus most current works
focus their efforts on population level and short-term small
group.
Here we focus on the long-term daily data in individual
level, to explore the negative sentiment spreading mechanism. Specifically, we focus on the negative emotion spread
process, due to its greater emotional contagion and independence of positive emotion(Golder and Macy 2011). Studying
people’s negative sentiment contamination is challenging:
macroscopic laws may not apply to individual level. The social network may play a different role. So in individual level,
how negative sentiment spread?
In this paper, we introduce a metric to measure people’s frustrating energy, and give a general sentiment spread
model to simulate and compute this metric, with considering
the differences between sentiment contamination and traditional epidemic contamination.

Individual mood is important for physical and emotional well-being, creativity and working memory.
However, due to the lack of long-term real tracking
daily data in individual level, most current works focus
their efforts on population level and short-term small
group. An ignored yet important task is to find the sentiment spreading mechanism in individual level from
their daily behavior data. This paper studies this task by
raising the following fundamental and summarization
question, being not sufficiently answered by the literature so far:Given a social network, how the sentiment
spread?
The current individual-level network spreading models
always assume one can infect others only when he/she
has been infected. Considering the negative emotion
spreading characters in individual level, we loose this
assumption, and give an individual negative emotion
spreading model. In this paper, we propose a GraphCoupled Hidden Markov Sentiment Model for modeling the propagation of infectious negative sentiment locally within a social network.
Taking the MIT Social Evolution dataset as an example, the experimental results verify the efficacy of our
techniques on real-world data.

Problem Definitions
Here, we introduce the following statistic metric F rui to
assess people’s negative emotion contamination ability (Du
et al. 2014). This metric represents the probability a person’s
encounters feel negative.
Problem (The Emotion Spreading Problem) Given a
dynamic social network, how the negative sentiment spread
in the network between people featured by frustrating score
F rui ?
To solve the Emotion Spreading Problem, a general sentiment spread model is needed to simulate and compute this
metric, with considering the differences between sentiment
contamination and traditional epidemic contamination.

Introduction
Well-being is a important measure of people’s quality of life.
Increasing people and organizations place greater emphasis
on exploring the secret of individual emotion shift. Emotional contagion in social network plays a significant role
to understand people’s emotional change. Sentiment, such
as oppression and unhappiness, can contaminate others, just
like the virus (Miller 2011). Emotional states can be transferred directly from one individual to another by emotional
contagion, perhaps by the emotionally relevant bodily actions, particularly facial expressions, seen in others.
Many works do the emotional contagion research in
computer-mediated communication systems (Hancock et al.
2008). Unfortunately, identifying how contagion begin and
develop in these environments is difficult because estimation
is confounded by the incomplete monitor of people’s daily

A General Emotion Spread Model
In this section, we will introduce a general emotion spread
model to simulate the epidemic process and compute the
F rui . Inspired by the epidemic model used in MIT Social
Evolution Dataset (Dong, Pentland, and Heller 2012), the
following model is proposed to model the spread of negative sentiments. A Gibbs sampling method is also given out
to solve this model. Here, in keeping with the SIS model,
we assume that there are certain transmission rates for the

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4156

