Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Efficient Computation of Semivalues for Game-Theoretic Network Centrality
Piotr L. Szczepański∗

Mateusz K. Tarkowski∗

Warsaw University of Technology, Poland

University of Oxford, United Kingdom

Tomasz P. Michalak1,2 and Paul Harrenstein1 and Michael Wooldridge1
1

University of Oxford, United Kingdom
2
University of Warsaw, Poland

Abstract

reader to Tarkowski et al. (2014) for an overview on the
topic. This approach has been considered for a variety of
applications, such as social and organisational network analysis (Suri and Narahari 2010), biological networks (Kotter et
al. 2007), and covert networks (Michalak et al. 2013a).
Many studies of the complexity of game-theoretic solution concepts have been carried out over the past decade
(see Chalkiadakis, Elkind, and Wooldridge (2012)). Unfortunately, for many representations of games, the solution
concepts of most interest are computationally intractable
(typically, #P -complete). However, only a few studies to
date have investigated whether negative complexity results
carry over when these solution concepts are applied to network centrality. Among those, Michalak et al. (2013a) established that computing the Shapley value-based centrality
measure for connectivity games on graphs is #P -complete.
It is also known that various other cooperative games on
graphs that could be used as centrality measures are challenging (Nebel 2011; Aziz and de Keijzer 2014). 1
Fortunately, positive results have also been established.
In particular, it is possible to compute in polynomial time
various Shapley value-based centrality measures that extend
standard degree and closeness centrality (Michalak et al.
2013b). A similar positive result was obtained for the standard betweenness centrality (Szczepański, Michalak, and
Rahwan 2012). However, many other centrality measures
have not been extended to game-theoretic centrality, nor is
the computational complexity of such extensions known.
In this paper, we address this issue. We present a general
framework in which it is possible to construct a variety of
game-theoretic network centralities (and, in particular, extensions of standard centrality measures) such that they can
be computed in polynomial time. Using this key result, we
are able to present game-theoretic extensions of weighted
and normalized degree centralities, impact factor centrality,
distance-scaled and normalized betweenness centrality, and
closeness and normalized closeness centralities. As a corollary of our general result, all of these centrality measures can
be computed in polynomial time.

Solution concepts from cooperative game theory, such
as the Shapley value or the Banzhaf index, have recently been advocated as interesting extensions of standard measures of node centrality in networks. While
this direction of research is promising, the computation of game-theoretic centrality can be challenging. In an attempt to address the computational issues of game-theoretic network centrality, we present
a generic framework for constructing game-theoretic
network centralities. We prove that all extensions that
can be expressed in this framework are computable in
polynomial time. Using our framework, we present the
first game-theoretic extensions of weighted and normalized degree centralities, impact factor centrality,
distance-scaled and normalized betweenness centrality,
and closeness and normalized closeness centralities.

Introduction
Determining whether a given node or edge in a network is
more significant (or central) than another is an important research topic, studied in fields like social network analysis,
biology, and computer science. To this end, researchers have
proposed a range of centrality measures that aim to numerically characterise the centrality of a node or edge. Among
the numerous centrality measures proposed in the literature,
the four most fundamental and prominent are degree centrality, closeness centrality, betweenness centrality (Freeman 1979), and eigenvector centrality (Bonacich 1972).
Recently, solution concepts from the field of cooperative game theory (e.g., the Shapley value (Shapley 1953),
the Banzhaf power index (Banzhaf 1965), and, more generally, semivalues (Dubey, Neyman, and Weber 1981)) have
been advocated as measures of network centrality extending standard centrality measures (Gómez et al. 2003; Amer,
Giménez, and Magaña 2012). The basic idea behind gametheoretic network centrality is to consider network nodes as
players in a cooperative game (where players form coalitions
and divide between them the payoff from cooperation). In
this setting, game-theoretic solution concepts of payoff division become metrics for network analysis. We refer the

1

∗

In principle, any cooperative game described on a graph and an
associated solution concept can be considered as a game-theoretic
centrality measure.

Both first authors contributed equally to the paper.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

461

