Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Lifting Model Sampling for General Game Playing
to Incomplete-Information Models
Michael Schofield and Michael Thielscher
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The University of New South Wales
{mschofield, mit}@cse.unsw.edu.au

Abstract

both use standard model sampling as a partial solution to
this challenge. The sampled states are then used to form the
root of a separate perfect information search.
An obvious criticism of these sampling methods is that
they value information at zero because each individual sample assumes perfect information at all times (Frank and
Basin 2001). This was confirmed at the incomplete information track of the GGP competition at the Australasian Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence; where three games,
NumberGuessing, BankerAndThief, BattleshipsInFog, were
specifically designed to test the ability of players to value
information. None of the competitors were able to do so.2
In this paper we propose HyperPlay-II (for: HyperPlay
with incomplete information models) as an extension of the
original model sampling technique HyperPlay (Schofield,
Cerexhe, and Thielscher 2012). This extended technique is
able to play a much larger class of games by reasoning on incomplete information models. Our analysis and experimental results show that the new technique values information
correctly according to the expected cost/benefit, performs
information gathering moves when appropriate, is protective
of information that should remain discreet, and requires no
additional resources over its predecessor.
This paper is organised as follows. First, we recapitulate
the basics of General Game Playing and related work. We
formally present both techniques3 ; then we report on experimental comparisons using the aforementioned games. We
conclude with a short discussion.

General Game Playing is the design of AI systems able
to understand the rules of new games and to use such descriptions to play those games effectively. Games with
incomplete information have recently been added as a
new challenge for general game-playing systems. The
only published solutions to this challenge are based
on sampling complete information models. In doing so
they ground all of the unknown information, thereby
making information gathering moves of no value; a
well-known criticism of such sampling based systems.
We present and analyse a method for escalating reasoning from complete information models to incomplete information models and show how this enables
a general game player to correctly value information
in incomplete information games. Experimental results
demonstrate the success of this technique over standard
model sampling.

Introduction
General Game Playing (GGP) is concerned with the design
of AI systems able to take the rules of any game described
in a formal language; and to play that game effectively.
Games with perfect information have made advances due,
mostly, to the standardisation of the Game Description Language (GDL) (Love et al. 2006) and its widespread adoption.
For example, in the AAAI GGP Competition (Genesereth,
Love, and Pell 2005). Successful players employ either:
automatically generated evaluation functions (Clune 2007;
Schiffel and Thielscher 2007); or some form of Monte Carlo
technique such as the modern UCT (Björnsson and Finnsson
2009; Méhat and Cazenave 2011).
Games with imperfect1 information have recently been
added as a new challenge for existing general game playing systems (Thielscher 2010). However little progress has
been made on these types of games beyond a specification of
their rules (Quenault and Cazenave 2007; Thielscher 2011).
The only published approaches to modelling and playing incomplete information games (Edelkamp, Federholzner, and
Kissmann 2012; Schofield, Cerexhe, and Thielscher 2012)

Related Work
The declarative game description language (GDL) has been
defined as a formal language that allows an arbitrary game
to be specified by a complete set of rules (Genesereth, Love,
and Pell 2005). It uses a logic programming-like syntax and
is characterised by a few keywords. These are highlighted in
an example shown below, in Figure 1.
Originally for complete information games, GDL has
been extended to GDL-II (for: GDL with imperfect information) to allow for arbitrary, finite games with randomised
moves and incomplete information (Thielscher 2010).

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
GGP uses “imperfect” where general AI uses “incomplete”.
We will use “incomplete”.

2
3

3585

see https://wiki.cse.unsw.edu.au/ai2012/GGP.
The new technique is built on the formalism of the old.

