Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

GEF: A Self-Programming Robot Using Grammatical Evolution
Charles Peabody and Jennifer Seitzer
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Rollins College, Winter Park, FL 32789
{cpeabody, jseitzer}@rollins.edu
http://myweb.rollins.edu/JSEITZER

automatically create an optimal robot controller-program to
direct a Finch robot to solve simple navigation problems.

Abstract
Grammatical Evolution (GE) is that area of genetic
algorithms that evolves computer programs in high-level
languages possessing a BNF grammar. In this work, we
present GEF (“Grammatical Evolution for the Finch”), a
system that employs grammatical evolution to create a
Finch robot controller program in Java. The system uses
both the traditional GE model as well as employing
extensions and augmentations that push the boundaries of
goal-oriented contexts in which robots typically act
including a meta-level handler that fosters a level of selfawareness in the robot.

Grammatical Evolution
Genetic algorithms (GA) is the basis for evolutionary
computation which iteratively evolves solutions to
problems using a continuous iterative algorithm of
generate–measure–select of evolving solutions called
chromosomes [Holland 1995].

To handle contingencies, the GEF system has been endowed
with the ability to perform meta-level jumps. When
confronted with unplanned events and dynamic changes in
the environment, our robot will automatically transition to
pursue another goal, changing fitness functions, and
generate and invoke operating system level scripting to
facilitate the change. The robot houses a raspberry pi
controller that is capable of executing one (evolved)
program while wirelessly receiving another over an
asynchronous client. This work is part of an overall project
that involves planning for contingencies. In this poster, we
present the development framework and system architecture
of GEF, including the newly discovered meta-level handler,
as well as some other system successes, failures, and
insights.

Introduction

Fig.1 System GEF Components and Behavior [Seitzer2014]

Machine learning is an area of artificial intelligence in
which computer systems are built to extract patterns and
knowledge from data for the purpose of solving complex
tasks [Russel2010]. One method of machine learning is the
use of Genetic Algorithms (GA) inspired by mechanisms
of biological evolution [Booker1989]. The work presented
here uses a derivative of GAs known as Grammatical
Evolution (GE) [Ryan1998] of which the computer system
GEF (“Grammatical Evolution for the Finch”) was built to

Genetic programming (GP) uses the techniques established
in GA to derive solutions in the form of LISP programs –
that is, it evolves computer programs in the language of
LISP [Koza 1992]. Grammatical evolution (GE) extends
the work of GP by evolving computer programs in any
imperative computer language that has an associated
Bakus-Naur Form (BNF) grammar. In GE, the high-level
programming language (e.g., Java) is represented in a data
structure with a format spawned from the BNF
representation and exploits the multiple options inherent in
grammar rules to exhaustively create the many different
possibilities of programming statements.

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4194

