Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Ordering-Sensitive and Semantic-Aware Topic Modeling
Min Yang

The University of Hong Kong
myang@cs.hku.hk

Tianyi Cui

Zhejiang University
tianyicui@gmail.com

Abstract

Wenting Tu

The University of Hong Kong
wttu@cs.hku.hk

successful (Teh et al. 2006; Steyvers and Griffiths 2007).
Nevertheless, exact inference for these model is computationally hard, so one has to resort to slow or inaccurate approximations to compute the posterior distribution over topics. New undirected graphical model approaches, including
the Replicated softmax model (Hinton and Salakhutdinov
2009), are also successfully applied to exploring the topics of the text, and in particular cases they outperform LDA
(Srivastava, Salakhutdinov, and Hinton 2013).
A major limitation of these topic models and many of
their extensions is the bag-of-word assumption, which assumes that document can be fully characterized by bag-ofword features. This assumption is favorable in the computational point of view, but loses the ordering of the words and
cannot properly capture the semantics of the context. For
example, the phrases “the department chair couches offers”
and “the chair department offers couches” have the same unigram statistics, but are about quite different topics. When
deciding which topic generated the word “chair” in the first
sentence, knowing that it was immediately preceded by the
word “department” makes it much more likely to have been
generated by a topic that assigns high probability to words
related to university administration (Wallach 2006).
There has been little work on developing topic models
where the order of words is taken into consideration. To
remove the assumption that the order of words is negligible,
Gruber, Weiss, and Rosen-Zvi (2007) propose modeling the
topics of words in the document via a Markov chain. Wallach (2006) explores a hierarchical generative probabilistic model that incorporates both n-gram statistics and latent topic variables. Even though they consider the order of
words to some extent, their model is still not capable of characterizing the semantics of words. For example, the integer
representation of the words “teacher” and “teach” are completely unrelated, even if we know they have strong semantic
connections and are very likely belonging to the same topic.
To seek a distributed way of representing words that capture
semantic similarities, several Neural Probabilistic Language
Models (NPLMs) have been proposed (Mnih and Hinton
2009; Mnih and Teh 2012; Mnih and Kavukcuoglu 2013;
Mikolov et al. 2013; Le and Mikolov 2014). Nevertheless,
the dense word embeddings learned by previous NPLMs
cannot be directly interpreted as topics. This is because
that word embeddings are usually considered opaque, in the

Topic modeling of textual corpora is an important and challenging problem. In most previous work, the “bag-of-words”
assumption is usually made which ignores the ordering of
words. This assumption simplifies the computation, but it unrealistically loses the ordering information and the semantic
of words in the context. In this paper, we present a Gaussian Mixture Neural Topic Model (GMNTM) which incorporates both the ordering of words and the semantic meaning
of sentences into topic modeling. Specifically, we represent
each topic as a cluster of multi-dimensional vectors and embed the corpus into a collection of vectors generated by the
Gaussian mixture model. Each word is affected not only by
its topic, but also by the embedding vector of its surrounding words and the context. The Gaussian mixture components and the topic of documents, sentences and words can
be learnt jointly. Extensive experiments show that our model
can learn better topics and more accurate word distributions
for each topic. Quantitatively, comparing to state-of-the-art
topic modeling approaches, GMNTM obtains significantly
better performance in terms of perplexity, retrieval accuracy
and classification accuracy.

Introduction
With the growing of large collection of electronic texts,
much attention has been given to topic modeling of textual corpora, designed to identify representations of the data
and learn thematic structure from large document collections
without human supervision. Topic models have been applied
to a variety of applications, including information retrieval
(Wei and Croft 2006), collaborative filtering (Marlin 2003),
authorship identification (Rosen-Zvi et al. 2004) and opinion extraction (Lin et al. 2012), etc. Existing topic models
(Griffiths and Tenenbaum 2004; Mcauliffe and Blei 2008;
Blei 2012) are built based on the assumption that each document is represented by a mixture of topics, where each
topic defines a probability distribution over words. These
models, including the probabilistic latent semantic analysis
(PLSA) (Hofmann 1999) model and latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) model, can be
viewed as graphical models with latent variables. Some nonparametric extensions to these models have also been quite
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2353

