Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Novel Mechanisms for Online Crowdsourcing with Unreliable, Strategic Agents
Praphul Chandra1,2 , Yadati Narahari1 , Debmalya Mandal3,∗ , Prasenjit Dey4,†
1

3

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India, 2 Hewlett Packard, Bangalore, India,
SEAS, Harvard University, Cambrige, MA, USA, 4 IBM Research, Bangalore, India,
∗
Work done while at IISc, † Work done while at Hewlett Packard.

Abstract

agent who is allocated a task may not complete it; hence the
task may need to be reallocated. Online Arrivals: Agents arrive over time and may leave; allocation and payment decision must be made without information about future arrivals.
Time Sensitive : There is a deadline before which the set of
tasks must be completed. Strategic Agents: An agent’s cost
is private information and he may not reveal it truthfully.
The strategic nature of agents clearly calls for a mechanism design approach. Consider a requester who posts timesensitive tasks on a crowdsourcing platform. The arrival of
agents who accept the task is a stochastic process. At any
point before the deadline, the requester needs a mechanism
to decide how many tasks to allocate to an agent and what
payments to make for these allocated tasks. Even though we
assume that only the costs of the agents are private information and the arrival time of the agents is common knowledge, the mechanism design problem becomes non-trivial
due to the unreliable agents: when the requester values ontime completion, a mechanism must take into account the
value of potential time lost due to the unreliability of an
agent, along with the cost of paying the agent.

Motivated by current day crowdsourcing platforms and
emergence of online labor markets, this work addresses
the problem of task allocation and payment decisions
when unreliable and strategic workers arrive over time
to work on tasks which must be completed within a
deadline. We consider the following scenario: a requester has a set of tasks that must be completed before
a deadline; agents (aka crowd workers) arrive over time
and it is required to make sequential decisions regarding
task allocation and pricing. Agents may have different
costs for providing service and these costs are private information of the agents. We assume that agents are not
strategic about their arrival times but could be strategic
about their costs of service. In addition, agents could
be unreliable in the sense of not being able to complete
the assigned tasks within the allocated time; these tasks
must then be reallocated to other agents to ensure ontime completion of the set of tasks by the deadline. For
this setting, we propose two mechanisms: a DPM (Dynamic Price Mechanism) and an ABM (Auction Based
Mechanism). Both mechanisms are dominant strategy
incentive compatible, budget feasible, and also satisfy
ex-post individual rationality for agents who complete
the allocated tasks. These mechanisms can be implemented in current day crowdsourcing platforms with
minimal changes to the current interaction model.

Related Work
A vast majority of the literature in mechanism design focuses on maximizing either social utility (allocative efficiency) or the seller’s revenue (optimal) (Mas-Colell et al.
1995) - minimizing cost in reverse auctions. Singer (Singer
2010) introduced the scenario where the social planner’s valuation depends on the allocation. In such settings, the mechanism seeks to maximize the social planner’s value within
a budget constraint. Such budget feasible mechanisms are
relevant when the social planner is not indifferent to the allocation among agents. Singer and Mittal (Singer and Mittal 2011) design budget feasible auctions for crowdsourcing
marketplaces. In crowdsourcing settings, when the requester
utility depends on the capability of the agent to whom the
task is allocated, a reverse auction which minimizes cost is
not suitable. Instead, an auction which accounts for the value
that a requester places on allocating a task to an agent, while
ensuring that the budget constraint is satisfied, is more suitable. The online version of their mechanism relies on dividing time into epochs, splitting up the available budget into
chunks and applying the proportional share allocation mechanism in each epoch so that the budget constraint is satisfied.

Introduction
We consider the problem of allocation and pricing of tasks in
a crowdsourcing setting where agents arrive over time, so as
to ensure that all tasks can be completed before a deadline.
The costs of service are private information of the agents
and the agents may be strategic about revealing this information. Furthermore, an agent assigned a task may not complete it (unreliable agents) and these incomplete tasks must
then be reallocated to other agents to ensure on-time completion. Though motivated by crowdsourcing marketplaces
like Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), this setting models
has significance for any reverse (procurement) auction setting where agents commit to a time and may not deliver.
Allocation and pricing decisions in this setting are challenging due to the following reasons. Unreliable Agents: An
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1256

