Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Using Supervised Learning to Uncover Deep Musical Structure
Phillip B. Kirlin

David D. Jensen

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Rhodes College
Memphis, Tennessee 38112

School of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, Massachusetts 01003

Abstract

and approaching musical studies from a scientific standpoint brings a certain empiricism to the domain which
historically has been difficult or impossible due to innate
human biases (Volk, Wiering, and van Kranenburg 2011;
Marsden 2009).
Despite the importance of Schenkerian analysis in the music theory community, computational studies of Schenkerian analysis are few and far between due to the lack
of a definitive, unambiguous set of rules for the analysis
procedure, limited availability of high-quality ground truth
data, and no established evaluation metrics (Kassler 1975;
Frankel, Rosenschein, and Smoliar 1978). More recent models, such as those that take advantage of new representational
techniques (Mavromatis and Brown 2004; Marsden 2010) or
machine learning algorithms (Gilbert and Conklin 2007) are
promising but still rely on a hand-created set of rules.
In contrast, the work presented here represents the first
purely data-driven approach to modeling hierarchical music
analysis. We use the largest set of encoded music analyses
in existence to develop a probabilistic model of the rules of
music analysis, deploy this model in an algorithm that can
identify the most likely analysis for a piece of music, and
evaluate the system using multiple metrics, including a study
with human experts comparing the algorithmic output headto-head against published analyses from textbooks.
There are many potential uses of this work. Aside from
the straightforward option of analyzing new music, the probabilistic model and algorithm described here could be used
in systems for calculating music similarity, such as in music
recommendation or new music discovery; intelligent tutoring systems for teaching music composition or Schenkerian
analysis itself; or in music notation software.

The overarching goal of music theory is to explain the
inner workings of a musical composition by examining the structure of the composition. Schenkerian music
theory supposes that Western tonal compositions can be
viewed as hierarchies of musical objects. The process
of Schenkerian analysis reveals this hierarchy by identifying connections between notes or chords of a composition that illustrate both the small- and large-scale construction of the music. We present a new probabilistic
model of this variety of music analysis, details of how
the parameters of the model can be learned from a corpus, an algorithm for deriving the most probable analysis for a given piece of music, and both quantitative
and human-based evaluations of the algorithm’s performance. This represents the first large-scale data-driven
computational approach to hierarchical music analysis.

Introduction
Music analysis is largely concerned with the study of musical structures: identifying them, relating them to each other,
and examining how they work together to form larger structures. Analysts apply various techniques to discover how the
building blocks of music, such as notes, chords, phrases, or
larger components, function in relation to each other and to
the whole composition. Schenkerian analysis is a particular
style of music analysis. This widely-used theory of music
posits that compositions are structured as hierarchies of musical events, such as notes or intervals, with the surface level
music at the lowest level of the hierarchy and an abstract
structure representing the entire composition at the highest
level. This type of analysis is used to reveal deep structure
within the music and illustrate the relationships between various notes or chords at multiple levels of the hierarchy.
For more than forty years, music informatics researchers
have attempted to construct computational systems that perform automated music analysis, as having systems capable of analyzing music is helpful for both academic and
applied reasons. Music naturally lends itself to scientific
study because it is a “complex, culturally embedded activity that is open to quantitative analysis” (Cook 2005),

The MOP Representation
Schenkerian analysis views a musical composition as a series of hierarchical levels. During the analysis process, structural levels are uncovered by identifying prolongations, situations where a musical event (a note, chord, or harmony)
remains in control of a musical passage even when the event
is not physically sounding during the entire passage. Consider the five-note melodic sequence shown in Figure 1, a
descending sequence from D down to G. Assume that an analyst interprets this passage as an outline of a G-major chord,
and wishes to express the fact that the first, third, and fifth

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1770

