Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

From Non-Negative to General Operator Cost Partitioning
Florian Pommerening and Malte Helmert and Gabriele Röger and Jendrik Seipp
University of Basel
Basel, Switzerland
{florian.pommerening,malte.helmert,gabriele.roeger,jendrik.seipp}@unibas.ch

Abstract

tive influence of allowing negative costs in cost partitioning
and the strong performance of potential heuristics.

Operator cost partitioning is a well-known technique to make
admissible heuristics additive by distributing the operator
costs among individual heuristics. Planning tasks are usually defined with non-negative operator costs and therefore
it appears natural to demand the same for the distributed
costs. We argue that this requirement is not necessary and
demonstrate the benefit of using general cost partitioning. We
show that LP heuristics for operator-counting constraints are
cost-partitioned heuristics and that the state equation heuristic computes a cost partitioning over atomic projections. We
also introduce a new family of potential heuristics and show
their relationship to general cost partitioning.

SAS+ Planning and Heuristics
We consider SAS+ planning (Bäckström and Nebel 1995)
with operator costs, where a task is given as a tuple Π =
hV, O, sI , s? , costi. Each V in the finite set of variables
V has a finite domain dom(V ). A state s is a variable assignment over V. A fact is a pair of a variable and one
of its values. For a partial variable assignment p we use
vars(p) to refer to the set of variables on which p is defined and where convenient we consider p to be a set of facts
{hV, p[V ]i | V ∈ vars(p)}. Each operator o in the finite set
O has a precondition pre(o) and an effect eff (o), which are
both partial variable assignments over V. Operator o is applicable in a state s if s and pre(o) are consistent, i. e., they
do not assign a variable to different values. Applying o in s
results in state sJoK with

eff (o)[V ] if V ∈ vars(eff (o))
sJoK[V ] =
s[V ]
otherwise.

Introduction
Heuristic search is commonly used to solve classical planning tasks. Optimal planning requires admissible heuristics,
which estimate the cost to the goal without overestimation.
If several admissible heuristics are used, they must be combined in a way that guarantees admissibility. By evaluating
each heuristic on a copy of the task with a suitably reduced
cost function, operator cost partitioning (Katz and Domshlak 2010) allows summing heuristic estimates admissibly.
Previous work on operator cost partitioning required all
cost functions to be non-negative. We show that this restriction is not necessary to guarantee admissibility and
that dropping it can lead to more accurate heuristic estimates. Moreover, we demonstrate that when allowing negative operator costs, heuristics based on the recently proposed
operator-counting constraints (Pommerening et al. 2014b)
can be interpreted as a form of optimal cost partitioning.
This includes the state equation heuristic (Bonet and van
den Briel 2014), which was previously thought (Bonet 2013)
to fall outside the four main categories of heuristics for classical planning: abstractions, landmarks, delete-relaxations
and critical paths (Helmert and Domshlak 2009). We show
that the state equation heuristic computes a general optimal
cost partitioning over atomic projection heuristics. In addition, we introduce potential heuristics, a new family of
heuristics with a close relationship to general operator cost
partitioning. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the posi-

An operator sequence π = ho1 , . . . , on i is applicable in state
s0 if there are states s1 , . . . , sn such that for 1 ≤ i ≤ n,
operator oi is applicable in si−1 and si = si−1 Joi K. We
refer to the resulting state sn by s0 JπK.
The initial state sI is a complete and the goal description
s? a partial variable assignment over V. For a state s, an
s-plan is an operator sequence π that is applicable in s and
for which sJπK and s? are consistent. An sI -plan is called a
solution or plan for the task.
The function cost : O → R+
0 assigns a non-negative cost
to each operator. Throughout the paper, we will vary planning tasks by considering different cost functions, so the
following definitions refer to arbitrary cost functions cost0 ,
which need not be equal to cost.
The cost of a plan
Pnπ = ho1 , . . . , on i under cost function
cost0 is cost0 (π) = i=1 cost0 (oi ). An optimal s-plan under
cost function cost0 is a plan π that minimizes cost0 (π) among
all s-plans. Its cost is denoted with h∗ (s, cost0 ). If there is
no s-plan then h∗ (s, cost0 ) = ∞. A heuristic h is a function
that produces an estimate h(s, cost0 ) ∈ R+
0 ∪ {∞} of the
optimal cost h∗ (s, cost0 ). If cost0 = cost, these notations
can be abbreviated to h∗ (s) and h(s). In cases where we

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3335

