Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Mathematical Programming-Based Approach to Determining Objective
Functions from Qualitative and Subjective Comparisons
Takayuki Yoshizumi
IBM Research - Tokyo
yszm@jp.ibm.com

than solution j”. Even when experts evaluate a single solution, they must have a reference solution in mind, and compare the single solution with that benchmark in their mind,
perhaps thinking “This solution is better than the benchmark.” Therefore, from the viewpoint of level of measurement (Stevens 1946), it is reasonable that experts’ evaluations should be measured with an ordinal scale rather than
an interval scale or ratio scale. Using an ordinal scale, an expert can compare a pair of solutions and qualitatively evaluate which is better, but cannot quantitatively evaluate the absolute degree of the differences between the two solutions.
Even with a pair of evaluations such as “Solution i is better
than solution j” and “Solution s is far better than solution
t”, we cannot conclude that the relative degree of solution s
against solution t is, for example, two times larger than that
of solution i against solution j. At the same time, another
expert might feel that “Solution i is far better than solution
j”, even though the first expert only said “Solution i is better
than solution j”. This implies that experts’ evaluations can
be subjective.
Some kinds of machine learning such as learning-to-rank
(Liu 2009) may be suitable for this problem. However,
sometimes evaluations made by an expert may implicitly
include more information than standard machine-learningbased algorithms can extract. For example, we cannot conclude that the degree of “far better than” is two times larger
than that of “better than”, but we can say that the degree
of “far better than” is at least larger than that of “better
than”. This kind of information cannot be used by existing
machine-learning-based algorithms. Since it is usually time
consuming for experts to evaluate solutions, it is desirable
to extract as much information as possible from their evaluations. Also, existing machine-learning-based algorithms
cannot appropriately deal with subjective evaluations.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for extracting
more information from experts’ evaluations in comparison
to typical machine-learning-based algorithms. The key idea
of our method is to use an ordinal scale for measuring paired
differences of the objective values as well as the paired objective values. By using an ordinal scale, experts’ qualitative
and subjective evaluations can be appropriately expressed
with simultaneous linear inequalities. As a result, the problem of finding appropriate weights of an objective function
can be formulated as a linear programming (or mixed in-

Abstract
The solutions or states of optimization problems or simulations are evaluated by using objective functions. The
weights for these objective functions usually have to be
estimated from experts’ evaluations, which are likely to
be qualitative and somewhat subjective. Although such
estimation tasks are normally regarded as quite suitable for machine learning, we propose a mathematical programming-based method for better estimation.
The key idea of our method is to use an ordinal scale
for measuring paired differences of the objective values as well as the paired objective values. By using an
ordinal scale, experts’ qualitative and subjective evaluations can be appropriately expressed with simultaneous linear inequalities, and which can be handled by a
mathematical programming solver. This allows us to extract more information from experts’ evaluations compared to machine-learning-based algorithms, which increases the accuracy of our estimation. We show that
our method outperforms machine-learning-based algorithms in a test of finding appropriate weights for an
objective function.

Introduction
In such fields as optimization, simulation, and computer
gaming, the solutions or states must often be evaluated by
domain experts. One of the ways to model implicit knowledge and the intuitions of domain experts is to design an objective function (or an evaluation function). In typical cases,
this objective function is represented as a weighted sum of
several metrics. Objective functions should appropriately reflect the experts’ knowledge and intuitions, which is usually
done by adjusting the weights for each objective term. Once
an appropriate objective function has been obtained, various
kinds of optimization systems or simulation systems can be
run without further involvement of the experts. The problem
dealt with in this paper is to find good weights for an objective function from the experts’ evaluations.
For experts, it is intuitive and natural to compare pairs
of solutions and qualitatively evaluate them with such descriptions as “Solution i is similar to solution j”, “Solution i is better than solution j”, or “Solution i is far better
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3136

