Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Leveraging Social Foci for Information Seeking in Social Media
Suhas Ranganath

Jiliang Tang

Xia Hu

srangan8@asu.edu
Arizona State University

Jiliang.Tang@asu.edu
Arizona State University

Xia.Hu@asu.edu
Arizona State University

Hari Sundaram

Huan Liu

hs1@illinois.edu
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign

Huan.Liu@asu.edu
Arizona State University

Abstract

information gap of users and increase user satisfaction. This
framework can also help enhance Twitter search by making
it personalized to the asker.
Information need of social media user is subjective or personal, unlike traditional Q&A platforms like Stackoverflow,
and hi social context is useful to find appropriate people able
to satisfy it (Hecht et al. 2012). Also, users with higher tie
strength with the asker were shown to better satisfy information needs in social media (Panovich, Miller, and Karger
2012). For example, to assist a person looking to get a new
hairstyle, finding people from his social connections who
share related context with him can be more useful to him
than finding web pages related to hair salons.
This task faces several challenges. The questions are textual while the social context of the asker can involve network
information. Integrating such kind of heterogeneous information will help to efficiently utilize social context to identify
answerers to social media questions. Each social media user
has many social connections and produces a lot of content
leading to significant issues of scalability. Finally, the social
context of the asker related to the question needs to be determined and appropriately utilized in order to identify suitable
answerers.
In sociological literature, the social foci theory postulates
that interactions between people are organized around relevant entities known as foci (Feld 1981). A focus can be the
activities, interests, and various affiliations of a user. Different groups of social connections of a user share different foci
with him. For example, from Fig. 1(a) we see that the user
shares an interest of sports with his connections in green, an
interest of music with his connections in yellow and academic
interests with his connections in red.
Inspired by the social foci theory we propose that, people
in social media sharing social foci related to the question with
the asker are suitable to answer them. Illustrative examples
of questions are given in Fig. 1(b). The asker of Q1 is seeking
assistance in his math homework, and this might be best
responded by users sharing academic foci with him. Q2 is
seeking opinions on an NFL game, and this might be best
provided by his connections sharing foci related to sports
with the asker. Similarly, Q3 might be best answered by
connections sharing music related foci with the asker.
In this paper, we propose a framework to investigate the
utility of social context derived from network and content in-

The rise of social media provides a great opportunity for
people to reach out to their social connections to satisfy
their information needs. However, generic social media
platforms are not explicitly designed to assist information seeking of users. In this paper, we propose a novel
framework to identify the social connections of a user
able to satisfy his information needs. The information
need of a social media user is subjective and personal,
and we investigate the utility of his social context to
identify people able to satisfy it. We present questions
users post on Twitter as instances of information seeking activities in social media. We infer soft community
memberships of the asker and his social connections by
integrating network and content information. Drawing
concepts from the social foci theory, we identify answerers who share communities with the asker w.r.t. the
question. Our experiments demonstrate that the framework is effective in identifying answerers to social media
questions.

Information seeking is defined as “A conscious effort to acquire information in response to a need or gap in knowledge”
(Case 2012). Online social media makes it easier for users to
reach out to a large number of friends, leading people to use
them to seek information from their social connections. This
gives rise to a distinct way for online information seeking,
wherein the information needs expressed are subjective and
personal to the asker. An interesting way people leverage online social media to seek information is by asking questions
through their status messages (Morris, Teevan, and Panovich
2010). This phenomenon is prevalent in social media platforms like Twitter and Facebook and has received considerable attention in recent literature (Efron and Winget 2010a;
Paul, Hong, and Chi 2011; Lampe et al. 2014).
However, unlike dedicated Q&A platforms, generic social
media sites like Twitter and Facebook are not designed for
information seeking (Paul, Hong, and Chi 2011). Questions
are not archived, thus finding people who answered similar
questions in the past is difficult. Questions are buried among
other content produced by the social connections of a potential answerer. Designing algorithmic frameworks to identify
answerers to social media questions will help to bridge the
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

261

