Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Large-Scale Multi-View Spectral Clustering via Bipartite Graph
Yeqing Li, Feiping Nie, Heng Huang, Junzhou Huang∗
University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, 76019, USA
{yeqing.li@mavs.uta.edu, feipingnie@gmail.com, heng@uta.edu, jzhuang@uta.edu}

Abstract

it is critical for learning algorithm to integrate these heterogeneous features to improve its accuracy and robustness. In
this paper, we focus on one specific unsupervised learning
task, i.e., multi-view spectral clustering.
Recently, spectral clustering (SC) is drawing more and
more attention because of its effectiveness (Shi and Malik 2000; Von Luxburg 2007; Ng et al. 2002; Zelnik-Manor
and Perona 2004; Nie, Wang, and Huang 2014; Chang et
al. 2015). However, the growth of the scale of data has
rendered the multi-view clustering problem more challenging. None of the existing methods is applicable on largescale multi-view data. In general, SC methods usually involve two time consuming steps. The first step is to construct the affinity graph and the second step is to compute the
eigen-decomposition. The first step usually takes O(n2 d)
time while the second step takes O(Kn2 ) time, where n is
the number of data points, d is the dimension of features
and K is the number of clusters. Many works have been
proposed to accelerate SC algorithm (Fowlkes et al. 2004),
(Shinnou and Sasaki 2008), (Sakai and Imiya 2009), (Yan,
Huang, and Jordan 2009), (Chen et al. 2011), (Chen and
Cai 2011). These methods reply on various off-the-shelf projection or sampling methods (Bingham and Mannila 2001;
Li et al. 2014; Li, Chen, and Huang 2014) to reduce the
complexity of graph construction or eigen-decomposition.
However, they only discuss the situation of handling single view data, which limits their usage. There are also SC
methods that deal with multi-view data, such as (Kumar,
Rai, and Daume 2011), (Cai et al. 2011). These methods
try to model the multi-view clustering problem as solving
local and global optimization among different views. Although they have achieved better accuracy than single-view
SC methods, they are more computationally expensive due
to the fact that they require iterations to reach consensus of
different views or large-scale matrix inversion.
Another drawback of SC methods is that they usually do
not provide natural extension to handle the out-of-sample
problem (Nie et al. 2011; Bengio et al. 2004). To address
this problem, several methods have been proposed, e.g.
(Passerini, Pontil, and Frasconi 2004; Fowlkes et al. 2004;
Alzate and Suykens 2010; Bengio et al. 2004; Nie et al.
2011). They either rely on approximation of eigenfuncions
(Fowlkes et al. 2004; Bengio et al. 2004) or data projection such as error correcting output code (ECOC) method

In this paper, we address the problem of large-scale
multi-view spectral clustering. In many real-world applications, data can be represented in various heterogeneous features or views. Different views often provide
different aspects of information that are complementary
to each other. Several previous methods of clustering
have demonstrated that better accuracy can be achieved
using integrated information of all the views than just
using each view individually. One important class of
such methods is multi-view spectral clustering, which
is based on graph Laplacian. However, existing methods are not applicable to large-scale problem for their
high computational complexity. To this end, we propose a novel large-scale multi-view spectral clustering
approach based on the bipartite graph. Our method uses
local manifold fusion to integrate heterogeneous features. To improve efficiency, we approximate the similarity graphs using bipartite graphs. Furthermore, we
show that our method can be easily extended to handle
the out-of-sample problem. Extensive experimental results on five benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method, where
our method runs up to nearly 3000 times faster than the
state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Clustering multi-view data is an important problem. In many
real-world datasets, data are naturally represented by different features or views. This is due to the fact that data
may be collected from different sources or be represented by
different kind of features for different tasks. For example,
documents can be written in different languages; gene can
be measured by different techniques, e.g. gene expression,
Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), methylation; images can be described by different features like Gabor (Oliva
and Torralba 2001), HoG (Dalal and Triggs 2005), GIST
(Oliva and Torralba 2001), LBP (Ojala, Pietikainen, and
Maenpaa 2002). Different features capture different aspects
of data and can be complementary to each other. Therefore,
∗

Corresponding
author:
Junzhou
Huang.
Email:
jzhuang@uta.edu. This work was partially supported by NSF
IIS-1423056, CMMI-1434401, CNS-1405985.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2750

