Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Kernelized Online Imbalanced Learning with Fixed Budgets
Junjie Hu1,2 , Haiqin Yang1,2 , Irwin King1,2 , Michael R. Lyu1,2 , and Anthony Man-Cho So3
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Rich Media Big Data Analytics and Applications
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3
Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{jjhu, hqyang, king, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Here, we aim at developing kernelized online imbalanced learning techniques, which are less explored, but important in both theory and applications. We address two
more challenges. First, the learned kernel-based estimator
becomes more complex as the number of observations increases (Kivinen, Smola, and Williamson 2004; Yang et al.
2011; 2012). Without suitable stream oblivious strategy, in
the extreme case, the number of learned support vectors can
be scaled to infinity. This is undesirable for large-scale applications. Although in the literature, refinement techniques,
e.g., Projectron (Orabona, Keshet, and Caputo 2009), and
online learning with fixed budgets algorithms, such as randomized budget perceptron (Cavallanti, Cesa-Bianchi, and
Gentile 2007) and Forgetron (Dekel, Shalev-Shwartz, and
Singer 2008), have been proposed, it is non-trival to tackle
online imbalanced learning. Second, fluctuation by outliers
is unavoidable in online learning (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi
2006; Ross, Mineiro, and Langford 2013; Karampatziakis
and Langford 2011). How to attain smooth updating requires
additional effort.
To this end, we propose a Kernelized Online Imbalanced
Learning algorithm with fixed budgets, namely, KOIL, for
online nonlinear AUC maximization. Our contributions are
as follows:
• First, our proposed KOIL directly maximizes the AUC
metric representing by the kernel expansion with fixed
budgets, i.e., maintaining two buffers with the same
buffer sizes to store the most informative data from each
class as learned support vectors. This is an effective way
to handle imbalanced streaming data while capturing
their nonlinearity and heterogeneity (Kivinen, Smola,
and Williamson 2004; Yang et al. 2013) and also sets
it apart from Projectron (Orabona, Keshet, and Caputo
2009), which may include too many support vectors.
Another important and novel feature is that we update
the weights of the new and old support vectors by confining the influence of a new instance to its k-nearest
opposite support vectors. This leads to smooth updating and makes KOIL different from previously proposed
online AUC maximization algorithms (Gao et al. 2013;
Zhao et al. 2011), which update the weight of a new instance based on all information stored in the buffers.
• Second, other than the standard stream oblivious policies, such as First-In-First-Out (FIFO) and reservoir

Online learning from imbalanced streaming data to capture the nonlinearity and heterogeneity of the data is significant in machine learning and data mining. To tackle
this problem, we propose a kernelized online imbalanced learning (KOIL) algorithm to directly maximize
the area under the ROC curve (AUC). We address two
more challenges: 1) How to control the number of support vectors without sacrificing model performance; and
2) how to restrict the fluctuation of the learned decision
function to attain smooth updating. To this end, we introduce two buffers with fixed budgets (buffer sizes) for
positive class and negative class, respectively, to store
the learned support vectors, which can allow us to capture the global information of the decision boundary.
When determining the weight of a new support vector,
we confine its influence only to its k-nearest opposite
support vectors. This can restrict the effect of new instances and prevent the harm of outliers. More importantly, we design a sophisticated scheme to compensate
the model after replacement is conducted when either
buffer is full. With this compensation, the learned model
approaches the one learned with infinite budgets. We
present both theoretical analysis and extensive experimental comparison to demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed KOIL.

Introduction
Learning binary classification models from imbalanced data,
where the number of instances from one class is significantly
larger than that from the other class, is an important topic
in both machine learning and data mining (Liang and Cohn
2013; Wu et al. 2008; Yang and King 2009). In the literature, area under the ROC curve (AUC) is an effective metric to measure the performance of classifiers learned from
imbalanced data (Bradley 1997; Brefeld and Scheffer 2005;
Hanley and McNeil 1982; Joachims 2005). Recently, online AUC maximization is proposed to tackle this problem when the data appears sequentially (Gao et al. 2013;
Yang et al. 2010; Zhao et al. 2011). However, these algorithms only focus on seeking the decision function in a linear
form. They cannot capture nonlinearity and heterogeneity of
the data and miss the learning power of kernel methods.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2666

