Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A New Computational Intelligence Model
for Long-Term Prediction of Solar and Geomagnetic Activity
1

Mahboobeh Parsapoor1,2, John Brooke1, Bertil Svensson2

mahboobeh.parsapoor@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk, 1John.brooke@cs.manchester.ac.uk,
2
Mahboobeh.Parsapoor@hh.se, 2bertil.svensson@hh.se,
1
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering & Physical Science,
The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
2
School of Information Science, Computer and Electrical Engineering (IDE),
Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden

Abstract

model for the long-term prediction of solar and geomagnetic activity. The CI model has been developed through inspiration from the emotional aspect instead of the rational
aspect of a biological system; the CI model is on the basis
of the neural structure of fear conditioning (Ledoux, 1998,
Moren et al. 2000) that is a mechanism by which a biological system learns fearful stimuli to predict aversive events.
The CI model is a new type of Brain Emotional Learning
Inspired Models (BELIMs) that have been developed by
taking inspiration from the neural structure underlying the
fearful circuit of mammals. So far two types of BELIMs
(Parsapoor 2014) have been evaluated on short-term prediction of solar activity and geomagnetic storms. The obtained results of them have been excellent and have provided great motivation to develop a new version of BELIM
focusing on long-term prediction of chaotic systems with a
small number of training samples. The main contribution
of this study is the development of a new version of
BELIM with low model complexity in order to overcome
both over-fitting and under-fitting issues. In addition to the
above contribution, this study contributes by introducing a
new CI model that aims to outperform the traditional CI
models such as neuro-fuzzy and neural networks. The rest
of this paper is organized as follows. First, the challenges
related to the development of a new model will be presented. Second, the structural, functional, and learning aspects
of the model are described. Third, notable conclusions are
discussed.

This paper briefly describes how the neural structure of fear
conditioning has inspired to develop a computational intelligence model that is referred to as the brain emotional
learning-inspired model (BELIM). The model is applied to
predict long step ahead of solar activity and geomagnetic
storms.

Introduction
Solar and geomagnetic activity are the main causes of
space weather phenomena that have harmful effects on
satellites, space missions, ground-based communication,
power grids, and human life (Hathaway, 2010, Gonzalez et
al. 1994). Accurate prediction of solar and geomagnetic
activity is necessary in order to develop alert systems of
solar and geophysical events and to mitigate these adverse
effects. However, long-term prediction of solar and geomagnetic activity is a challenging task due to their chaotic
and nonlinear behaviors. Thus, no data-driven models,
such as neuro-fuzzy and neural networks (Mirmomeni et
al. 2009), or physical-based methods, such as precursor
methods (Gholipour et al. 2007), have been able to accurately predict long-term steps within these chaotic systems.
Moreover, the results of long-term prediction of these systems are worse when the number of training samples is
small. In order to improve the results obtained from applying data-driven models on long-term prediction of solar
activity, some efforts have been made by adding preprocessing techniques such as single spectrum analysis(Mirmomeni et al. 2009 , Gholipour et al. 2007). Developing a new model with the capability to predict long-term
horizon in these systems is an interesting research topic.
This study suggests a new computational intelligence (CI)

Challenges

Developing a new CI model involves choosing a suitable
biological system, selecting an appropriate theory to explain the biological system, and using simple and efficient
mathematical formulations to implement the functionality
of the new CI model. Moreover, the answers to the above
questions propose new sets of challenging questions.

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4192

