Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Cerebella: Automatic Generation of Nonverbal Behavior for Virtual Humans
Margot Lhommet and Yuyu Xu and Stacy Marsella
Northeastern University
360 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA, 02115

Abstract

Such challenges make the pattern and timing of the behavior animations that accompany utterances unique to the
utterance and the state of the character. Manual creation of
the behaviors by hand animation and/or motion capture are
consequently time consuming, costly, and require considerable expertise from the animator or the motion capture performer.
This has led us to research and develop Cerebella, an automatic system to generate expressive, life-like nonverbal
behaviors (including nonverbal behaviors accompanying the
speech, responses to perceptual events and listening behaviors). Cerebella is designed to operate in multiple modes.
If the virtual character has mental processes that provide
communicative functions, Cerebella will generate appropriate behaviors. However, in the absence of such information,
Cerebella infers underlying communicative functions from
the audio and text, and generates a performance by selecting
appropriate animations and procedural behaviors.
This latter approach has illustrated its effectiveness in a
variety of applications: the use as an embodied conversational agent (DeVault et al. 2014) or inside a previsualization
tool for film (Marsella et al. 2013).
The interactive demonstration associated to this paper allows you to record your own lines and watch the virtual human perform them.

Our method automatically generates realistic nonverbal
performances for virtual characters to accompany spoken utterances. It analyses the acoustic, syntactic, semantic and rhetorical properties of the utterance text
and audio signal to generate nonverbal behavior such
as such as head movements, eye saccades, and novel
gesture animations based on co-articulation.

Overview
The flip of a hand, a raising of an eyebrow, a gaze shift: a
range of physical, nonverbal behaviors accompany speech
in face-to-face interactions. They are pervasive in every moment of dialog and convey meaning that powerfully influence interaction.
Our interest in such behaviors lies in a desire to automate
the generation of nonverbal behavior for convincing, lifelike virtual character performances. Specifically, we demonstrate the automatic generation of a character’s nonverbal behavior from the audio and text of the dialog they must speak.
Nonverbals can stand in different relations to the verbal
content, serving a variety of functions in face-to-face interaction. Shifts in topic can be cued by shifts in posture or in
head pose. Comparison and contrasts between abstract ideas
can be emphasized by deictic gestures that point at the opposing ideas as if they each had a distinct physical location
(McNeill 1992). The form of nonverbal gestures is often tied
to physical metaphors; rejecting an idea can be illustrated by
a sideways flip of the hand (Calbris 2011). A wide range of
mental states and character traits can also be conveyed: gaze
reveals thought processes, blushing suggests shyness and facial expressions convey emotions. Finally, nonverbals help
manage the conversation, for example by signaling the desire to hold onto, get or hand over the dialog turn (Bavelas
1994).
Generating nonverbal behaviors must additionally take
into account that they are synchronized with the dialog. For
instance, the stroke of a hand gesture, a nod or eyebrow raise
are often used to emphasize a word or phrase in the speech.
Alteration of the timing will change what words are emphasized and consequently how the utterance is understood.

Generation Pipeline
A brief overview of the analyses is given bellow (for more
detail, see (Marsella et al. 2013)):
1. Acoustic Processing: the spoken utterance is analyzed to
derive information on what words are being stressed.
2. Syntactic Analysis: the sentence text is parsed to derive
its syntactic structure.
3. Function Derivation: the utterance’s communicative functions are inferred using forward-chaining rules to build up
a hierarchically structured lexical, semantic, metaphoric
and pragmatic analysis.
4. Behavior Mapping: a set of nonverbal behavior rules maps
from communicative functions to classes of nonverbal behaviors.
5. Animation Specification: a schedule of behaviors is generated by mapping behavior classes to specific behaviors.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4303

