Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Localized Centering: Reducing Hubness in Large-Sample Data
Kazuo Hara∗

Ikumi Suzuki∗

Masashi Shimbo

kazuo.hara@gmail.com
National Institute of Genetics
Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan

suzuki.ikumi@gmail.com
National Institute of Genetics
Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan

shimbo@is.naist.jp
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
Ikoma, Nara, Japan

Kei Kobayashi

Kenji Fukumizu

Miloš Radovanović

fukumizu@ism.ac.jp
kei@ism.ac.jp
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
Tachikawa, Tokyo, Japan
Tachikawa, Tokyo, Japan

radacha@dmi.uns.ac.rs
University of Novi Sad
Novi Sad, Serbia

To mitigate the influence of hubness in the kNN classification, Suzuki et al. (2013) reported that centering—that is,
shifting the origin of the vector space to the centroid of the
dataset—is effective at reducing hubs, when sample similarity is measured by the inner product.

Abstract
Hubness has been recently identified as a problematic
phenomenon occurring in high-dimensional space. In
this paper, we address a different type of hubness that
occurs when the number of samples is large. We investigate the difference between the hubness in highdimensional data and the one in large-sample data. One
finding is that centering, which is known to reduce the
former, does not work for the latter. We then propose a
new hub-reduction method, called localized centering.
It is an extension of centering, yet works effectively for
both types of hubness. Using real-world datasets consisting of a large number of documents, we demonstrate
that the proposed method improves the accuracy of knearest neighbor classification.

Contributions
As in Suzuki et al. (2013), this paper also addresses how to
alter the inner product similarity into the one which produces
less hubs.
Thus far, it is known that hubness emerges in highdimensional datasets, and that hubs are the samples similar to the data centroid (Radovanović, Nanopoulos, and
Ivanović 2010a). In such cases, centering successfully reduces hubness.
We point out that there exists a different type of hubness
which occurs when the number n of samples is large, with
the dimension d of the vector space not necessarily very
high; e.g., n = 10, 000, d = 500. Unlike the hubs in highdimensional datasets, these hubs are generally not so similar
to the centroid of the entire dataset. Consequently, centering
fails to reduce them.
We demonstrate that such a “new” hub sample is the one
highly similar to its local centroid, the mean of samples
within its local neighborhood. On the basis of this finding, we propose a new hub-reduction method, which we
call localized centering. Our experimental results using synthetic data indicate that localized centering reduces the hubness not suppressed by classical centering. Using large realworld datasets, moreover, we show that the proposed method
improves the performance of document classification with
kNN insofar as it reduces hubness.

Introduction
The k-nearest neighbor (kNN) classifier (Cover and Hart
1967) is a simple instance-based classification algorithm. It
predicts the class label for a query sample using a majority
vote from its k most similar samples in a dataset, and thus
no traning is required beforehand. In spite of its simplicity, the performance of kNN is comparable to other methods in tasks such as text classification (Yang and Liu 1999;
Colas and Brazdil 2006).
However, the kNN classifier is vulnerable to hubness, a
phenomenon known to occur in high-dimensional data; i.e.,
some samples in a high-dimensional dataset emerge as hubs
that frequently appear in the k nearest (or k most-similar)
neighbors of other samples (Radovanović, Nanopoulos, and
Ivanović 2010a).
The emergence of hubness often affects the accuracy of
kNN classification, as it incurs a bias in the prediction of
the classifier towards the labels of the hubs. This happens
because the predicted label of a query sample is determined
by the labels of its kNN samples, in which hubs are very
likely included.

Hubness in High-Dimensional Data
Hubness is known as a phenomenon concerning nearest neighbors in high dimensional space (Radovanović,
Nanopoulos, and Ivanović 2010a). Let D ⊂ Rd be a dataset
in d-dimensional space, and let Nk (x) denote the number of
times a sample x ∈ D occurs in the kNNs of other samples

∗

Equally contributed
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2645

