Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Submodular Surrogates for Value of Information
Yuxin Chen

Shervin Javdani

Amin Karbasi

ETH Zürich
yuxin.chen@inf.ethz.ch

Carnegie Mellon University
sjavdani@cmu.edu

Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

J. Andrew Bagnell

Siddhartha Srinivasa

Andreas Krause

Carnegie Mellon University
dbagnell@ri.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
ss5@andrew.cmu.edu

ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract

formation (Howard 1966). Here, we seek policies that maximize the increase in the maximum expected utility that the
decision maker could obtain when acting upon the acquired
information. Optimizing this criterion in general probabilistic models is NPPP -complete (Krause and Guestrin 2009).
Recently, Same-Decision Probability (SDP) has been proposed for the purpose of robust decision making (Choi, Xue,
and Darwiche 2012). However, it has been shown that SDP
is PPPP -complete in general, and even remains NP-hard in
Navie Bayes Nets (Chen, Choi, and Darwiche 2014). Consequently, greedy heuristics that myopically select the next
test are employed. It is known (Golovin, Krause, and Ray
2010) that these heuristics can perform arbitrarily poorly;
unfortunately exact algorithms for non-myopic value of information have so far been restricted to simple probabilistic
models (Krause and Guestrin 2009).
One can model the non-myopic value of information
problem as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) (Smallwood and Sondik 1973; Kaelbling,
Littman, and Cassandra 1998), where state represents the
selected tests and observed outcome of each test. Unfortunately, this gives us an exponentially large state space, making the application of many black-box POMDP solvers (e.g.,
(Pineau, Gordon, and Thrun 2006)) infeasible.
The problem of selecting information gathering tests
for purely reducing uncertainty about some hidden
variable (ignoring utilities of decision making) is studied in the context of active learning (Dasgupta 2004;
Balcan, Beygelzimer, and Langford 2006; Hanneke 2007;
Settles 2012) and (Bayesian) experimental design (Chaloner
and Verdinelli 1995). Deriving optimal policies is generally NP-hard (Chakaravarthy et al. 2007), but some
approximation results are known. In particular, if tests are
noise-free (i.e., deterministic functions of the hidden state),
the problem is known as the Optimal Decision Tree (ODT)
problem, and a simple greedy algorithm, called generalized
binary search (GBS), is guaranteed to produce a bounded
approximation to the optimal policy in terms of the cost
(Kosaraju, Przytycka, and Borgstrom 1999).
Recently, these results have been brought closer to
decision making by associating each hidden state with
some optimal decision(s). Information gathering policies
no longer aim to reduce all uncertainty – but just enough
to make the right decision. Two algorithms, namely equiv-

How should we gather information to make effective
decisions? A classical answer to this fundamental problem
is given by the decision-theoretic value of information.
Unfortunately, optimizing this objective is intractable, and
myopic (greedy) approximations are known to perform
poorly. In this paper, we introduce D I REC T, an efficient yet
near-optimal algorithm for nonmyopically optimizing value
of information. Crucially, D I REC T uses a novel surrogate
objective that is: (1) aligned with the value of information
problem (2) efficient to evaluate and (3) adaptive submodular. This latter property enables us to utilize an efficient
greedy optimization while providing strong approximation
guarantees. We demonstrate the utility of our approach on
four diverse case-studies: touch-based robotic localization,
comparison-based preference learning, wild-life conservation management, and preference elicitation in behavioral
economics. In the first application, we demonstrate D I REC T
in closed-loop on an actual robotic platform.

Introduction
In many real-world decision making tasks we must adaptively choose among informative but expensive tests.
As an illustrative example, consider medical diagnosis
(Kononenko 2001), where many medical tests are available,
and we aim to administer tests that will enable us to provide
effective treatment. In such systems, the reward of making
a decision depends on some unknown hidden state (e.g., the
patient’s condition). Generally, it is impossible to observe
this hidden state directly, but one can perform tests, and
observe the outcome of variables correlated with the hidden
state, at some cost. The task is then to find a policy for
selecting the most informative tests, so that we can gather
enough information to make effective decisions, while
minimizing the cost of testing. Similar problems arise in
numerous other domains, ranging from optimal experimental design (Chaloner and Verdinelli 1995) to recommender
systems (Javdani et al. 2014) to policy making (Runge,
Converse, and Lyons 2011).
Related work A classical approach to information gathering for decision making is the decision-theoretic value of inCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3511

