Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Online Bayesian Models for Personal Analytics in Social Media
Svitlana Volkova and Benjamin Van Durme
Center for Language and Speech Processing, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD 21218, USA
svitlana@jhu.edu, vandurme@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Latent author attribute prediction in social media provides
a novel set of conditions for the construction of supervised
classification models. With individual authors as training and
test instances, their associated content (“features”) are made
available incrementally over time, as they converse over discussion forums. We propose various approaches to handling
this dynamic data, from traditional batch training and testing, to incremental bootstrapping, and then active learning
via crowdsourcing. Our underlying model relies on an intuitive application of Bayes rule, which should be easy to adopt
by the community, thus allowing for a general shift towards
online modeling for social media.

Introduction

Figure 1: An example of political preference prediction over
a dynamic stream of communications. R stands for Republican and D for Democratic users. As time τ goes by, both
labeled and unlabeled users generate tweets t1 . . . tm . Boxes
outline the amount of train and test data available at each τk .

The recent explosion of social media has led to an interest
in predicting hidden information from the large amounts of
freely available content. As compared to the earlier explosion of documents arising from the web, social media content is significantly more personalized, i.e., written in the
first person, informal, and often revealing of latent properties of the author. This has become known alternatively as
constructing: user demographic models, personal analytics
or customer profiling services. Researchers have explored
the prediction of latent attributes including gender (Rao et
al. 2010; Filippova 2012; Bergsma et al. 2013), age (Nguyen
et al. 2013), political preferences (Conover et al. 2011b; Cohen and Ruths 2013; Volkova, Coppersmith, and Van Dume
2014), personality traits (Bachrach et al. 2012), and so on.
However, the majority of this work treats the modeling
task much as prior work on non-social media: construct a
corpus of labeled materials, and perform supervised classification in a batch setting. This ignores one of the primary distinguishing characteristics of social media content: it is dynamically generated over time, and usually centered within
the context of a social network (i.e., friends or other types
of associates of the author). Further, different users of the
medium contribute to greater or lesser extent: a given user
may send one tweet a week, or one tweet an hour, etc. Prior
work tends to gloss over this fact by building controlled collections with a large, fixed amount of content assumed per

user e.g., 1K tweets. (Zamal, Liu, and Ruths 2012) or even
5K tweets (Rao et al. 2010).
In contrast, Burger et al. and Volkova, Coppersmith, and
Van Dume showed the intuitive importance of the amount
of content available per user at test time: the more content
you have, the better your predictions. This was followed
by Van Durme who proposed a model that allowed for incremental updating of classifier predictions over time, as
users continued to author new content. This model treated
each user as a sort of dynamic feature vector that evolved
over time, and assumed access to a pre-trained classification
model based on labeled data available a priori, akin to earlier work in the purely batch setting.
Here we go beyond the existing work and propose two
novel contributions in mining streaming social media: (1)
contrasting Van Durme, we treat each new message as independent evidence which is combined into an incremental user-prediction model as a straightforward application
of Bayes Rule; (2) we explore model training in parallel
to its application, rather than assuming a previously existing labeled dataset. Also, distinct from Van Durme, but previously explored in the batch-setting by (Zamal, Liu, and

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2325

