Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Spectral Learning of Predictive State Representations
with Insufficient Statistics
Alex Kulesza and Nan Jiang and Satinder Singh
Computer Science & Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Abstract

predictions about future events that, crucially, are observable. This means that the signal needed for learning appears
directly in the data, rendering iterative algorithms unnecessary. Instead, it becomes possible to exploit recent developments in spectral learning (Hsu, Kakade, and Zhang 2012;
Balle, Quattoni, and Carreras 2011; Parikh, Song, and Xing
2011; Anandkumar et al. 2012). In particular, Boots, Siddiqi, and Gordon (2010) proposed a spectral learning algorithm for PSRs that is closed-form, fast, and, under the
right assumptions, statistically consistent. In addition to being potentially easier to learn, PSRs of rank k are strictly
more expressive than HMMs with k states (Jaeger 2000;
Siddiqi, Boots, and Gordon 2010).
The learning algorithm of Boots, Siddiqi, and Gordon
(2010) takes as input a matrix of statistics indexed by sets of
tests and histories; these comprise sequences of observations
that might occur (tests) or might have occurred (histories)
at any given point in time, and are typically determined in
advance by the practitioner. If the chosen tests and histories
are sufficient in the right technical sense, then the learning
process is consistent. If they are not, then as far as we are
aware no formal guarantees are known.
Unfortunately, sufficiency requires that the number of tests
and histories is at least the linear dimension of the underlying
system that generates the data. (This condition does not by
itself imply sufficiency, but it is necessary.) Linear dimension
is a measure of system complexity; in an HMM, for example,
it is at most the number of states. While small toy problems
may have modest dimension, real-world systems are typically
extremely complex. At the same time, since the cost of the
learning algorithm scales cubically with the dimension of the
input matrices, we are usually computationally constrained to
small sets of tests and histories. The sufficiency assumption,
therefore, almost always fails in practice.
In this paper we propose a novel, practical method for
selecting sets of tests and histories for spectral learning of
PSRs in the constrained setting where sufficiency is infeasible.
As shown in Figure 1, this is not trivial; randomly chosen
sets of tests and histories of a fixed size exhibit a wide range
of prediction error rates. A simple baseline that chooses the
shortest available tests and histories (as often done in practice)
has higher error than average, and in the worst case, a poor
choice can produce highly uninformative predictions. The
sets chosen by our method, which have the same cardinality,

Predictive state representations (PSRs) are models of
dynamical systems that represent state as a vector of
predictions about future observable events (tests) conditioned on past observed events (histories). If a practitioner selects finite sets of tests and histories that are
known to be sufficient to completely capture the system,
an exact PSR can be learned in polynomial time using
spectral methods. However, most real-world systems are
complex, and in practice computational constraints limit
us to small sets of tests and histories which are therefore never truly sufficient. How, then, should we choose
these sets? Existing theory offers little guidance here,
and yet we show that the choice is highly consequential—
tests and histories selected at random or by a naı̈ve rule
significantly underperform the best sets. In this paper
we approach the problem both theoretically and empirically. While any fixed system can be represented by
an infinite number of equivalent but distinct PSRs, we
show that in the computationally unconstrained setting,
where existing theory guarantees accurate predictions,
the PSRs learned by spectral methods always satisfy a
particular spectral bound. Adapting this idea, we propose a simple algorithmic technique to search for sets of
tests and histories that approximately satisfy the bound
while respecting computational limits. Empirically, our
method significantly reduces prediction errors compared
to standard spectral learning approaches.

Introduction
Hidden Markov models (HMMs) and their variants, which
postulate state variables that are never observed, are among
the most well-known models of discrete-time dynamical systems. They are usually trained with iterative expectationmaximization (EM) algorithms that alternately “guess” the
latent state value and then update the model parameters assuming the guessed value is correct. This process is guaranteed to converge, however, it can often be quite slow and get
stuck in local optima (Wu 1983).
Predictive state representations (PSRs), first proposed
by Littman, Sutton, and Singh (2002), take a different approach. Unlike HMMs, they represent state as a vector of
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2715

