Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

SMT-Based Validation of Timed Failure Propagation Graphs
Marco Bozzano, Alessandro Cimatti, Marco Gario and Andrea Micheli
Fondazione Bruno Kessler – Italy
{bozzano,cimatti,gario,amicheli}@fbk.eu—

2012) where TFPGs are used as the basis for the specification of fault detection and isolation components (Bittner et
al. 2014). Recently, in addition to monitoring of safety critical systems, there has been some interest in using TFPGs for
performing software monitoring (Dubey, Karsai, and Mahadevan 2010; 2011). Other applications of TFPGs are described in (Srivastava and Han 2012).
Unfortunately, the practical application of TFPGs is currently clashing against the lack of suitable validation methods and tools. TFPGs are usually built manually by safety
engineers, based on their own knowledge of the relations
between faults in the system, and based on safety artifacts
such as Fault-Trees (Vesely et al. 2002). In the few cases in
which they can be generated from a system model, there is
no way for the users to modify or adapt them and still be
able to certify their quality. TFPGs are usually validated via
extensive testing, and no approach exists for performing a
more exhaustive analysis and validation of the model. However, since TFPGs are used as a basis for diagnosis, it is fundamental to be able to establish their formal properties, and
to gain confidence in their adequacy — similarly to other
model-based approaches, the effectiveness of the reasoning
relies on the accuracy of the model.
Interest in validation is witnessed in (Strasser and Sheppard 2011), that introduces a data-driven method called
alarm-sequence maturation in order to correct errors in the
causality relations of the model. This method, however, requires data to be already available, and thus can be applied
only after the overall system has been put into production. In
many contexts, e.g., aerospace, it is not possible or desirable
to wait until deployment of the system to validate the TFPG.
Thus the validation should be performed in the design phase.
In this paper, we propose a practical approach to support the analysis and validation of TFPG models. We define some important design-time queries, and show how they
can be efficiently answered by performing symbolic reasoning. Our approach is based on a logical characterization of
TFPGs, and cast in the field of Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) (Barrett et al. 2009). The set of possible executions of a TFPG is modeled as a formula in SMT. The
reasoning tasks are expressed in form of logical queries in
SMT, and the implementation is based on the use of an efficient SMT solver. We explore the problems of validation,
refinement testing, and diagnosis and diagnosability. We im-

Abstract
Timed Failure Propagation Graphs (TFPGs) are a formalism
used in industry to describe failure propagation in a dynamic
partially observable system. TFPGs are commonly used to
perform model-based diagnosis. As in any model-based diagnosis approach, however, the quality of the diagnosis strongly
depends on the quality of the model. Approaches to certify the quality of the TFPG are limited and mainly rely on
testing. In this work we address this problem by leveraging efficient Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) engines
to perform exhaustive reasoning on TFPGs. We apply modelchecking techniques to certify that a given TFPG satisfies (or
not) a property of interest. Moreover, we discuss the problem
of refinement and diagnosability testing and empirically show
that our technique can be used to efficiently solve them.

1

Introduction

Timely detection, identification and recovery of faults is
an essential component for the correct operation of complex critical systems (e.g., trains, satellites, cars, industrial plants). Failures typically originate from basic faults,
can manifest with delays, and can interact with each other
over time in very complex ways. Timed Failure Propagation graphs (TFPGs) have been introduced in (Karsai, Abdelwahed, and Biswas 2003) as a framework to capture the
temporal propagation of faults in complex systems, and to
support important run-time activities such as diagnosis and
prognosis. Intuitively, a TFPG is a graph-like model that accounts for the temporal progression of failures in dynamic
systems and for the causality between failure effects, taking
into consideration time delays, system reconfiguration, partial observability, and sensor failures.
In practice, TFPGs have been applied in several industrial
contexts. In aerospace, NASA (Hayden et al. 2006) positively evaluated them in the context of diagnostic technology for manned aircraft. Moreover, Boeing has been using
them (Ofsthun and Abdelwahed 2007) for performing maintenance monitoring of systems; in particular, in (Atlas et al.
2001) they present an integrated vehicle health management
system based on TFPGs. Furthermore, the European Space
Agency has funded projects (European Space Agency 2011;
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3724

