Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Inertial Hidden Markov Models: Modeling Change in Multivariate Time Series
George D. Montañez

Saeed Amizadeh

Nikolay Laptev

Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA USA
gmontane@cs.cmu.edu

Yahoo Labs
Sunnyvale, CA USA
amizadeh@yahoo-inc.com

Yahoo Labs
Sunnyvale, CA USA
nlaptev@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract

detect these change points as they are quite often indicative of an “interesting” event or an anomaly in the system.
We are also interested in characterizing the new state of the
system (e.g. running vs. walking) which reflects its mode
of operation. Change point detection methods (Kawahara,
Yairi, and Machida 2007; Xie, Huang, and Willett 2013;
Liu et al. 2013; Ray and Tsay 2002) have been proposed
to address the first challenge while Hidden Markov Models
(HMMs) can address both.
One crucial observation in many real-world systems, natural and man-made, is that the behavioral changes are typically infrequent; that is, the system takes some (unknown)
time before it changes its behavior to a new modus operandi.
For instance, in our earlier example, it is unlikely for a person to rapidly fluctuate between walking and running, making the durations of different activities over time relatively
long and highly variable. We refer to this as the inertial
property, alluding to the physical property of matter such
that it continues along a fixed course unless acted upon by
an external force. Unfortunately, classical HMMs are not
equipped with sufficient mechanisms to capture this property and often produce high rates of state transitioning with
subsequent false positives when detecting change points.
Few solutions exist in the literature to address this problem. In the context of Markov models, Fox et al. (Fox et al.
2011; Willsky et al. 2009) have recently proposed the sticky
hierarchical Dirichlet process hidden Markov model (HDPHMM) which uses a Bayesian non-parametric approach with
appropriate priors to promote self-transitioning (or stickiness) for HMMs. Despite its elegant theoretical foundation,
the sticky HDP-HMM is not a practical solution in many
real-world situations. In particular, the performance of the
HDP-HMM tends to degrade as the dimensionality of the
problem increases beyond ten dimensions. Moreover, due
to iterative Gibbs sampling for its learning, the sticky HDPHMM can become computationally prohibitive. In practice,
the most significant drawback of the sticky HDP-HMM originates with its non-parametric Bayesian nature: due to the
existence of many hyperparameters, the search space for initial tuning is exponentially large and significantly affects the
learning quality for a given task.
In this paper, we propose a regularization-based framework for HMMs, called Inertial hidden Markov models (Inertial HMMs), which are biased towards the inertial state-

Faced with the problem of characterizing systematic changes
in multivariate time series in an unsupervised manner, we
derive and test two methods of regularizing hidden Markov
models for this task. Regularization on state transitions provides smooth transitioning among states, such that the sequences are split into broad, contiguous segments. Our methods are compared with a recent hierarchical Dirichlet process hidden Markov model (HDP-HMM) and a baseline standard hidden Markov model, of which the former suffers from
poor performance on moderate-dimensional data and sensitivity to parameter settings, while the latter suffers from rapid
state transitioning, over-segmentation and poor performance
on a segmentation task involving human activity accelerometer data from the UCI Repository. The regularized methods
developed here are able to perfectly characterize change of
behavior in the human activity data for roughly half of the
real-data test cases, with accuracy of 94% and low variation
of information. In contrast to the HDP-HMM, our methods provide simple, drop-in replacements for standard hidden
Markov model update rules, allowing standard expectation
maximization (EM) algorithms to be used for learning.

Introduction
“Some seek complex solutions to simple problems;
it is better to find simple solutions to complex
problems.” - Soramichi Akiyama
Time series data arise in different areas of science and
technology, describing the behavior of both natural and
man-made systems. These behaviors are often quite complex with uncertainty, which in turn require us to incorporate sophisticated dynamics and stochastic representations
to model them. Furthermore, these complex behaviors can
change over time due to some external event and/or some
internal systematic change of dynamics/distribution. For example, consider the case of monitoring one’s physical activity via an array of accelerometer body sensors over time. A
certain pattern emerges on the time series of the sensors’
readings while the person is walking; however, this pattern quickly changes to a new one as she begins running.
From the data analysis perspective, it is important to first
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1819

