Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Don’t Fall for Tuning Parameters:
Tuning-Free Variable Selection in High Dimensions With the TREX
Johannes Lederer

Department of Statistical Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
johanneslederer@cornell.edu

Christian L. Müller

NYU Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences and
Center for Genomics and Systems Biology
New York, NY 10012
cm192@nyu.edu

Abstract

by Square-Root Lasso is also not a satisfactory approach,
because Square-Root Lasso resolves only the adjustment of
the tuning parameter to the variance of the noise but does not
address the adjustment to the tail behavior of the noise and
to the design. Similarly, more advanced Lasso-based procedures such as the Uncorrelated Lasso (Chen et al. 2013)
or the Trace Lasso (Grave, Obozinski, and Bach 2011) also
comprise tuning parameters that need proper calibration. In
conclusion, none of the present approaches simultaneously
provides parameter-free, accurate, and computationally attractive variable selection.
Our contribution: In this study, we present a novel approach for high-dimensional variable selection. First, we
reveal how a systematic development of the Square-Root
Lasso approach leads to TREX, an estimator without any
tuning parameter. For optimal variable selection, we then
combine TREX with a bootstrapping scheme. Next, we detail on implementations and demonstrate in a thorough numerical study that TREX is both accurate and computationally efficient. Finally, we discuss the findings and indicate
directions for subsequent studies.

Lasso is a popular method for high-dimensional variable selection, but it hinges on a tuning parameter that
is difficult to calibrate in practice. In this study, we introduce TREX, an alternative to Lasso with an inherent calibration to all aspects of the model. This adaptation to the entire model renders TREX an estimator that
does not require any calibration of tuning parameters.
We show that TREX can outperform cross-validated
Lasso in terms of variable selection and computational
efficiency. We also introduce a bootstrapped version of
TREX that can further improve variable selection. We
illustrate the promising performance of TREX both on
synthetic data and on two biological data sets from the
fields of genomics and proteomics.

Introduction
In recent years, statistical tools that can deal with highdimensional data and models have become pivotal in many
areas of science and engineering. The advent of highthroughput technologies, for example, has transformed biology into a data-driven science that requires mathematical
models with many variables. The need to analyze and reduce
the complexity of these models has triggered an enormous
interest in high-dimensional statistical methods that are able
to separate relevant variables from irrelevant ones (Belloni
and Chernozhukov 2011; Bühlmann and van de Geer 2011;
Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2001). Among the many
existing methods, Lasso (Tibshirani 1996) and Square-Root
Lasso (or Scaled Lasso) (Belloni, Chernozhukov, and Wang
2011; Owen 2007; Städler, Bühlmann, and van de Geer
2010; Sun and Zhang 2012) have become very popular representatives.
In practice, however, high-dimensional variable selection
turns out to be a difficult task. A major shortcoming of
Lasso, in particular, is its need for a tuning parameter that
is properly adjusted to all aspects of the model (Hebiri and
Lederer 2013) and therefore difficult to calibrate in practice. Using Cross-Validation to adjust the tuning parameter is
not a satisfactory approach to this problem, because CrossValidation is computationally inefficient and provides unsatisfactory variable selection performance. Replacing Lasso

Methodology
Framework for our study
In this study, we aim at variable selection in linear regression. We therefore consider models of the form
Y = Xβ ∗ + σ,

(Model)

where Y ∈ Rn is a response vector, X ∈ Rn×p a design
matrix, σ > 0 a constant, and  ∈ Rn a noise vector. We
allow in particular for high-dimensional settings, where p rivals or exceeds n, and undisclosed distributions of the noise
σ. Statistical methods for models of the above form typically target β ∗ (estimation), the support of β ∗ (variable selection), Xβ ∗ (prediction), or σ 2 (variance estimation). In
this study, we focus on variable selection.
To ease the exposition of the sequel, we append some conventions and notation: We allow for fixed and for random design matrices
X but assume in either case the normalization

X > X jj = n for all j ∈ {1, . . . , p}. Moreover, we assume
that the distribution of the noise vector  has variance 1 so
that σ is the standard deviation of the entire noise σ. Finally, we denote the support (the index set of the non-zero

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2729

