Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Elections with Few Voters: Candidate Control Can Be Easy∗
Jiehua Chen1 and Piotr Faliszewski2 and Rolf Niedermeier1 and Nimrod Talmon1
1

TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
{jiehua.chen, rolf.niedermeier}@tu-berlin.de, nimrodtalmon77@gmail.com
2
AGH University of Science and Technology, Krakow, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

Abstract

add or delete whole groups of candidates at unit cost. In this
we follow the path initiated by Chen et al. (2014), who introduced combinatorial voter control.
Motivation. There is a number of settings in which it is
most natural to consider elections with few voters (and, typically, many candidates). Let us look at several examples.
Hiring committee. Consider a university department which
is going to hire a new faculty member. Typically the committee consists of relatively few faculty members, but it
may consider hundreds of applications for a position.
Holiday planning. Consider a group of people who are
planning to spend holidays together. The group typically
would consist of no more than a dozen persons, but—
technically—they have to choose from all the possible options provided by the travel offices, hotels, airlines, etc.
This example is particularly relevant to the case of multiagent systems: One may foresee that in the future we will
delegate the task of finding the most satisfying holiday location to our personal software agents that will negotiate
with travel offices and other travelers on our behalf.
Meta-search engine. Dwork et al. (2001) argued that one
can build a web meta-search engine that queries several
other search engines (the few voters) regarding a given
query, aggregates their rankings of the web pages (the
many candidates), and outputs the consensus ranking.
In all these examples, it is clear that before we actually
hold an election, the voters (or, some particular individual)
first shrink the set of candidates. In the case of the hiring
committee, most of the applications are removed from the
considerations early in the evaluation process. The people
planning holidays first, implicitly, remove most of possible
holiday options and, then, remove those candidates that do
not fit their preferences completely (e.g., too expensive offers). The search engines usually disregard those web pages
that appear completely irrelevant to a given query.
This natural process of modifying the candidate set, however, creates a natural opportunity for manipulating the result. A particularly crafty agent may remove those candidates that prevent his or her favorite one from winning. Similarly, after the initial process of thinning down the candidate
set, a voter may request that some candidates are added back
into consideration, possibly to help his or her favorite candidate. More importantly, it is quite realistic to assume that the

We study the computational complexity of candidate
control in elections with few voters (that is, we take
the number of voters as a parameter). We consider both
the standard scenario of adding and deleting candidates, where one asks if a given candidate can become
a winner (or, in the destructive case, can be precluded
from winning) by adding/deleting some candidates, and
a combinatorial scenario where adding/deleting a candidate automatically means adding/deleting a whole
group of candidates. Our results show that the parameterized complexity of candidate control (with the number of voters as the parameter) is much more varied than
in the setting with many voters.

Introduction
Election control problems model the issue of affecting the
result of an election by either introducing some new candidates/voters or by removing some of them from the election.
We study the complexity of election control by adding and
deleting candidates, for the case where the election involves
a few voters only. We focus on very simple, practical voting
rules such as Plurality, Veto, and t-Approval, but we also
discuss some more involved ones. To analyze the effect of a
small number of voters, we use the formal tools of parameterized complexity theory.
From the point of view of classical complexity theory,
candidate control is NP-hard for almost all typically studied
voting rules (even for the Plurality rule; though some natural examples of polynomial-time candidate control problems
exist as well). It turns out that for the case of elections with
few voters (i.e., for control problems parameterized by the
number of voters), the landscape of the complexity of candidate control is quite varied and, indeed, sometimes quite
surprising (see Table 1 for an overview of our results). In
addition to the standard candidate control problems, we also
study their combinatorial variants, where it is possible to
∗

PF was supported by the DFG project PAWS (NI 369/10) and
by AGH University grant 11.11.230.124 (statutory research). NT
was supported by the DFG Research Training Group “Methods for
Discrete Structures” (GRK 1408). This work has been partly supported by COST Action IC1205 on Computational Social Choice.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2045

