Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploiting Submodular Value Functions
for Faster Dynamic Sensor Selection
Yash Satsangi and Shimon Whiteson

Frans A. Oliehoek

Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{y.satsangi,s.a.whiteson}@uva.nl

Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam
Dept. of CS, University of Liverpool
frans.oliehoek@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract

better. A natural decision-theoretic model for such an approach is the partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) (Aström 1965; Smallwood and Sondik 1973;
Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998) in which actions
specify different subsets of sensors.
In a typical POMDP, reducing uncertainty about the state
is only a means to an end. For example, in a robot control
task, the robot aims to determine its current location so it
can more easily reach its goal. However, dynamic sensor selection is a type of active perception problem (Spaan 2008;
Spaan and Lima 2009), which can be seen as a subclass of
POMDPs in which reducing uncertainty is an end in itself.
For example, a surveillance system’s goal is typically just to
ascertatin the state of its environment, not use that knowledge to achieve another goal. While perception is arguably
always performed to aid decision-making, in an active perception problem that decision is made by another agent, e.g.,
a human, not modeled by the POMDP.
Although POMDPs are computationally expensive to
solve, approximate methods such as point-based planners
(Pineau, Gordon, and Thrun 2006; Araya et al. 2010) have
made it practical to solve POMDPs with large state spaces.
However, dynamic sensor selection poses a different challenge: as the number
of sensors N grows, the size of the

N
action space K grows exponentially. Consequently, as the
number of sensors grows, solving the POMDP even approximately quickly becomes infeasible with existing methods.
In this paper, we propose a new point-based planning
method for dynamic sensor selection that scales much better
with the number of sensors. The main idea is to replace maximization with greedy maximization (Nemhauser, Wolsey,
and Fisher 1978; Golovin and Krause 2011; Krause and
Golovin 2014) in which a subset of sensors is constructed by
iteratively adding the sensor that gives the largest marginal
increase in value. Doing so avoids iterating over the entire
action space, yielding enormous computational savings.
In addition, we present theoretical results bounding the error in the value functions computed by this method. Our core
result is that, under certain conditions including submodularity (Krause and Golovin 2014; Nemhauser, Wolsey, and
Fisher 1978), the value function computed using POMDP
backups based on greedy maximization has bounded error.
We also show that such conditions are met, or approximately
met, if reward is defined using negative belief entropy or an

A key challenge in the design of multi-sensor systems is the
efficient allocation of scarce resources such as bandwidth,
CPU cycles, and energy, leading to the dynamic sensor selection problem in which a subset of the available sensors
must be selected at each timestep. While partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) provide a natural
decision-theoretic model for this problem, the computational
cost of POMDP planning grows exponentially in the number of sensors, making it feasible only for small problems.
We propose a new POMDP planning method that uses greedy
maximization to greatly improve scalability in the number of
sensors. We show that, under certain conditions, the value
function of a dynamic sensor selection POMDP is submodular and use this result to bound the error introduced by performing greedy maximization. Experimental results on a realworld dataset from a multi-camera tracking system in a shopping mall show it achieves similar performance to existing
methods but incurs only a fraction of the computational cost,
leading to much better scalability in the number of cameras.

Introduction
Multi-sensor systems are becoming increasingly prevalent
in a wide range of settings. For example, multi-camera systems are now routinely used for security, surveillance, and
tracking. A key challenge in the design of such systems is
the efficient allocation of scarce resources such as the bandwidth required to communicate the collected data to a central server, the CPU cycles required to process that data, and
the energy costs of the entire system. This gives rise to the
dynamic sensor selection problem (Spaan and Lima 2009;
Kreucher, Kastella, and Hero 2005; Williams, Fisher, and
Willsky 2007): selecting, based on the system’s current uncertainty about its environment, K of the N available sensors to use at each timestep, where K is the maximum number of sensors allowed given the resource constraints.
When the state of the environment is static, a myopic approach that always selects the sensors that maximize the immediate expected reduction in uncertainty is typically sufficient. However, when that state changes over time, a nonmyopic approach that reasons about the long-term effects
of the sensor selection performed at each step can perform
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3356

