Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

VELDA: Relating an Image Tweet’s Text and Images
Tao Chen,1 Hany M. SalahEldeen,2 Xiangnan He 1 Min-Yen Kan,1,3 Dongyuan Lu1
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
Department of Computer Science, Old Dominion University
3
NUS Interactive and Digital Media Institute, Singapore
{taochen, xiangnan, kanmy, ludy}@comp.nus.edu.sg hany@cs.odu.edu
2

Abstract
Image tweets are becoming a prevalent form of social
media, but little is known about their content – textual
and visual – and the relationship between the two mediums. Our analysis of image tweets shows that while visual elements certainly play a large role in image-text
relationships, other factors such as emotional elements,
also factor into the relationship. We develop VisualEmotional LDA (VELDA), a novel topic model to capture the image-text correlation from multiple perspectives (namely, visual and emotional).
Experiments on real-world image tweets in both English and Chinese and other user generated content,
show that VELDA significantly outperforms existing
methods on cross-modality image retrieval. Even in
other domains where emotion does not factor in image
choice directly, our VELDA model demonstrates good
generalization ability, achieving higher fidelity modeling of such multimedia documents.

1

Figure 1: A visually relevant image tweet from Twitter (left)
and an emotionally relevant image tweet from Weibo (right).
given the answers to these questions, can we design a model
that explains how image tweets could be generated?
Through a corpus analysis, Chen et al. (2013) identified
image and text in the microblog can be either visually or
emotionally correlated. To validate this, we surveyed image
tweets authors, and discovered images are used for visual
purpose (i.e., both image and text mention the same physical
object) as well as for enhancing the emotion of the post (see
Figure 1 for both examples). However, current multi-modal
models only capture a single factor in modeling image-text
correspondence.
Our paper’s key contribution is to address this modeling gap by introducing Visual–Emotional LDA (VELDA),
a novel topic model that captures image–text correlations
through multiple evidence sources (namely, visual and emotional, yielding the method’s namesake). On experiments
with both English (Twitter) and Chinese (Weibo) image
tweets and other forms of user generated content, VELDA
yields significantly improved modeling over the other existing methods on cross-modality image retrieval. Even in
other domains where emotion does not factor in image
choice directly, VELDA demonstrates good generalization
ability, modeling these multimedia documents much better
than existed methods. Finally, we apply VELDA in a realworld task of automated microblog illustration, selecting a
relevant image from an image collection.

Introduction

Smartphones with cameras have morphed traditional textonly user generated content into multimedia. Image tweets –
microblog posts which embed images – enable a viewer to
see the world through someone else’s eyes. Their multimedia form attracts larger viewership and prolongs their halflife as compared to their poorer cousins – text only posts –
in Sina Weibo (Zhao et al. 2012), the dominant microblog
platform in China, and have been found to be 35% more
retweetable than text-only tweets in Twitter1 .
These posts are fast becoming the de facto standard on
such microblog platforms. They constitute over 45% of
overall traffic in Weibo (Chen et al. 2013) and have seen
rapid adoption in Twitter. How about image-only tweets?
While a picture may be worth a thousand words, image-only
posts are still rare: over 99% of tweets with images are also
accompanied by text (Chen et al. 2013).
A natural set of questions emerge that our work attempts
to address. Why do people post image tweets? What is the
nature of the relationship between the text and image? And,

2

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1

Related Work

The duality of image and text has been a recurring topic
of study in the multimedia area. Uncovering and model-

https://blog.twitter.com/2014/what-fuels-a-tweets-engagement

30

