Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Towards a Programmer’s Apprentice (Again)
Howard Shrobe, Boris Katz, and Randall Davis
MIT CSAIL
32 Vassar Street
Cambridge, MA 02139

Abstract

this would allow the apprentice both to catch blunders and
to capture the rationale for unusual programming choices.
Interactions with the Apprentice were also envisioned to
be “natural”, i.e., largely indistinguishable from those one
would have with a colleague. They would, therefore, include
natural language, both spoken and written, and the use of
diagrams and other informal drawings.
In retrospect, the idea was at least as wildly optimistic as it
was visionary. Making the vision a reality required meeting
several still daunting technical challenges:

Programmers are loathe to interrupt their workflow to document their design rationale, leading to frequent errors when
software is modified—often much later and by different programmers. A Programmer’s Assistant could interact with the
programmer to capture and preserve design rationale, in a natural way that would make rationale capture “cost less than it’s
worth”, and could also detect common flaws in program design. Such a programmer’s assistant was not practical when
it was first proposed decades ago, but advances over the years
make now the time to revisit the concept, as our prototype
shows.

• First, we believed that most large software systems are
built from routine combinations of standard patterns and
clichés. But the challenge is finding a representation
that makes those commonalities obvious while overcoming the variations in surface syntax (due to programmer
style or choice of programming language) that obscure
the commonalities.
• The second challenge is to pre-analyze these clichés and
patterns so that we know a priori how, why and under
what conditions they work.
• The third challenge is to recognize instances of standard
clichés and patterns within source code, making it possible to reuse prior analyses stored in the apprentice’s
knowledge base.
• The final challenge is to construct an apprentice system
that would be as natural to interact with as a junior colleague. We need to build a system that can understand the
informal diagrams and natural language that programmers
and designers use when talking to one another.

In the early 1970’s, Chuck Rich, Dick Waters and Howard
Shrobe, inspired by a number of other people around the
MIT AI Laboratory (e.g., Terry Winograd, Carl Hewitt,
Gerry Sussman), proposed the idea of a Programmer’s Apprentice, an intelligent assistant that would help a programmer write, debug and evolve software (Rich et al. 1978; Rich
and Shrobe 1976; 1978; Rich, Shrobe, and Waters 1979a;
Rich and Waters 1981; Rich, Shrobe, and Waters 1979b;
Rich and Waters 1988; 1990). Part of the vision was the
idea that software systems always evolve over their lifetimes
and that our failure to capture and preserve design rationale
makes it difficult to extend and evolve systems without introducing new errors. But in practice, capturing rationale is often a burdensome and thankless task. Writing down the reason for a design choice involves a disruption of the normal
flow of activity, one that causes the programmer to switch
from programming to explaining and then back again. Furthermore, this effort is of benefit to somebody else, in the
future. Even if that somebody else turns out to be yourself,
the benefit is still in the (perhaps distant) future and its current value is minimal. To make rationale capture work, one
has to make it cost less than it’s worth.
To solve this problem, the apprentice was envisioned to
be a knowledgeable junior programmer, one that would understand the basic patterns and clichés of programming and
that would only ask questions about unusual aspects of a
system’s design, ones that the programmer would actually
be willing to chat about. These unusual elements might involve not only mistakes and oversights but also clever hacks;

Despite these challenges, the original Programmer’s Apprentice project accomplished a great deal:
• It demonstrated that routine software is often realized
as compositions of commonly occurring clichés and patterns (Rich 1987).
• It demonstrated that these clichés are best characterized
not in terms of source code templates but rather in terms
of the “plan calculus”—a formal language whose building
blocks are control-flow and data-flow links that connect
a collection of components specified by formal pre- and
post-conditions and other invariants. In addition, a technique called temporal abstraction allows one to abstract
away loops and recursions and instead to view the program as a pipeline of streaming components. This both

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4062

