Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Agent-Based Model of the Emergence and Transmission of a
Language System for the Expression of Logical Combinations
Josefina Sierra-Santibáñez
Technical University of Catalonia, Campus Nord, Ed. Omega
c/ Jordi Girona Salgado 1-3, Barcelona 08034 Spain
E-mail: Maria.Josefina.Sierra@upc.edu

Abstract

The agent-based model proposed in this paper follows
the evolutionary linguistics approach: It involves a population of autonomous software agents that interact with each
other playing language games. A language game (Wittgenstein 1953) is typically an interaction between two agents,
a speaker and a hearer. The speaker has a communicative
goal, conceptualises the world for language, transforms this
conceptualisation into an utterance, and communicates that
utterance to the hearer. The hearer tries to parse the utterance, reconstruct its meaning and map it onto its own internal representation of the world. Speaker and hearer normally
use extralinguistic means to determine the outcome of a language game and, depending on that outcome, employ different strategies to expand and adapt their internal languages in
order to be more successful in future language games.
The agents in these models are initially endowed with a
set of cognitive abilities that are assumed to be necessary
for seeing the emergence of possible language systems that
allow them to be successful in a language game (e.g. the
ability to construct complex concepts, or to use and detect
linguistic devices such as word order, syntactic categories or
case markers). Then, they are made to play a series of language games, where they configure possible language systems and try them out. The goal of the experiments is to
find out whether the population as a whole succeeds in the
language game, i.e. communicates effectively, and to observe the conceptualisations and linguistic constructions that
emerge in the population as a result of the processes of collective invention and negotiation, as well as the evolution
over time of various macroscopic features of these language
systems, such as the average size of the agents’ grammars,
or the similarity of their grammatical constructions.
Theories of language evolution study language change at
two levels: that of language systems and that of language
strategies. Language systems capture the regularity observed
in some part of the vocabulary or the grammar of a language, for example, a system of colour terms, cases, tenseaspect distinctions or logical combinations. Language systems group a set of paradigmatic choices both on the side
of meaning (the conceptual system) and on the side of form
(the linguistic system). The conceptual system contains the
semantic distinctions that are expressible in the language
system and can therefore be used as building blocks for conceptualisation. The linguistic system includes the syntactic

This paper presents an agent-based model of the emergence
and transmission of a language system for the expression of
logical combinations of propositions. The model assumes the
agents have some cognitive capacities for invention, adoption, repair, induction and adaptation, a common vocabulary
for basic categories, and the ability to construct complex concepts using recursive combinations of basic categories and
logical categories. It also supposes the agents initially do
not have a vocabulary for logical categories (i.e. logical connectives), nor grammatical constructions for expressing logical combinations of basic categories through language. The
results of the experiments we have performed show that a
language system for the expression of logical combinations
emerges as a result of a process of self-organisation of the
agents’ linguistic interactions. Such a language system is concise, because it only uses words and grammatical constructions for three logical categories (i.e. and, or, not). It is also
expressive, since it allows the communication of logical combinations of categories of the same complexity as propositional logic formulas, using linguistic devices such as syntactic categories, word order and auxiliary words. Furthermore,
it is easy to learn and reliably transmitted across generations,
according to the results of our experiments.

1

Introduction

The question of the origins and evolution of language has
received much interest in the last two decades. It has been
approached from different disciplines such as anthropology, historical linguistics, evolutionary biology or artificial
intelligence. In particular in artificial intelligence agentbased models, implemented and tested in computer simulations, have been used to study the emergence and evolution
of language (Hurford, Studdert-Kennedy, and Kight 1998;
Briscoe 2002; Lyon, Nehaniv, and Cangelosi 2007; Cartmill
et al. 2014). Depending on whether these models emphasise the role of biological evolution or the role of cultural
evolution, agent-based models are classified into two areas:
Biolinguistics, which assumes that the structure of language
is determined to a large extent by biological factors (Di Sciullo and Boeckx 2011); and Evolutionary Linguistics, which
supposes language is primarily shaped by cultural forces
(Minett and Wang 2005; Steels 2012).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

492

