Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Mechanism Design Approach to Measure Awareness∗
Diodato Ferraioli

Carmine Ventre

Gabor Aranyi

DI, Università degli Studi di Salerno, Italy
dferraioli@unisa.it

SCM, Teesside University, UK
C.Ventre@tees.ac.uk

SCM, Teesside University, UK
G.Aranyi@tees.ac.uk

Abstract

only a succinct description of these scenarios, starting with
the blindsight experiment. Before the experiment, the subject is instructed that in each trial either a visual stimulus
would be presented in her blind field or no stimulus would
be shown. After each possible exposure to the stimulus, the
subject firstly has to make a decision on its absence/presence
and then either wager high or low on the correctness of the
decision. The other two experiments follow a similar pattern: an initial training phase in which subjects gain some
“knowledge”, a successive exposition to some sort of positive/negative signal and finally the subject’s decision (with
wagering on the correctness) about the “sign” of the signal.
The positive (negative, resp.) signal corresponds to a string
that follows (does not follow, resp.) a previously learned pattern in the artificial grammar task, and a pack of cards with
positive (negative, resp.) expected gain in the Iowa gambling
task. In all scenarios, the amount wagered is gained if the decision is correct and lost otherwise. The process is repeated,
but the subject receives feedback on the accuracy of the decisions and the amount won/lost only after the last trial.
According to its designers, PDW is successful because
participants with some awareness that their decision is correct will wager high. Then a failure to maximize cash rewards (i.e., correct answers do not always correspond to a
high wager) would signal that some of the correct decisions
were made unconsciously. However, some criticism on the
effectiveness of PDW has been moved (see below).
This work stems from the observation that PDW connects
very neatly to mechanism design. We want here to theoretically analyze the claim of (Persaud, McLeod, and Cowey
2007) and investigate the relation between mechanism design and awareness.

In this paper, we study protocols that allow to discern conscious and unconscious decisions of human beings; i.e., protocols that measure awareness. Consciousness is a central
research theme in Neuroscience and AI, which remains, to
date, an obscure phenomenon of human brains. Our starting
point is a recent experiment, called Post Decision Wagering
(PDW) (Persaud, McLeod, and Cowey 2007), that attempts
to align experimenters’ and subjects’ objectives by leveraging financial incentives. We note a similarity with mechanism
design, a research area which aims at the design of protocols
that reconcile often divergent objectives through incentivecompatibility. We look at the issue of measuring awareness
from this perspective. We abstract the setting underlying the
PDW experiment and identify three factors that could make
it ineffective: rationality, risk attitude and bias of subjects.
Using mechanism design tools, we study the barrier between
possibility and impossibility of incentive compatibility with
respect to the aforementioned characteristics of subjects. We
complete this study by showing how to use our mechanisms
to potentially get a better understanding of consciousness.

Introduction
Can machines “feel” just like human beings do? This is
a fundamental question in AI, which has attracted a number of contributions with often divergent answers, see, e.g.,
(Hofstadter 1979; Searle and others 1980). It is, however,
a question that could be considered ill-posed since it is not
exactly understood how humans “feel”: it is, for example,
not even clear how to establish whether decisions are taken
consciously or not. To find an answer, a group of neuroscientists (Persaud, McLeod, and Cowey 2007) have recently introduced a protocol, named Post-Decision Wagering (PDW),
as a means to “directly measure awareness”. They consider
three scenarios to motivate the effectiveness of PDW: an experiment run on a blindsight subject1 , artificial grammar task
and Iowa gambling task. Due to the page limit, we next give

Our Contribution. PDW is designed to align the experimenter’s objective of measuring awareness with the subject’s (induced) objective of maximizing her financial gains.
This very same approach is used in mechanism design. By
using a game-theoretic terminology, we can call the information regarding the subject’s awareness/unawareness of the
stimulus as the type of the subject. The experimenter wants
to design a mechanism that incentivizes the subject to reveal
her type truthfully. The incentives correspond to the maximization of a utility function for money, with the type determining the expected outcome of the wagering lottery.

∗
The first two authors are ordered alphabetically, as common in
Theoretical Computer Science literature. Third author only is listed
by contribution.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Brain lesions may lead to blindness on a portion of the visual
field. Blindsight is the ability to respond to visual stimuli in the
blind fields even in absence of perception, cf. (Celesia 2010).

886

