Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Salient Object Detection via Objectness Proposals
Tam V. Nguyen
Department for Technology, Innovation and Enterprise
Singapore Polytechnic, Singapore

Abstract
Salient object detection has gradually become a popular topic in robotics and computer vision research. This
paper presents a real-time system that detects salient
object by integrating objectness, foreground and compactness measures. Our algorithm consists of four basic
steps. First, our method generates the objectness map
via object proposals. Based on the objectness map, we
estimate the background margin and compute the corresponding foreground map which prefers the foreground
objects. From the objectness map and the foreground
map, the compactness map is formed to favor the compact objects. We then integrate those cues to form a
pixel-accurate saliency map which covers the salient objects and consistently separates fore- and background.

Introduction

Figure 1: Overview of our system which forms the saliency
map from objectness, foreground and compactness maps.

The objective of salient object detection is to find the salient
objects which draw the attention of humans at the first sight
on the image. The recent research has shown that computational models simulating low-level stimuli-driven attention are quite successful and represent useful tools in many
practical scenarios, including image retargeting (Avidan and
Shamir 2007), image re-attentionizing (Nguyen et al. 2013),
and action recognition (Nguyen, Song, and Yan 2015). The
existing methods can be classified into biologically-inspired
(Itti, Koch, and Niebur 1998) and computationally-oriented
approaches (Hou and Zhang 2007; Achanta et al. 2009;
Perazzi et al. 2012; Cheng et al. 2013; Bruce and Tsotsos 2005). Despite many recent advancements, the difficult
question is still whether “the salient object is a real object”.
That question bridges the problem of salient object detection into the traditional object detection research. In the object detection, the efficient sliding window object detection
while keeping the computational cost feasible is very important. Therefore, there exist numerous objectness proposal
generation methods proposing a small number (e.g. 1,000)
of proposals, that are expected to cover all objects in an image. Lampert et al. (Lampert, Blaschko, and Hofmann 2008)
introduced a branch-and-bound scheme for detection. However, it can only be used to speed up classifiers that users can
provide a good bound on highest score. Later, Cheng et al.

(Cheng et al. 2014) presented a simple and fast objectness
measure by using binarized normed gradients features, with
which computing the objectness of each image window at
any scale and aspect ratio only needs a few bit operations.
The main contributions are three-fold. First, to the best of
our knowledge, we integrate objectness proposals into the
salient object detection problem. Second, we propose the
foreground map and compactness map which can cover both
global and local information of the saliency object. Last but
not least, our work performs in a real-time manner unlike
other works in the literature.

Implementation
In this section, we describe the details of our implementation on how the objectness measures as well as the saliency
assignment can be efficiently computed. Figure 1 illustrates the overview of our processing steps. The object proposals are generated from the input image. We apply the
state-of-the-art objectness detection technique, e.g., binarized normed gradients (BING) (Cheng et al. 2014), to produce a set of candidate object windows. Our selection of
BING is two-fold. First, BING extractor has a weak training from the simple feature, namely, binarized normed gradients. Therefore, it is useful comparing to bottom-up edge

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4286

