Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Strong Bounds Consistencies and Their Application to Linear Constraints∗
Christian Bessiere

Anastasia Paparrizou

Kostas Stergiou

CNRS, University of Montpellier
Montpellier, France
bessiere@lirmm.fr

CNRS, University of Montpellier
Montpellier, France
paparrizou@lirmm.fr

University of Western Macedonia
Kozani, Greece
kstergiou@uowm.gr

Abstract

of domain bounds just like BC, but unlike BC it simultaneously considers combinations of constraints as opposed to
single constraints. Naturally, this results in stronger filtering.
We present theoretical results that investigate the pruning power of the new local consistencies. For example, we
show that BC is strictly weaker than rBCall and rBC2, which
are incomparable to SBC, just as GAC is strictly weaker
than maxRPWC and rPIC, which are incomparable to SAC.
These hold even when constraints are linear inequalities
where we know that GAC is equivalent to BC (Zhang and
Yap 2000). However, the stronger pruning of rBC2 and rBCall comes at a cost: we prove that rBC2 and rBCall are
NP-hard to enforce even when constraints are linear.
Thereafter, we focus exclusively on linear constraints.
This is the most common class of constraints on which BC
propagators are applied. We propose two polynomial-time
techniques to enforce approximations of rBC2 and rBCall
that are still stronger than BC. The first technique is a reformulation of the constraints which introduces extra variables
to capture intersections (i.e., shared variables) between constraints. Then we simply enforce BC on the reformulation.
This is a flexible technique that depending on the extra variables introduced achieves approximations of varying pruning strength. The drawback, that becomes evident on dense
problems, is its memory requirements. The second technique
is a polynomial time algorithm that operates on the original model of the problem. This algorithm exploits intersections between pairs of constraints to approximate rBC2.
Both techniques can be easily crafted in CP solvers to enhance their pruning power on linear constraints.
Finally, we make an experimental study on various types
of problems. Results demonstrate that both of our techniques can outperform BC, being exponentially better in
many cases. The reformulation technique is faster on sparse
problems, but the algorithm is the preferred technique on
dense problems with many constraint intersections.

We propose two local consistencies that extend bounds
consistency (BC) by simultaneously considering combinations of constraints as opposed to single constraints.
We prove that these two local consistencies are both
stronger than BC, but are NP-hard to enforce even
when constraints are linear. Hence, we propose two
polynomial-time techniques to enforce approximations
of these two consistencies on linear constraints. One is
a reformulation of the constraints on which we enforce
BC whereas the other is a polynomial time algorithm.
Both achieve stronger pruning than BC. Our experiments show large differences in favor of our approaches.

Introduction
Generalized Arc Consistency (GAC) and Bounds Consistency (BC) are the two local consistencies that are predominantly used for propagation by finite domain constraint
solvers. Many stronger local consistencies based on GAC
have been proposed, both for binary and non-binary constraints, e.g. (Debruyne and Bessière 2001; Bessiere, Stergiou, and Walsh 2008). However, similar consistencies that
are based on BC have been comparatively overlooked.
There is a also a considerable body of work dedicated
to the study of propagation methods for linear constraints
(Zhang and Yap 2000; Harvey and Stuckey 2003; Apt and
Zoeteweij 2007; Bordeaux et al. 2011). However, these
works focus almost exclusively on BC propagation. One
exception is (Trick 2003) where the idea of considering
many linear constraints simultaneously to strengthen propagation was investigated in the context of knapsack constraints. Another exception is Singleton Bounds Consistency
(SBC), which has been mainly studied on numerical CSPs
(Lhomme 1993).
In this paper we introduce rBC2 and rBCall, two new
strong local consistencies for non-binary constraints that extend BC. rBC2 is related to the domain filtering consistency
relational Path Inverse Consistency (rPIC) and rBCall is related to maxRPWC (Bessiere, Stergiou, and Walsh 2008).
The application of rBC2 and rBCall results in the shrinking

Background
A (finite domain) Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) is
defined as a triplet (X , D, C) where: X = {x1 , . . . , xn }
is a set of n variables, D = {D(x1 ), . . . , D(xn )} is
a set of domains, one for each variable, with maximum
cardinality d, and C = {c1 , . . . , ce } is a set of e constraints. Each constraint c is a pair (var(c), rel(c)), where

∗

Funded by the EU project ICON (FP7-284715).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3717

