Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Extracting Verb Expressions Implying Negative Opinions
Huayi Li† , Arjun Mukherjee‡ , Jianfeng Si§ , Bing Liu†
†

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA
‡
Department of Computer Science
University of Houston, TX, USA
§
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
lhymvp@gmail.com, arjun@cs.uh.edu, thankjeff@gmail.com, liub@cs.uic.edu
Abstract

towards important issues/problems of products and services.
Based on our experimental data, we found 81% of the negative verb expressions describe product issues.
Nowadays apart from generic reviews, we also find dedicated feedback/review forums like Complaints.com, Pissedconsumer.com, which collect consumer complaints about
products and services. It is worth noting that negative opinions often weigh more than positive ones to businesses as
companies want to know the key issues with their products
and services in order to make improvements based on users’
feedback. Complaints or issues are usually expressed as
verb expressions with fine-grained sentiments often implying product malfunctions and failing to work as expected.
They are often not captured by opinion words or phrases.
For instance, the sentence “The mouse double-clicks on a
single click” implies a negative opinion about the mouse,
which is also an issue or problem of the mouse. But the sentence does not have any opinion word. Discovering such issues is thus challenging because the problem setting departs
from existing works, which mainly use opinion adjectives,
adverbs, nouns and verbs (such as hate, dislike, etc.) for
opinion analysis.
In this paper, we focus on tackling the problem of mining verb expressions implying negative opinions from customer reviews because they often describe product issues.
We propose a two-step approach. First, we parse each sentence using a shallow parser to obtain phrasal chunks, which
are then used to extract verb expressions. Next, we propose
a supervised model with Markov Networks to rank verb expressions based on their probabilities of implying negative
opinions. However, our approach does not use any manually
labeled data for learning. Instead, our training verb expressions are from titles of negatively rated reviews and positive
rated reviews. Titles of negative reviews often contain negative verb expressions, while titles of positive opinions may
contain both positive and neutral ones. Clearly, the automatically extracted labels contain some noise, but we will see
that they still enable us to build good models.
Two baselines that we compare with are Naı̈ve Bayes and
SVM. With n-gram features, they can coarsely model the
sequential dependency of adjacent words to some extent.
However, our proposed Markov Networks method is more
powerful because it takes into consideration correlations between both adjacent and non-adjacent words of different

Identifying aspect-based opinions has been studied extensively in recent years. However, existing work primarily focused on adjective, adverb, and noun expressions. Clearly, verb expressions can imply opinions
too. We found that in many domains verb expressions
can be even more important to applications because
they often describe major issues of products or services.
These issues enable brands and businesses to directly
improve their products or services. To the best of our
knowledge, this problem has not received much attention in the literature. In this paper, we make an attempt
to solve this problem. Our proposed method first extracts verb expressions from reviews and then employs
Markov Networks to model rich linguistic features and
long distance relationships to identify negative issue expressions. Since our training data is obtained from titles of reviews whose labels are automatically inferred
from review ratings, our approach is applicable to any
domain without manual involvement. Experimental results using real-life review datasets show that our approach outperforms strong baselines.

Introduction
Sentiment analysis has attracted a great deal of attention in
recent years due to the rapid growth of e-commerce and social media services (Liu 2012; Pang and Lee 2008). There
exists an extensive body of work on major tasks like aspect extraction (Hu and Liu 2004; Chen, Mukherjee, and Liu
2014; Popescu, Nguyen, and Etzioni 2005; Xu et al. 2013;
Fang, Huang, and Zhu 2013), opinion and polarity identification e.g., (Hu and Liu 2004; Pang and Lee 2008; Wilson,
Wiebe, and Hwa 2004; Yu, Kaufmann, and Diermeier 2008;
Jiang et al. 2011) and subjectivity analysis (Hatzivassiloglou
and Wiebe 2000). The task of discovering phrasal opinions
has also been studied extensively. For example, Wilson et.
al. (2009) investigate phrasal opinions with opinion lexicons. Fei, Chen and Liu (2014) used topic models to discover noun phrases. Zhang and Liu (2011) identify noun
phrases implying inexplicit opinions but our problem emphasizes verb expressions where verbs play a significant role
and verb expressions are more likely to convey an opinion
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2411

