Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploring Key Concept Paraphrasing based on Pivot Language Translation
for Question Retrieval
Wei-Nan Zhang1 , Zhao-Yan Ming2⇤ , Yu Zhang1 , Ting Liu1 , Tat-Seng Chua3

1 Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology
2 Department of Computer Science, Digipen Institute of Technology
3 School of Computing, National University of Singapore

Abstract

Table 1: An example for illustrating the word mismatch between a query and a relevant question.

Question retrieval in current community-based question
answering (CQA) services does not, in general, work
well for long and complex queries. One of the main difficulties lies in the word mismatch between queries and
candidate questions. Existing solutions try to expand the
queries at word level, but they usually fail to consider
concept level enrichment. In this paper, we explore a
pivot language translation based approach to derive the
paraphrases of key concepts. We further propose a unified question retrieval model which integrates the key
concepts and their paraphrases for the query question.
Experimental results demonstrate that the paraphrase
enhanced retrieval model significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art models in question retrieval.

1

Query
Q1: Why do people get colds more often in lower temperature?
Relevant Question:
Q2:Why are you less likely to catch a cold or flu in spring summer and autumn than winter months?

explored local and global features to expand single terms
in queries. (Collins-Thompson and Callan 2005) used synonyms, cue words, co-occurrence and background smoothing to determine query associations. However, the former
approach fails to assign explicit weights to the expanded
aspects and the later approach overlooks phrase level evidences for query expansion. Meanwhile, pseudo relevance
feedback (Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto 2011) and blending (Belkin et al. 1993) are also two effective approaches to
tackle the word mismatch between queries and the candidate
documents in the term level. (Zhou et al. 2013) utilized the
Wikipedia as an external knowledge base to enhance the performance of question retrieval. Despite their success, literature that considers the concept level expansion by exploiting
multiple external knowledge sources is still sparse.
In this paper, we take three major actions to solve the word
mismatch problem in question retrieval from CQA archives
as illustrated in Figure 1. First, we utilize a pivot language
translation approach (Callison-Burch 2008) to explore key
concept paraphrases in the queries from bilingual parallel
corpora2 . Figure 2 presents an example of pivot language
translation for concept paraphrasing. We put the original
concept “get colds” on the left column. The arrow directions
represent the translation from source to target. English concepts on right column indicate the candidate paraphrases.
Pivot languages are on the intermediate columns, German
and Chinese for (a) and (b) respectively. Both of the translations in two directions are obtained by using the method of
(Koehn, Och, and Marcu 2003).
Second, we estimate the importance of the generated paraphrases for the original query under two considerations. One

Introduction

Question retrieval in community based question answering (CQA) is different from general Web search (Xue, Jeon,
and Croft 2008). Unlike the Web search engines that return
a long list of ranked documents, question retrieval returns several relevant questions with possible answers directly. While in traditional question answering (QA), the main
tasks are answer extraction (Kwok, Etzioni, and Weld 2001;
Moldovan et al. 2003), answer matching (Cui, Kan, and
Chua 2007) and answer ranking (Ko et al. 2010), with CQA, the main task is to search for relevant questions with
good ready answers (Cao et al. 2012).
One of the major challenges for question retrieval is the
word mismatch between queries and candidate questions.
For example, in Table 1, the query and question are relevant
to each other, but the same meaning is expressed with different word forms, such as “get colds” and “catch a cold”,
“lower temperature” and “winter months”. These make it
non-trivial for semantic level question matching.
To tackle the word mismatch problem, previous work
mainly resorts to query expansion. (Xu and Croft 1996)
⇤
corresponding author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Here we define question retrieval in CQA services as a task
that new questions are used as queries to find relevant questions
with ready answers. For simplicity and consistency, we use the term
“query” to denote new questions posed by users and “question” to
denote those answered questions available in the CQA archives.

2

Bilingual corpora have been verified to be the effective resource in many subjects of information retrieval (Mehdad, Negri,
and Federico 2011).

410

