Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Microblog Sentiment Classification
with Contextual Knowledge Regularization
Fangzhao Wu† , Yangqiu Song‡ , Yongfeng Huang†
†
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology,
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
‡
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
wufangzhao@gmail.com, yqsong@illinois.edu, yfhuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

not be sufficient to infer a model to predict the sentiment
polarity for such acronyms and informal words. Manually
labeling enough data is costly and time consuming. On the
other hand, the unlabled data are relatively cheap and microblogs in their nature provide a lot of knowledge about
sentiment orientations of the short messages. For example,
microblogs usually enable and encourage users to use emoticons to express their emotions. Thus, it will be helpful to
mine such sentiment knowledge from unlabeled data to improve classification.
One way to use the knowledge from large scale unlabeled
data is to build a larger sentiment lexicon to increase the coverage (Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann 2005; Baccianella,
Esuli, and Sebastiani 2010; Dang, Zhang, and Chen 2010;
Tang et al. 2014; Kiritchenko, Zhu, and Mohammad 2014;
Cambria et al. 2014). For example, Kiritchenko et al. generated two tweet-specific sentiment lexicons based on words’
associations with emoticons and hashtags containing sentiment word respectively (Kiritchenko, Zhu, and Mohammad 2014). Then a sentiment classification system was created which incorporates lexicon-related features, such as the
number of positive and negative terms in a message, as well
as other features into training and classification. Their system won the first place in SemEval-2013 competition. However, a word in different domains or contexts may convey
different sentiments. For example, when describing CPU,
the word “fast” is positive. Whereas, when describing battery, it usually conveys negative sentiment. For instance,
“the battery runs out fast.” The above lexicon based methods can not tackle this problem very well, because the same
word is set to have the same sentiment polarity for different
contexts.
In this paper, we propose a contextual knowledge regularization framework. Our framework can mine contextual
knowledge of words from unlabeled data, and incorporate
it as regularization terms into supervised learning framework to train a more accurate and robust model. Specifically, we establish two kinds of contextual knowledge from
large scale short messages, i.e., the word-word association
and word-sentiment association. The word-word association
is the information indicating that two words may share similar sentiment. The word-sentiment association indicates the
prior knowledge about the sentiment polarity of words. We
propose to use a linear classification model to perform sen-

Microblog sentiment classification is an important research topic which has wide applications in both
academia and industry. Because microblog messages
are short, noisy and contain masses of acronyms and
informal words, microblog sentiment classification is a
very challenging task. Fortunately, collectively the contextual information about these idiosyncratic words provide knowledge about their sentiment orientations. In
this paper, we propose to use the microblogs’ contextual knowledge mined from a large amount of unlabeled
data to help improve microblog sentiment classification.
We define two kinds of contextual knowledge: wordword association and word-sentiment association. The
contextual knowledge is formulated as regularization
terms in supervised learning algorithms. An efficient
optimization procedure is proposed to learn the model.
Experimental results on benchmark datasets show that
our method can consistently and significantly outperform the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Microblogging services, such as Twitter, have become very
popular in recent years. They provide public platforms for
users to share their opinions on various topics, such as daily
living activities, social or political events, news about companies or celebrities and so on. Identifying sentiments or
opinions from microblogs can statistically facilitate or validate many other disciplines, including social customer relationship management, political science, and social psychology etc. (Go, Bhayani, and Huang 2009; O’Connor et al.
2010; Bollen, Mao, and Pepe 2011; Wu et al. 2014).
Machine learning methods, especially supervised learning methods, are widely used in microblog sentiment classification field (Go, Bhayani, and Huang 2009; Bermingham
and Smeaton 2010; Liu, Li, and Guo 2012; Hu et al. 2013).
These methods use labeled data to train a sentiment classifier to classify the new microblog messages. However, microblog messages are usually very short and noisy, and contain massive acronyms and informal words, such as “tnx”
and “coooool.” This brings challenges to microblog sentiment classification, because the labeled training data may
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2332

