Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Elementary Loops and Proper Loops
for Disjunctive Logic Programs
Jianmin Ji

Hai Wan∗ and Peng Xiao

School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei 230027, China
jianmin@ustc.edu.cn

School of Software
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou 510006, China
wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

also be disregarded in the answer set computation. They introduced a subclass proper loops of elementary loops and
refined the Lin-Zhao theory by considering a special form
of loop formulas for proper loops only.
Gebser, Lee, and Lierler (2011) extended the notion of
elementary loops to DLPs and showed that these elementary loops are sufficient for selecting the answer sets among
the models of a DLP. Based on elementary loops, they presented the class of Head-Elementary-loop-Free (HEF) programs, which strictly generalizes the class of Head-CycleFree (HCF) programs in (Ben-Eliyahu and Dechter 1994).
Like an HCF program, an HEF program can be turned into
an equivalent NLP in polynomial time by “shifting” head
atoms into the body.
In this paper, we extend the notion of proper loops to
DLPs, show that they are a subclass of elementary loops, and
refine the Lin-Zhao theory to DLPs by considering a special form of loop formulas for proper loops only. Based on
proper loops, we introduce the class of Head-Proper-loopFree (HPF) programs, which strictly generalizes the class of
HEF programs, and show that an HPF program can be turned
into an equivalent NLP by “shifting”. Although properties of
elementary loops and proper loops could benefit the answer
set computation, the computational complexities of recognizing them are coNP-complete. To address this problem, we
introduce weaker versions of elementary loops and proper
loops and provide polynomial time algorithms for identifying these classes of loops respectively. Moreover, we present
a subclass of HEF programs which still generalizes HCF
programs and provide a polynomial time algorithm to identify them. At last, we provide experiments to illustrate how
these notions of loops work out in the benchmark suite. The
result implies that both elementary loops and proper loops
could be replaced by their weak versions in practice.

This paper proposes an alternative definition of elementary loops and extends the notion of proper loops for
disjunctive logic programs. Different from normal logic
programs, the computational complexities of recognizing elementary loops and proper loops for disjunctive
programs are coNP-complete. To address this problem,
we introduce weaker versions of both elementary loops
and proper loops and provide polynomial time algorithms for identifying them respectively. On the other
hand, based on the notion of elementary loops, the
class of Head-Elementary-loop-Free (HEF) programs
was presented, which can be turned into equivalent normal logic programs by shifting head atoms into bodies.
However, the problem of recognizing an HEF program
is coNP-complete. Then we present a subclass of HEF
programs which generalizes the class of Head-CycleFree programs and provide a polynomial time algorithm
to identify them. At last, some experiments show that
both elementary loops and proper loops could be replaced by their weak versions in practice.

Introduction
The notions of loops and loop formulas were first proposed
by Lin and Zhao (2004) for Normal Logic Programs (NLPs).
They showed that a set of atoms is an answer set of a program iff it satisfies both the loop formulas and the program.
Later, the notions and the result were extended to Disjunctive Logic Programs (DLPs) (Lee and Lifschitz 2003). These
results guarantee the correctness and completeness of SAT
approach based answer set solvers for both NLPs and DLPs,
like ASSAT (Lin and Zhao 2004), cmodels (Giunchiglia,
Lierler, and Maratea 2006), clasp (Gebser et al. 2007), and
claspD (Drescher et al. 2008).
In general there may be an exponential number
of loops (Lifschitz and Razborov 2006). Gebser and
Schaub (2005) showed that not all loops are necessary for
selecting the answer sets among the models of a NLP. They
introduced the subclass elementary loops and refined the
Lin-Zhao theory by considering elementary loops only. Ji et
al. (2014) further showed that some elementary loops could

Preliminaries
Disjunctive Logic Programs
In this paper, we consider only fully grounded finite logic
programs. A (disjunctive) logic program (DLP) is a finite
set of (disjunctive) rules of the form
a1 ∨ · · · ∨ ak ← ak+1 , . . . , am , not am+1 , . . . , not an , (1)

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where n ≥ m ≥ k ≥ 1 and a1 , . . . , an are atoms. If k = 1,
it is a normal rule. In particular, a normal logic program

1518

