Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Towards Cognitive Automation of Data Science
Alain Biem, Maria A. Butrico, Mark D. Feblowitz, Tim Klinger, Yuri Malitsky,
Kenney Ng, Adam Perer, Chandra Reddy, Anton V. Riabov, Horst Samulowitz,
Daby Sow, Gerald Tesauro, Deepak Turaga
{biem,mbutrico,mfeb,tklinger,ymalits,kenney.ng,adam.perer,creddy,riabov,samulowitz,sowdaby,gtesauro,turaga}@us.ibm.com
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA

Abstract

1

A Data Scientist typically performs a number of tedious and
time-consuming steps to derive insight from a raw data set.
The process usually starts with data ingestion, cleaning, and
transformation (e.g. outlier removal, missing value imputation), then proceeds to model building, and finally a presentation of predictions that align with the end-users objectives
and preferences. It is a long, complex, and sometimes artful process requiring substantial time and effort, especially
because of the combinatorial explosion in choices of algorithms (and platforms), their parameters, and their compositions. Tools that can help automate steps in this process have
the potential to accelerate the time-to-delivery of useful results, expand the reach of data science to non-experts, and
offer a more systematic exploration of the available options.
This work presents a step towards this goal.

6

Learning Controller
2

User Interface

Analytics
Repository

7

3

4
Deployed Analytic

External
Knowledge

Planning and
Deployment

5

Deployed Analytic

R, Weka, SPSS, …

Figure 1: System Architecture and Data Analysis Workflow

System Architecture
Our system consists of three functional parts, a) A repository of analytic algorithms annotated with metadata, and a
planning based composition and deployment engine, b) A
learning control strategy to determine the right set of analytic algorithms, their combinations, and their configurations to use for the task, and c) An interactive user interface
to provide user preferences, input datasets, visual summaries
of analytic algorithm performance and supporting evidence
integrated into a common implementation. The system architecture, and workflow are shown in Figure 1.
As shown, users can employ the front-end interface to
submit a dataset as Step 1, and specify the nature of the problem (e.g. Regression or Classification) for which they need
a model, along with other constraints (such as model interpretability). The learning controller strategy uses the planner and analytic repository in Step 2 to identify the space
of possible analytic algorithm flows (e.g., combinations of
feature selection and model learning) given the dataset and
constraints. The learning controller strategy then determines
which of these flows to deploy in Step 3, and uses the planning and deployment engine to construct and deploy these
analytics across the different analytic platforms in Step 4.
Data from the submitted dataset is then fed into these analytic algorithms, models are constructed, and evaluated to
determine the performance of each flow. These results are
fed back to the learning controller strategy in Step 5 which
then decides which of these flows to continue deploying or
to replace by novel flows. Steps 3, 4, and 5 are iterated un-

Introduction
In this paper we focus on the post-ingest steps of the data
science processing pipeline. Specifically, we show how the
automated composition and configuration of data analytics (spanning multiple analytic platforms such as R, Weka,
SPSS) can offer increased insight into the data and how
model selection algorithms can suggest models that are well
suited to the predictive task, while respecting user preferences. Given a data set and a task (e.g., classification or regression) the system aims to quickly determine an appropriate combination of preprocessing steps (e.g., feature reduction or mapping) and models and platforms to achieve
the users’ goals. During this process the user is continuously updated with intermediate results providing real-time
insights into the data and the reasoning process itself. For
example, which features are important? How well do entire classes of analytic tools perform on the data set? Are
there potentially significant outliers? So while we automate
the entire post-ingest steps of the processing, at any point
the user can directly interact with the process providing resource constraints (e.g., time available for training/testing)
or their preference as befitting their expertise (e.g. utilization of only specific features). In addition, the system aims
to provide basic suggestions of potentially related work that
may enable the data scientist to improve results even further.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4268

