Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning to Reject Sequential Importance Steps
for Continuous-Time Bayesian Networks
Jeremy C. Weiss

Sriraam Natarajan

C. David Page

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, US
jcweiss@cs.wisc.edu

Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, US
natarasr@indiana.edu

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, US
page@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract

One drawback of filtering is that it does not efficiently account for future evidence, and in cases of severe proposalevidence mismatch, many resampling steps are required,
leading to sample impoverishment. Akin to adaptive importance sampling, our method addresses proposal-evidence
mismatch by developing “foresight”, i.e. adaptation to approaching evidence, to guide its proposals. It develops “foresight” by learning a binary classifier dependent on approaching evidence to accept or reject each proposal. Our procedure can be viewed as the construction of a second proposal
distribution, learned to account for evidence and to better approximate the target distribution, and is a new form of adaptive importance sampling.
In greater detail, our task is to recover a target distribution
f ∗ , which can be factored variable by variable into component conditional distributions fi∗ for i ∈ 1 . . . k. The SIS
framework provides a suboptimal surrogate distribution g,
which likewise can be factored into a set of conditional distributions gi . We propose a second surrogate distribution h
closer to f ∗ based on learning conditional acceptance probabilities ai of rejection samplers relating fi∗ and gi . That is,
to sample from h, we iteratively (re-)sample from proposals
gi and accept with probability ai .
Our key idea is to relate the proposal gi and target fi∗ distributions by the ratio of expected weights of sequence completions, i.e., a setting for each variable from i to k, given
acceptance and rejection of the sample from gi . Given the
expected weight ratio, we can recover the optimal acceptance probability a∗i and thus fi∗ .
Unfortunately, the calculation of the expected weights,
and thus the ratio, is typically intractable because of the
exponential number of sequence completions. Instead, we
can approximate it using machine learning. First, we show
that the expected weight ratio equals the odds of accepting a proposal from gi under the fi∗ distribution. Then,
transforming the odds to a probability, we can learn a binary classifier for the probability of acceptance under fi∗
given the sample proposal from gi . Finally, we show how
to generate examples to train a classifier to make the optimal accept/reject decision. We specifically examine the application of our rejection-based SIS (ReBaSIS) algorithm to
continuous-time Bayesian networks (CTBNs) (Nodelman,
Shelton, and Koller 2002), where inference (even approximate) is NP-hard (Sturlaugson and Sheppard 2014).

Applications of graphical models often require the use
of approximate inference, such as sequential importance sampling (SIS), for estimation of the model distribution given partial evidence, i.e., the target distribution. However, when SIS proposal and target distributions are dissimilar, such procedures lead to biased estimates or require a prohibitive number of samples. We
introduce ReBaSIS, a method that better approximates
the target distribution by sampling variable by variable
from existing importance samplers and accepting or rejecting each proposed assignment in the sequence: a
choice made based on anticipating upcoming evidence.
We relate the per-variable proposal and model distributions by expected weight ratios of sequence completions and show that we can learn accurate models of
optimal acceptance probabilities from local samples. In
a continuous-time domain, our method improves upon
previous importance samplers by transforming an SIS
problem into a machine learning one.

1

Introduction

Sequential importance sampling (SIS) is a method for approximating an intractable target distribution by sampling
from a proposal distribution and weighting the sample by the
ratio of target to proposal distribution probabilities at each
step of the sequence. It provides the basis for many distribution approximations with applications including robotic environment mapping and speech recognition (Montemerlo et
al. 2003; Wolfel and Faubel 2007). The characteristic shortcoming of importance sampling stems from the potentially
high weight variance that results from large differences in
the target and proposal densities. SIS compounds this problem by iteratively sampling over the steps of the sequence,
resulting in sequence weights equal to the product of step
weights. The sequence weight distribution is exponential,
so only the high-weight tail of the sample distribution contributes substantially to the approximation. Two approaches
to mitigate this problem are filtering, e.g., (Doucet, Godsill,
and Andrieu 2000; Fan, Xu, and Shelton 2010) and adaptive
importance sampling, e.g., (Cornebise, Moulines, and Olsson 2008; Yuan and Druzdzel 2003; 2007a).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3628

