Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Nonparametric Online Model for Air Quality Prediction
Vitor Guizilini1 and Fabio Ramos1,2
1

2

National ICT Australia (NICTA),
School of Information Technologies, The University of Sydney, Australia.

(PM10) and 2.5 μm (PM2.5). Despite these efforts, air pollution is estimated to kill 3 million people worldwide, and
PM pollution in particular has been directly linked to excess
deaths in many countries.
The ﬁrst RT-AQF techniques were developed in the
1970s, based largely on empirical or statistically trained
models (McCollister and Wilson 1975; Wolff and Lioy
1978). The sophistication level of such models increased
considerably over time to address challenges, such as nonlinearity (Ryan 1995). The development of 3-D numerical
air quality models (AQMs) on urban, regional and global
scales (Zhang et al. 2012a) also led to signiﬁcant performance improvements, introducing systems that account for
meteorology, emissions, chemistry and removal processes
(Zhang 2008; Russel and Dennis 2000). Another performance leap was due to the ﬁrst real-time data repositories
(U.S. EPA 2009), providing effective platforms for continuously communicating air quality conditions and forecasts to
the public via the internet and other medias.
Broadly speaking, techniques for RT-AQF can be divided
into three categories (Wayland 2002):
Criteria Schemes: Employ rules-of-thumb or thresholds
to predict the future state of air quality. For example, if the
temperature forecast if above 30o C, then a photochemical
smog event will occur. Another example, often surprisingly
robust, is persistence, which means assuming that the air
quality tomorrow will be similar to today’s (U.S. EPA 2003).
Deterministic methods: Attempt to simulate the underlying chemical and physical process of air pollution production. Usually requires a lot of computational power,
and takes into consideration variables such as meteorological conditions, gaseous and particle emissions, chemical reactions and nature of surface (Zhang et al. 2012a;
Zhang 2008),.
Nonparametric models: An increasingly popular approach that makes predictions based on patterns in past meteorological, trafﬁc and air quality data, using regression or
neural network systems. For example: multiple non-linear
regression relations for radiation and temperature might be
use to predict peak ozone concentrations (Athanasiadis et al.
2003; Marchant and Ramos 2012; Athanasiadis and Mitkas
2004).
A detailed list of different methods currently used
throughout the world can be found in (Cope and Hess

Abstract
We introduce a novel method for the continuous online
prediction of particulate matter in the air (more specifically, PM10 and PM2.5) given sparse sensor information. A nonparametric model is developed using Gaussian Processes, which eschews the need for an explicit
formulation of internal – and usually very complex – dependencies between meteorological variables. Instead,
it uses historical data to extrapolate pollutant values
both spatially (in areas with no sensor information) and
temporally (the near future). Each prediction also contains a respective variance, indicating its uncertainty
level and thus allowing a probabilistic treatment of results. A novel training methodology (Structural CrossValidation) is presented, which preserves the spatiotemporal structure of available data during the hyperparameter optimization process. Tests were conducted using a real-time feed from a sensor network in an area of
roughly 50 × 80 km, alongside comparisons with other
techniques for air pollution prediction. The promising
results motivated the development of a smartphone applicative and a website, currently in use to increase the
efﬁciency of air quality monitoring and control in the
area.

Introduction
Real-Time Air Quality Forecast (RT-AQF), although a fairly
new discipline in atmospheric sciences, represents one of the
most far-reaching developments and practical applications
of science and engineering (Zhang et al. 2012a). Numerous
studies (Phalen and Phalen 2011; Greenbaum et al. 2001)
show that even acute (short-term) exposure to high level of
air pollutants may pose serious health consequences, such
as eye irritation, difﬁculty breathing, pulmonary, cardiovascular health effects and premature death. Chronic (longterm) exposure may lead to cancer, premature death and
damage to the body’s immune, neurological, reproductive
and respiratory systems. The US. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) has set air quality standards for six air pollutants: sulfur dioxide (SO2 ), nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ), carbon
monoxide (CO), ozone (O3 ), lead (Pb) and particulate matter with aerodynamic diameters less than or equal to 10 μm
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

651

