Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Lifted Probabilistic Inference for Asymmetric Graphical Models
Guy Van den Broeck

Mathias Niepert

Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven, Belgium
guy.vandenbroeck@cs.kuleuven.be

Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle
mniepert@cs.washington.edu

Abstract

are not symmetric. To bring the achievements of the lifted
inference community to the mainstream of machine learning and uncertain reasoning it is crucial to explore ways to
apply ideas from the lifted inference literature to inference
problems in asymmetric graphical models.
Recent work has introduced methods to generate symmetric approximations of probabilistic models (Van den
Broeck and Darwiche 2013; Venugopal and Gogate 2014;
Singla, Nath, and Domingos 2014). All of these approaches
turn approximate symmetries, that is, symmetries that “almost” hold in the probabilistic models, into perfect symmetries, and proceed to apply lifted inference algorithms to the
symmetrized model. These approaches were shown to perform well but are also limited in a fundamental way. The introduction of artificial symmetries results in marginal probabilities that are different from the ones of the original model.
The per variable Kullback-Leibler divergence, a measure often used to assess the performance of approximate inference
algorithms, might improve when these symmetries are induced but it is possible that the marginals the user actually
cares about are highly biased. Of course, this is a potential
problem in applications. For instance, consider a medical application where one queries the probability of diseases given
symptoms. A symmetric approximation may perform well
in terms of the KL divergence but might skew the probabilities of the most probable diseases to become equal. A
major argument for graphical models is the need to detect
subtle differences in the posterior, which becomes impossible when approximate symmetries skew the distribution.
To apply lifted inference to asymmetric graphical models we propose a completely novel approach. As in previous
approaches, we compute a symmetric approximation of the
original model but leverage the symmetrized model to compute a proposal distribution for a Metropolis-Hastings chain.
The approach combines a base MCMC algorithm such as
the Gibbs sampler with the Metropolis chain that performs
jumps in the symmetric model. The novel framework allows us to utilize work on approximate symmetries such
as color passing algorithms (Kersting et al. 2014) and lowrank Boolean matrix approximations (Van den Broeck and
Darwiche 2013) while producing unbiased probability estimates. We identify properties of an approximate symmetry
group that make it suitable for the novel lifted MetropolisHastings approach.

Lifted probabilistic inference algorithms have been
successfully applied to a large number of symmetric
graphical models. Unfortunately, the majority of realworld graphical models is asymmetric. This is even
the case for relational representations when evidence
is given. Therefore, more recent work in the community moved to making the models symmetric and then
applying existing lifted inference algorithms. However,
this approach has two shortcomings. First, all existing over-symmetric approximations require a relational
representation such as Markov logic networks. Second, the induced symmetries often change the distribution significantly, making the computed probabilities
highly biased. We present a framework for probabilistic
sampling-based inference that only uses the induced approximate symmetries to propose steps in a MetropolisHastings style Markov chain. The framework, therefore, leads to improved probability estimates while remaining unbiased. Experiments demonstrate that the
approach outperforms existing MCMC algorithms.

Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models are successfully used in a
wide range of applications. Inference in these models is
intractable in general and, therefore, approximate algorithms are mostly applied. However, there are several probabilistic graphical models for which inference is tractable
due to (conditional) independences and the resulting low
treewidth (Darwiche 2009; Koller and Friedman 2009). Examples of the former class of models are chains and tree
models. More recently, the AI community has uncovered
additional statistical properties based on symmetries of the
graphical model that render inference tractable (Niepert and
Van den Broeck 2014). In the literature, approaches exploiting these symmetries are often referred to as lifted or
symmetry-aware inference algorithms (Poole 2003; Kersting 2012).
While lifted inference algorithms perform well for highly
symmetric graphical models, they depend heavily on the
presence of symmetries and perform worse for asymmetric
models due to their computational overhead. This is especially unfortunate as numerous real-world graphical models
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3599

