Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Active Manifold Learning via Gershgorin Circle Guided Sample Selection
Hongteng Xu1 , Hongyuan Zha2,3 , Ren-Cang Li4 , Mark A. Davenport1
1

School of ECE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
3
Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
4
Department of Mathematics, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA
2

Abstract

to the alignment matrix. In this framework, we formulate the
active learning problem as follows: given the alignment matrix (which contains all the geometrical information of the
manifold), delete L rows/columns (corresponding to label L
samples) so that the remaining principal submatrix has the
smallest condition number (the learning error is bounded
well). We analyze the problem theoretically and propose an
effective algorithm, which relaxed the original problem rationally and solve it based on a heuristic process.
Our algorithm is based on two key points. First, the logarithmic condition number of a normal symmetric matrix is
equal to the difference between the maximum eigenvalue
and the minimum one of the logarithmic function of the
matrix. Based on this fact, the original condition number
minimization problem is rewritten as an eigenvalue dynamic
range minimization problem. Second, the Gershgorin circle
theorem provides us with an upper bound for the dynamic
range of eigenvalues. Deleting the rows/columns of matrix
is then equal to deleting the corresponding Gershgorin circles. Applying a sequential strategy, we delete circles and
the corresponding rows/columns one at a time, which approximately minimizes the corresponding condition number.
The contributions of our method include the following
three points. 1) We come up with an algebraic interpretation
of active learning, formulating active learning as a condition
number minimization problem in semi-supervised manifold
learning. 2) We give an upper bound for the solution based
on results from matrix theory. 3) Focusing on the active
manifold learning problem, we propose an effective sample
selection method guided by the Gershgorin circle theorem.
Comparing with existing methods, we show the superiority
of the proposed method.

In this paper, we propose an interpretation of active
learning from a pure algebraic view and combine it with
semi-supervised manifold learning. The proposed active manifold learning algorithm aims to learn the lowdimensional parameter space of the manifold with high
accuracy from smartly labeled samples. We demonstrate that this problem is equivalent to a condition number minimization problem of the alignment matrix. Focusing on this problem, we first give a theoretical upper
bound for the solution. Then we develop a heuristic but
effective sample selection algorithm with the help of the
Gershgorin circle theorem. We investigate the rationality, the feasibility, the universality and the complexity of
the proposed method and demonstrate that our method
yields encouraging active learning results.

Introduction
Many learning tasks need to model high-dimensional data
via a low-dimensional parametric model. Manifold learning provides us with an approach for finding the lowdimensional structure of data from high-dimensional observations, which has yielded encouraging results in a number of unsupervised learning tasks (Roweis and Saul 2000;
Belkin and Niyogi 2003; Zhang and Zha 2005; Zhang,
Wang, and Zha 2012) and semi-supervised learning tasks
(De Silva and Tenenbaum 2004; Ham, Ahn, and Lee 2006;
Yang et al. 2006; Zhang, Zha, and Zhang 2008).
However, one important issue has remained (at least not
explicitly addressed): the success of semi-supervised manifold learning relies on the distribution of labeled samples in
the sample space. Facing a large number of unlabeled samples, we can only label a small subset of them because of the
limitations in money, time and other resources. Specifying
which samples to label to obtain the best learning results, as
the essential problem of active learning, is still a challenging
problem from the view point of manifold learning.
In this paper, we propose an active manifold learning
algorithm, combining active learning with semi-supervised
manifold learning in a novel manner. Specifically, we unify
various manifold learning algorithms into the same framework, which corresponds to an eigenvalue problem related

Related Work
Manifold Learning. Many manifold learning approaches
have been proposed to find the intrinsic structure of data.
Among them, the methods based on local analysis, e.g., the
locally linear embedding (LLE) (Roweis and Saul 2000),
the Laplacian Eigenmap (LE) (Belkin and Niyogi 2003) and
the local tangent space alignment (LTSA) (Zhang and Zha
2005) are widely used. Based on the fact that each data
point and its neighbors lie on a locally linear patch of the
manifold, LLE finds the linear coefficients that reconstruct
each data point from its neighbors and align them glob-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3108

