Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Sparse Bayesian Multiview Learning for Simultaneous
Association Discovery and Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease
Shandian Zhe

Zenglin Xu

Department of Computer Science
Purdue University

School of Computer Science & Engineering,
Big Data Res. Center
University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China

Yuan Qi

Peng Yu

Department of Computer Science
Purdue University

Eli Lilly and Company

Abstract

for the ADNI∗

for better preventative care; to understand the underlying AD
pathology, we want to identify the disease related features
and discover their associations.

In the analysis and diagnosis of many diseases, such as
the Alzheimer’s disease (AD), two important and related
tasks are usually required: i) selecting genetic and phenotypical markers for diagnosis, and ii) identifying associations
between genetic and phenotypical features. While previous
studies treat these two tasks separately, they are tightly coupled due to the same underlying biological basis. To harness their potential benefits for each other, we propose a new
sparse Bayesian approach to jointly carry out the two important and related tasks. In our approach, we extract common
latent features from different data sources by sparse projection matrices and then use the latent features to predict disease severity levels; in return, the disease status can guide the
learning of sparse projection matrices, which not only reveal
interactions between data sources but also select groups of
related biomarkers. In order to boost the learning of sparse
projection matrices, we further incorporate graph Laplacian
priors encoding the valuable linkage disequilibrium (LD)
information. To efficiently estimate the model, we develop
a variational inference algorithm. Analysis on an imaging
genetics dataset for AD study shows that our model discovers biologically meaningful associations between single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) features, and achieves significantly higher
accuracy for predicting ordinal AD stages than competitive
methods.

Many approaches have been proposed to discover associations, such as canonical correlation analysis (CCA) and its
extensions (Harold 1936; Bach and Jordan 2005a), or select
features (or variables), such as lasso (Tibshirani 1994), elastic net (Zou and Hastie 2005), and Bayesian automatic relevance determination (MacKay 1991; Neal 1996). Despite
their wide success in many applications, these approaches
suffer several limitations: i) most association studies neglect
the supervision from the disease status, while diseases as AD
are a direct result of genetic variations and often highly correlated to clinical traits; ii) most feature selection approaches
do not consider the disease severity order, while AD subjects have a natural severity order from being normal to mild
cognitive impairment (MCI) and then from MCI to AD; iii)
most previous approaches are not designed to handle heterogeneous data sources, e.g., the SNPs values are discrete
and ordinal while the imaging features are continuous; iv)
most previous methods ignore the valuable prior knowledge
such as Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) (Falconer and Mackay
1996) measuring the non-random association of alleles. To
our knowledge, this structure has not been utilized for association discovery in medical study.
To address these limitations, we propose a new Bayesian
model that unifies multiview learning with sparse ordinal regression for joint association study and disease diagnosis.
Specifically, genetic variations and phenotypical traits are
generated from common latent features based on separate
sparse projection matrices and suitable link functions, and
the latent features are used to predict the disease status. To
encourage sparsity, we assign spike and slab priors (George
and McCulloch 1997) over the projection matrices; we further employ an additional graph Laplacian prior encoding
LD knowledge to boost the learning of the sparse projection
matrix on the genetic variation view. The sparse projection
matrices then not only reveal critical interactions between
the data sources but also identify biomarkers relevant to the
disease. Meanwhile, via their direct connection to the latent
features, the disease status will influence the estimation of
the projection matrices and guide the discovery of disease-

Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder (Khachaturian 1985). Given genetic
variations, e.g., single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),
and phenotypical traits, e.g., magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), we want to develop noninvasive diagnosis methods
∗
Data used in preparation of this article were obtained
from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
database (adni.loni.ucla.edu). As such, the investigators within
the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation
of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in
analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of
ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.ucla.edu/wpcontent/uploads/how to apply/ADNI Acknowledgement List.pdf
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1966

