Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Probabilistic Covariate Shift Assumption for Domain Adaptation
Tameem Adel

Alexander Wong

University of Waterloo
thesham@uwaterloo.ca

University of Waterloo
a28wong@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

domain adaptation (Ben-David et al. 2007). In order for domain adaptation to achieve reasonable classification performance, there must be some sort of similarity between the
two domains, so that the learning hypothesis can have a
chance of performing better than a random classifier on target data. Such performance depends both on the hypothesis
performance in the source domain, and on the relationship
between the two domains.
In some works, existing domain adaptation algorithms
have been grouped into two categories: i) conservative and
ii) adaptive. A “conservative” domain adaptation algorithm
is one that learns only from source labeled data, without
making use of data from the target domain, whereas “adaptive” algorithms make use of target generated data (BenDavid and Urner 2012; 2014). With respect to this taxonomy, our proposed algorithm is adaptive since it adapts its
target learner based on target unlabeled data. One example
of a domain adaptation problem is learning from images captured under certain lighting conditions or taken by a certain
type of camera, and performing an object recognition task on
images captured under different lighting conditions or taken
by another camera type, respectively (Saenko et al. 2010).
Another common example is to train a spam filter on emails
belonging to one address, and test it on a different address.
In domain adaptation, understanding the relationship between the source and target domains is fundamental for the
learner. The two extremes in the source-target domain relationship spectrum are: i) If there is no relationship between
the two domains at all, there is no basis for domain adaptation, and ii) if the source and target domains are identical then there is no need for domain adaptation. Covariate
shift is a common assumption that formulates this relationship in the majority of previous works on domain adaptation, e.g. (Sugiyama and Mueller 2005; Huang et al. 2006;
Ben-David and Urner 2014). Covariate shift refers to the assumption that the labeling functions of the source and target
domains are identical. Practically speaking, covariate shift
is a reasonable assumption for some, but not all, domain
adaptation problems. As an example of an adaptation problem where covariate shift does not hold, let us assume that
there is a sentiment analysis dataset containing the music
and films domains. The sentence ‘I love the story but not the
music’, is an example of an input pattern that has different
rates depending on the domain (Thet et al. 2009). Another

The aim of domain adaptation algorithms is to establish
a learner, trained on labeled data from a source domain,
that can classify samples from a target domain, in which
few or no labeled data are available for training. Covariate shift, a primary assumption in several works on
domain adaptation, assumes that the labeling functions
of source and target domains are identical. We present
a domain adaptation algorithm that assumes a relaxed
version of covariate shift where the assumption that the
labeling functions of the source and target domains are
identical holds with a certain probability. Assuming a
source deterministic large margin binary classifier, the
farther a target instance is from the source decision
boundary, the higher the probability that covariate shift
holds. In this context, given a target unlabeled sample
and no target labeled data, we develop a domain adaptation algorithm that bases its labeling decisions both on
the source learner and on the similarities between the
target unlabeled instances. The source labeling function
decisions associated with probabilistic covariate shift,
along with the target similarities are concurrently expressed on a similarity graph. We evaluate our proposed
algorithm on a benchmark sentiment analysis (and domain adaptation) dataset, where state-of-the-art adaptation results are achieved. We also derive a lower bound
on the performance of the algorithm.

Introduction
In machine learning, domain adaptation refers to the situation when one learns from samples drawn from a certain
domain, and tests the resulting hypothesis on samples drawn
from another domain. For many application domains, obtaining enough labeled data for training is not easy due to
cost, availability, etc. One possible approach of addressing
this challenge is to leverage labeled data that may be available from similar domains, and this is basically where the
concept of domain adaptation is paramount. In the domain
adaptation literature, the training domain is commonly referred to as the source domain, whereas the test domain is
commonly referred to as the target domain. The hypothesis performance in the target domain is the main metric in
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2476

