Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Compress and Control
Joel Veness, Marc G. Bellemare, Marcus Hutter, Alvin Chua, Guillaume Desjardins
Google DeepMind, Australian National University
{veness,bellemare,alschua,gdesjardins}@google.com
marcus.hutter@anu.edu.au

Abstract

(Howard 1960), approximate dynamic programming (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1996; Powell 2011) and actor-critic
methods (Sutton and Barto 1998), for example, all crucially
depend on how well policy evaluation can be performed. In
this paper we introduce a model-based approach to policy
evaluation, which transforms the task of estimating a value
function to that of learning a particular kind of probabilistic
state model.
To better put our work into context, it is worth making
the distinction between two fundamentally different classes
of model based reinforcement learning methods. Simulation based techniques involve learning some kind of forward model of the environment from which future samples
can be generated. Given access to such models, planning
can be performed directly using search. Noteworthy recent
examples include the work of Doshi-Velez (2009), Walsh,
Goschin, and Littman (2010), Veness et al. (2010), Veness
et al. (2011), Asmuth and Littman (2011), Guez, Silver,
and Dayan (2012), Hamilton, Fard, and Pineau (2013) and
Tziortziotis, Dimitrakakis, and Blekas (2014). Although the
aforementioned works demonstrate quite impressive performance on small domains possessing complicated dynamics,
scaling these methods to large state or observation spaces
has proven challenging. The main difficulty that arises when
using learnt forward models is that the modeling errors
tend to compound when reasoning over long time horizons
(Talvitie 2014).
In contrast, another family of techniques, referred to in
the literature as planning as inference, attempt to side-step
the issue of needing to perform accurate simulations by reducing the planning task to one of probabilistic inference
within a generative model of the system. These ideas have
been recently explored in both the neuroscience (Botvinick
and Toussaint 2012; Solway and Botvinick 2012) and machine learning (Attias 2003; Poupart, Lang, and Toussaint
2011) literature. The experimental results to date have been
somewhat inconclusive, making it far from clear whether the
transformed problem is any easier to solve in practice. Our
main contribution in this paper is to show how to set up a particularly tractable form of inference problem by generalizing
compression-based classification to reinforcement learning.
The key novelty is to focus the modeling effort on learning
the stationary distribution of a particular kind of augmented
Markov chain describing the system, from which we can ap-

This paper describes a new information-theoretic policy evaluation technique for reinforcement learning. This technique
converts any compression or density model into a corresponding estimate of value. Under appropriate stationarity and ergodicity conditions, we show that the use of a sufficiently
powerful model gives rise to a consistent value function estimator. We also study the behavior of this technique when
applied to various Atari 2600 video games, where the use of
suboptimal modeling techniques is unavoidable. We consider
three fundamentally different models, all too limited to perfectly model the dynamics of the system. Remarkably, we
find that our technique provides sufficiently accurate value
estimates for effective on-policy control. We conclude with a
suggestive study highlighting the potential of our technique
to scale to large problems.

1

Introduction

Within recent years, a number of information-theoretic approaches have emerged as practical alternatives to traditional
machine learning algorithms. Noteworthy examples include
the compression-based approaches of Frank, Chui, and Witten (2000) and Bratko et al. (2006) to classification, and Cilibrasi and Vitányi (2005) to clustering. What differentiates
these techniques from more traditional machine learning approaches is that they rely on the ability to compress the raw
input, rather than combining or learning features relevant to
the task at hand. Thus this family of techniques has proven
most successful in situations where the nature of the data
makes it somewhat unwieldy to specify or learn appropriate features. This class of methods can be formally justified
by appealing to various notions within algorithmic information theory, such as Kolmogorov complexity (Li and Vitányi
2008). In this paper we show how a similarly inspired approach can be applied to reinforcement learning, or more
specifically, to the tasks of policy evaluation and on-policy
control.
Policy evaluation refers to the task of estimating the
value function associated with a given policy, for an arbitrary given environment. The performance of well-known
reinforcement learning techniques such as policy iteration
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3016

