Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Pearl’s Causality in a Logical Setting
Alexander Bochman

Vladimir Lifschitz

Computer Science Department
Holon Institute of Technology, Israel
bochmana@hit.ac.il

Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
vl@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We provide a logical representation of Pearl’s structural
causal models in the framework of the causal calculus of
McCain and Turner (1997) and its first-order generalization
by Lifschitz. It will be shown that, under this representation, the nonmonotonic semantics of the causal calculus describes precisely the solutions of the structural equations (the
causal worlds of a causal model), while the causal logic from
Bochman (2004) is adequate for describing the behavior of
causal models under interventions (forming submodels).

1

Introduction

In recent years we witnessed successful uses of causal reasoning in two largely unrelated areas, reasoning about action
and change in AI, and reasoning in statistics, economics,
cognitive and social sciences, based mainly on Judea Pearl’s
theory (Pearl 2000). A common assumption behind both
these approaches is that reasoning in the relevant domains
cannot be expressed in the plain language of (classical)
logic, but requires the explicit use of causal concepts and a
general language of causation. In both cases, the corresponding causal formalisms have provided working concepts of
reasoning that have turned out to be essential for an adequate
representation of the respective areas, as well as for broad
correspondence with commonsense descriptions. Nevertheless, studies in these two areas so far used apparently different formalisms and pursued quite different objectives.
In this study we are going to show that these two causal
formalisms are based on essentially the same understanding
of causation. We will do this by demonstrating that the central notion of Pearl’s theory, the notion of a structural causal
model (which is based, in turn, on the notion of a structural equation) can be naturally represented in the causal
calculus of (McCain and Turner 1997), and especially in the
first-order generalization of the latter, introduced in (Lifschitz 1997). Moreover, this representation creates a powerful
generalization of Pearl’s formalism that relaxes many of its
more specific restrictions (such as acyclicity and uniqueness
of solutions). In addition, it allows us to clarify some of the
issues and confusions related to the use of causal concepts in
Pearl’s theory, such as the distinction between a plain mathematical and a causal understanding of structural equations.

In sum, we believe that our representation provides all the
necessary conditions for returning Pearl’s theory of causal
reasoning to logic, with all the expected benefits such a logical representation could provide for its analysis, generalization and further development.

2

Structural Equations and Causal Models

Pearl’s account
According to (Pearl 2000, Chapter 7), a causal model is a
triple M = hU, V, F i where
(i) U is a set of background (or exogenous) variables.
(ii) V is a set {V1 , V2 , . . . , Vn } of endogenous variables that
are determined by variables in U ∪ V .
(iii) F is a set of functions {f1 , f2 , . . . , fn } such that each fi
is a mapping from U ∪ (V \Vi ) to Vi , and the entire set,
F , forms a mapping from U to V .
Symbolically, Pearl continues, F is represented as a set of
equations
vi = fi (pai , ui ) i = 1, . . . , n
where pai is any realization of the unique minimal set of
variables P Ai in V \{Vi } (parents) sufficient for representing fi , and similarly for Ui ⊆ U .
In Pearl’s account, every instantiation U = u of the exogenous variables determines a particular “causal world” of
the causal model. Such worlds stand in one-to-one correspondence with the solutions to the above equations in the
ordinary mathematical sense. However, structural equations
also encode causal information in their very syntax by treating the variable on the left-hand side of = as the effect and
treating those on the right as causes. Accordingly, the equality signs in structural equations convey the asymmetrical relation of “is determined by”. This causal reading does not
affect the set of solutions of a causal model, but it plays a
crucial role in determining the effect of external interventions and evaluation of counterfactual assertions with respect
to such a model (Pearl 2012).
Each structural equation in a causal model is intended
to represent a stable and autonomous physical mechanism,
which means that it is conceivable to modify (or cancel) one
such equation without changing the others. In Pearl’s theory,
this modularity plays an instrumental role in determining the

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1446

