Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Massively Parallel A* Search on a GPU
Yichao Zhou and Jianyang Zeng∗
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University, Beijing, P. R. China

Abstract

an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 580M has six times more theoretical GFLOPS (giga floating-point operation per second)
than that of Intel Core i7-3960 (Intel Corporation 2011;
NVIDIA Corporation 2013). In the domain of A* search,
some applications, such as protein design (Leach and Lemon
1998), require heavy floating-point operations in the stages
of computing heuristic functions. When the computation
of heuristic functions becomes the main bottleneck of the
whole algorithm, these applications can significantly benefit
from the advantage of GFLOPS on a GPU.
In addition, a GPU has a memory system which is independent of that of its CPU. Such a design provides a higher
bandwidth for accessing the global memory. In other words,
cores of a GPU can retrieve and write data from/to the
global memory much faster than a CPU. Therefore, even for
those A* search applications which use only integer heuristic functions, they can still benefit a lot from the acceleration provided by a GPU. This is because A* search usually requires massive access to the global memory for storing and retrieving states from/to both open and closed lists,
and higher global memory bandwidth can lead to a faster
expansion rate during A* search.
On the other hand, using an independent global memory
system has certain disadvantage. Before and after computation, data need to be transferred between the memories of
CPU and GPU systems through a relatively slow PCI-E bus.
Nevertheless, for those applications which have to explore
exponential search space, A* search usually has a relatively
small ratio between the amount of time used to transfer input/output data and the amount of time spent on computation. Thus, in these applications, the data transfer overhead
is usually negligible.

A* search is a fundamental topic in artificial intelligence. Recently, the general purpose computation on graphics processing units (GPGPU) has been widely used to accelerate numerous computational tasks. In this paper, we propose the
first parallel variant of the A* search algorithm such that
the search process of an agent can be accelerated by a single GPU processor in a massively parallel fashion. Our experiments have demonstrated that the GPU-accelerated A*
search is efficient in solving multiple real-world search tasks,
including combinatorial optimization problems, pathfinding
and game solving. Compared to the traditional sequential
CPU-based A* implementation, our GPU-based A* algorithm can achieve a significant speedup by up to 45x on largescale search problems.

1

Introduction

A* search is one of the most widely used best-first search
algorithms in artificial intelligence, guided by a heuristic
function (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968). Intrinsically, A*
search is a sequential algorithm that is hard to be parallelized
efficiently. In this paper, we propose the first parallel variant
of the A* search algorithm that is able to run on a graphics processing unit (GPU) processor in a massively parallel
fashion, called GA*.

1.1

General-Purpose Computation on GPUs

General-purpose computation on graphics processing units
(aka GPGPU) is a new technology to use graphics processing units to accelerate traditional CPU-based computational
tasks. CPUs and GPUs handle a computational task differently. A CPU usually contains several highly optimized
cores for sequential instruction execution, while a GPU typically contains thousands of simpler but more efficient cores
that are good at manipulating different data at the same time.
So we need to modify search algorithms originally designed
for a CPU to exploit such a large amount of parallelism
brought by a GPU.
A GPU typically performs better in floating-point operations than a CPU around the same price. For example,

1.2

Related Work

Previous work on parallelization of A* search and best-first
search mainly focused on CPU-based implementations. One
of the earliest parallel A* search algorithms was developed
in (Kumar, Ramesh, and Rao 1988). With the advent of
multi-core CPUs in the commercial desktop processor market, Burns et al. (2009) proposed a general approach for
best-first search on a multi-core system with shared memory.
Recently, Kishimoto, Fukunaga, and Botea presented a distributed A* search algorithm, called HDA*, on a CPU cluster by assigning internal states to different machines using a

∗

Corresponding author. Email: zengjy321@tsinghua.edu.cn.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1248

