Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

The Queue Method: Handling Delay,
Heuristics, Prior Data, and Evaluation in Bandits
Travis Mandel1 , Yun-En Liu1 , Emma Brunskill2 , and Zoran Popović1
1

Center for Game Science, Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
{tmandel, yunliu, zoran}@cs.washington.edu, ebrun@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

distributed systems with thousands of incoming users, realtime policy updates may be infeasible; instead, one typically
launches a fixed (possibly stochastic) policy for a batch of
users, updating it only after a period of time. These related
problems, delayed feedback and batch updating, pose challenges for typical bandit algorithms theoretically (Desautels,
Krause, and Burdick 2012) and empirically (Chapelle and Li
2011). Although stochastic algorithms perform best empirically in the face of delay (Chapelle and Li 2011), deterministic algorithms have the best theoretical guarantees (Joulani,
Gyorgy, and Szepesvari 2013).
Second, we may know heuristic algorithms that do not
possess good theoretical guarantees, but tend to perform
well. For example, encouraging an algorithm to be more
exploitative often results in good short-term performance
(Chapelle and Li 2011), but may cause it to eventually settle
on a sub-optimal arm. Or, we can make a structural assumption that similar arms share information which enables good
performance if this assumption is true (Scott 2010), but if
false results in poor performance. Ideally, we could incorporate a heuristic to help improve performance while retaining
strong theoretical guarantees.
Third, we may have a prior data set consisting of information from a subset of arms, such as a website which decides
to add new ads to help improve revenue. We want to make
use of the old ad data without being overly biased by it, since
the data can be drawn from an arbitrary arm distribution and
thus possibly hurt performance. Ideally, we want a method
that guarantees good black-box algorithms will perform well
(or even better) when leveraging a prior dataset.
Finally, if we want to compare different bandit algorithms
(and associated parameter settings) on a real application,
running them online is often prohibitively expensive, especially when running an algorithm requires interacting with
people. One could build a simulator, possibly using collected data, but simulators will often lack strong guarantees
on their estimation quality. A preferred approach is datadriven offline evaluation, especially if it has strong theoretical guarantees such as unbiasedness. However, previouslyproposed unbiased estimators need to know the original
sampling policy (Li et al. 2011; Dudı́k et al. 2012) and tend
to be sample-inefficient. We would prefer a more efficient,
theoretically sound estimator that does not need to know the
original sampling distribution.

Current algorithms for the standard multi-armed bandit problem have good empirical performance and optimal regret
bounds. However, real-world problems often differ from the
standard formulation in several ways. First, feedback may
be delayed instead of arriving immediately. Second, the
real world often contains structure which suggests heuristics, which we wish to incorporate while retaining strong
theoretical guarantees. Third, we may wish to make use of
an arbitrary prior dataset without negatively impacting performance. Fourth, we may wish to efficiently evaluate algorithms using a previously collected dataset. Surprisingly,
these seemingly-disparate problems can be addressed using
algorithms inspired by a recently-developed queueing technique. We present the Stochastic Delayed Bandits (SDB)
algorithm as a solution to these four problems, which takes
black-box bandit algorithms (including heuristic approaches)
as input while achieving good theoretical guarantees. We
present empirical results from both synthetic simulations and
real-world data drawn from an educational game. Our results show that SDB outperforms state-of-the-art approaches
to handling delay, heuristics, prior data, and evaluation.

Introduction
A key part of AI systems is the ability to make decisions
under uncertainty. Multi-armed bandits (Thompson 1933)
are a common framework for deciding between a discrete
number of choices with uncertain payoffs. For example, we
might wish to select the best ad to show on a webpage to
maximize revenue, or we may have several different educational strategies and we want to select the one that maximizes learning. However, we do not want to decouple exploration and exploitation: we want to use the feedback we
get from pulling one arm to inform the next pull.
The standard bandit problem has been well studied, resulting in algorithms with near-optimal performance both in
theory (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002) and empirically (Vermorel and Mohri 2005). However, most real-world
problems do not match the bandit framework exactly. One
difference is delay: if we present a problem to a student,
other students who we need to interact with may arrive before the original student has finished. Also, when we have
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2849

