Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Better Be Lucky Than Good:
Exceeding Expectations in MDP Evaluation
Thomas Keller and Florian Geißer
University of Freiburg
Freiburg, Germany
{tkeller,geisserf}@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract

that correspond to the application of a policy on the baseMDP. Interestingly, the computation of the optimal policy
is no longer the only objective of participating planners, and
the fact that the execution of other policies on the base-MDP
can be part of an optimal strategy for the MDP-ESP leads to
a problem that is intractable in practice.
However, there are special cases where the MDP-ESP
can be reduced to an instance of an optimal stopping problem (OSP). Two functions that depend only on the number of remaining runs – one that specifies the target reward
that is necessary to stop, and one that gives the policy that
is applied otherwise – suffice to describe an optimal policy. Based on these observations, we present four approximate algorithms for the general problem. A strategy that
is inspired from a solution to the related Secretary Problem
(SecP) (Dynkin 1963; Ferguson 1989) can be applied even
when a policy for the base-MDP is computed online and not
known in advance. Two other algorithms require the knowledge of the optimal policy and its expected reward. We show
that the expected reward of the optimal policy is a lower
bound for the expected performance of both strategies.
Our final algorithm switches between the application of
the optimal policy and the policy with the highest possible
outcome, which can be computed without notable overhead
in the Trial-based Heuristic Tree Search (THTS) framework
(Keller and Helmert 2013). We show theoretically and empirically that all algorithms outperform the naı̈ve base approach that ignores the potential of optimizing evaluation
runs in hindsight, and that it pays off to take suboptimal base
policies in addition to the optimal one into account. Finally,
we discuss the influence of the MDP-ESP on the results of
IPPC 2014, and propose potential applications of our algorithms by discussing them in the context of related work.

We introduce the MDP-Evaluation Stopping Problem, the optimization problem faced by participants of the International
Probabilistic Planning Competition 2014 that focus on their
own performance. It can be constructed as a meta-MDP
where actions correspond to the application of a policy on
a base-MDP, which is intractable in practice. Our theoretical
analysis reveals that there are tractable special cases where
the problem can be reduced to an optimal stopping problem.
We derive approximate strategies of high quality by relaxing the general problem to an optimal stopping problem, and
show both theoretically and experimentally that it not only
pays off to pursue luck in the execution of the optimal policy,
but that there are even cases where it is better to be lucky than
good as the execution of a suboptimal base policy is part of
an optimal strategy in the meta-MDP.

Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) offer a general framework to describe probabilistic planning problems of varying
complexity. The development of algorithms that act successfully in MDPs is important to many AI applications.
Since it is often impossible or intractable to evaluate MDP
algorithms based on a theoretical analysis alone, the International Probabilistic Planning Competition (IPPC) was introduced to allow a comparison based on experimental evaluation. The idea is to approximate the quality of an MDP
solver by performing a sequence of runs on a problem instance, and by using the average of the obtained results as
an approximation of the expected reward. Following the optimal policy (i.e., the policy that maximizes the expected reward) leads to the best result in such a setting.
The work on this paper started with our preparation for
IPPC 2014, where each solver had to perform at least 30
runs within a given time limit, while only the last 30 runs
were used for evaluation. The decision when to stop the
sequence of runs could be taken at any point of the evaluation with knowledge of the rewards that were collected in all
previous runs. We describe the MDP-Evaluation Stopping
Problem (MDP-ESP) as the optimization problem faced by
IPPC participants that focus on their own performance, and
show how it can be constructed as a meta-MDP with actions

Background
Markov Decision Processes. In this paper we consider
problems of planning and acting under uncertainty, where an
agent interacts with an uncertain environment by performing
a sequence of runs. The environment is described in terms
of a finite-horizon MDP M = hV, A, T, R, s0 , hi (Puterman 1994; Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1996) with a factored
representation of states (Boutilier, Dearden, and Goldszmidt
2000) that are induced by a set of state variables V as S =
2V . A is a finite set of actions such that A(s) gives the set of

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3540

