Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Bayesian Model Averaging Naive Bayes (BMA-NB):
Averaging over an Exponential Number of Feature Models in Linear Time
Ga Wu

Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
wuga214@gmail.com

Scott Sanner

NICTA & Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
ssanner@nicta.com.au

Rodrigo F.S.C. Oliveira
University of Pernambuco
Recife, Brazil
rfsantacruz@gmail.com

to different feature sets, BMA has the advantage over feature
selection that its predictions tend to have lower variance in
comparison to any single model.
While BMA has had some notable successes for averaging over tree-based models such as the context-tree
(CTW) weighting (Willems, Shtarkov, and Tjalkens 1995)
algorithm for sequential prediction, or prunings of decision
trees (Oliver and Dowe 1995), it has not been previously
applied to averaging over all possible feature sets (i.e., the
exponentially sized power set) for classifiers such as NB,
which would correspond to averaging over all nodes of the
feature subset lattice — a problem which defies the simpler
recursions that can be used for BMA on tree structures.
In this paper, we show the somewhat surprising result
that it is indeed possible to exactly evaluate BMA over
the exponentially-sized powerset of NB feature models in
linear-time in the number of features; this yields an algorithm no more expensive to train than a single NB model
with all features, but yet provably converges to the globally
optimal feature subset in the asymptotic limit of data.
This is the first-time we are aware of such an exact lineartime computation result for BMA over the feature subset lattice for any classifier or regressor. While previous work has
proposed algorithms for BMA over the feature subset lattice in generalized linear models such as logistic regression
and linear regression (Raftery 1996; Raftery, Madigan, and
Hoeting 1997; Hoeting et al. 1999), all of these methods either rely on biased approximations or use MCMC methods
to sample the model space with no a priori bound on the
mixing time of such Markov Chains; in contrast our proposal for NB does not approximate and provides an exact
answer in linear-time in the number of features.
We evaluate our novel BMA-NB classifier on a range of
datasets showing that it never underperforms NB (as expected) and sometimes offers performance competitive (or
superior) to classifiers such as SVMs and logistic regression
while taking a fraction of the time to train.

Abstract
Naive Bayes (NB) is well-known to be a simple but effective classifier, especially when combined with feature selection. Unfortunately, feature selection methods
are often greedy and thus cannot guarantee an optimal
feature set is selected. An alternative to feature selection is to use Bayesian model averaging (BMA), which
computes a weighted average over multiple predictors;
when the different predictor models correspond to different feature sets, BMA has the advantage over feature
selection that its predictions tend to have lower variance on average in comparison to any single model.
In this paper, we show for the first time that it is possible to exactly evaluate BMA over the exponentiallysized powerset of NB feature models in linear-time in
the number of features; this yields an algorithm about
as expensive to train as a single NB model with all features, but yet provably converges to the globally optimal
feature subset in the asymptotic limit of data. We evaluate this novel BMA-NB classifier on a range of datasets
showing that it never underperforms NB (as expected)
and sometimes offers performance competitive (or superior) to classifiers such as SVMs and logistic regression while taking a fraction of the time to train.

Introduction
Naive Bayes (NB) is well-known to be a simple but effective
classifier in practice owing to both theoretical justifications
and extensive empirical studies (Langley, Iba, and Thompson 1992; Friedman 1997; Domingos and Pazzani 1997;
Ng and Jordan 2001). At the same time, in domains such
as text classification that tend to have many features, it is
also noted that NB often performs best when combined with
feature selection (Manning, Raghavan, and Schütze 2008;
Fung, Morstatter, and Liu 2011).
Unfortunately, tractable feature selection methods are in
general greedy (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003) and thus cannot
guarantee that an optimal feature set is selected — even for
the training data. An interesting alternative to feature selection is to use Bayesian model averaging (BMA) (Hoeting et
al. 1999), which computes a weighted average over multiple
predictors; when the different predictor models correspond

Preliminaries
We begin by providing a graphical model perspective of
Naive Bayes (NB) classifiers and Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) that simplify the subsequent presentation and
derivation of our BMA-NB algorithm.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3094

