Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

AffectiveSpace 2:
Enabling Affective Intuition for Concept-Level Sentiment Analysis
Erik Cambria

Jie Fu

School of Computer Engineering
NTU, Singapore
cambria@ntu.edu.sg

School of Computing
NUS, Singapore
jie.fu@comp.nus.edu.sg

Federica Bisio

Soujanya Poria

DITEN
University of Genoa, Italy
federica.bisio@edu.unige.it

School of Computer Engineering
NTU, Singapore
sporia@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

example, the word cloud could wrongly activate concepts
related to weather).

Predicting the affective valence of unknown multi-word
expressions is key for concept-level sentiment analysis. AffectiveSpace 2 is a vector space model, built
by means of random projection, that allows for reasoning by analogy on natural language concepts. By reducing the dimensionality of affective common-sense
knowledge, the model allows semantic features associated with concepts to be generalized and, hence, allows
concepts to be intuitively clustered according to their
semantic and affective relatedness. Such an affective
intuition (so called because it does not rely on explicit
features, but rather on implicit analogies) enables the
inference of emotions and polarity conveyed by multiword expressions, thus achieving efficient concept-level
sentiment analysis.

The analysis at concept-level allows for the inference
of semantic and affective information associated with natural language opinions and, hence, enables a comparative fine-grained feature-based sentiment analysis. Rather
than gathering isolated opinions about a whole item (e.g.,
iPhone6), users are generally more interested in comparing
different products according to their specific features (e.g.,
iPhone6’s vs GalaxyS6’s touchscreen), or even sub-features
(e.g., fragility of iPhone6’s vs GalaxyS6’s touchscreen).
In this context, common-sense knowledge is key for properly deconstructing natural language text into sentiments –
for example, to appraise the concept small room as negative for a hotel review and small queue as positive in
a patient opinion, or the concept go read the book
as positive for a book review but negative for a movie review. The inference of emotions and polarity from natural language concepts, however, is a formidable task as it
requires advanced reasoning capabilities such as commonsense, analogical, and affective reasoning.
In this work, we present AffectiveSpace 2, a novel vector
space model for concept-level sentiment analysis that allows
for reasoning by analogy on natural language concepts, even
when these are represented by highly dimensional semantic
features. In this sense, AffectiveSpace 2 can be seen as a
powerful tool to address the emerging issue of “Big Dimensionality” (Zhai, Ong, and Tsang 2014) in the context of natural language processing (NLP) and sentiment analysis. The
proposed model, however, should not be considered solely
as a NLP tool, but rather as a framework for analogical reasoning that can be embedded in potentially any cognitive
system dealing with real-world semantics, e.g., concepts associated with images (Cambria and Hussain 2012a), audio
(Principi et al. 2015), handwriting (Wang et al. 2013), and
multimodal data (Poria et al. 2015).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the first sec-

Introduction
Concept-level sentiment analysis focuses on a semantic
analysis of text through the use of web ontologies or semantic networks, which allow the aggregation of conceptual and
affective information associated with natural language opinions. By relying on large semantic knowledge bases, such
approaches step away from blind use of keywords and word
co-occurrence count, but rather rely on the implicit features
associated with natural language concepts.
Unlike purely syntactical techniques, concept-based
approaches are able to detect also sentiments that are
expressed in a subtle manner, e.g., through the analysis of
concepts that do not explicitly convey any emotion, but
which are implicitly linked to other concepts that do so. The
bag-of-concepts model can represent semantics associated
with natural language much better than bags of words. In
the bag-of-words model, in fact, a concept such as cloud
computing would be split into two separate words,
disrupting the semantics of the input sentence (in which, for
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

508

