Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

HVAC-Aware Occupancy Scheduling
Scott Backhaus, Russell Bent

BoonPing Lim, Menkes van den Briel,
Sylvie Thiébaux

Defense Systems and Analysis Division
Los Alamos National Laboratory
{backhaus,rbent}@lanl.gov

Optimisation Research Group, NICTA
Research School of Computer Science, ANU
{first.last@anu.edu.au}

Abstract

some scope for occupancy control via their room booking
and scheduling systems. For instance meetings, exams, use
of special purpose rooms, and other short-term activities can
be scheduled to occur at times and in rooms that are beneficial from an energy standpoint. Unfortunately, existing occupancy scheduling approaches assume conventional HVAC
control strategies (Kwak et al. 2013). Moreover, since reasoning using explicit models of the HVAC and the building
is computationally expensive, they typically adopt suboptimal scheduling strategies guided by proxies for the optimisation criterion. One such proxy is the minimisation of the
number of rooms used and of the time gap between successive meetings; it is used to guide the search towards solutions
that take advantage of thermal inertia and schedule meetings
to take place back-to-back in as few rooms as possible (Pan
et al. 2012; Majumdar, Albonesi, and Bose 2012).
This paper presents an approach which aims at combining the strengths of the above research directions. A naı̈ve
combination would be to schedule occupancy in a first phase
using existing methods, and then control HVAC based on
this occupancy schedule. In contrast, we model and solve
the joint HVAC control and occupancy scheduling problem.
This results in an integrated approach whose benefits exceed
the naı̈ve superposition of both of its parts, as the scheduling
fully exploits the capabilities of the underlying occupancybased HVAC control across available times and locations.
In more detail, the joint problem we consider is that of
deciding the respective times and locations (rooms) of a set
of meetings or similar activities, as well as the HVAC supply air temperature and air flow rate for each zone and time,
in such a way as to optimise the overall HVAC consumption over a long time horizon. The schedule complies with
the HVAC and building dynamics models, and with comfort
and air-flow rate bounds that depend on the scheduled zone
occupancy. It also satisfies typical meeting scheduling constraints, including constraints on meetings times, on meeting
locations (e.g. room capacity, equipment availability), and
on participant attendance conflicts. Once built, such a schedule can be used in any building equipped with an occupancybased HVAC controller by simply complementing the occupancy forecast (Mamidi, Chang, and Maheswaran 2012)
with the occupancy information captured in the schedule.
Our approach can even be used with a conventional HVAC
control system by constraining the bounds on supply air flow

Energy consumption in commercial and educational buildings is impacted by group activities such as meetings, workshops, classes and exams, and can be reduced by scheduling
these activities to take place at times and locations that are
favorable from an energy standpoint. This paper improves
on the effectiveness of energy-aware room-booking and occupancy scheduling approaches, by allowing the scheduling decisions to rely on an explicit model of the building’s
occupancy-based HVAC control. The core component of
our approach is a mixed-integer linear programming (MILP)
model which optimally solves the joint occupancy scheduling
and occupancy-based HVAC control problem. To scale up to
realistic problem sizes, we embed this MILP model into a
large neighbourhood search (LNS). We obtain substantial energy reduction in comparison with occupancy-based HVAC
control using arbitrary schedules or using schedules obtained
by existing heuristic energy-aware scheduling approaches.

1

Introduction

Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems
are responsible for 20% of the USA total energy consumption (Pérez-Lombard, Ortiz, and Pout 2008) and account
for one hundred billion dollars/year electrical expenditure.
These high energy costs together with rising environmental
pollution levels call for innovative computational sustainability research focused on improving energy management
in buildings.
Recent studies show that building HVAC consumption
can be significantly reduced by adopting occupancy-based
control strategies that exploit measured or predicted occupancy information (Erickson et al. 2009; Agarwal et al.
2010; West, Ward, and Wall 2014). For instance, model predictive control strategies determine supply air flow rate and
temperature over longer time horizons so as to optimise energy consumption, whilst remaining within air flow and temperature bounds that reflect the predicted occupancy of various building zones (Goyal, Ingley, and Barooah 2013).
Another recent research line investigates the proactive
control of occupancy in order to minimise HVAC consumption (Kwak et al. 2013; Majumdar, Albonesi, and Bose 2012;
Pan et al. 2012). Many office and university buildings offer
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

679

