Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Planning Over Multi-Agent Epistemic States: A Classical Planning Approach
Christian Muise∗ , Vaishak Belle† , Paolo Felli∗ , Sheila McIlraith†
Tim Miller∗ , Adrian R. Pearce∗ , Liz Sonenberg∗
∗

Department of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne
†
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
∗
{christian.muise,paolo.felli,tmiller,adrianrp,l.sonenberg}@unimelb.edu.au, † {vaishak,sheila}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

actions whose outcomes are unknown to other agents; we are
interested in synthesizing a plan to achieve a goal condition.
Planning is at the belief level and as such, while we consider the execution of actions that can change the state of the
world (ontic actions) as well as an agent’s state of knowledge
or belief (epistemic or more accurately doxastic actions, including communication actions), all outcomes are with respect to belief. Further, those beliefs respect the KD45n axioms of epistemic logic (Fagin et al. 1995). Finally, we take
a perspectival view, planning from the viewpoint of a single
agent. We contrast this with traditional multi-agent planning
which generates a coordinated plan to be executed by multiple agents (e.g., (Brenner and Nebel 2009)).
We focus on computational aspects of this synthesis task,
leaving exploration of interesting theoretical properties to
a companion paper. To this end, we propose a means of
encoding a compelling but restricted subclass of our synthesis task as a classical planning problem, enabling us to
exploit state-of-the-art classical planning techniques to synthesize plans for these challenging planning problems. Our
approach relies on two key restrictions: (1) we do not allow
for disjunctive belief; and (2) the depth of nested belief is
bounded. A key aspect of our encoding is the use of ancillary conditional effects – additional conditional effects of
actions which enforce desirable properties such as epistemic
modal logic axioms (cf. Section 3), and allow domain modellers to encode conditions under which agents are mutually
aware of actions (cf. Section 4). By encoding modal logic
axioms as effects of actions, we are using our planner to perform epistemic reasoning. As such, our planning machinery
additionally supports answering queries involving the nested
beliefs of agents (cf. Section 5): e.g, “Does Agent 1 believe
that Agent 2 believes they can achieve the goal?”.
Computational machinery for epistemic reasoning has
historically appealed to theorem proving or model checking (e.g., (van Eijck 2004)), while epistemic planning, recently popularized within the Dynamic Epistemic Logic
(DEL) community, has largely focused on theoretical concerns (e.g., (Löwe, Pacuit, and Witzel 2011)). The work
presented here is an important first step towards leveraging state-of-the-art planning technology to address rich epistemic planning problems of the sort examined by the DEL
community. Indeed, we can readily solve existing examples
in the DEL literature (cf. Section 6). We further discuss the

Many AI applications involve the interaction of multiple autonomous agents, requiring those agents to reason about their
own beliefs, as well as those of other agents. However, planning involving nested beliefs is known to be computationally
challenging. In this work, we address the task of synthesizing plans that necessitate reasoning about the beliefs of other
agents. We plan from the perspective of a single agent with
the potential for goals and actions that involve nested beliefs,
non-homogeneous agents, co-present observations, and the
ability for one agent to reason as if it were another. We formally characterize our notion of planning with nested belief,
and subsequently demonstrate how to automatically convert
such problems into problems that appeal to classical planning technology. Our approach represents an important first
step towards applying the well-established field of automated
planning to the challenging task of planning involving nested
beliefs of multiple agents.

1

Introduction

AI applications increasingly involve the interaction of multiple agents – be they intelligent user interfaces that interact
with human users, gaming systems, or multiple autonomous
robots interacting together in a factory setting. In the absence of prescribed coordination, it is often necessary for
individual agents to synthesize their own plans, taking into
account not only their own capabilities and beliefs about the
world but also their beliefs about other agents, including
what each of the agents will come to believe as the consequence of the actions of others. To illustrate, consider the
scenario where Larry and Moe plan to work together on an
assembly task. Each knows what needs to be done and can
plan accordingly. Unbeknownst to Moe, Larry decides to
start the job early. Larry believes that Moe believes that assembly has not yet commenced. As a consequence, Larry’s
plan must include a communication action to inform Moe of
the status of the assembly when Moe arrives.
In this paper, we examine the problem of synthesizing
plans in such settings. In particular, given a finite set of
agents, each with: (1) (possibly incomplete and incorrect)
beliefs about the world and about the beliefs of other agents;
and (2) differing capabilities including the ability to perform
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3327

