Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Machine Learning towards Predictive Sales Pipeline Analytics∗
Junchi Yan123 , Chao Zhang2 , Hongyuan Zha14 , Min Gong2 ,
Changhua Sun2 , Jin Huang2 , Stephen Chu2 , Xiaokang Yang3
{yanjunchi,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, zha@cc.gatech.edu, {bjzchao,gminsh,schangh,huangjsh,schu}@cn.ibm.com
1
Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University, Shanghai, 200062, China
2
IBM Research – China, Shanghai, 201203, China
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China
4
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, 30332, USA
Abstract

an actual client purchase. All open opportunities are tracked,
ideally culminating in a “won” deal that generates revenue.
By collecting the up-to-date information about the
pipeline, analytics approaches can be used to streamline the
sales pipeline management. From the management perspective, the resource owner can reallocate their resources based
on the pipeline quality assessment in comparison with their
sales target or quota, which in turn, can also be dynamically
adjusted based on the updated assessment result. From the
individual salesperson perspective, assessment can further
provide actionable advise to field sellers. By predictively
scoring the quality of each lead at hand, it allows field sellers to better prioritize their personal resources and actions,
in face of a relatively large number of ongoing leads within a
tight period. These two situations are especially pronounced
for companies having large and global client-facing sales
teams dealing with increasingly complex portfolios of everchanging products and services.
The fundamental building block to pipeline quality assessment is the lead-level win-propensity scorer. In fact,
machine learning currently has not been widely applied to
the B2B sales pipeline environment, or little technical work
have been released from the business side. In practice, many
internal pipeline systems, including the company that will
be studied in our case study, typically ask the field seller to
enter his subjective rating towards each of the leads that he
owns. Then these fine-grained evaluations would be aggregated by accompanying with other factors to facilitate the
decision making at different management levels.
However, such a subjective approach would unavoidably
introduce noise. From our observation to the referred company, on one hand, many sellers intentionally manipulate the
ratings in two ways: i) some leads are underrated by the
seller in order to avoid the attention and competition from
other sellers who may also have the channel to touch the
clients behind the leads; ii) in contrast, some leads are overrated because the sellers suffer pressure from their leaders,
who set different subtle performance metrics in a process
oriented management fashion, not only for the final won revenue. Another drawback is different sellers may have biased
personal expectations to similar leads. This fact is also common for human rating in many information retrieval applications, and is typically solved by asking pairwise comparison
instead of entering a global score. However, such interfaces

Sales pipeline win-propensity prediction is fundamental to effective sales management. In contrast to using subjective human rating, we propose a modern machine learning paradigm to estimate the winpropensity of sales leads over time. A profile-specific
two-dimensional Hawkes processes model is developed
to capture the influence from seller’s activities on their
leads to the win outcome, coupled with lead’s personalized profiles. It is motivated by two observations: i)
sellers tend to frequently focus their selling activities
and efforts on a few leads during a relatively short time.
This is evidenced and reflected by their concentrated interactions with the pipeline, including login, browsing
and updating the sales leads which are logged by the
system; ii) the pending opportunity is prone to reach its
win outcome shortly after such temporally concentrated
interactions. Our model is deployed and in continual use
to a large, global, B2B multinational technology enterprize (Fortune 500) with a case study. Due to the generality and flexibility of the model, it also enjoys the
potential applicability to other real-world problems.

Introduction
Business-to-business (B2B) selling has evolved considerably over the last five decades from the in-person pitches
depicted in the television series, to email and user profilebased deals, to customer relationship management (CRM)
systems (Linoff and Berry 2011), and to the emerging trend
of automatic sales analytics that allows the optimization of
sales processes (Kawas et al. 2013).
Therefore, companies are adopting more systematic and
digitalized sales management systems to support the sales
process. The common pipeline operation model (Kawas et
al. 2013) can be described as follows: As new sales leads
are identified, the seller enters these leads into the sales opportunity pipeline management system. These leads are further evaluated and some are qualified into opportunities. A
sales opportunity consists of a set of one or more products
or services that the salesperson is attempting to convert into
∗
The work is partially supported by NSF IIS-1116886, NIH
R01 GM108341, NSFC 61129001 and 61025005/F010403.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1945

