Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Leveraging Features and Networks for Probabilistic Tensor Decomposition
Piyush Rai, Yingjian Wang, Lawrence Carin
{piyush.rai,yingjian.wang,lcarin}@duke.edu
‘ ECE Department, Duke University
Durham, NC 27708

noted by Y where Yijk = 1 denotes that user i visited location j and performed activity k. In addition to the tensor data Y, there may be additional information associated
with one or more of the modes of the tensor. For examples,
we may be given user attributes, location attributes, and a
user-user social network (Fig 1 (a)). Leveraging such additional sources of information can lead to improved tensor
decomposition and completion, especially when a significant amount of tensor data is missing, or data in an entire
slice is missing, or in cold-start problems involving tensor
data (Ermiş, Acar, and Cemgil 2013; Narita et al. 2012).
There has been a recent interest in tensor decomposition
methods that leverage side-information associated with one
or more of the tensor modes (Ermiş, Acar, and Cemgil 2013;
Narita et al. 2012).
Motivated by this problem, in this paper, we present a
probabilistic, fully Bayesian approach for tensor decomposition and completion with side-information. Our approach
has the following key advantages: (i) ability to incorporate
side-information from modes that have side-information in
form of a feature matrix and/or an adjacency network between the mode entities, (ii) a two-layer decomposition of
the tensor, with the second layer decomposition also providing a binary vector representation for entities in each mode,
which can be useful in its own right, (iii) a generative, fully
Bayesian model which allows modeling both real-valued
and binary-valued tensors and infers the appropriate tensor
rank from the data, and (iv) conjugate Bayesian inference
for both real and binary data, allowing easy to derive Gibbs
sampling updates to facilitate a fully Bayesian analysis.

Abstract
We present a probabilistic model for tensor decomposition where one or more tensor modes may have sideinformation about the mode entities in form of their
features and/or their adjacency network. We consider a
Bayesian approach based on the Canonical PARAFAC
(CP) decomposition and enrich this single-layer decomposition approach with a two-layer decomposition. The
second layer fits a factor model for each layer-one factor matrix and models the factor matrix via the mode
entities’ features and/or the network between the mode
entities. The second-layer decomposition of each factor
matrix also learns a binary latent representation for the
entities of that mode, which can be useful in its own
right. Our model can handle both continuous as well as
binary tensor observations. Another appealing aspect of
our model is the simplicity of the model inference, with
easy-to-sample Gibbs updates. We demonstrate the results of our model on several benchmarks datasets, consisting of both real and binary tensors.

Introduction
Learning from multiway and multirelational data is becoming more and more ubiquitous in the era of big data.
Multiway tensor data (Kolda and Bader 2009; Acar and
Yener 2009), in particular, arises in diverse applications,
such as recommender systems (Yin et al. 2013), multirelational networks (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2011), and
brain-computer imaging (Cichocki 2013), among others.
Tensor decomposition methods (Kolda and Bader 2009;
Acar and Yener 2009) provide an effective way to extract
latent factors from such data, and are now routinely used
for tensor completion of sparse, incomplete tensors. Probabilistic tensor decomposition methods (Chu and Ghahramani 2009; Xiong et al. 2010; Xu, Yan, and Qi 2013;
Rai et al. 2014) are especially appealing because they can
deal with with diverse data types and missing data in a principled way via a proper generative model.
In many problems of practical interest, in addition to the
tensor data, there is also additional information for one of the
more tensor modes. For example, consider a tensor data containing a three-way user-location-activity relationship de-

The Model
At the core of our proposed model is the Canonical
PARAFAC (CP) decomposition (Kolda and Bader 2009;
Xiong et al. 2010; Rai et al. 2014) model. Formally, a Kway tensor X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×···×nK can be represented as:
X =

R
X

(2)
(K)
λr · u(1)
r ◦ ur ◦ · · · ◦ ur

r=1

where nk denotes the dimension of tensor X along the
(k)
k way (or mode) of the tensor, ur ∈ Rnk , ‘◦’ denotes
the outer product, and R is the rank of the tensor X . This
construction essentially expresses the tensor X as a sum of
th

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2942

