Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Incorporating Assortativity and
Degree Dependence into Scalable Network Models
Stephen Mussmann1,2 * and John Moore1 * and Joseph J. Pfeiffer III1 and Jennifer Neville1
Departments of Computer Science and Statistics1 , and Mathematics2
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
Email: {somussma, moore269, jpfeiffer, neville}@purdue.edu
*Authors contributed equally
Abstract

used to reason about observed graph structures by constructing graphs that are, ideally, structurally similar to an input
graph. The methods use an input (observed) graph to estimate parameters of the model, then the learned parameters
are used to generate a new network by drawing a sample
from the model. A variety of scalable generative network
models exist that capture common network structure such
as a power law degree distribution, small diameter and clustering coefficients (Chung and Lu 2002; Kolda et al. 2013;
Leskovec et al. 2010; Pfeiffer III et al. 2012).
However, the assortativity of a network, or the tendency
for vertices to form connections with other vertices of similar degree, is largely overlooked in these modeling efforts. This is surprising in the sense that assortativity typically reflects the network type: social networks generally have positive assortativity, while biological and technological networks are generally disassortative (i.e., negative assortativity) (Stanton and Pinar 2011). Thus, the assortativity in a network can provide significant insight into
the type of complex network observed, making it a popular statistic within social network analysis (Newman 2002;
Zhou et al. 2012).
Although assortativity is rarely directly modeled, it may
be produced as a byproduct of the modeling process. For
example, the Block Two-Level Erdos Renyi (BTER) model
(Kolda et al. 2013) groups clusters of vertices with similar degree together in such a way that the vertices within
a cluster have higher probability of linking to each other;
this representation produces networks with high clustering
and assortativity. However, this approach cannot produce
disassortative networks and moreover, the assortativity and
clustering cannot be varied independently, since they are tied
together in the process. Stanton and Pinar (2011) explicitly
model the joint degree distribution of a network, which generalizes the assortativity summary statistic. However, their
approach that directly models the entire joint degree distribution is quadratic in the number of unique degrees in the
network, and their model cannot easily model other network
statistics (e.g., clustering).
In this work, we explore two aspects of this problem.
First, we formally discuss the relationship between the assortativity of a network and its joint degree distribution.
Namely, we prove that assortativity alone cannot summarize
the joint degree distribution of a network: even networks

Due to the recent availability of large complex networks, considerable analysis has focused on understanding and characterizing the properties of these networks. Scalable generative graph models focus on modeling distributions of graphs
that match real world network properties and scale to large
datasets. Much work has focused on modeling networks with
a power law degree distribution, clustering, and small diameter. In network analysis, the assortativity statistic is defined
as the correlation between the degrees of linked nodes in the
network. The assortativity measure can distinguish between
types of networks—social networks commonly exhibit positive assortativity, in contrast to biological or technological
networks that are typically disassortative. Despite this, little work has focused on scalable graph models that capture
assortativity in networks.
The contributions of our work are twofold. First, we prove
that an unbounded number of pairs of networks exist with the
same degree distribution and assortativity, yet different joint
degree distributions. Thus, assortativity as a network measure cannot distinguish between graphs with complex (nonlinear) dependence in their joint degree distributions. Motivated by this finding, we introduce a generative graph model
that explicitly estimates and models the joint degree distribution. Our Binned Chung Lu method accurately captures
both the joint degree distribution and assortativity, while still
matching characteristics such as the degree distribution and
clustering coefficients. Further, our method has subquadratic
learning and sampling methods that enable scaling to large,
real world networks. We evaluate performance compared to
other scalable graph models on six real world networks, including a citation network with over 14 million edges.

1

Introduction

Networks are commonly used as a representation for understanding complex systems. For example, interactions of
physical systems (e.g., internet topology), biology (e.g., protein interactions), the Web (e.g., hyperlink structure) and
social networks (e.g., Facebook, email) can be represented
as networks. This has led to considerable interest in understanding these networks and constructing generative network models that can capture a wide range of network behavior. Generally speaking, generative graph models are
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

238

