Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Computing Maximal Subsets of Clauses that Must Be Satisfiable
with Possibly Mutually-Contradictory Assumptive Contexts
Philippe Besnard

Éric Grégoire and Jean-Marie Lagniez

IRIT
CNRS UMR 5505
118 Route de Narbonne
F-31062 Toulouse, France
besnard@irit.fr

CRIL
Université d’Artois & CNRS
rue Jean Souvraz SP18
F-62307 Lens, France
{gregoire,lagniez}@cril.fr

Abstract

sumptive contexts, that are under the form of (possibly mutually contradictory) Boolean formulas. These assumptive
contexts are mutually conflicting when they express incompatible possible branches of an alternative. Should any of the
assumptive contexts turn out to be true, the (cardinality or inclusion) MSS would not get contradicted. Such a context is
widespread in A.I. and everyday life. A few examples:

An original method for the extraction of one maximal
subset of a set of Boolean clauses that must be satisfiable with possibly mutually contradictory assumptive
contexts is motivated and experimented. Noticeably, it
performs a direct computation and avoids the enumeration of all subsets that are satisfiable with at least one
of the contexts. The method applies for subsets that are
maximal with respect to inclusion or cardinality.

• Planning. A robot needs to plan its next moves. It must
take its decisions based on its own knowledge ∆ and
two newly downloaded maps. Although each map is itself conflict-free, it contains information conflicting with
the other map. Since the robot must act quickly and since
it assumes that the conflicts inside ∆ are of a minor importance, it decides to rely on just one MSS of the settheoretic union of ∆ with the two maps, provided that this
MSS is compatible with each map. If the robot is given
more time then it computes more MSSes and takes a decision on their global basis.

Introduction
The extraction of maximal satisfiable subsets (MSSes) of a
set of Boolean clauses is a key issue in many knowledge
representation and reasoning fields. These subsets can be
maximal with respect to set-theoretic inclusion or cardinality. The set-theoretic complement of one MSS (noted CoMSS) is also of importance in many A.I. areas since it is
an (inclusion or cardinality)-minimal subset of clauses that
should be corrected in order for the whole set of clauses to
be conflict-free. Although there can be an exponential number of MSSes in a contradictory set of clauses, the extraction of one MSS can prove useful when a quick decision
needs to be taken and when it is acceptable to base this decision on one MSS, only. Moreover, computing one MSS
is also the basic kernel of techniques that either enumerate
all MSSes (Marques-Silva et al. 2013) when their number
is small, or compute some preferred ones. In addition, many
algorithms that enumerate minimal proofs of unsatisfiability,
or MUSes for (inclusion)-Minimal Unsatisfiable Sets, in the
clausal Boolean framework (Liffiton and Sakallah 2008a;
Grégoire, Mazure, and Piette 2007), rely on the enumeration of MSSes. MUSes have also many applications in their
own right.
In this respect, techniques for extracting one MSS that
prove experimentally viable in many actual situations are
thus of a wide scope interest.
In this paper, we investigate the more general situation
where the maximal satisfiable subset to be extracted must
be conflict-free with a series of potential cases, called as-

• Decision making. An agent wants to found her decision on
the part of her own knowledge and beliefs ∆ that does not
contradict a given range of possibilities. Since she must
decide quickly, she starts by considering one maximal
subset of ∆ that is satisfiable with each of those possibilities (which again we call assumptive contexts). She is then
guaranteed that her decision will not be conflicting with
any of the assumptive contexts, should one of them eventually turn out to be true. She feels that conflicts within
her own information ∆ are of lesser importance, so that
she accepts to drop some pieces of information involved
in these latter conflicts. Indeed, she regards it more important to take a quick decision that is compatible with each
of the assumptive contexts.
• Model-based diagnosis. Diagnoses are defined as formulas from a Co-MSS, among other constraints (Hamscher,
Console, and de Kleer 1992; DX 2014). Diagnoses can
be required to be conflict-free with each member of a set
of additional considerations or assumptive contexts that
might be mutually conflicting.
• Reasoning about exceptions and default reasoning. For
example, in default logic (Reiter 1980), when the set of
standard logical formulas is consistent, an extension is a

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3710

