Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Action Language BC+: Preliminary Report
Joseph Babb and Joohyung Lee
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, 85287, USA
{Joseph.Babb,joolee}@asu.edu

Abstract

and the recurring pattern of ASP rules for representing transition systems. However, the existing work on action languages have two limitations. First, they do not allow many
useful ASP constructs, such as choice rules, aggregates, abstract constraint atoms, and external atoms, that have recently been introduced into ASP and have been shown to
be very useful. The inability to use these modern constructs
in action languages is what often prevents the users from
writing in action languages, and instead forces them to write
in the language of ASP directly.
Another issue is that even when we do not use such constructs, there are certain limitations that each action language has in comparison with another. For instance, in language B, the frame problem is solved by enforcing in the semantics that every fluent be governed by the commonsense
law of inertia, which makes it difficult to represent fluents
whose behavior is described by defaults other than inertia.
Languages C and C+ do not have this limitation, but instead
they do not handle Prolog-style recursive definitions, such
as transitive closure, available in B. The recently proposed
language BC (Lee, Lifschitz, and Yang 2013) combines the
attractive features of B and C+, but it is not a proper generalization. In comparison with C+, it does not allow us to
describe complex dependencies among actions, thus it is unable to describe several concepts that C+ is able to express
naturally, such as defeasible causal laws (Giunchiglia et al.
2004, Section 4.3) and action attributes (Giunchiglia et al.
2004, Section 5.6).
We present a simple solution to these problems. The main
idea is to define an action language in terms of a general
stable model semantics, which has not been considered in
the work of action languages. We present a new action language called BC+, which is defined as a high level notation
of propositional formulas under the stable model semantics
in (Ferraris 2005). It has been well studied in ASP that several useful constructs, such as aggregates, abstract constraint
atoms, and conditional literals, can be identified with abbreviations of propositional formulas (e.g.,(Ferraris 2005;
Pelov, Denecker, and Bruynooghe 2003; Son and Pontelli
2007; Harrison, Lifschitz, and Yang 2014)). Thus, BC+ employs such constructs as well. Further, it is more expressive
than the other action languages mentioned above, allowing
them to be easily embedded. The computation of BC+ is carried out by ASP solvers, which is implemented by modify-

Action languages are formal models of parts of natural language that are designed to describe effects of actions. Many
of these languages can be viewed as high level notations of
answer set programs structured to represent transition systems. However, the form of answer set programs considered
in the earlier work is quite limited in comparison with the
modern Answer Set Programming (ASP) language, which
allows several useful constructs for knowledge representation, such as choice rules, aggregates, and abstract constraint
atoms. We propose a new action language called BC+, which
closes the gap between action languages and the modern ASP
language. Language BC+ is defined as a high level notation
of propositional formulas under the stable model semantics.
Due to the generality of the underlying language, BC+ is expressive enough to encompass many modern ASP language
constructs and the best features of several other action languages, such as B, C, C+ and BC. Computational methods
available in ASP solvers are readily applicable to compute
BC+, which led us to implement the language by extending
system CPLUS 2 ASP.

Introduction
Action languages are formal models of parts of natural language that are used for describing properties of actions. The
semantics of action languages describe transition systems—
directed graphs whose vertices represent states and whose
edges represent actions that affect the states. Many action
languages, such as languages A (Gelfond and Lifschitz
1993) and B (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1998, Section 5), can
be viewed as high level notations of answer set programs
structured to represent transition systems. Languages C
(Giunchiglia and Lifschitz 1998) and C+ (Giunchiglia et
al. 2004) are originally defined in terms of nonmonotonic
causal theories, but their “definite” fragments can be equivalently turned into logic programs as well, leading to the implementation CPLUS 2 ASP, which uses ASP solvers for computation (Babb and Lee 2013).
The main advantage of using action languages over ASP
programs is their structured abstract representations for describing transition systems, which allows their users to focus
on high level descriptions and avoids the “cryptic” syntax
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1424

