Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploiting Parallelism for Hard Problems in Abstract Argumentation
Ilias Tachmazidis, Mauro Vallati,
Sotirios Batsakis

Federico Cerutti
Dept. Computing Science
University of Aberdeen, UK

School of Computing and Engineering
University of Huddersfield, UK

Massimiliano Giacomin

Grigoris Antoniou

Dept. of Information Engineering
University of Brescia, I

School of Computing and Engineering
University of Huddersfield, UK

Abstract

at the second level of the polynomial hierarchy — which
exploits the SCC-recursive schema (Baroni, Giacomin, and
Guida 2005), a semantics definition schema where extensions are defined at the level of the sub-frameworks identified by the strongly connected components. A similar approach has been recently discussed in (Cerutti et al. 2014a):
however, in this work we (1) show that preferred extensions can be derived from the solution of independent subproblems; (2) identify independent clusters of SCCs to consider when solving such sub-problems; (3) develop efficient
algorithms and data structures for exploiting such independence using parallel and dynamic programming techniques.
As large-scale argumentation is vastly unexplored, there
is no further work directly related to our approach. The
closest work is in the context of Assumption-Based Argumentation (ABA) Frameworks (Bondarenko et al. 1997), an
abstract framework for default reasoning which can be instantiated with different deductive systems (e.g. logic programming, autoepistemic logic, default logic). (Craven et al.
2012) describes a parallel implementation for credulous acceptance under the acceptablity semantics for some specific
instances of ABAs in the medical domain. It considers competitive parallel executions: multiple versions — equivalent
w.r.t. their outcome — of a sequential process are created
and then started in parallel. Once one version finds a solution to the problem, the others are killed.
Our work can be seen as part of a broader recent push
towards large-scale reasoning which, among others, concerns simple semantic web reasoning (Urbani et al. 2012),
fuzzy ontologies (Liu et al. 2012) and logic programming
(Tachmazidis, Antoniou, and Faber 2014). Indeed, the fastgrowing field of argument mining from content in the Web
(Grosse et al. 2012; Cabrio and Villata 2013) highlights the
lack of large-scale reasoning approaches in formal argumentation, and thus increases the importance of our research.
The paper is organised as follows. In the first section we
recall some necessary background on Dung’s AF , the SCCrecursive schema and the existing algorithmic approach exploiting it. In the subsequent section we present our approach for exploiting the SCC-recursive schema in a parallel fashion, and we discuss the theoretical remarks granting
the correctness of the approach. An exhaustive experimental
analysis is then presented in the forthcoming section. The
last section concludes the paper and discusses future work.

Abstract argumentation framework (AF ) is a unifying
framework able to encompass a variety of nonmonotonic reasoning approaches, logic programming and
computational argumentation. Yet, efficient approaches
for most of the decision and enumeration problems associated to AF s are missing, thus limiting the efficacy
of argumentation-based approaches in real domains. In
this paper, we present an algorithm for enumerating the
preferred extensions of abstract argumentation frameworks which exploits parallel computation. To this purpose, the SCC-recursive semantics definition schema is
adopted, where extensions are defined at the level of
specific sub-frameworks. The algorithm shows significant performance improvements in large frameworks,
in terms of number of solutions found and speedup.

Introduction
Dung’s theory of abstract argumentation (Dung 1995) is a
unifying framework able to encompass a large variety of
specific formalisms in the areas of nonmonotonic reasoning, logic programming and computational argumentation.
It is based on the notion of argumentation framework (AF ),
consisting of a set of arguments and an attack relation between them. Different argumentation semantics introduce
in a declarative way the criteria to determine which arguments emerge as ‘justified’ from the conflict, by identifying
a number of extensions, i.e. sets of arguments that can “survive the conflict together”. In (Dung 1995) four “traditional”
semantics were introduced, namely complete, grounded, stable, and preferred semantics. For an introduction on alternative semantics see (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2011).
The main computational problems in abstract argumentation include decision and construction problems, and turn
out to be computationally intractable for most of argumentation semantics (Dunne and Wooldridge 2009). In this paper
we focus on the extension enumeration problem, i.e. constructing all extensions for a given AF : its solution provides
complete information about the justification status of arguments and subsumes the solutions to the other problems.
In this paper we propose the first parallel approach for
enumerating preferred extensions — a problem which lies
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1475

