Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Partial Lexicographic Preference Trees
over Combinatorial Domains
Xudong Liu and Miroslaw Truszczynski
Department of Computer Science
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY USA
{liu,mirek}@cs.uky.edu

Abstract

trees) (Booth et al. 2010) generalizes the language of lexicographic strategies by arranging issues into decision trees
that assign preference ranks to outcomes. An important aspect of LP-trees is that they allow us to model conditional
preferences on issues and conditional ordering of issues. Another formalism, the language of conditional lexicographic
preference trees (or CLP-trees) (Bräuning and Eyke 2012),
extends LP-trees by allowing subsets of issues as labels of
nodes.
A central problem in preference representation concerns
learning implicit models of preferences (such as lexicographic strategies, LP-trees or CLP-trees), of possibly small
sizes, that are consistent with all (or at least possibly many)
given examples, each correctly ordering a pair of outcomes.
The problem was extensively studied. Booth et al. (2010)
considered learning of LP-trees, and Bräuning and Eyke
(2012) of CLP-trees.
In this paper, we introduce partial lexicographic preference trees (or PLP-trees) as means to represent total preorders over combinatorial domains. PLP-trees are closely
related to LP-trees requiring that every path in the tree contains all issues used to describe outcomes. Consequently,
LP-trees describe total orders over the outcomes. PLP-trees
relax this requirement and allow paths on which some issues
may be missing. Hence, PLP-trees describe total preorders.
This seemingly small difference has a significant impact on
some of the learning problems. It allows us to seek PLPtrees that minimize the set of issues on their paths, which
may lead to more robust models by disregarding issues that
have no or little influence on the true preference (pre)order.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we introduce the language of PLP-trees and describe
a classification of PLP-trees according to their complexity. We also define three types of passive learning problems
for the setting of PLP-trees. In the following sections, we
present algorithms learning PLP-trees of particular types and
computational complexity results on the existence of PLPtrees of different types, given size or accuracy. We close with
conclusions and a brief account of future work.

We introduce partial lexicographic preference trees (PLPtrees) as a formalism for compact representations of preferences over combinatorial domains. Our main results concern
the problem of passive learning of PLP-trees. Specifically, for
several classes of PLP-trees, we study how to learn (i) a PLPtree consistent with a dataset of examples, possibly subject to
requirements on the size of the tree, and (ii) a PLP-tree correctly ordering as many of the examples as possible in case
the dataset of examples is inconsistent. We establish complexity of these problems and, in all cases where the problem
is in the class P, propose polynomial time algorithms.

Introduction
Representing and reasoning about preferences are fundamental to decision making and so, of significant interest
to artificial intelligence. When the choice is among a few
outcomes (alternatives), representations in terms of explicit
enumerations of the preference order are feasible and lend
themselves well to formal analysis. However, in many applications outcomes come from combinatorial domains. That
is, outcomes are described as tuples of values of issues (also
referred to as variables or attributes), say X1 , . . . , Xp , with
each issue Xi assuming values from some set Di – its domain. Because of the combinatorial size of the space of such
outcomes, explicit enumerations of their elements are impractical. Instead, we resort to formalisms supporting intuitive and, ideally, concise implicit descriptions of the order.
The language of CP-nets (Boutilier et al. 2004) is a prime
example of such a formalism.
Recently, however, there has been a rising interest in representing preferences over combinatorial domains by exploiting the notion of the lexicographic ordering. For instance, assuming issues are over the binary domain {0, 1},
with the preferred value for each issue being 1, a sequence
of issues naturally determines an order on outcomes. This
idea gave rise to the language of lexicographic preference
models or lexicographic strategies, which has been extensively studied in the literature (Schmitt and Martignon 2006;
Dombi, Imreh, and Vincze 2007; Yaman et al. 2008). The
formalism of complete lexicographic preference trees (LP-

Partial Lexicographic Preference Trees
Let I = {X1 , . . . , Xp } be a set of binary issues, with each
Xi having its domain Di = {0i , 1i }. The corresponding

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1539

