Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On the Equivalence of Linear Discriminant Analysis and Least Squares
Kibok Lee1,2 and Junmo Kim1
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
2
Samsung Electronics DMC R&D Center, Suwon, Korea
kibok90@gmail.com, junmo.kim@kaist.ac.kr

matrix with a certain dependent variable matrix1 (Hastie,
Tibshirani, and Buja 1994).
Recently, there has been progress in generalizing the
equivalence of LS and LDA to multiclass cases without
regularization and multiclass cases with regularization. Ye
(2007) extended the equivalence to multiclass cases without
regularization by considering LS with one specific choice of
dependent variable matrix. Sun (2010) and Zhang (2010)
dealt with multiclass cases with regularization, which are of
more practical importance. They proposed a two-stage algorithm that consists of an LS stage with a dependent variable
matrix and a generalized eigenvalue decomposition (GEVD)
stage, where the resulting transformation matrix consists of
the eigenvectors of the original LDA problem. Cai et al.
(2008) also considered multiclass cases with regularization
and proposed an algorithm to obtain the LDA solution subspace by solving LS. Their algorithm suggested a way to
find the dependent variable matrix. However, the theory for
the equivalence of LDA and LS has remained incomplete in
the sense that the necessary and sufficient condition for the
equivalence is unknown. Consequently, there has been no
simple way to check the validity of a potential candidate dependent variable matrix with some desirable properties; the
equivalence needs to be proved once again for the candidate
dependent variable matrix. Similarly, a two-stage algorithm
was proposed and verified only for a specific choice of dependent variable matrix (Sun, Ceran, and Ye 2010) (Zhang
et al. 2010).
In this paper, we complete the theory for the equivalence
of LDA and LS by establishing the necessary and sufficient
conditions for the dependent variable matrices, i.e., we identify the exact set of dependent variable matrices such that
the corresponding LS is equivalent to the LDA for any data
so that one can apply LS to obtain the LDA solution. The
equivalence is in the sense that they have the same solution
subspace (i.e., the same range). The resulting LS with the
set of dependent variable matrices provides an interesting
and appealing intuitive interpretation in that the mapping
for dimensionality reduction given by the LS solution, or
equivalently the LDA solution, performs a sort of data clus-

Abstract
Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) is a popular dimensionality reduction and classification method that simultaneously
maximizes between-class scatter and minimizes within-class
scatter. In this paper, we verify the equivalence of LDA and
least squares (LS) with a set of dependent variable matrices.
The equivalence is in the sense that the LDA solution matrix
and the LS solution matrix have the same range. The resulting LS provides an intuitive interpretation in which its solution performs data clustering according to class labels. Further, the fact that LDA and LS have the same range allows us
to design a two-stage algorithm that computes the LDA solution given by generalized eigenvalue decomposition (GEVD),
much faster than computing the original GEVD. Experimental results demonstrate the equivalence of the LDA solution
and the proposed LS solution.

Introduction
In classification, dimensionality reduction has been an important problem in many fields dealing with high dimensional data. The main objective of dimensionality reduction is to discard redundant and noisy features while preserving discriminative information so that the curse of dimensionality can be overcome. Linear discriminant analysis
(LDA) is a popular dimensionality reduction and classification method that simultaneously maximizes between-class
scatter and minimizes within-class scatter (Bishop 2006)
(Fukunaga 1990), thereby keeping discriminative information while reducing indiscriminative information. The original formulation of LDA, known as Fisher’s linear discriminant, deals with binary classification. This binary-class LDA
is equivalent to a least squares (LS) problem with a particular dependent variable matrix (Bishop 2006). Many realworld applications involve multiclass problems, and LDA
can be generalized to a multiclass problem. With the generalized Fisher criterion, LDA finds a subspace that has less
than or equal to c − 1 dimensions, where c is the number
of classes (Bishop 2006) (Fukunaga 1990). It has been proposed that the range of the LDA solution matrix for the multiclass cases can be obtained from that of the LS solution

1
For example, in a typical LS problem minW kAW − BkF , A
and B are the independent and dependent variable matrices for the
LS, respectively. In this paper, we use Y for the dependent variable
matrix.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2736

