Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Self-Paced Curriculum Learning
Lu Jiang1 , Deyu Meng1,2 , Qian Zhao1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,3 , Alexander G. Hauptmann1
1

2

School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 15217
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, P. R. China, 710049
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P. R. China, 100190
lujiang@cs.cmu.edu, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
timmy.zhaoqian@gmail.com, sgshan@ict.ac.cn, alex@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract

between curriculum learning (CL) and self-paced learning
(SPL) lies in the derivation of the curriculum. In CL, the curriculum is assumed to be given by an oracle beforehand, and
remains fixed thereafter. In SPL, the curriculum is dynamically generated by the learner itself, according to what the
learner has already learned.
The advantage of CL includes the flexibility to incorporate prior knowledge from various sources. Its drawback
stems from the fact that the curriculum design is determined
independently of the subsequent learning, which may result
in inconsistency between the fixed curriculum and the dynamically learned models. From the optimization perspective, since the learning proceeds iteratively, there is no guarantee that the predetermined curriculum can even lead to
a converged solution. SPL, on the other hand, formulates
the learning problem as a concise biconvex problem, where
the curriculum design is embedded and jointly learned with
model parameters. Therefore, the learned model is consistent. However, SPL is limited in incorporating prior knowledge into learning, rendering it prone to overfitting. Ignoring
prior knowledge is less reasonable when reliable prior information is available. Since both methods have their advantages, it is difficult to judge which one is better in practice.
In this paper, we discover the missing link between CL
and SPL. We formally propose a unified framework called
Self-paced Curriculum Leaning (SPCL). SPCL represents
a general learning paradigm that combines the merits from
both the CL and SPL. On one hand, it inherits and further
generalizes the theory of SPL. On the other hand, SPCL addresses the drawback of SPL by introducing a flexible way
to incorporate prior knowledge. This paper also discusses
concrete implementations within the proposed framework,
which can be useful for solving various problems.
This paper offers a compelling insight on the relationship between the existing CL and SPL methods. Their relation can be intuitively explained in the context of human
education, in which SPCL represents an “instructor-student
collaborative” learning paradigm, as opposed to “instructordriven” in CL or “student-driven” in SPL. In SPCL, instructors provide prior knowledge on a weak learning sequence
of samples, while leaving students the freedom to decide the
actual curriculum according to their learning pace. Since an
optimal curriculum for the instructor may not necessarily be
optimal for all students, we hypothesize that given reason-

Curriculum learning (CL) or self-paced learning (SPL)
represents a recently proposed learning regime inspired
by the learning process of humans and animals that
gradually proceeds from easy to more complex samples in training. The two methods share a similar conceptual learning paradigm, but differ in specific learning schemes. In CL, the curriculum is predetermined by
prior knowledge, and remain fixed thereafter. Therefore,
this type of method heavily relies on the quality of prior
knowledge while ignoring feedback about the learner.
In SPL, the curriculum is dynamically determined to adjust to the learning pace of the leaner. However, SPL is
unable to deal with prior knowledge, rendering it prone
to overfitting. In this paper, we discover the missing link
between CL and SPL, and propose a unified framework
named self-paced curriculum leaning (SPCL). SPCL
is formulated as a concise optimization problem that
takes into account both prior knowledge known before
training and the learning progress during training. In
comparison to human education, SPCL is analogous to
“instructor-student-collaborative” learning mode, as opposed to “instructor-driven” in CL or “student-driven”
in SPL. Empirically, we show that the advantage of
SPCL on two tasks.

Curriculum learning (Bengio et al. 2009) and self-paced
learning (Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010) have been attracting increasing attention in the field of machine learning
and artificial intelligence. Both the learning paradigms are
inspired by the learning principle underlying the cognitive
process of humans and animals, which generally start with
learning easier aspects of a task, and then gradually take
more complex examples into consideration. The intuition
can be explained in analogous to human education in which
a pupil is supposed to understand elementary algebra before he or she can learn more advanced algebra topics. This
learning paradigm has been empirically demonstrated to be
instrumental in avoiding bad local minima and in achieving
a better generalization result (Khan, Zhu, and Mutlu 2011;
Basu and Christensen 2013; Tang et al. 2012).
A curriculum determines a sequence of training samples
which essentially corresponds to a list of samples ranked
in ascending order of learning difficulty. A major disparity
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2694

