Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Integrating Image Clustering and Codebook Learning
Pengtao Xie and Eric Xing
{pengtaox,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Cluster
Labels

Abstract
Image clustering and visual codebook learning are two
fundamental problems in computer vision and they are
tightly related. On one hand, a good codebook can generate effective feature representations which largely affect clustering performance. On the other hand, class
labels obtained from image clustering can serve as supervised information to guide codebook learning. Traditionally, these two processes are conducted separately
and their correlation is generally ignored. In this paper,
we propose a Double Layer Gaussian Mixture Model
(DLGMM) to simultaneously perform image clustering and codebook learning. In DLGMM, two tasks
are seamlessly coupled and can mutually promote each
other. Cluster labels and codebook are jointly estimated to achieve the overall best performance. To incorporate the spatial coherence between neighboring
visual patches, we propose a Spatially Coherent DLGMM which uses a Markov Random Field to encourage neighboring patches to share the same visual word
label. We use variational inference to approximate the
posterior of latent variables and learn model parameters.
Experiments on two datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of two models.

Image
Clustering

Codebook
Learning
Feature
Vectors

Figure 1: Image clustering and codebook learning are
closely related and can mutually promote each other. First,
good codebook will produce good feature vectors, which
determine the performance of clustering. Second, the cluster labels generated from clustering algorithm can supervise
codebook learning. For example, given the information that
image A and B are grouped into cluster 1 and image C and
D are grouped into cluster 2, a codebook can be learned to
make the feature vectors of A and B to be similar and those
of A and C to be dissimilar.
a visual codebook and uses the resultant histogram of words
for downstream tasks such as image clustering, classification
and retrieval. To obtain a codebook, visual features extracted
from the entire training collection are grouped into clusters
and each cluster center is deemed as a visual word and assigned a unique word index.
Traditionally, codebook learning and image clustering are
performed separately. A codebook is first built off-line and
images are converted into BOW histograms based on the
codebook. Subsequently, clustering is performed over the
BOW histograms. This separation ignores the correlation between two tasks. As shown in Figure 1, image clustering
and codebook learning are closely coupled and can mutually benefit each other. On one hand, a good codebook can
generate effective BOW representations, which are the input
of clustering algorithms and largely affect clustering performance. On the other hand, cluster labels obtained from
clustering methods can serve as supervised information to
guide codebook learning. For example, if knowing two images are likely to be assigned to the same cluster, we can
learn a codebook based on which BOW representations of
the two images are similar. Clustering and codebook learning follow a chicken-and-egg relationship. Better clustering
results produce better codebook and better codebook in turn

Introduction
Image clustering (Barnard, Duygulu, and Forsyth 2001;
Gordon, Greenspan, and Goldberger 2003; Ci et al. 2006;
Gao et al. 2005; He et al. 2005; Rege, Dong, and Hua 2008;
Aly et al. 2009; Yang et al. 2010) represents a fundamental problem in computer vision and has wide applications in image collection summarization, browsing and
analysis. Probably, the most widely used image clustering
technique is bag-of-words representation (Sivic and Zisserman 2003; Fei-Fei and Perona 2005; Lazebnik, Schmid,
and Ponce 2007) plus K-means clustering (Lloyd 1982),
which first converts images into bag-of-words histograms
using a learned codebook, then uses K-means method to obtain clusters. Bag-of-words (BOW) model (Sivic and Zisserman 2003; Fei-Fei and Perona 2005; Lazebnik, Schmid, and
Ponce 2007) extracts local features (e.g., patches) from images, quantizes their descriptors into visual words based on
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1903

