Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Unidimensional Clustering of Discrete Data Using Latent Tree Models
April H. Liu1 and Leonard K.M. Poon2 and Nevin L. Zhang1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
{aprillh, lzhang}@cse.ust.hk
2
Department of Mathematics and Information Technology
The Hong Kong Institute of Education, Hong Kong
kmpoon@ied.edu.hk

Abstract

In this paper, we propose a novel method to relax the local
independence assumption of LCM and to detect and model
local dependence properly so as to improve clustering quality. The idea is to: (1) Partition the attributes into groups such
that correlations among the attributes in each group can be
properly modeled using one single latent variable, and introduce a latent variable for each group; (2) Construct several
models for clustering using the latent variables from Step 1;
and (3) Select of one the models to produce the final results.

This paper is concerned with model-based clustering of
discrete data. Latent class models (LCMs) are usually
used for the task. An LCM consists of a latent variable
and a number of attributes. It makes the overly restrictive assumption that the attributes are mutually independent given the latent variable. We propose a novel
method to relax the assumption. The key idea is to partition the attributes into groups such that correlations
among the attributes in each group can be properly modeled by using one single latent variable. The latent variables for the attribute groups are then used to build a
number of models and one of them is chosen to produce the clustering results. Extensive empirical studies
have been conducted to compare the new method with
LCM and several other methods (K-means, kernel Kmeans and spectral clustering) that are not model-based.
The new method outperforms the alternative methods in
most cases and the differences are often large.

Intuitively, each latent variable introduced in Step 1 can
be understood as capturing one aspect of the data.
One of the models constructed in Step 2 uses the latent
variables from Step 1 as features and introduces a new latent
variable for clustering. It produces a partition of data that is
based on all aspects of data evenly and hence is called the
balanced model. In each of the other models, attributes from
one group and latent variables for the other groups are used
as features for clustering. They produce partitions of data
that predominantly depends on only one aspect of data and
hence are called unbalanced models. We choose among the
different models using a model selection criterion. Both the
AIC score (Akaike 1974) and the BIC score (Schwarz 1978)
are considered.

Introduction
Cluster analysis is a classic research topic in AI. A
variety of approaches have been proposed, including
distance/similarity-based algorithms such as K-means, kernel K-means and spectral clustering (Filippone et al. 2008),
as well as model-based methods such as Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) (McLachlan and Peel 2000) and latent
class models (LCMs) (Bartholomew and Knott 1999). While
GMMs are used to analyze continuous data, LCMs are used
to deal with discrete data.
This paper focuses on LCMs. An LCM consists of a latent
variable and a set of discrete attributes (observed variables)
that describe the data. Each state of the latent variable represents a cluster to be identified, and the latent variable itself represents a partition of data to be obtained. The model
assumes that the attributes are mutually independent given
the clustering latent variable. In other words, the attributes
are mutually independent in each cluster. The assumption is
hence referred to as the local independence assumption. It
is often violated in practice and can lead to spurious clusters
(Garrett and Zeger 2000; Vermunt and Magidson 2002).

All the models contain multiple latent variables that are
connected up to form a tree structure. Hence they are special latent tree models (LTMs) (Zhang 2004; Mourad et al.
2014). This paper differs from previous works on LTMs in
that one of the latent variables is designated as the clustering variable during model construction. The objective is to
model local dependence in LCM so as to improve clustering
quality. In contrast, the objective of previous works on LTMs
is to optimize fitness to data. None of the latent variables is
designated as the clustering variable. They are sometimes all
interpreted as clustering variables, leading to multiple partitions of data. So, previous works on LTMs aim at finding
the best way to cluster data simultaneously along multiple
dimensions, while this paper focuses on finding the best way
to cluster data along a single dimension.
We will start with a brief review of the basic concepts. In
the bulk of the paper, we will describe the new method, first
Step 1 and then Steps 2 and 3. After that, we will discuss related works, present empirical results and draw conclusions.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2771

