Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Fairness in Decision-Making under Uncertainty:
Definitions, Computation, and Comparison
Chongjie Zhang and Julie A. Shah
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
{chongjie,julie a shah}@csail.mit.edu
Abstract

tion in networking (Bonald and Massoulié 2001; Nace and
Pióro 2008). These existing works on fairness have been focused on one-shot decision-making in deterministic settings.
In this paper, we will study fairness in sequential decisionmaking under uncertainty. Our fairness notion is based on
the maximin principle in Rawlsian theory of justice, maximizing the utility of the agents who are worse off. Motivated
by different application domains, we propose four different
maximin fairness solution criteria and develop corresponding algorithms for computing fair policies. In order to identify proper fairness criteria for different domains, we also
formally analyze the connections between these four criteria
and discuss and compare their characteristics.

The utilitarian solution criterion, which has been extensively studied in multi-agent decision making under uncertainty, aims to maximize the sum of individual utilities. However, as the utilitarian solution often discriminates against some agents, it is not desirable for many
practical applications where agents have their own interests and fairness is expected. To address this issue,
this paper introduces egalitarian solution criteria for sequential decision-making under uncertainty, which are
based on the maximin principle. Motivated by different
application domains, we propose four maximin fairness
criteria and develop corresponding algorithms for computing their optimal policies. Furthermore, we analyze
the connections between these criteria and discuss and
compare their characteristics.

Multi-Agent Decision Making Model
We are interested in multi-agent sequential decision-making
problems, where agents have their own interests. We will
focus on centralized policies. This focus is sensible because
we assume that although agents have local interests, they are
cooperative. Such cooperation can be proactive, e.g., sharing
resources with other agents to sustain cooperation that benefits all agents, or can be passive, where agents’ actions are
controlled by a central decision maker, as in many practical
resource allocation problems in manufacturing, cloud computing, networking, and transportation.
We use a multi-agent Markov decision processes (MDP)
to model multi-agent sequential decision-making problems,
defined by a tuple hI, S, A, T, {Ri }i∈I , s1 , Hi, where

Introduction
Multi-agent Markov decision processes (MMDPs) provide a
powerful framework for studying sequential decision making under uncertainty in the presence of multiple agents.
Existing techniques for MMDPs (Guestrin 2003; Kok and
Vlassis 2006; Zhang and Lesser 2011) have been focused
on optimizing the utilitarian criterion, where the central decision maker aims to find a policy for maximizing the sum
of individual utilities. The computed utilitarian solution is
optimal from the perspective of the system where the performance is additive. However, as the utilitarian solution often discriminates against some agents, it is not desirable for
many practical applications where agents have their own interests and fairness is expected. For example, in manufacturing plants, resources need to be fairly and dynamically allocated to work stations on assembly lines in order to maximize the throughput; in telecommunication systems, wireless bandwidth needs to be fairly allocated to avoid “unhappy” customers; in transportation systems, traffic lights
are controlled so that traffic flow is balanced.
To tackle these decision-making problems, we need to introduce a notion of fairness in the computed policy. Fairness
has been studied for resource division in economics (Andrews et al. 2001; Brams 1995), and primary goods distribution in social science (Rawls 1971) and bandwidth alloca-

I = {1, . . . , n} is a set of agent indices.
S is a finite set of states.
A = ×i∈I Ai is a finite set of joint actions, where Ai is a
finite set of actions available for agent i.
T: S × A × S → [0, 1] is the transition function. T (s0 |s, a)
is the probability of transiting to the next state s0 after a
joint action a ∈ A is taken by agents in state s.
Ri : S × A × S → < is a reward function of agent i and provides agent i with an individual reward Ri (s, a, s0 ) after a
joint action a taken in state s and resulting in state s0 .
s1 is the initial state.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

H is the horizon.

3642

