Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Dealing with Trouble: A Data-Driven Model of
a Repair Type for a Conversational Agent
Sviatlana Höhn
sviatlana.danilava@uni.lu, phone: +352 46 66 44 5461
University of Luxembourg, 6 rue Coudenhove Calergie, Luxembourg, 1359 Luxembourg

Abstract

dialogues a conversational agent needs to recognize that the
user initiates a repair, extract the repairable (a.k.a. troublesource or TS) and carry out the repair.
Contribution I address here the problem of computational modelling of linguistic repair in chat conversation
where the user does not understand agent’s talk due to difficulties in understanding the language to be learned. In contrast to the previous research on conversational agents for
SLA, I propose a data-driven approach inspired by Conversation Analysis (CA) to create models of linguistic repair.
I use the data set of instant messaging dialogues in German described in (Danilava et al. 2013). The corpus consists of 72 free conversations produced by 9 learners and
4 native speakers. For the implementation, I extend a German AIML (Artificial Intelligence Markup Language) based
chatbot (Droßmann 2005; Bush 2006) with a repair manager.

Troubles in hearing, comprehension or speech production are common in human conversations, especially if
participants of the conversation communicate in a foreign language that they have not yet fully mastered.
Here I describe a data-driven model for simulation of
dialogue sequences where the learner user does not understand the talk of a conversational agent in chat and
asks for clarification.

Conversational agents for educational purposes, specifically
for Second Language Acquisition (SLA) use different approaches to support language learning through conversation. CSIEC chatbot (Jia 2009) can correct spelling errors.
CLIVE (Zakos and Capper 2008) understands input in the
native language of the learner. The language and culture
training system (Sagae, Johnson, and Valente 2011)supports
learning in the form of task based dialogues with agents in
a serious game environment. The systems are supposed to
simulate the native speaker (NS) in conversations with the
learner, non-native speaker (NNS). However, studies on NSNNS communication found out, that there are sub-dialogues
in NS-NNS conversations which are almost non-existant in
first language (L1) communication (Hosoda 2006; Tudini
2012). In such sequences participants explicitly orient to
their linguistic knowledge, like for example error correction
and meaning checks, which are types of repair.
Example 1: Trouble-source and references to it (bold),
English translation (italics) and turn types (brackets).
N zugegeben, ich war dieses Jahr auch noch in keinem
See, aber so langsam könnte man das mal ins Auge
fassen :-)
[trouble-source turn]
I admit I was this year not in a lake either, but I could
slowly consider it
L ins auge fassen?
[repair initiation]
consider?
N das heißt hier etwa soviel wie ”planen” oder ”bald
mal machen”
[repair carry-out]
it means here smth like ”to plan” or ”to do soon”
Example 1 shows a repair sequence where the learner L does
not understand a part of the native speaker’s N talk and initiates a repair, N explains the meaning. To simulate such sub-

Repair
“Repair in the CA sense deals with any problems in speaking, hearing, or understanding, such as clarification requests,
understanding checks, repetitions, restatements, offers of
candidate hearings, and the like, and it includes but is not
limited to corrections of linguistic errors” (Hosoda 2006).
From the perspective of the speaker who produced the repairable, CA differentiates between self-initiated and otherinitiated self-repair and other-repair.
Nothing in the language is a TS by itself, but everything
can appear to be a TS in a conversation if it is marked as a TS
by the conversation participants. However, there are structures in language that have a greater potential to become a
TS because they require a higher level of language proficiency to use or to understand them correctly, for instance
idioms, figurative expressions and proverbs.
Here we are in particular interested in models for situations where the system produces a repairable and the user
initiates a repair sequence, thus, in other-initiated self-repair
(OISR) where the system is the trouble-speaker (OISRS ).
The term clarification dialogues is mostly used to describe repair sequences in AI. Repair initiations are referred to as clarification requests. Clarification dialogues
have been studied from the point of view of managing
lack of information to satisfy user’s need in task-based dialogue systems, question answering systems, information
systems and robotics. Only the case of OISR where the sys-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4166

