Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Gaussian Cardinality Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Cheng Wan† , Xiaoming Jin† , Guiguang Ding† and Dou Shen‡

†School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
‡
Baidu Corporation, Beijing, China
wanc12@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xmjin, dinggg}@tsinghua.edu.cn, doushen@gmail.com

since it often results in non-trivial dependencies between
hidden units that make inference intractable.
Swersky et al. presented CaRBM in (Swersky et al.
2012). The main idea of CaRBM is that no more than a given
number of hidden units are activated simultaneously. To do
so, a universal threshold of the number of activated hidden
units is added to the joint probability distribution. Therefore, all hidden units compete with each other for the limited
chances of being activated, which lead to the consequence
that only the most important hidden units, in terms of representing input data, can be activated. This would make the
model capable to obtain genuinely sparse representations.
However, it is improper to assume that all input data have
the same threshold of the number of activated hidden units,
in many real world applications. Naturally, data (for example, images, in our experiments) in different catalogs should
activate different numbers of hidden units. Consider that if
we use a high threshold to model data which actually activate a few hidden units, it would bring some redundancy.
And if we use a low threshold to model data which actually
activate plenty of hidden units, it would lead to some information loss. Therefore, it is necessary that adapt the thresholds to the input data.
In this paper, we propose a principled method, which replaces the universal threshold in CaRBM by thresholds sampled from a certain distribution. Our model is capable of
handling the input data more ﬂexibly. For example, in our
experiments, the threshold of the number of activated hidden units should be higher when the input image is relatively more complex. We also analyze how parameters in our
model inﬂuence the performance. Here we name the model
Gaussian Cardinality RBM (GC-RBM) since we use Gaussian distribution in our experiments. The reasons for why
we choose Gaussian distribution are elaborated. Experimental results show the advantage of GC-RBM in classiﬁcation
tasks compared with CaRBM and the improvement is extremely statistically signiﬁcant.

Abstract
Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) has been applied
to a wide variety of tasks due to its advantage in feature extraction. Implementing sparsity constraint in the
activated hidden units is an important improvement on
RBM. The sparsity constraints in the existing methods
are usually speciﬁed by users and are independent of the
input data. However, the input data could be heterogeneous in content and thus naturally demand elastic and
adaptive settings of the sparsity constraints.
To solve this problem, we proposed a generalized model
with adaptive sparsity constraint, named Gaussian Cardinality Restricted Boltzmann Machines (GC-RBM). In
this model, the thresholds of hidden unit activations are
decided by the input data and a given Gaussian distribution in the pre-training phase. We provide a principled
method to train the GC-RBM with Gaussian prior. Experimental results on two real world data sets justify the
effectiveness of the proposed method and its superiority
over CaRBM in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy.

Introduction
Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) has been widely
studied since 2006 (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006; Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006; Hinton 2010). It has been
applied to a variety of tasks such as image classiﬁcation
and voice recognition. As a building block of deep structure (Bengio et al. 2007; Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009;
Cho, Raiko, and Ilin 2011), it provides good initialization on
both supervised and unsupervised learning (Lee et al. 2009;
Snoek, Adams, and Larochelle 2012). One important research direction is to improve its performance, along which
enforcing sparsity constraints has been an effective way.
There are several approaches to introduce sparsity to
RBM. Implementing sparsity constraints as penalty functions (Lee, Ekanadham, and Ng 2007; Luo et al. 2011) is
one of those approaches. The work by Goh et al. (Goh et
al. 2010; 2011) is also based on the same idea and aims to
obtain a more precise control of the regularization. Another
important way is to integrate strict sparsity constraints directly into energy function, which is not recommended before the Cardinality-RBM (CaRBM) (Swersky et al. 2012)

Background
Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Restricted Boltzmann Machine is a particular type of
energy-based model with hidden variables (Bengio 2009) .
It could be represented by an undirected bipartite graph. The

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3031

