Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Theoretical Analysis of Optimization by Gaussian Continuation
Hossein Mobahi and John W. Fisher III
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab. (CSAIL)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
hmobahi,fisher@csail.mit.edu

self2 . For example, it is not clear which properties of the
problem make its associated optimization easy or difficult
for this approach.
This paper provides a bound on the objective value attained by the continuation method. The derived bound
monotonically depends on a particular characteristic of the
objective function. That is, lower value of the characteristic
guarantees attaining lower objective value by the continuation. This characteristic reflects the complexity of the optimization task. Hence, we refer to it as the optimization complexity. Importantly, we show that this complexity parameter is computable when the objective function is expressed in
some suitable basis functions such as Gaussian Radial Basis
Function (RBF).
We provide a brief description of our main result here,
while the complete statement is postponed to Theorem 7.
Let f (x) be a nonconvex function to be minimized and let
x̂ be the solution discovered by the continuation method.
Let f † be the minimum of the simplified objective function.
Then,

Abstract
Optimization via continuation method is a widely used
approach for solving nonconvex minimization problems. While this method generally does not provide a
global minimum, empirically it often achieves a superior local minimum compared to alternative approaches
such as gradient descent. However, theoretical analysis
of this method is largely unavailable. Here, we provide
a theoretical analysis that provides a bound on the endpoint solution of the continuation method. The derived
bound depends on a problem specific characteristic that
we refer to as optimization complexity. We show that
this characteristic can be analytically computed when
the objective function is expressed in some suitable basis functions. Our analysis combines elements of scalespace theory, regularization and differential equations.

1

Introduction

Nonconvex energy minimization problems arise frequently
in learning and complex inference tasks. In these problems, computing the global minima are generally intractable
and as such, heuristic methods are sought. These methods
may not always find the global minimum, but often provide good suboptimal solutions. A popular heuristic is the
so called continuation method. It starts by solving an easy
problem, and progressively changes it to the actual complex
task. Each step in this progression is guided by the solution
obtained in the previous step.
This idea is very popular owing to its ease of implementation and often superior empirical performance1 against alternatives such as gradient descent. Instances of this concept
have been utilized by the artificial intelligence community
for more than three decades. Examples include graduatednonconvexity (Blake and Zisserman 1987), mean field theory (Yuille 1987), deterministic annealing (Rose, Gurewitz,
and Fox 1990), and optimization via scale-space (Witkin,
Terzopoulos, and Kass 1987). It is widely used in various state-of-the-art solutions (see Section 2). Despite that,
there exists no theoretical understanding of the method it-

√
f (x̂) ≤ w1 f † + w2 α ,

(1)

where w1 > 0 and w2 > 0 are independent of f and α is
the optimization complexity of f . When f can be expressed
(x−x )2
PK
− 2δ2k
by Gaussian RBFs f (x) =
a
e
, then in
k
k=1
Proposition 9 we show that its optimization complexity α
(x −xk )2
PK PK
− j
is proportional to j=1 k=1 aj ak e 2(2δ2 −2 ) .
Our analysis here combines elements of scale space theory (Loog, Duistermaat, and Florack 2001), differential
equations (Widder 1975), and regularization theory (Girosi,
Jones, and Poggio 1995).
We clarify that optimization by continuation, which traces
one particular solution, should not be confused by homotopy
continuation in the context of finding all roots of a system
of equation3 . Homotopy continuation has a rich theory for
2
We note that prior “application tailored” analysis is available,
e.g. (Kosowsky and Yuille 1994). However, there is no general and
application independent result in the literature.
3
In principle, one may formulate the optimization problem as
finding all roots of the gradient and then evaluating the objective at
those points to choose the lowest. However, this is not practical as
the number of stationary points can be abundant, e.g. exponential

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
That is finding much deeper local minima, if not the global
minima.

1205

