Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi-Tensor Completion with Common Structures
1,2

Chao Li, 2 Qibin Zhao, 2 Junhua Li, 2,3 Andrzej Cichocki and 1 Lili Guo
1

Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China
2
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako, Saitama, Japan
3
Systems Research Institute, PAS, Warsaw, Poland
{chao.li, junhua.li}@riken.jp, {qbzhao, cia}@brain.riken.jp, guolili@hrbeu.edu.cn

Multi-datasets

Abstract
In multi-data learning, it is usually assumed that common latent factors exist among multi-datasets, but it
may lead to deteriorated performance when datasets are
heterogeneous and unbalanced. In this paper, we propose a novel common structure for multi-data learning. Instead of common latent factors, we assume that
datasets share Common Adjacency Graph (CAG) structure, which is more robust to heterogeneity and unbalance of datasets. Furthermore, we utilize CAG structure
to develop a new method for multi-tensor completion,
which exploits the common structure in datasets to improve the completion performance. Numerical results
demonstrate that the proposed method not only outperforms state-of-the-art methods for video in-painting, but
also can recover missing data well even in cases that
conventional methods are not applicable.

Concatenation

Completion

(a) Conventional model
Multi-datasets

Common Structure
Learning

Completion

Common
Adjacency
Graph

Introduction
In multi-data learning, a general assumption is that datasets
contain common latent factors, and such an assumption
has been successfully applied in many ﬁelds, e.g., Collective Matrix Factorization (Singh and Gordon 2008), Multi
Tensor Decomposition (Takeuchi et al. 2013; Acar, Kolda,
and Dunlavy 2011), and Group Analysis (Calhoun, Liu,
and Adali 2009; Karhunen, Hao, and Ylipaavalniemi 2013;
Ylmaz, Cemgil, and Simsekli 2011). For example, in the matrix case, a set of matrices Xk , k = 1, . . . , K can be decomposed as (Zhou, Cichocki, and Xie 2012)
Xk = UC VkT + Nk ,

k = 1, . . . , K,

(b) The proposed model

Figure 1: Comparison between conventional model and
the proposed model for multi-data completion where white
squares represent missing data, and ﬁlled squares represent
estimated data.
common factors UC by factorizing the concatenated matrix
X̄ directly. However, in the problem of data completion,
the model given by (2) does not work well when different
datasets are heterogeneous or unbalanced, even though they
indeed mutually share common information. Such situation
frequently occurs in multi-view/media data in-painting,
link prediction for social networks and recommendation
systems, due to that datasets might be collected from
different devices or domains.
In the problem of recommendation system, a well-known
principle is “Similar users select similar items.”. Thus it is
straightforward to infer that utilizing similarity structure to
describe common information is better than common latent
factors in multi-data completion. Therefore, in this paper, we
develop a novel framework to exploit common information

(1)

where UC denotes common factors shared among Xk , and
Nk denotes residuals such as distinctive factors or noise. To
solve this problem, “concatenation” usually plays a key role
since (1) can be represented by
X̄

= [X1 . . . XK ]
T

= UC [V1 . . . VK ] + [N1 . . . NK ]

(2)

= UC V̄T + N̄,
where X̄, V̄, N̄ denote concatenated matrices of
Xk , Vk , Nk , respectively. From (2) we can estimate
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2743

