Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Combining Compact Representation and Incremental Generation in
Large Games with Sequential Strategies
Branislav Bošanský1,2 , Albert Xin Jiang3 , Milind Tambe4 , Christopher Kiekintveld5
1

Agent Technology Center, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University
3
Department of Computer Science, Trinity University, San Antonio, Texas
4
Computer Science Department, University of Southern California, Los Angeles
5
Computer Science Department, University of Texas at El Paso
Abstract

the computational difficulties. EFGs have a crucial property called perfect recall that holds when the players perfectly remember the history of play and gained information.
Most of the exact (Koller, Megiddo, and von Stengel 1996;
von Stengel 1996; Bosansky et al. 2013) and approximative algorithms (Zinkevich et al. 2008; Hoda et al. 2010) require perfect recall to guarantee finding the solution. Unfortunately, the games of perfect recall suffer from extremely
large state space1 . In EFGs without perfect recall, however,
equilibria might not exist (see e.g. (Wichardt 2008)) and
finding maximin strategies is known to be very hard (Koller
and Megiddo 1992). Moreover, practical algorithms (Lanctot et al. 2012) require strong assumptions on the game structure that do not in general hold in NFGSS.
Previous works therefore tackled the algorithmic challenges in NFGSS along two main lines: (1) using a compact network-flow representation of strategies with linear
programming (McMahan 2006; Jiang et al. 2013), or (2) iterative, strategy-generation framework of double-oracle algorithms (McMahan, Gordon, and Blum 2003; Halvorson,
Conitzer, and Parr 2009; Jain et al. 2011; Vanek et al. 2012;
Jain, Conitzer, and Tambe 2013). The central idea of the iterative approach is to restrict the size of the game by limiting
the strategies that can be played, and then to iteratively relax
the restrictions by adding new strategies into the restricted
game based on best-response calculations in the complete
game. As we show, however, both of the existing approaches
have limited scalability.
In this paper we combine these two lines of research and
introduce new compact-strategy double-oracle (CS-DO) algorithm for NFGSS. We first formally define NFGSS, describe the compact network-flow representation, and linear
program for computing strategies in this representation. We
follow by the description of the CS-DO algorithm. Our algorithm is inspired by the sequence-form double-oracle algorithm designed for solving EFGs (Bosansky et al. 2013)
that also uses compact representation, but which cannot be
used directly for NFGSS due to its requirement of perfect recall. CS-DO thus extends this idea to NFGSS and it is able
to: (1) handle the imperfect recall in this class of games, (2)

Many search and security games played on a graph can
be modeled as normal-form zero-sum games with strategies
consisting of sequences of actions. The size of the strategy
space provides a computational challenge when solving these
games. This complexity is tackled either by using the compact representation of sequential strategies and linear programming, or by incremental strategy generation of iterative double-oracle methods. In this paper, we present novel
hybrid of these two approaches: compact-strategy doubleoracle (CS-DO) algorithm that combines the advantages of
the compact representation with incremental strategy generation. We experimentally compare CS-DO with the standard
approaches and analyze the impact of the size of the support on the performance of the algorithms. Results show that
CS-DO dramatically improves the convergence rate in games
with non-trivial support.

Introduction
Scalable algorithms have driven many recent applications
of game theory in domains ranging from security (Tambe
2011) to Poker (Sandholm 2010). We present a new algorithm for strictly competitive games in which players have
sequential strategies, but cannot directly observe the immediate effects of the actions of their opponent during the
game. The strategy of each player in these games is modeled as a finite-horizon Markov Decision Process (MDP) and
we term these games as normal-form games with sequential strategies (NFGSS). In typical examples, the strategies
of the players correspond to a movement on an underlying
graph in time, such as maritime transit (Vanek et al. 2010;
2012), search games (McMahan, Gordon, and Blum 2003),
network interdiction (Washburn and Wood 1995), or securing road networks (Jain et al. 2011; Jain, Conitzer, and
Tambe 2013). Other examples assume a similar structure
of strategies, but do not focus on strictly competitive scenarios (e.g., in the fare evasion domain (Yin et al. 2012;
Jiang et al. 2013)).
In spite of the sequential nature of these scenarios, the
existing works do not use the standard sequential model
of extensive-form games (EFGs; players are able to observe and react to some actions of the opponent) due to

1

A single player without considering an opponent would have
over 2 × 106 states when remembering the history in the smallest
graph (3 × 6) in our experiments.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

812

