Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Automatic Ellipsis Resolution:
Recovering Covert Information from Text
Marjorie McShane & Petr Babkin
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
{margemc34, petr.a.babkin}@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper reports an implemented and evaluated method
of automatically resolving elided scopes of modality,
which expands upon the preliminary work reported in
McShane et al. 2012b. The work is novel because ellipsis
has been left largely untreated by natural language processing (NLP) systems (Spenader and Hendriks 2005), being resistant to the currently prevalent methodological
preference for supervised machine learning. The closest
point of comparison is Hardt’s (1997) VP ellipsis system;
however, whereas that system requires a perfect (manually
corrected) syntactic parse as input, ours does not rely on
any manually provided prerequisites. Other comparisons
require the leap from elided to overt referring expressions;
Lee et al. 2013 provides a nice overview of the current
state of the art in resolving those.
The key point about ellipsis that has been overlooked is
that while resolving some instances does require sophisticated semantic and pragmatic reasoning, not all cases are
so difficult. Leveraging linguistic insights, our system automatically detects which instances of ellipsis it can resolve with high confidence and treats only those, supplementing each resolution decision with a corpus-attested
measure of confidence that will contribute to an intelligent
agent’s evaluation of whether it has understood the meaning of a language input sufficiently to act in response to it.
The work is being carried out within the OntoSem language processing system of the OntoAgent cognitive architecture (McShane and Nirenburg 2012). OntoAgents are
cognitively simulated, language-endowed intelligent agents
that are being configured to collaborate with people in
task-oriented applications, such as the prototype Maryland
Virtual Patient physician training system (Nirenburg,
McShane and Beale 2008). OntoAgents carry out deep semantic and pragmatic language analysis, yielding ontologically grounded text meaning representations that populate
agent memory and subsequently support agent reasoning
(McShane et al. 2012a; McShane, Nirenburg and Beale,
Submitted).
Research and development in the OntoAgent paradigm
seeks to balance the socio-economic necessity of near-term
utility with the scientific goal of fundamentally solving

Ellipsis is a linguistic process that makes certain aspects of
text meaning not directly traceable to surface text elements
and, therefore, inaccessible to most language processing
technologies. However, detecting and resolving ellipsis is
an indispensable capability for language-enabled intelligent
agents. The key insight of the work presented here is that
not all cases of ellipsis are equally difficult: some can be
detected and resolved with high confidence even before we
are able to build agents with full human-level semantic and
pragmatic understanding of text. This paper describes a fully automatic, implemented and evaluated method of treating one class of ellipsis: elided scopes of modality. Our
cognitively-inspired approach, which centrally leverages
linguistic principles, has also been applied to overt referring expressions with equally promising results.

Introduction
The grammatical process of ellipsis – the non-expression
of semantic content – increases the efficiency of natural
language communication by people but introduces challenges for machine processing. For example, the final
clause in sentence (1)1 will be of little use to an intelligent
agent until and unless it is decorated with metadata indicating that what the toddler could do is teach illiterate women
to read and write. (In this and subsequent examples, elided
categories are indicated by [e] and their sponsors – i.e., the
material used to recover their meaning – are italicized.2)
(1) Aid workers in war-ravaged Kabul were stunned when
a toddler from a poor family offered to teach illiterate
women to read and write – and then promptly proved
he could [e].

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Most examples are from the Gigaword corpus (Graff and Cieri 2003),
which we used for system testing and evaluation.
2
The inflectional form of the head of the sponsor is irrelevant since, in reality, an elided meaning is recovered based on the meaning of the sponsor. For discussion of the term sponsor, see Byron 2004, p. 16.

572

