Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Local Sparse Model for Matching Problem
Bo Jiang1 , Jin Tang1 , Chris Ding2,1 and Bin Luo1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, China
2
CSE Department, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
jiangbo@ahu.edu.cn, ahhftang@gmail.com, chqding@uta.edu, luobin@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract

selection) objective, and thus may lead to weak local optimum. Inspired by game theory, Albarelli et al (Albarelli et
al. 2009) proposed a relaxation matching method by replacing the `2 norm constraint in SM with `1 -norm. Recently,
this model has been widely used in many matching tasks
(Albarelli, Rodolà, and Torsello 2012; Liu and Yan 2010;
Rodolà et al. 2012). One important feature is that it can generate a sparse solution for the problem due to the `1 norm
constraint, and thus has a desired selective behavior in nature. However, one main limitation is that the sparsity of its
solution is generally uncontrolable and usually too high to
select desired number of matches from the potential match
space. Rodolà et al (Rodolà et al. 2013) recently provided a
relaxation method with elastic net constraint and thus combined SM and game-theoretic matching simultaneously. The
accuracy and sparsity can be balanced by a weighting parameter in this model (Rodolà et al. 2013).
Inspired by these works, our aim in this paper is to propose a new match selection method by exploring a local
sparse model. Our local sparse matching (LSM) is motivated
by the observations that: (1) the potential match space C has
an inherent partition property; (2) For the one-to-one matching task, the optimal selected matches S ∗ must be uniformly
distributed in all parts of C. Our LSM is motivated by the
desire to sparsely select matches from each part of C. An
effective algorithm can be derived to solve LSM problem.
Promising experimental results on several matching tasks
demonstrate the effectiveness of LSM method.

Feature matching problem that incorporates pairwise
constraints is usually formulated as a quadratic assignment problem (QAP). Since it is NP-hard, relaxation
models are required. In this paper, we first formulate the
QAP from the match selection point of view; and then
propose a local sparse model for matching problem. Our
local sparse matching (LSM) method has the following
advantages: (1) It is parameter-free; (2) It generates a
local sparse solution which is closer to a discrete matrix
than most other continuous relaxation methods for the
matching problem. (3) The one-to-one matching constraints are better maintained in LSM solution. Promising experimental results show the effectiveness of the
proposed LSM method.

Many problems of interest in computer vision and pattern
recognition can be formulated as a problem of finding consistent correspondences between two sets of features. Since
it is NP-hard, approximate relaxation methods are usually
required (Albarelli et al. 2009; Gold and Rangarajan 1996;
Cho, Lee, and Lee 2010; Zhou and la Torre 2012).
Recently, many relaxation methods have been developed
to the feature matching problem (Albarelli et al. 2009;
Cho, Lee, and Lee 2010; Leordeanu and Hebert 2005;
Leordeanu, Hebert, and Sukthankar 2009; Rodolà et al.
2013; Torresani, Kolmogorov, and Rother 2008; Pachauri
et al. 2012). Among these methods, one kind of popular relaxation methods is to solve the problem under different norm constraints (Albarelli et al. 2009; Leordeanu
and Hebert 2005; Rodolà et al. 2012; Liu and Yan 2010;
Rodolà et al. 2013). These methods can be well interpreted
or inspired from match selection view, i.e., aim to select
the subset of matches S ∗ with some constraint (e.g. one-toone or one-to-many) from the potential match space C such
that the total match score is maximized. Leordeanu et al.
(Leordeanu and Hebert 2005) proposed a relaxed match selection model (spectral matching, SM) under a `2 -norm constraint. The benefit of SM is that it has a closed-form optimal
solution. As a post-selection step, SM further uses a greedy
selection strategy to select the optimal matches S ∗ with
mapping constraint. One drawback is that this post-selection
step is independent with the matching problem (or match

Problem Formulation and Related Works
Given two feature sets M, containing nM model features
and D, containing nD data features, a corresponding mapping is a set C of potential matches (or candidate matches)
(i, i0 ), where i ∈ D and i0 ∈ M. Generally, the size of C
depends mainly on how discriminative the descriptors of the
features are. When the features are non-discriminative, such
as 2D or 3D points, all possible matches should be kept as
candidate correspondences in C. If the features are discriminative, such as SIFT descriptor, only small fraction of all
possible matches (i, i0 ) are kept in C (Leordeanu and Hebert
2005). For each match pair (a, b) in C, where a = (i, i0 ) and
b = (j, j 0 ), there is an affinity W(a, b) that measures how
compatible the feature pair (i, j) in D are with the feature
pair (i0 , j 0 ) in M.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3790

