Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Coupled Interdependent Attribute Analysis on Mixed Data
Can Wang, Chi-Hung Chi, Wei Zhou

Raymond Wong

Digital Productivity Flagship, CSIRO, Australia
{can.wang, chihung.chi, wei.zhou}@csiro.au

University of New South Wales, Australia
wong@cse.unsw.edu.au

Abstract

simultaneously in data mining (Jia and Zhang 2008) processes is not an easy task because data scales/types are totally different, which challenges the calculation of similarity
between mixed-type objects. There have been research efforts on mixed data, but most of them are partial and mainly
address either heterogeneity or interdependence. For example, k-prototype (Huang 1998) tries to quantify similarity
between mixed-typed objects, but without analyzing interdependence; mADD (Ahmad and Dey 2007) models only
the interdependence of discrete attributes; and mixture (Hunt
and Jorgensen 2011) only captures the interdependence of
numerical attributes. Due to the complexity and variety of
mixed data, addressing interdependence among heterogeneous mixed data in data mining is still a big open research
question. This is the motivation of our paper.
Taking a fragment of synthetic data1 as an example (i.e.
Table 1), six objects are characterized by two categorical attributes and two continuous attributes; and they are divided
into three classes. Each value only exhibits relevant information of its belonged attributes, but does not reflect any interaction with other variables. Based on such a table, many data
mining techniques and machine learning tasks (Plant 2012)
including clustering and classification have been performed.
One of the critical parts in these applications is to study the
pairwise distance between objects, which challenges the current work since the distance calculations for discrete and
continuous variables are totally different. It is a significant
research issue on how to integrate distinct mechanisms of
distance computation in a proper manner.
A few metrics have been developed for mixed data, such
as the weighted mixed metrics (wmm for short) proposed in
(Huang 1998). Since objects u4 and u6 have identical values
of ad1 and ad2 , the wmm between them is only 0.535, which
is much smaller than that between u4 , u3 (i.e. 1.311) and
nearly third of that between u6 , u5 (i.e. 1.411). It indicates
that u4 and u6 stand a good chance to be clustered into the
same group. However, in fact, u4 and u3 belong to G2 , u6
and u5 are labeled as G3 . The same phenomenon also applies for the partition of u3 and u5 with the wmm to be 0.861.
This instance shows it is too limited to analyze mixed data
by assuming all heterogeneous attributes to be independent.

In the real-world applications, heterogeneous interdependent attributes that consist of both discrete and numerical variables can be observed ubiquitously. The
usual representation of these data sets is an information
table, assuming the independence of attributes. However, very often, they are actually interdependent on one
another, either explicitly or implicitly. Limited research
has been conducted in analyzing such attribute interactions, which causes the analysis results to be more local
than global. This paper proposes the coupled heterogeneous attribute analysis to capture the interdependence
among mixed data by addressing coupling context and
coupling weights in unsupervised learning. Such global
couplings integrate the interactions within discrete attributes, within numerical attributes and across them
to form the coupled representation for mixed-type objects based on dimension conversion and feature selection. This work makes one step forward towards explicitly modeling the interdependence of heterogeneous
attributes among mixed data, verified by the applications in data structure analysis, data clustering evaluation, and density comparison. Substantial experiments
on 12 UCI data sets show that our approach can effectively capture the global couplings of heterogeneous
attributes and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods,
supported by statistical analysis.

Introduction
In the era of big data, real-life mixed data sets are usually described by a mixture of heterogeneous interdependent attributes in diverse domains, including demography
and finance. Here, mixed data is defined as a data set whose
columns consist of both discrete and numerical attributes
(i.e. with multiple heterogeneous attributes). The classical
data representation is an information table, in which rows
stand for objects and columns denote attributes. Each entry is designated a value of a particular attribute for a given
object. This traditional way quantifies objects by associated
multiple variables and assumes the independence of them.
The two key properties of mixed data focused in our study
are its heterogeneity (Hunt and Jorgensen 2011) and interdependence (Cao, Ou, and Yu 2011). Tackling both properties

1
It is produced from a mixture of three Gaussian distributions
with the first two variables categorized and predefined classes.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1861

