Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Pareto Ensemble Pruning∗
Chao Qian and Yang Yu and Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Nanjing 210023, China
{qianc,yuy,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

into the pruned ensemble gives an order of the base classifiers, the front classifiers of which constitute the final
ensemble. Different ordering methods are mainly different on the choice of the objective, which can be minimizing the error (Margineantu and Dietterich 1997), maximizing the diversity (Banfield et al. 2005), or combining the both (Li, Yu, and Zhou 2012). Many studies have
shown that they can achieve a good pruned ensemble efficiently (Martı́nez-Muñoz, Hernández-Lobato, and Suárez
2009; Hernández-Lobato, Martı́nez-Muñoz, and Suárez
2011). The optimization-based pruning formulates the ensemble pruning as an optimization problem which aims at
finding a subset of base learners with the best generalization performance. Different optimization techniques have
been employed, e.g., semi-definite programming (Zhang,
Burer, and Street 2006), quadratic programming (Li and
Zhou 2009) and heuristic optimization such as genetic algorithms (Zhou, Wu, and Tang 2002) and artificial immune algorithms (Castro et al. 2005). The heuristic methods
use some trial-and-error style heuristics to directly search
in the solution space. They were believed to be powerful,
but their performance had no theoretical support. Moreover, empirical results have shown that the size of the
pruned ensemble by heuristic methods is often much larger
than that by ordering methods (Zhou, Wu, and Tang 2002;
Li and Zhou 2009).
Ensemble pruning naturally bears two goals simultaneously, maximizing the generalization performance and minimizing the number of learners. When pushing to the limit,
the two goals are conflicting, as overly fewer base learners
lead to a poor performance. In order to achieve both a good
performance and a small ensemble size, previous ensemble
pruning approaches solve some objectives that mix the two
goals. But recently, it has been revealed that, when dealing
with multiple objectives via evolutionary optimization, explicit consideration of every goal in a multi-objective formulation can be quite helpful (Yu, Yao, and Zhou 2012).
This paper investigates the explicit bi-objective formulation of ensemble pruning, and proposes the PEP (Pareto Ensemble Pruning) approach. PEP solves the bi-objective formulation of ensemble pruning by an evolutionary Pareto optimization method combined with a local search operator.
Firstly, we show theoretically that PEP is superior to the ordering methods in both performance and size. Then, the em-

Ensemble learning is among the state-of-the-art learning techniques, which trains and combines many base
learners. Ensemble pruning removes some of the base
learners of an ensemble, and has been shown to be
able to further improve the generalization performance.
However, the two goals of ensemble pruning, i.e., maximizing the generalization performance and minimizing
the number of base learners, can conflict when being
pushed to the limit. Most previous ensemble pruning
approaches solve objectives that mix the two goals. In
this paper, motivated by the recent theoretical advance
of evolutionary optimization, we investigate solving the
two goals explicitly in a bi-objective formulation and
propose the PEP (Pareto Ensemble Pruning) approach.
We disclose that PEP does not only achieve significantly
better performance than the state-of-the-art approaches,
and also gains theoretical support.

Introduction
Ensemble methods (Zhou 2012) are a kind of powerful machine learning approaches, which train and combine multiple base learners for one single learning task. They usually achieve the state-of-the-art prediction performance, and
thus have been widely applied. Instead of combining all
the trained base learners of an ensemble, ensemble pruning (Tsoumakas, Partalas, and Vlahavas 2009) selects only a
subset of base learners to use. Obviously, reducing the compositing base learners can save the storage space and accelerate the prediction speed. Furthermore, it has been shown that
the pruned ensemble can have a better generalization performance than the whole ensemble (Zhou, Wu, and Tang 2002;
Zhang, Burer, and Street 2006).
Previous ensemble pruning techniques can be categorized into two branches, the ordering-based pruning
and the optimization-based pruning. The ordering methods (Martı́nez-Muñoz, Hernández-Lobato, and Suárez 2009;
Partalas, Tsoumakas, and Vlahavas 2012) commonly start
from an empty set and then iteratively add a base learner optimizing a certain objective. The sequence of being added
∗

This research was supported by the NSFC (61333014,
61375061), JiangsuSF (BK2012303), FRF Central Universities
(20620140519) and Baidu Fund (181415PO2189).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2935

