Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Risk-Aware Scheduling throughout Planning and Execution
Andrew J. Wang
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
wangaj@mit.edu

Motivation
Scheduling is integral to many real-world logistics problems. It can be as simple as catching the bus in the morning, or as complex as assembling a commercial airliner.
While simple applications render scheduling tools trivial,
these tools have not been widely adopted for complex scenarios either. The larger the scenario, the greater the temporal uncertainty throughout the system, and many schedulers
do not consider the probabilistic uncertainty in actions’ durations. This makes them brittle to temporal disturbances or
poor modeling, which incurs high replanning costs and unacceptable risks for the mission-critical nature of large applications.
Mitigating such risk is challenging because temporal reasoning is present at every level of planning and execution.
Figure 1 diagrams the layers of reasoning for a planning executive to map logistical goals into real-world actions. First,
the planner generates an grounded plan. The the scheduler
produces a scheduling policy, which the dispatcher then follows to execute the plan’s actions at appropriate times.
Although the scheduler is responsible for creating the
scheduling policy, the planner and dispatcher still have to be
aware of time: The dispatcher is responsible for keeping the
plan on schedule. Hence, it needs to monitor actions’ durations to make sure they match what the policy predicts. Likewise, the planner needs to know when the scheduler cannot
produce a valid policy for a given plan, and use that information to avoid unschedulable plans.
When temporal uncertainty is factored into the scheduling
algorithm, the planner and dispatcher must adapt to reason
about the consequences of uncertainty as well. Thus, quantifying and managing scheduling risk requires one to apply
probabilistic temporal reasoning across the entire planning
and execution architecture. If this could be done efficiently,
it would remove a significant obstacle to deploying largescale logistics scenarios with confidence.

Figure 1: The role of scheduling in a plannning and execution architecture.
to augment an existing non-probabilistic planning and execution architecture to reason about risk-aware scheduling.
In this architecture, the planner and scheduler first generate
a plan and scheduling policy offline, which the dispatcher
then executes online. However, if real-world disturbances
break the policy, then the scheduler and planner may be invoked online incrementally to repair the remaining plan and
schedule.
At its core, this work addresses the problem of chanceconstrained scheduling, where the generated policy is guaranteed to satisfy a set of constraints that bound the risk
of violating certain temporal requirements. A chanceconstrained formulation was chosen over risk minimization
for two reasons: First, risk minimization is an infinite goal
that leads to overly conservative solutions, whereas a chance
constraint specifies a clear bound to aim for. Second, multiple chance constraints may be specified over different subplans, which together indicate the user’s risk priorities.
Given this problem framing, the proposed modifications
to the architecture are as follows: The planner accepts a
set of chance constraints accompanying the planning goals.
When it generates a candidate plan, it also identifies what
portions of the chance constraints would be affected by
scheduling decisions, and sends those down to the scheduler. Now the scheduler does not just verify that the plan
is temporally consistent, but that a scheduling policy exists
which succeeds with sufficient likelihood in the context of
each chance constraint. If such a policy cannot be found,
then the planner tries again until the scheduler is successful.
When the dispatcher receives the chance-constrained
scheduling policy, it must continuously monitor the risk to

Problem statement
The goal of this thesis is to provide probabilistic guarantees on a plan’s scheduling requirements. The approach is
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4261

