Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Detecting Change Points in the
Large-Scale Structure of Evolving Networks
Leto Peel and Aaron Clauset
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309

Abstract

Here we define the network change-point detection problem and introduce an online probabilistic learning algorithm
for solving it. Identifying a change point requires inferring
a structural “norm” for interactions across a sequence of
graphs and accurately detecting if, when and how this norm
has shifted at some point in time. To characterize what kind
and how large a change occurred, we prefer interpretable
models of network structure, so that changes in parameter
values have direct meaning with respect to the network’s
large-scale structure. Here, we take the novel approach of
characterizing network norms via probabilistic distributions
over graphs, which we learn in an online fashion. Identifying
the timing and shape of such change points divides a network’s evolution into contiguous periods of relative structural stability, allowing us to subsequently analyze each period independently, while also facilitating hypotheses about
the underlying processes shaping the data.
Beyond specialized solutions for change-point detection
in cybersecurity domains (Lévy-Leduc and Roueff 2009),
many “change-point detection” methods for networks are in
fact solving the distinct anomaly detection problem of identifying network snapshots that deviate significantly from a
stationary network norm (Hirose et al. 2009; Akoglu and
Faloutsos 2010). In contrast, traditional change-point detection focuses on the more difficult problem of identifying significant shifts in the norm itself. Solving this problem requires distinguishing a statistically significant change from
mere noise, and thus qualitative approaches are likely to be
insufficient (Sun et al. 2007; Berlingerio et al. 2013).
Much like traditional online change-point detection methods for scalar- or vector-valued time series (Basseville and
Nikiforov 1993), our approach for the network change-point
detection problem has three components:
1. select a parametric family of probability distributions appropriate for the data, and a sliding window size w;
2. infer two versions of the model, one representing a change
of parameters at a particular point in time within the window, and the one representing the null hypothesis of no
change over the entire window; and,
3. conduct a statistical hypothesis test to choose which
model, change or no-change, is the better fit.
Past work on the network change-point detection problem has typically converted the sequence of networks into

Interactions among people or objects are often dynamic
in nature and can be represented as a sequence of networks, each providing a snapshot of the interactions
over a brief period of time. An important task in analyzing such evolving networks is change-point detection, in which we both identify the times at which the
large-scale pattern of interactions changes fundamentally and quantify how large and what kind of change
occurred. Here, we formalize for the first time the network change-point detection problem within an online probabilistic learning framework and introduce a
method that can reliably solve it. This method combines
a generalized hierarchical random graph model with a
Bayesian hypothesis test to quantitatively determine if,
when, and precisely how a change point has occurred.
We analyze the detectability of our method using synthetic data with known change points of different types
and magnitudes, and show that this method is more
accurate than several previously used alternatives. Applied to two high-resolution evolving social networks,
this method identifies a sequence of change points that
align with known external “shocks” to these networks.

Networks are frequently used as a general framework to
quantify and analyze the interactions between objects or
people. Network models can be used to better understand
the large-scale structure of interactions by identifying clusters of highly interacting communities or functional groups
of structurally equivalent nodes. However, these interactions
are often dynamic in nature, and traditional approaches can
overlook the non-stationary structure of real networks. In
these dynamic and temporally evolving systems we are not
only interested in understanding the large-scale structure but
also identifying if, when and how it changes in time.
For instance, in social networks, change points may be
the result of normal periodic behavior, as in the weekly transition from weekdays to weekends. In other cases, change
points may result from the collective anticipation of or response to external events or system “shocks”. Detecting such
changes in social networks could provide a better understanding of patterns of social life and an early detection of
social stress caused by, e.g, natural or man-made disasters.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2914

