Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Finding a Collective Set of Items:
From Proportional Multirepresentation to Group Recommendation
Piotr Skowron

Piotr Faliszewski

Jérôme Lang

University of Warsaw, Poland
p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl

AGH University, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

Université Paris-Dauphine, France
lang@lamsade.dauphine.fr

Abstract

from a given item may depend on the rank of this item (from
the agent’s point of view) among the selected ones. Extreme
examples include the case where each agent derives utility
from his or her most preferred item only (e.g., an agent will
watch his or her favorite movie only, will read/use the favorite
journal/favorite facility only, will feel represented by the most
appropriate politician only), from his or her least preferred
item only (say, the agent worries that the family will force
her to watch the worst available movie), or derives 1/K of
the utility from each of the available items (e.g., the agent
chooses the item—say, a movie—at random). However, in
practice one should expect much more complicated schemes
(e.g., an agent watches the top movie certainly, the second one
probably, the third one perhaps, etc.; or, an agent is interested
in having at least some T interesting journals in the library;
an agent feels represented by some top T members of the
parliament, etc.).
The goal of this paper is to formally define a model that
captures all the above-described scenarios, to provide a set of
examples where the model is applicable, and to provide an
initial set of computational results for it in terms of efficient
algorithms (exact or approximate) and computational hardness results (NP-hardness and inapproximability results).
Our work builds upon, generalizes, and extends quite a
number of previously studied settings. We provide a deeper
overview of this research throughout the paper. Here we
mention the direct connection to the study of Chamberlin–
Courant’s multiwinner voting rule (see the original discussion of Chamberlin and Courant (1983) and, e.g., the papers of Procaccia et al. (2008), Betzler et al. (2013), Yu et
al. (2013) and Skowron et al. (2013) for examples of computational results), to the study of budgeted social choice (Lu
and Boutilier 2011; Oren and Lucier 2014), to the study of
multiwinner approval voting rules (see, e.g., the overview
of Kilgour (2010) and the papers of LeGrand et al. (2007)
and Aziz et al. (2014)), and to several other settings, including, e.g., the Santa Claus problem (Bansal and Sviridenko 2006) and the problem of designing optimal picking
sequences (Brams and Taylor 2000; Bouveret and Lang 2011;
Kalinowski et al. 2012).

We consider the following problem: There is a set of
items (e.g., movies) and a group of agents (e.g., passengers on a plane); each agent has some intrinsic utility for
each of the items. Our goal is to pick a set of K items
that maximize the total derived utility of all the agents
(i.e., in our example we are to pick K movies that we
put on the plane’s entertainment system). However, the
actual utility that an agent derives from a given item
is only a fraction of its intrinsic one, and this fraction
depends on how the agent ranks the item among the chosen, available, ones. We provide a formal specification
of the model and provide concrete examples and settings
where it is applicable. We show that the problem is hard
in general, but we show a number of tractability results
for its natural special cases.

1

Introduction

A number of real-world problems consist of selecting a set
of items for a group of agents to jointly use. Such activities
include, e.g., picking the movies to put on a plane’s entertainment system, deciding which journals a university library
should subscribe to, deciding what common facilities to build,
or even choosing a parliament. Let us consider some common
features of these examples.
First, there is a set of items1 and a set of agents; each
agent has some intrinsic utility for each of the items (e.g.,
this utility can be the level of appreciation for a movie, the
average number of articles one reads from a given issue of a
journal, expected benefit from building a particular facility,
the feeling—measured in some way—of being represented
by a particular politician).
Second, typically it is not possible to provide all the items
to the agents and we can only pick some K of them, say (a
plane’s entertainment system fits only a handful of movies,
the library has a limited budget, only several sites for the
facilities are available, the parliament has a fixed size).
Third, the intrinsic utilities for items extend to the sets
of items in such a way that the utility derived by an agent
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use the term ‘item’ in the most neutral possible way. Items
may be candidates running for an election, or movies, or possible
facilities, and so on.

2

The Model

In this section we give a formal description of our model.
However, before we move on to the mathematical details,

2131

