Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Approximately Optimal Risk-Averse
Routing Policies via Adaptive Discretization
Darrell Hoy

Evdokia Nikolova

Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Northwestern University
darrell.hoy@u.northwestern.edu

Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin
nikolova@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract

Little is known about efficient computation of the optimal
policy for utility functions beyond linear and exponential,
and we provide examples suggesting that computing the optimal policy in such situations is likely intractable. With the
goal of retaining efficient computation, we focus on finding
an approximately optimal policy and, in particular, on the
question how well can we approximate routing decisions in
polynomial time?
Our main result is that the optimal routing policy can be
approximated arbitrarily well, in polynomial time, under arbitrary monotone utility functions. At the core of our algorithm, we present a general-purpose technique based on
adaptive discretization that works for any monotone utility
function. The main insight is to perform discretization at
the utility level space, which results in a nonuniform discretization of the domain (cost or travel time). We use this
technique to generate -approximate routing policies in time
polynomial in the input size and 1 .
In contrast to much of the literature, our approximation is
to the optimal continuous-time policy, not the optimal policy
to the time-discretized problem. This is essential in nonlinear utility models since standard constant-step discretization
of time incurs approximation errors that may become significant when the utility function is a step function (e.g., the
probability of arriving on time) or a steep function with a
large gradient.
While we discuss agents who have non-linear utilities
over arrival times, our model applies equally well when
agents have a non-linear utility over the expenditure of a different resource, for instance money or fuel.

Mitigating risk in decision-making has been a longstanding problem. Due to the mathematical challenge
of its nonlinear nature, especially in adaptive decisionmaking problems, finding optimal policies is typically
intractable. With a focus on efficient algorithms, we ask
how well we can approximate the optimal policies for
the difficult case of general utility models of risk.
Little is known about efficient algorithms beyond the
very special cases of linear (risk-neutral) and exponential utilities since general utilities are not separable and
preclude the use of traditional dynamic programming
techniques. In this paper, we consider general utility
functions and investigate efficient computation of approximately optimal routing policies, where the goal is
to maximize the expected utility of arriving at a destination around a given deadline. We present an adaptive discretization variant of successive approximation
which gives an -optimal policy in polynomial time.
The main insight is to perform discretization at the utility level space, which results in a nonuniform discretization of the domain, and applies for any monotone utility
function.

Introduction
A central question in decision making under uncertainty is
how to mitigate risk. Under the expected utility framework
this means to find the decision (or a sequence of decisions)
that maximizes the expected utility of the decision, for some
nonlinear utility function that represents the agent’s riskaverse preferences.
In adaptive or sequential decision-making, due to the large
space of possible decisions, it is especially challenging to
compute an optimal policy—that is, an optimal sequence of
actions, efficiently. In the prevalent framework of Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs), efficient algorithms are known
for the special cases of linear utility (that corresponds to a
risk-neutral agent) and exponential utility, which was used
to define risk-sensitive MDPs (Howard and Matheson 1972).
The latter allows for efficient computation since the exponential utility function of a sum of rewards separates into a
product of terms, specifying a utility for each action.

Related Work
Risk-sensitive Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Howard
and Matheson 1972) have seen a recent boom in risk
models expanding from the exponential utility function
model to other nonlinear and general utilities (Bäuerle
and Rieder 2014; Ruszczyński 2010; Wu and Lin 1999;
Ermon et al. 2011; 2012; Liu and Koenig 2005; 2006; 2008;
Dean et al. 1993; Xu and Mannor 2011; Osogami 2011;
Le Tallec 2007). Recognizing the challenge of nonlinear
cumulative reward functions, most recent work focuses on
characterizing properties of such MDPs or providing heuristics. Little remains known about efficient computation of approximately optimal policies. Ruszczyński (2010) observes

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3533

