Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Modeling Status Theory in Trust Prediction
Ying Wang1,2 , Xin Wang1,2,4 , Jiliang Tang3 , Wanli Zuo1,2∗ , Guoyong Cai5
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering, Ministry of Education, China
3
College of Computer Science and Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
4
School of Computer Technology and Engineering, Changchun Institute of Technology, Changchun 130012, China
5
Guangxi Key Lab of Trusted Software, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China
wangying2010@jlu.edu.cn;zuowl@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

propose a classification approach to address the trust prediction problem by developing a taxonomy to obtain an extensive set of relevant features derived from user attributes
and user interactions in an online community. Korovaiko
et al (Korovaiko and Thomo 2013) focus on a case where
the background data are user ratings for online product reviews and show that the state-of-the-art classifiers can do
an impressive job in predicting trust based on extracted features. Zolfaghar et al (Zolfaghar and Aghaie 2012) provide
a framework of social trust-inducing factors that contribute
in trust formation process using data mining and classification approaches, and then investigate the role of these factors in predicting trust between users by experimental study
on real data from Epinions. While unsupervised methods
try to infer trust relations based on some properties of trust
networks such as trust propagation and low-rank representations. Liu et al (Liu, Wang, and Orgun 2012) propose a
social context-aware trust network discovery algorithm by
adopting the Monte Carlo method. Hyun-Kyo Oh et al (Oh et
al. 2013) propose a probability-based trust prediction model
based on trust-message passing which takes advantage of
two kinds of information: an explicit information and an
implicit information. Xiang et al (Xiang, Neville, and Rogati 2010) develop an unsupervised model to estimate relationship strength from interaction activity (e.g., communication, tagging) and user similarity with the goal of automatically distinguishing strong relationships from weak ones.
However, the available trust relations may not be sufficient
to guarantee the success of these methods, although there
are several methods exploiting extra sources to mitigate the
sparseness problem (Tang et al. 2013).
Social status is an important concept in trust, which refers
to the position or rank of a user in a social community representing the degree of honor or prestige attached to the position of each individual (Giddens, Duneier, and Appelbaum
2012). Status theory is developed to explain how users trust
each other based on their statuses (Leskovec, Huttenlocher,
and Kleinberg 2010; Leskovec 2013), and indicates that a
user is likely to trust users with higher statuses. Modeling
status theory can potentially improve the performance, and
bring about new opportunities for trust prediction.
In this paper, we study trust prediction with status theory. In essence, we investigate how to model status theory
mathematically and how to incorporate it for trust predic-

With the pervasion of social media, trust has been playing more of an important role in helping online users
collect reliable information. In reality, user-specified
trust relations are often very sparse; hence, inferring
unknown trust relations has attracted increasing attention in recent years. Social status is one of the most
important concepts in trust, and status theory is developed to help us understand the important role of social
status in the formation of trust relations. In this paper,
we investigate how to exploit social status in trust prediction by modeling status theory. We first verify status
theory in trust relations, then provide a principled way
to model it mathematically, and propose a novel framework sTrust which incorporates status theory for trust
prediction. Experimental results on real-world datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Further experiments are conducted to understand
the importance of status theory in trust prediction.

Introduction
With the growing popularity of social media, trust, as a
decision-support tool, dissects relevant and reliable information sources for online users (Gefen, Karahanna, and
Straub 2003; McKnight, Choudhury, and Kacmar 2003;
Ziegler and Golbeck 2007; Liu, Wang, and Orgun 2012).
Trust has been extensively studied by the computer science community, which promotes many trust-related applications, such as trust-aware recommendation system (Golbeck 2009; Ma et al. 2011; Tang, Gao, and Liu 2012), highquality user generated content finding (Lu et al. 2010) and
viral marketing (Richardson and Domingos 2002). However,
in reality, explicit trust relations are extremely sparse; hence,
inferring unknown trust relations attracts increasing attention in recent years.
Existing trust prediction algorithms can be roughly categorized into two groups - supervised methods and unsupervised methods (Tang and Liu 2014). Supervised methods boil down the problem of trust prediction into a classification problem, which first represents each pair of users
by extracting features from available sources and then treats
the existence of trust as labels. Liu et al (Liu et al. 2008)
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1875

