Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Minimizing User Involvement
for Accurate Ontology Matching Problems
Anika Schumann and Freddy Lécué
IBM Research - Ireland
Damastown Industrial Estate, Dublin, Ireland
{(firstname.lastname)@ie.ibm.com}

Abstract

(e.g., in the context of building, energy or water management
systems) use state-of-the-art representation / vocabularies
for defining specific features of their systems. In most cases
manufacturers implement their own ontologies for internal
representation and rarely update the core state-of-the-art vocabulary. Therefore each and every domain (e.g., building,
energy or water) has multitude variance of their knowledge
representation, which differ from one manufacturer to another. Integrating systems from different providers and manufacturers is then a difficult problem. We study this problem
of ontology matching given some pre-determined common
representation and high-level alignments, i.e. alignments of
descriptions from where underlying alignments can be discovered. In our context the two ontologies to be aligned have
(some, not all) common structures and having some alignments implies (indirectly) that some underlying (i.e., sub or
super) descriptions will be also aligned.
Given these high level alignments, that can be computed
using for example the method of (Stoilos, Stamou, and Kollias 2005), our goal is to find the matching of the specific descriptions that are guaranteed to be correct which is a manual, complex and hence time consuming task.
Suppose we would verify ontology matching results by
asking the user for each alignment of the result set whether it
is correct or not and put his response on record. Our aim is to
obtain exactly this record of responses but without the need
of having to involve the user for each alignment verification.
The problem here is: Which alignments need to be verified
by the users such that the user response for the remaining
ones can be automatically inferred?
Our approach complements existing approaches in mapping verification but cannot be compared to them: Mapping
verification approaches such as (Cruz, Stroe, and Palmonari
2012; Jiménez-Ruiz et al. 2013; Shi et al. 2009) determine
iteratively individual mappings that need to be verified in
order to improve the matching result. In contrast, we determine simultaneously the set of mappings that need to be verified in order to verify the complete matching result. For our
problem this simultaneous computation of the mapping set
is necessary in order to indeed minimize user involvement
rather than verifying the mapping result in a greedy way.
Figure 1 illustrates our problem setting. In this example
we have the three descriptions A, X, and Y that are part of
the common domain vocabulary, and descriptions A1, A2,
B, B1, B2, B3, and B4 that are part of the manufacturer

Many various types of sensors coming from different
complex devices collect data from a city. Their underlying data representation follows specific manufacturer
specifications that have possibly incomplete descriptions (in ontology) alignments. This paper addresses the
problem of determining accurate and complete matching of ontologies given some common descriptions and
their pre-determined high level alignments. In this context the problem of ontology matching consists of automatically determining all matching given the latter
alignments, and manually verifying the matching results. Especially for applications where it is crucial
that ontologies are matched correctly the latter can turn
into a very time-consuming task for the user. This paper tackles this challenge and addresses the problem of
computing the minimum number of user inputs needed
to verify all matchings. We show how to represent this
problem as a reasoning problem over a bipartite graph
and how to encode it over pseudo Boolean constraints.
Experiments show that our approach can be successfully applied to real-world data sets.

Introduction
Handling variations in meaning in description interpretation
or ambiguity is an open problem (Agrawal et al. 2008). Either it cannot be solved automatically or the returned solution is not guaranteed to be correct. However, for several applications correctness is crucial. Consider, for example, the
matching problem in smart buildings that consists in identifying among thousands of sensor descriptions the ones that
are needed as inputs to energy efficiency approaches (Roth
et al. 2005). If the matching is done incorrectly the energy
saving approaches do not operate correctly and cannot prevent energy waste.
This paper presents an approach for semi-automatically
solving matching problems for applications such as the
building one for which correctness is crucial. Contrary to
existing works (Pavel and Euzenat 2013) in ontology matching we assume that common descriptions and representations are shared among the ontologies to be matched but
not all mappings are known. Such problems occur in many
real-world scenarios where different systems manufacturers
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1576

