Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi-Objective MDPs with Conditional Lexicographic Reward Preferences
Kyle Hollins Wray1
1

Shlomo Zilberstein1

School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA
2
GREYC Laboratory, University of Caen, Basse-Normandie, France

Abstract

functions, calling this technique ordinal dynamic programming (Mitten 1974; Sobel 1975). Mitten assumed a specific
preference ordering over outcomes for a finite horizon MDP;
Sobel extended this model to infinite horizon MDPs. Ordinal dynamic programming has been explored under reinforcement learning (Gábor, Kalmár, and Szepesvári 1998;
Natarajan and Tadepalli 2005), with the notion of a minimum criterion value.
We propose a natural extension of sequential decision
making with lexicographic order by introducing two added
model components: conditioning and slack. Conditioning allows the lexicographic order to depend on certain state variables. Slack allows a small deviation from the optimal value
of a primary variable so as to improve secondary value functions. The added flexibility is essential to capture practical
preferences in many domains. For example, in manufacturing, there is always a trade-off among cost, quality, and time.
In critical states of the manufacturing process, one may prefer to optimize quality with no slack, whereas in less important states one may optimize cost, but allow for some slack
in order to improve time and quality.
Our model is motivated by work on planning for semiautonomous systems (Zilberstein 2015). Consider a car that
can operate autonomously under certain conditions, for example, maintaining safe speed and distance from other vehicles on a highway. All other roads require manual driving. A
driver may want to minimize both the time needed to reach
the destination and the effort associated with manual driving.
The concepts of conditional preference and slack are quite
useful in defining the overall objective. To ensure safety, if
the driver is tired, then roads that are autonomous-capable
are preferred without any margin of slack; however, if the
driver is not tired, then roads that optimize travel time are
preferred, perhaps with some slack to increase the inclusion
of autonomous-capable segments. We focus on this sample
domain for the remainder of the paper.
The general use of preference decomposition is popular,
as found in Generalized Additive Decomposable (GAI) networks (Gonzales, Perny, and Dubus 2011) or Conditional
Preference Networks (CP-Nets) (Boutilier et al. 2004). Constrained MDPs (CMDPs) can also capture complex preference structures, as well as slack, and are potentially a more
general representation than LMDPs (Altman 1999). Various
other forms of slack are also commonly found in the liter-

Sequential decision problems that involve multiple objectives are prevalent. Consider for example a driver of a semiautonomous car who may want to optimize competing objectives such as travel time and the effort associated with
manual driving. We introduce a rich model called Lexicographic MDP (LMDP) and a corresponding planning algorithm called LVI that generalize previous work by allowing
for conditional lexicographic preferences with slack. We analyze the convergence characteristics of LVI and establish its
game theoretic properties. The performance of LVI in practice is tested within a realistic benchmark problem in the domain of semi-autonomous driving. Finally, we demonstrate
how GPU-based optimization can improve the scalability of
LVI and other value iteration algorithms for MDPs.

1

Abdel-Illah Mouaddib2

Introduction

Stochastic planning problems designed to optimize multiple objectives are widespread within numerous domains
such as management of smart homes and commercial buildings (Kwak et al. 2012), reservoir water control (Castelletti, Pianosi, and Soncini-Sessa 2008), and autonomous
robotics (Mouaddib 2004; Calisi et al. 2007). Current approaches often use a scalarization function and a weight
vector to project the multi-objective problem to a singleobjective problem (Roijers et al. 2013; Natarajan and Tadepalli 2005; Perny and Weng 2010; Perny et al. 2013). While
these approaches leverage effectively the vast existing work
on single-objective optimization, they have several drawbacks. Choosing a projection is often too onerous to use
in practice since there are many viable Pareto optimal solutions to the original multi-objective problem, making it hard
to visualize and analyze alternative solutions. Often there is
no clear way to prefer one over another. In some cases, a
simple lexicographic order exists among the objectives; for
example, using plan safety as primary criterion and cost as
secondary. But lexicographic order of objectives can be too
rigid, not allowing any trade-offs between objectives (e.g., a
large cost reduction for taking a minimal risk).
Recent work by Mouaddib (2004) used a strict lexicographic preference ordering for multi-objective MDPs. Others have also developed lexicographic orderings over value
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3418

