Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Spontaneous Retrieval from Long-Term Memory for a Cognitive Architecture
Justin Li and John Laird
University of Michigan
2260 Hayward Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2121
{justinnh, laird}@umich.edu

Abstract

which spontaneous retrieval would out-perform an agent with
top-down control of its memory.
This paper takes the first step in exploring how spontaneous retrieval can be effectively used in artificial agents. The
key insight is that deliberate retrieval has certain knowledge
requirements — namely the knowledge of when to search
memory and what to search for — that spontaneous retrieval
does not. We therefore hypothesize that spontaneous retrieval
could be well-suited for agents in domains where this
knowledge is unavailable or otherwise incorrect. This insight
is crucial in defining a space of possible spontaneous retrieval
mechanisms, as well as in deriving the design principles
necessary for an agent to take advantage of these retrievals.
Results from the Missing Link word puzzle support our
hypothesis, and further hint at the conditions under which
spontaneous retrieval can be beneficial.

This paper presents the first functional evaluation of spontaneous, uncued retrieval from long-term memory in a cognitive
architecture. The key insight is that current deliberate cued
retrieval mechanisms require the agent to have knowledge of
when and what to retrieve — knowledge that may be missing
or incorrect. Spontaneous uncued retrieval eliminates these
requirements through automatic retrievals that use the agent’s
problem solving context as a heuristic for relevance, thus
supplementing deliberate cued retrieval. Using constraints
derived from this insight, we sketch the space of spontaneous
retrieval mechanisms and describe an implementation of
spontaneous retrieval in Soar together with an agent that takes
advantage of that mechanism. Empirical evidence is provided
in the Missing Link word-puzzle domain, where agents
using spontaneous retrieval out-perform agents without that
capability, leading us to conclude that spontaneous retrieval
can be a useful mechanism and is worth further exploration.

Background: Memory Mechanisms in
Cognitive Architectures

Introduction
In almost every cognitive architecture, there is a distinction between short-term (working) memory and long-term
declarative memory, and the mechanisms that transfer
knowledge between the two have been a topic of study since
cognitive architectures existed (Raaijmakers and Shiffrin
1981). Although many long-term memory mechanisms have
been explored, one remains curiously unexamined: that of
a mechanism which automatically (spontaneously) retrieves
knowledge from long-term memory to short-term memory.
This is surprising, as human involuntary memory has
been recognized since the first systematic studies of memory
(Ebbinghaus 1913), and has continued to receive attention
up to the present day (Kvavilashvili and Mandler 2004;
Hintzman 2011). Its utility for artificial agents, however,
has not been evaluated. This is likely due to the success
of deliberate retrievals, and agent designers’ preference for
mechanisms whose behavior they can specify precisely. The
inherent unpredictability of spontaneous retrievals, both in
when the retrieval occurs and in what memory is returned,
may make it difficult to design agents that can effectively use
such a mechanism without compromising task performance.
Furthermore, it is difficult to imagine the circumstances under

The goal of cognitive architecture research is to explore
and understand the computational mechanisms that support
general intelligence. Although there are a number of cognitive
architectures in use, the majority share a similar core design;
here the focus is on ACT-R (Anderson 2007) and Soar (Laird
2012), two widely used architectures.
All knowledge is represented as an edge-labeled directed
graph in ACT-R and Soar. Working memory holds the
knowledge that is immediately relevant to the agent’s current
situation, while long-term memory contains other general
knowledge about the world; a single piece of knowledge in
either memory is called a memory element. Working memory
has specialized buffers that contain information about the
agent’s perception and motor output; an input-processingoutput step is called a decision cycle. These buffers may be
changed by procedural rules, which match on and modify
working memory.
In addition to input and output buffers, there are also
buffers for long-term memory access, where rules can initiate
retrievals. Such retrievals require that the agent create cues
that describe the desired features; long-term memory then
finds all memory elements that match the cue, and returns
a single element (a graph vertex together with all of its
outgoing edges) as determined by some bias. In ACT-R and

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

544

