Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Inferring Latent User Properties from Texts Published in Social Media
Svitlana Volkova1 , Yoram Bachrach2 , Michael Armstrong2 and Vijay Sharma2
1

Center for Language and Speech Processing, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD 21218, USA
svitlana@jhu.edu
2
Microsoft Research, Cambridge CB1 2FB, UK
{yobach, a-mica, a-vishar}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Our approach examines information on Twitter, determining the emotions expressed in tweets based on the words
used in these tweets. It also infers various properties for
a given user based on a set of aggregated tweets for that
user. Predictions from our system have several applications.
In personalized online advertising, the advertiser can personalize content based on user features, so as to match the
emotional tone that the user expects. In online marketing,
one could detect opinions and emotions users express in social media about products or services within targeted populations. In large scale passive polling or real-time polling
one could predict political opinions and voting intentions for
the users with certain demographics. Finally, this work could
be used in healthcare analytics, for example in identifying
depression or mental illness.

We demonstrate an approach to predict latent personal attributes including user demographics, online personality,
emotions and sentiments from texts published on Twitter. We
rely on machine learning and natural language processing
techniques to learn models from user communications. We
first examine individual tweets to detect emotions and opinions emanating from them, and then analyze all the tweets
published by a user to infer latent traits of that individual.
We consider various user properties including age, gender,
income, education, relationship status, optimism and life satisfaction. We focus on Ekman’s six emotions: anger, joy, surprise, fear, disgust and sadness. Our work can help social
network users to understand how others may perceive them
based on how they communicate in social media, in addition
to its evident applications in online sales and marketing, targeted advertising, large scale polling and healthcare analytics.

Models
Inferring Demographics and Online Personality Existing approaches for personal analytics typically rely on supervised models trained on a set of user profiles annotated with
latent properties. For example, some demographic traits like
gender, age and relationship status may be public in Facebook profiles or self-reported preferences may be expressed
in the Twitter biography field or tweets e.g., I am a Republican or It is my 25th birthday. Such models can then be
used to make new predictions for unseen users given features
extracted from their profiles. However, these “explicit/selfreported” publicly available annotations are very sparse, so
the existing datasets are very small including only few hundred users. Creating a larger dataset using surveys can be
costly. Our methodology uses crowdsourcing to annotate
user profiles.3 We asked workers on Amazon Mechanical
Turk to glance through 5,000 Twitter profiles, all available
metadata and tweets and make subjective judgments about a
variety of their latent properties.
We trained log-linear models using lexical features extracted from 200 tweets per user profile annotated as de-

Introduction
Online social networks like Twitter, Google+ and Facebook
contain much information that can potentially reveal many
traits, preferences and opinions of the profile owner. This
resulted in research on personal analytics – automatically
inferring such latent author attributes in social media. Recent work show that many traits of individuals can be accurately predicted from language on Twitter, including gender (Van Durme 2012), age (Zamal, Liu, and Ruths 2012),
and political views (Volkova, Coppersmith, and Van Durme
2014). Similar analysis has been applied to other information sources such as browsing history (Kosinski et al.
2012), likes or posts on Facebook1 (Bachrach et al. 2012;
Kosinski, Stillwell, and Graepel 2013). Moreover, previous
work on social dynamics and big data analytics demonstrated the role of social media in understanding emotional
and mood changes over time in large populations such as
user emotional reactions to sad or happy events, user wellbeing2 (Schwartz et al. 2013) and even depression and stress
level (De Choudhury et al. 2013).

3

We note that crowdsourcing subjective judgments of latent
user properties is not a trivial task; some attributes are more difficult to recognize than others. But such crowdsourced annotations have been proven to be a reasonable approximation of the
ground truth as shown for tasks at least as challenging, such as gender (Ciot, Sonderegger, and Ruths 2013) and depression prediction
in social media (De Choudhury et al. 2013).

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Demographics and personality prediction from Facebook likes
– https://apps.facebook.com/snpredictionapp/
2
World Well Being Project – http://wwbp.org/

4296

