Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Bayesian Approach to Perceptual 3D Object-Part
Decomposition Using Skeleton-Based Representations
Tarek El-Gaaly ∗

Vicky Froyen †

Department of Computer Science,
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA

Center for Cognitive Science,
Department of Psychology,
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA

Ahmed Elgammal

Jacob Feldman and Manish Singh

Department of Computer Science,
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA

Center for Cognitive Science,
Department of Psychology,
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA

Abstract
We present a probabilistic approach to shape decomposition that creates a skeleton-based shape representation of a 3D object while simultaneously decomposing it into constituent parts. Our approach probabilistically combines two prominent threads from the shape
literature: skeleton-based (medial axis) representations
of shape, and part-based representations of shape, in
which shapes are combinations of primitive parts. Our
approach recasts skeleton-based shape representation
as a mixture estimation problem, allowing us to apply
probabilistic estimation techniques to the problem of
3D shape decomposition, extending earlier work on the
2D case. The estimated 3D shape decompositions approximate human shape decomposition judgments. We
present a tractable implementation of the framework,
which begins by over-segmenting objects at concavities, and then probabilistically merges them to create a
distribution over possible decompositions. This results
in a hierarchy of decompositions at different structural
scales, again closely matching known properties of human shape representation. The probabilistic estimation
procedures that arise naturally in the model allow effective prediction of missing parts. We present results on
shapes from a standard database illustrating the effectiveness of the approach.

Figure 1: Dendogram showing 3D decompositions of a 3D
model point cloud. We show 4 decompositions in the hierarchy, starting (left) with an over-segmented interpretation
and ending (right) with an under-segmented interpretation
in which the whole object is represented as a single central
axis. Each interpretation shows a segmentation (color-code)
and the most probable skeletal axes under the model.

In 1967, Blum published his pioneering work on representing 2D shapes using the Medial Axis Transform (MAT)
(Blum 1967). The intuition behind MAT is that shapes are
intuitively captured by a lower-dimensional representation
that extracts local symmetries of the shape’s bounding contours, referred to as the the medial axis. MAT computes
the axis from the loci of centers of maximal discs contained within the shape. Evidence supporting medial representations can be found in psychophysics and neuroscience,
with recent work showing neural representations in areas
V4 and MT of the visual cortex (Hung, Carlson, and Connor 2012). On another front, early influential work has suggested that shapes can be recognized or classified based
on their part decomposition (Marr and Nishihara 1978;
Hoffman and Richards 1984; Biederman 1987). Both these
lines of thought have led to enormous research literatures,
but computational techniques for effectively decomposing
3D shapes into component parts remain poorly developed.
These problems remain central challenges today, especially
with the emergence of a plethora of 3D data and 3D sensor

Introduction
The goal of this work it to simultaneously decompose an object into its parts and compute a low-dimensional representation. For example, a coffee mug can be decomposed into
the handle and the cylindrical vessel, and each of these primitive parts has a skeleton-based representation expressing its
local symmetries (medial axes). The problem of interpreting
3D shape is fundamental in computer vision and robotics,
especially with the increasing availability of 3D data.
∗

Corresponding author: tgaaly@cs.rutgers.edu
Corresponding author: vickyf@rutgers.edu
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3762

