Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Designing Vaccines that are Robust to Virus Escape
Swetasudha Panda and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
swetasudha.panda@vanderbilt.edu, yevgeniy.vorobeychik@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract

even for a single evaluation (which could take nearly an
hour, as it makes use of its own sophisticated amalgam of
local search techniques to simulate a binding complex). To
significantly speed up the search, we use classification learning to predict whether or not an antibody-virus pair bind,
limiting Rosetta evaluations only to cases in which the classifier predicts that they do not. While this makes the virus
escape search practical, the bi-level nature of the problem
means that antibody design is still quite time consuming. To
address this, we make use of Poisson regression to predict
virus escape cost. Making use of the resulting predictions
now makes antibody design viable, with “inner loop” (virus
escape) evaluations restricted to a small set of candidate antibodies predicted to be difficult to escape.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
1. A bi-level optimization (Stackelberg game) model of antibody design and virus escape interaction,
2. stochastic local search techniques to determine optimal
virus escape, with classifier-in-the-loop used to speed up
the evaluations, and
3. stochastic local search techniques for optimal antibody
design, making use of Poisson regression to predict minimal virus escape time.
Our methods ultimately exhibit antibodies that are far more
robust to mutations than the native antibody.
Related work include (Lathrop and Pazzani 1999),
(Hernandez-Leal et al. ), (Lathrop et al. 1999), (Richter, Augustin, and Kramer 2010).

Drug and vaccination therapies are important tools in
the battle against infectious diseases such as HIV and
influenza. However, many viruses, including HIV, can
rapidly escape the therapeautic effect through a sequence of mutations. We propose to design vaccines, or,
equivalently, antibody sequences that make such evasion difficult. We frame this as a bilevel combinatorial
optimization problem of maximizing the escape cost,
defined as the minimum number of virus mutations to
evade binding an antibody. Binding strength can be
evaluated by a protein modeling software, Rosetta, that
serves as an oracle and computes a binding score for
an input virus-antibody pair. However, score calculation
for each possible such pair is intractable. We propose a
three-pronged approach to address this: first, application of local search, using a native antibody sequence
as leverage, second, machine learning to predict binding for antibody-virus pairs, and third, a poisson regression to predict escape costs as a function of antibody
sequence assignment. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed methods, and exhibit an antibody with
a far higher escape cost (7) than the native (1).

We formulate antibody design as a formal bi-level optimization problem, where the “designer” chooses an antibody so as to maximize the shortest sequence of mutations that lead to escape. This formulation can be viewed
as a Stackelberg game (Paruchuri et al. 2008) (Brückner
and Scheffer 2011) between the designer and the virus in
which the virus minimizes the cost of escaping the antibody
chosen by the designer. The designer-virus game poses two
challenges: 1) enormous search space for both the designer
and the virus (≥ 1050 in each case), and 2) determination
whether an arbitrary antibody-virus pair bind. To tackle the
former challenge, we propose, and compare the performance
of, several stochastic local search heuristics (Hoos and Stutzle 2004), using the native antibody as a “springboard”.
Even for computing virus escape alone, this approach scales
poorly. The major bottleneck is the second challenge: binding evaluation. For this purpose we make use of Rosetta,
a premier computational protein modeling tool (Gray et al.
2003). Rosetta, however, can be extremely time consuming

Antibody Design as a Stackelberg Game
Let v 0 denote the native virus, which we treat simply as a
sequence (vector) of amino acids, and v and a arbitrary virus
and antibody sequences, respectively. Let O(a, v) represent
binding energy for the antibody-virus pair (a, v), which is
computed by Rosetta. We stylize the “dilemma” faced by the
virus as the following constrained optimization problem:
min kv 0 − vk0

(1a)

s.t. : O(a, v) ≥ θ,

(1b)

v∈V

where V is the space of virus sequences under consideration, and θ is a threshold on binding energy which designates escape (that is, once binding energy is high enough,

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4188

