Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

SimSensei Demonstration: A Perceptive Virtual Human Interviewer
for Healthcare Applications
Louis-Philippe Morency, Giota Stratou, David DeVault, Arno Hartholt,
Margaux Lhommet, Gale Lucas, Fabrizio Morbini, Kallirroi Georgila,
Stefan Scherer, Jonathan Gratch, Stacy Marsella, David Traum, Albert Rizzo
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
Abstract

lyzes user state for both behavioral understanding and interactional purposes.

We present the SimSensei system, a fully automatic virtual agent that conducts interviews to assess indicators
of psychological distress. We emphasize on the perception part of the system, a multimodal framework which
captures and analyzes user state for both behavioral understanding and interactional purposes.

SimSensei System Overview
The SimSensei system, seen in Fig.1 is a fully automatic
framework designed to create an engaging face-to-face interaction with a user. It was developed as a clinical decision support tool that would complement existing selfassessment questionnaires by giving healthcare providers
objective measurements of the user behaviors that are correlated with psychological distress. As such, the main design goals were to create an interactional environment that
allows the user to feel comfortable talking during a semistructured interview, so that elicited behaviors can be automatically measured and analyzed under the specific context.
The SimSensei system has been designed and developed
over a two year iterative process described in detail in (DeVault et al. 2014). It is implemented using a modular approach (Hartholt et al. 2013) and its main components include a dialogue processing component, supported by individual modules for speech recognition, language understanding and dialogue management, a nonverbal behavior
generation component for the virtual human, a rendering engine and a multimodal perception system that analyzes audiovisual streams in real time.

Introduction
Virtual humans that can develop intimacy with people are
now becoming reality. Researchers have successfully incorporated social skills (e.g., active listening, mimicry, gestures) into virtual human systems (Bickmore, Gruber, and
Picard 2005; Gratch, Kang, and Wang 2013). Indeed, compared to their predecessors, virtual humans with such social
skills increase feelings of connection and rapport, namely
the experience of harmony, fluidity, synchrony, and flow felt
during a conversation; (Gratch, Kang, and Wang 2013). Enhanced with these skills, virtual humans could be particularly useful as tools. For example, a user experience can be
better standardized with virtual humans than with human beings. Recently it was also shown that virtual humans can
increase willingness to disclose by providing a “safe” environment where participants don’t feel judged by another
human interlocutor (Lucas et al. 2014). This is particularly
helpful in the case of healthcare scenarios where disclosure
of sensitive information is prominent. An automatic system
behind the virtual human brings other advantages as well.
Utilizing advances in natural language understanding, facial expression analysis and gesture recognition scientists
have the tools to analyze and quantify verbal and nonverbal behavior exchanges during real-time interactions. This
capability brings forward new opportunities in applications
where measuring and assessing human behavior is important
(for example in healthcare).
With this demonstration, we present the SimSensei system, a fully automatic system designed to conduct interviews related to psychological distress (DeVault et al. 2014).
In the live demo we emphasize on the perception part of the
system, a multimodal framework which captures and ana-

Perception System Overview
The perception system was tailored specifically for this application (details on the iterative process can be found in
(DeVault et al. 2014)). Specifically, it should serve a double
purpose: i) communicate the necessary nonverbal behavior
signals to the other components of the system so that the
agent is sensitive to the user’s nonverbal behavior, and ii)
recognize automatically and quantify the nonverbal behaviors. As an example, tracking the smile intensity of the participant serves both of these purposes: smile is a signal that
has been tied to investigations of depression and also plays
an important role in a dyadic interaction. As a basis for the
perception system, SimSensei uses the MultiSense framework, which is a flexible system for multimodal real-time
sensing. MultiSense allows for synchronized capture of different modalities, and provides a flexible platform for realtime tracking and multimodal fusion. MultiSense dynamically leverages the measures from current technologies into

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4307

