Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Chance-Constrained Scheduling
via Conflict-Directed Risk Allocation
Andrew J. Wang and Brian C. Williams
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{wangaj, williams}@mit.edu

Abstract

task is to select and evaluate a policy against the problem’s
chance constraints.
Prior art in scheduling with probabilistic temporal uncertainty has led to the synthesis of three key ideas: risk
allocation, STNU controllability, and nonlinear constraint
programming. (Tsamardinos 2002) was the first to use
constraint programming to minimize temporal risk, which
is a nonlinear objective. Recent work by (Fang, Yu, and
Williams 2014) introduces a chance-constrained alternative
that generates less conservative solutions by encoding risk
allocation and STNU controllability conditions into a constraint program. The main deficiency of these methods
is that their constraint programs become large and timeconsuming to solve. Off-the-shelf solvers typically use sequential quadratic programming (Gill, Murray, and Saunders 2002) or interior point methods (Wächter and Biegler
2006), whose runtimes grow polynomially in program size.
This work’s key insight, then, is to apply iterative conflict discovery on top of the previous three ideas, so that one
solves a series of constraint programs which start small and
grow incrementally. The combined runtime of solving these
small programs is still faster than solving one large program.
This is achieved through a master-and-subproblem architecture that decouples the reasoning about risk and temporal
constraints: First, the master generates a candidate risk allocation that distributes the available risk bounds across activity durations, thus ensuring that the chance constraints are
not violated. The risk allocation places concrete bounds on
the uncertain durations, which reformulates the probabilistic problem into a deterministic form, modeled as an STNU
(simple temporal network with uncertainty). Then, the subproblem checks the STNU for temporal controllability, and
it returns temporal conflicts to be added to the master problem. One repeats until there are no more conflicts, or the
master deems the problem infeasible. This process is efficient because not all temporal constraints have to be considered in generating a solution, but only in checking it.
In addition to conflict-driven risk allocation, another new
feature of this work is the ability to accommodate multiple
chance constraints. Each chance constraint may be defined
over a subset of the entire plan. This allows users to weight
the relative importance of different parts of the plan by assigning tighter chance constraints to the more critical areas.
This work’s approach is empirically validated against

Temporal uncertainty in large-scale logistics forces one to
trade off between lost efficiency through built-in slack and
costly replanning when deadlines are missed. Due to the difficulty of reasoning about such likelihoods and consequences,
a computational framework is needed to quantify and bound
the risk of violating scheduling requirements. This work addresses the chance-constrained scheduling problem, where
actions’ durations are modeled probabilistically. Our solution
method uses conflict-directed risk allocation to efficiently
compute a scheduling policy. The key insight, compared
to previous work in probabilistic scheduling, is to decouple
the reasoning about temporal and risk constraints. This decomposes the problem into a separate master and subproblem, which can be iteratively solved much quicker. Through
a set of simulated car-sharing scenarios, it is empirically
shown that conflict-directed risk allocation computes solutions nearly an order of magnitude faster than prior art does,
which considers all constraints in a single lump-sum optimization.

Introduction
Scheduling requirements for plans are often given as concrete constraints: a product needs to be delivered to a customer by the end of the month; to catch the bus, one has
to be at the bus stop before the bus arrives. Yet, real-world
actions have uncertain durations, whether due to variability in execution or impreciseness in modeling. This uncertainty makes it difficult to meet the scheduling requirements
with absolute certainty. However, even though uncertainty
can lead to failure, the user will want to evaluate and have a
guarantee on the probability of success.
This need is addressed by solving the chance-constrained
scheduling problem: given a temporally flexible plan, find a
scheduling policy for it that obeys the requirements within
user-specified acceptable risk. Framing the problem in a
probabilistic setting acknowledges that compliance under
100 percent of the scenarios may not be possible. Instead,
the problem imposes well-defined limits on risk across the
plan, called chance constraints. A plan’s scheduling during
execution is determined by a scheduling policy; hence, the
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3620

