Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Crowdsourced Action-Model Acquisition for Planning
Hankz Hankui Zhuo
School of Advanced Computing,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. 510006
zhuohank@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

in military operation, it is both difficult and expensive to collect a large number of plan traces (i.e., training data), since
there are only a small amount of plan examples that can be
collected in the real domain (e.g., a plan example may correspond to a war that does not happen frequently), and plan
examples themselves may take lots of resources, such as ammunition. It is challenging when there is only a limited number of plan traces available (Zhuo and Yang 2014).
Inspired by crowdsourcing (Howe 2008), we are interested in considering integrating intelligence of crowds into
action-model acquisition for planning, assuming the crowd
are able to provide knowledge to help learn action models. There have been successful general-purpose platforms
such as Amazons Mechanical Turk1 , task-specific sites for
call centers2 and programming jobs3 to do crowdsourcing. Crowdsourcing has in fact been heavily used to solve
various tasks, such as audio transcription (Liem, Zhang,
and Chen 2011), hand-written recognition (Ouyang and Li
2012), story generation (Li et al. 2013), labeling training
data for machine learning (Raykar et al. 2010), and crowdsourcing itinerary planning (Zhang et al. 2012). Rare work,
however, is proposed to explore crowdsourcing to help learn
action models in planning community.
In this paper, we propose an algorithm called
CAMA (which stands for Crowdsourced Action-Model
Acquisition), to explore knowledge from crowds to learn
action models for planning. Specifically, CAMA functions
by two phases. CAMA first builds a set of soft constraints
based on the labels (true or false) given by the crowd
or annotators. CAMA then builds a set of soft constraints
based on the input plan traces. After that CAMA puts
all the constraints together and solves them using a
weighted MAX-SAT solver (Borchers and Furman 1998;
Davies and Bacchus 2011), and converts the solution of the
solver to action models.
Our approach explores knowledge from both crowdsourcing and plan traces. This is superior to solely harness crowdsourcing since the crowd might give erroneous or outright
malicious responses, and these responses may be “filtered”
by plan traces.

AI planning techniques often require a given set of action models provided as input. Creating action models is, however, a difficult task that costs much manual effort. The problem of action-model acquisition has
drawn a lot of interest from researchers in the past. Despite the success of the previous systems, they are all
based on the assumption that there are enough training examples for learning high-quality action models. In
many real-world applications, e.g., military operation,
collecting a large amount of training examples is often both difficult and costly. Instead of collecting training examples, we assume there are abundant annotators,
i.e., the crowd, available to provide information learning action models. Specifically, we first build a set of
soft constraints based on the labels (true or false) given
by the crowd or annotators. We then builds a set of soft
constraints based on the input plan traces. After that we
put all the constraints together and solve them using a
weighted MAX-SAT solver, and convert the solution of
the solver to action models. We finally exhibit that our
approach is effective in the experiment.

Introduction
AI planning techniques often require a given set of action
models as input. Creating action models, however, is a difficult task that costs much manual effort. The problem of
action-model acquisition has drawn a lot of interest from researchers in the past. For instance, McCluskey et al. (McCluskey, Liu, and Simpson 2003) designed a system to interact with human experts to generate action models. Amir
(Amir 2005) introduced a tractable and exact technique for
learning action models known as Simultaneous Learning
and Filtering, where the state observations were needed for
learning. Yang et al. (Yang, Wu, and Jiang 2007) presented
a framework for discovering STRIPS (Fikes and Nilsson
1971) action models from a set of successfully observed
plans, just to name a few. Despite the success of previous
systems, they are all based on the assumption that there are
enough training examples for learning high-quality action
models. However, in many real-world applications, collecting a large amount of examples for learning high-quality action models is often both difficult and costly. For example,

1

http://mturk.com
http://liveops.com
3
http://topcoder.com
2

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3439

