Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Representation Discovery for MDPs Using Bisimulation Metrics
Sherry Shanshan Ruan, Gheorghe Comanici, Prakash Panangaden, Doina Precup
School of Computer Science,
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
{sherry, gcoman, prakash, dprecup}@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract

solving an MDP resulting from a coupling of the state space
with itself; such a coupling has size quadratic in the number
of states.
In this paper, we tackle this problem by proposing a significant improvement in how bisimulation metrics are computed. While we present our results in the context of MDPs,
the algorithmic ideas can also benefit the verification community, which relies on bisimulation metrics in order to automatically verify the concordance of a model with a specification.
Our approach constructs an iteratively improving sequence of state space partitions, which converges in the limit
to the bisimulation relation, just like previous algorithms.
We prove that at each step the error of the value function
computed over this partition (compared to the true optimal
value function) is bounded. Since at each step, the value
function approximation is computed over partitions rather
than states, this approach can generate substantial space and
computation time savings, as illustrated in our experiments
described later.
The second contribution of the paper consists in an algorithm for asynchronous updates of the metric and the representation. We provide theoretical conditions which allow
computational effort to be focused on parts of the state space
where changes are happening rapidly, similar to successful asynchronous or distributed dynamic programming techniques such as Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996), Bertsekas
and Castanon (1989), Moore and Atkeson (1993) . Empirical results illustrate the use of heuristics that can substantially speed up the computation.

We provide a novel, flexible, iterative refinement algorithm to automatically construct an approximate statespace representation for Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs). Our approach leverages bisimulation metrics,
which have been used in prior work to generate features to represent the state space of MDPs. We address a
drawback of this approach, which is the expensive computation of the bisimulation metrics. We propose an algorithm to generate an iteratively improving sequence
of state space partitions. Partial metric computations
guide the representation search and provide much lower
space and computational complexity, while maintaining
strong convergence properties. We provide theoretical
results guaranteeing convergence as well as experimental illustrations of the accuracy and savings (in time and
memory usage) of the new algorithm, compared to traditional bisimulation metric computation.

Introduction
Solving large sequential decision problems modeled as
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) requires the use of approximations to represent the state space. Popular approximation methods include state aggregation, linear function
approximation and kernel-based methods. In this paper we
are mainly interested in state aggregation, in which the state
space is partitioned into disjoint subsets and values are associated with each partition. The goal is to construct a partition
incrementally, in such a way as to provide a good approximation to the true value function. One approach for this
problem is to use bisimulation relations (Givan, Dean, and
Greig 2003), also known as MDP homomorphisms (Ravindran and Barto 2002), or their relaxation as bisimulation
metrics (Ferns, Panangaden, and Precup 2004). Bisimulation metrics in particular are attractive because they allow
quantifying the approximation error for any state space partitioning, or more generally, any linear function approximator (Comanici and Precup 2012). However, bisimulation
metric computation is very expensive (in the worst case,
more expensive than performing dynamic programming in
the original state space). Indeed, recent work (Ferns and Precup 2014) has shown that computing the metric amounts to

Markov Decision Processes
An MDP is a tuple (S, A, P, R) where S is a finite state
space S, A is a finite action space, P is a transition proba
ability function P : S × A × S → [0, 1], with Pss
0 giving
the probability that the system will end up in state s0 when
the action a is performed in state s, and R : S × A → R is
the immediate reward function, with Rsa giving the immediate reward for performing action a in state s.
The main objective of MDP solvers is to compute value
functions for different policies, i.e., strategies for choosing
actions. A policy is denoted by π : S × A → [0, 1] where πsa
is the probability of choosing action a in state s. We will define below the value function of π, which is dependent on a

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3578

