Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Resilient Upgrade of Electrical Distribution Grids
Emre Yamangil

Russell Bent

Scott Backhaus

Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ, 08901
yamangil@rutgers.edu

Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM, 87545
rbent@lanl.gov

Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM, 87545
backhaus@lanl.gov

Abstract

We formulate our approach, i.e. Optimal Resilient Distribution Grid Design (ORDGDP), as a two-stage mixedinteger program. The first (investment) stage selects from
the set of potential upgrades to the network. The second (operations) stage evaluates the network performance benefit of
the upgrades against a set of damage scenarios sampled from
a stochastic distribution. We first develop an exact solution
method that exploits decomposition across the sampled scenarios. We also develop a metaheuristic that we call Scenario
Based Variable Neighborhood Decomposition Search (SBVNDS) that is a hybrid of Variable Neighborhood Search
(Lazic et al. 2010) and the exact method. We present numerical evidence that our exact method is more efficient than outof-the-box commercial mixed-integer programming solvers,
and that our heuristic achieves near-optimal results in a fraction of the time required by exact methods.

Modern society is critically dependent on the services
provided by engineered infrastructure networks. When
natural disasters (e.g. Hurricane Sandy) occur, the ability of these networks to provide service is often degraded because of physical damage to network components. One of the most critical of these networks is
the electrical distribution grid, with medium voltage
circuits often suffering the most severe damage. However, well-placed upgrades to these distribution grids
can greatly improve post-event network performance.
We formulate an optimal electrical distribution grid design problem as a two-stage, stochastic mixed-integer
program with damage scenarios from natural disasters modeled as a set of stochastic events. We develop
and investigate the tractability of an exact and several
heuristic algorithms based on decompositions that are
hybrids of techniques developed by the AI and operations research communities. We provide computational
evidence that these algorithms have significant benefits
when compared with commercial, mixed-integer programming software.

Literature Review Network design problems and their
variations are generally NP-complete (Tomaszewski, Pióro,
and Żotkiewicz 2010; Nace et al. 2013; Johnson, Lenstra,
and Kan 1978). However, recent work by (Bent, Berscheid,
and Toole 2010) demonstrates that AI-based methods can
lead to substantial improvement for realistic applications.
While the specific problem of designing resilient distribution systems is novel, a number of related problems exist. The flow of electric power in tree-like distribution networks is related to multi-commodity network flows making our problem similar to the design of multi-commodity
flow networks with stochastic link and edge failures (Santoso et al. 2003; Garg and Smith 2008). However, the second stage of our formulation requires binary variables making our problem considerably more difficult than typical
second-stage flow problems. The interdiction literature includes related max-min or min-max problems where the
goal is to operate or design a system to make it as resilient
as possible to an adversary who can damage up to k elements. Such models are similar to ours if a k is chosen
that bounds the worst-case disaster (Chen and Phillips 2013;
Chen et al. 2014; Salmeron, Wood, and Baldick 2009;
Delgadillo, Arroyo, and Alguacil 2010). Binary variables
at all stages make these models computationally challenging and solvable only for small k. Here, we exploit the
probabilistic nature of our adversary to increase the size of
tractable problems (eliminates a stage of binary variables).

Introduction
Natural disasters such as earthquakes, hurricanes, and other
extreme weather pose serious risks to modern critical infrastructure including electrical distribution grids. At the
peak of Hurricane Sandy, 65% of New Jersey’s customers
lost power (Mansfield and Linzey 2013). Recent U.S. government sources (Executive Office of the President 2013;
US Department of Energy 2013) suggest that new methodologies for improving system resilience to these events is
necessary. Here, we focus on developing methods for designing and upgrading distribution grids to better withstand
and recover from these threats that are inspired by techniques developed in the artificial intelligence and operations
research communities. Our approach minimizes the upgrade
budget while meeting a minimum standard of service by
selecting from a set of potential upgrades, e.g. adding redundant lines, adding distributed (microgrid) generation (i.e.
wind, solar, and combined heat and power), hardening existing components, etc.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1233

