Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

AIBIRDS: The Angry Birds Artificial Intelligence Competition
Jochen Renz
Research School of Computer Science
The Australian National University
jochen.renz@anu.edu.au

Abstract
The Angry Birds AI Competition (aibirds.org) has been held
in conjunction with the AI 2012, IJCAI 2013 and ECAI 2014
conferences and will be held again at the IJCAI 2015 conference. The declared goal of the competition is to build an AI
agent that can play Angry Birds as good or better than the
best human players. In this paper we describe why this is a
very difficult problem, why it is a challenge for AI, and why
it is an important step towards building AI that can successfully interact with the real world. We also summarise some
highlights of past competitions, describe which methods were
successful, and give an outlook to proposed variants of the
competition.

Figure 1: Angry Birds, Easter Eggs level 8 ( c Rovio Entertainment). A good shot would hit the three round rocks on
the top right which will trigger the destruction of the left half
of the structure.

Angry Birds as a Challenge for AI
Angry Birds is a very popular example of the physics-based
simulation game (PBSG) category. The game world in these
games is typically completely parameterized, i.e., all physics
parameters such as mass, friction, density of objects, gravity, as well as all object types and their properties and location are known internally. Any chosen action can be perfectly simulated using an underlying physics simulator such
as Box2D (box2d.org) which makes the execution and the
consequences of actions look very real. In Angry Birds, the
actions a player can perform are very simple: the player can
decide (1) on the release point hx, yi where a bird is released
from the slingshot and (2) on a time point hti during flight
of the bird when its optional special power is activated. Both
the release point and the time point are in theory continuous, in practice very large, so that the resulting number of
different actions is huge. A game level is solved if executing a selected sequence of actions hx, y, ti leads to a game
state that satisfies certain victory conditions. In Angry Birds
all green pigs need to be destroyed in order to solve a given
game level (see Figure 1).
This simple game play and the simple actions mean that
even very young children are able to play the game successfully. The challenge of the AIBIRDS competition is to
build an AI player that can play new game levels as good
or better than the best human players. While this may sound
simple, particularly in comparison to seemingly hard games

such as Chess, it is surprisingly difficult for a number of reasons. Assuming all parameters of the game world are known,
we could simulate a number of actions and based on the
outcome of the simulation, we could simulate a number of
follow-up actions and so on until the victory condition is
reached. If we select the actions we simulate in an intelligent way, this could lead to a successful solution strategy.
However, the main issue in physics-based simulation games
is that the outcome of an action is only known once we simulate it, which in turn requires us to know all parameters necessary for the simulation. This is very different from games
such as Chess where the outcome of each action is known
in advance. Accurately predicting or approximating the outcome of actions is one of the main challenge in this type of
games, which is required before we can even look into determining good action sequences. Combining this with the potentially infinite action space and the possible lack of complete information about all required parameters means that
we are in for a big challenge. Humans are very good at predicting consequences of physical actions (if I do this then
this will happen, which in turn will trigger that, etc.), while
this form of reasoning in unknown environments is still unsolved in its generality.
In the AIBIRDS competition, we play Angry
Birds using the web version, publically available at
chrome.angrybirds.com. The competition server interfaces
with the website using a Chrome browser extension which

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4326

