Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Interruptible Pure Exploration in Multi-Armed Bandits∗
Alexander Shleyfman

Antonı́n Komenda

Carmel Domshlak

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, Israel

Dept. of Computer Science,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
Czech Technical University,
Prague, Czech Republic

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, Israel

Abstract

can be seen as a hierarchy of MAB players, and thus, having more effective sampling strategies for such pure exploration in MABs allows for devising more effective MCTS
algorithms (e.g., see the analysis/discussion by Feldman and
Domshlak, 2014).
Sampling strategies for pure exploration in MABs can
be roughly divided into contract strategies and interruptible
strategies. In the contract setting, the player is allowed exactly T samples up front, and thus his sampling strategy
should aim at optimizing the quality of the recommendation
that can be guaranteed within these T samples. In the interruptible setting, the player has no knowledge of T and can
be interrupted at any time. Thus, the player here should optimize the rate at which his recommendation improves over
time.
As of recent, certain contract strategies for pure exploration in MABs have been shown achieving guarantees that
are optimal up to logarithmic factors (Audibert, Bubeck, and
Munos 2010; Karnin, Koren, and Somekh 2013). A characteristic property of these strategies is that they incrementally zoom in on smaller and smaller subsets of actions. Unfortunately, contract strategies are not generally applicable
in the context of MCTS because the players corresponding
to the internal nodes of the search tree cannot be meaningfully preallocated with sampling budgets. In contrast,
among the interruptible strategies (that all fit the context of
MCTS), works on MCTS typically adopt the UCB1 strategy,
which incorporates a soft zooming-in mechanism, but guarantees only polynomial-rate performance improvement over
time (Bubeck, Munos, and Stoltz 2011). At the same time,
a simple uniform sampling guarantees an exponential-rate
performance improvement over time (Bubeck, Munos, and
Stoltz 2011), yet it appears to be less popular in practice because it completely ignores the information collected about
the actions over time.
In this work we introduce and study Discriminative Bucketing (DB), a family of interruptible strategies for pure exploration in MABs that allows for a flexible zooming-in
on subsets of actions while guaranteeing exponential-rate
performance improvement over time. We show that DB
straightforwardly generalizes both uniform and ε-greedy
sampling, but also, and more importantly, that certain instances of DB can be seen as interruptible variants of the
state-of-the-art, action rejecting contract strategies. Our ex-

Interruptible pure exploration in multi-armed bandits
(MABs) is a key component of Monte-Carlo tree search
algorithms for sequential decision problems. We introduce Discriminative Bucketing (DB), a novel family
of strategies for pure exploration in MABs, which allows for adapting recent advances in non-interruptible
strategies to the interruptible setting, while guaranteeing exponential-rate performance improvement over
time. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that
the corresponding instances of DB favorably compete
both with the currently popular strategies UCB1 and
ε-Greedy, as well as with the conservative uniform sampling.

Introduction
The decision setting known as Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB)
captures the structure of some of the most fundamental problems in the field of decision making (Robbins 1952). In particular, in the stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) setting,
a player is given K actions A := {a1 , ..., aK }. Each action
ai ∈ A is associated with a reward, which is a random variable bounded in the interval [0, 1] with expectation µi . The
highest expected reward among the actions is denoted by µ∗ ,
and the (for simplicity assumed to be single) action having
this expectation is denoted by a∗ . The player can make some
T samples of the actions, but he does not know the expectations of the action rewards.
One of the canonical decision problems in the context of
MABs is the problem of identifying an as good as possible action from A. In this problem, the player is not judged
by the quality of the rewards collected by his samples, but
only by the quality of the action which he recommends at
the end of the process. With the recent rise of Monte-Carlo
tree search (MCTS) algorithms for online planning of sequential decisions, this MAB problem receives a substantial attention in AI literature (Browne et al. 2012). This is
because the nodes of a state-space Monte-Carlo search tree
∗
This work is partially supported by and carried out at the
Technion-Microsoft Electronic Commerce Research Center, as
well as partially supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research, USAF, under grant number FA8655-12-1-2096.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3592

