Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning User-Specific Latent Influence and
Susceptibility from Information Cascades
Yongqing Wang∗ , Huawei Shen† , Shenghua Liu† and Xueqi Cheng†
CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
∗
wangyongqing@software.ict.ac.cn, † {shenhuawei,liushenghua,cxq}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

users. Kempe et al. (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003)
implemented the independent cascade model for information propagation, assuming a uniform propagation probability or a degree-modulated propagation probability. Goyal et
al. (Goyal, Bonchi, and Lakshmanan 2010) provided two
static models in terms of Bernoulli distribution and Jaccard index, and learned temporal factors to maximize likelihood of cascades. Saito et al. (Saito, Nakano, and Kimura
2008) learned the propagation probability for independent
cascade model in terms of expectation maximization of cascades. Artzi et al. (Artzi, Pantel, and Gamon 2012) estimated
the propagation probability by exploiting demographic and
content characteristics. These methods all adopt a pair-wise
manner, modeling the propagation probability between pairs
of users using n2 independent parameters for n users. Consequently, these models suffer from severe overfitting problem, limiting their prediction accuracy. For example, for a
pair of users without observed interactions, these methods
take the propagation probability between them as zero, indicating that it is never happened to propagate information
between the two users in the future. To the best of our knowledge, we lack a model that could concisely model the interpersonal influence and accurately predict the cascade dynamics in large-scale social networks.

Predicting cascade dynamics has important implications for
understanding information propagation and launching viral
marketing. Previous works mainly adopt a pair-wise manner,
modeling the propagation probability between pairs of users
using n2 independent parameters for n users. Consequently,
these models suffer from severe overfitting problem, especially for pairs of users without direct interactions, limiting
their prediction accuracy. Here we propose to model the cascade dynamics by learning two low-dimensional user-specific
vectors from observed cascades, capturing their influence and
susceptibility respectively. This model requires much less parameters and thus could combat overfitting problem. Moreover, this model could naturally model context-dependent
factors like cumulative effect in information propagation. Extensive experiments on synthetic dataset and a large-scale microblogging dataset demonstrate that this model outperforms
the existing pair-wise models at predicting cascade dynamics,
cascade size, and “who will be retweeted”.

Introduction
Social media is revolutionizing the dissemination of information via its great ease in information delivery, accessing
and filtering. In social media, users could post original messages or forward messages that they see from other users.
Information propagation proceeds along social relationships
between users, explicit or implicit, forming cascade dynamics. Modeling and predicting the cascade dynamics has important implications to understanding information propagation and launching viral marketing in social media. The key
for this problem is inferring the interpersonal influence between users or estimating the probability that information
propagates between them, fundamental to influence maximization (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Chen, Wang,
and Yang 2009; Cheng et al. 2013), social recommendation (Huang et al. 2012; Ma, King, and Lyu 2009), and viral marketing (Richardson and Domingos 2002; Leskovec,
Adamic, and Huberman 2007).
Existing studies mainly aim to determine the propagation probability of information between all pairs of users,
based on structure of social network, the record of information cascade, and demographic/content characteristics of

In this paper, we propose to model the cascade dynamics
by learning two low-dimensional latent vectors for each user
from observed cascades, capturing her influence and susceptibility respectively. In this latent influence and susceptibility
(LIS) model, the propagation probability that one user forwards a piece of information is determined by the product of
her activated neighbors’ influence vectors and her own susceptibility vector. The benefits of this model are three-fold:
(1) It directly models user-specific influence and susceptibility, instead of the interpersonal influence between all pairs
of users. Thus it requires much less parameters, and pairs of
users are no longer independent, effectively combating the
overfitting problem for pairs of users without direct interactions; (2) It could naturally capture context-dependent factors like cumulative effect in information propagation. For
a target user, context means her previous exposures to the
same message. In this model, one user’s previous exposures
to a message improve the probability that she propagates the
message, flexibly combining the benefits of both cascade
model and threshold model; (3) It is applicable to scenar-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

477

