Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Proximal Operators for Multi-Agent Path Planning
José Bento†
Boston College
jose.bento@bc.edu

Charles Mathy

Nate Derbinsky

Wentworth Institute of Technology Disney Research Boston
cmathy@disneyresearch.com
derbinskyn@wit.edu

Abstract

Disney Research Boston
yedidia@disneyresearch.com

tree algorithm (RRT; LaValle and Kuffner 2001), is guaranteed to asymptotically find feasible solutions with highprobabilty while the RRT* algorithm (Karaman and Frazzoli 2010) asymptotically finds the optimal solution. However, their convergence rate degrades as the dimension of
the joint configuration space increases, as when considering
multiple robots, and they cannot easily find solutions where
robots move in tight spaces. In addition, even approximately
solving some simple problems requires many samples, e.g.,
approximating a shortest path solution for a single robot required to move between two points with no obstacles (Karaman and Frazzoli 2010, see Fig. 1). These methods explore
a continuous space using discrete structures and are different from methods that only consider agents that move on a
graph with no concern about their volume or dynamics, e.g.
(Standley and Korf ; Sharon et al. 2013).
An optimization-based approach has been used by several authors, including Mellinger, Kushleyev, and Kumar
(2012), who formulate global planning as a mixed-integer
quadratic problem and, for up to four robots, solve it using
branch and bound techniques. Sequential convex programming was used in (Augugliaro, Schoellig, and D’Andrea
2012) to efficiently obtain good local optima for global planning up to twelve robots. State-of-the-art optimization-based
algorithms for local planning typically have real-time performance and are based on the velocity-obstacle (VO) idea
of (Fiorini and Shiller 1998), which greedily plans paths
only a few seconds into the future and then re-plans. These
methods scale to hundreds of robots. Unlike sampling algorithms, optimization-based methods easily find solutions
where robots move tightly together and solve simple problems very fast. However, they do not perform as well in
problems involving robots in complex mazes.
Our work builds on the work of Bento et al. (2013), which
formulates multi-agent path planning as a large non-convex
optimization problem and uses proximal algorithms to solve
it. More specifically, the authors use the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) and the variant introduced in Derbinsky et al. (2013) called the Three Weight
Algorithm (TWA). These are iterative algorithms that do not
access the objective function directly but indirectly through
multiple (simple) algorithmic blocks called proximal operators, one per function-term in the objective. At each iteration
these operators can be applied independently and so both the

We address the problem of planning collision-free paths
for multiple agents using optimization methods known
as proximal algorithms. Recently this approach was explored in Bento et al. (2013), which demonstrated its
ease of parallelization and decentralization, the speed
with which the algorithms generate good quality solutions, and its ability to incorporate different proximal
operators, each ensuring that paths satisfy a desired
property. Unfortunately, the operators derived only apply to paths in 2D and require that any intermediate
waypoints we might want agents to follow be preassigned to specific agents, limiting their range of applicability. In this paper we resolve these limitations. We introduce new operators to deal with agents moving in arbitrary dimensions that are faster to compute than their
2D predecessors and we introduce landmarks, spacetime positions that are automatically assigned to the set
of agents under different optimality criteria. Finally, we
report the performance of the new operators in several
numerical experiments.

1

Jonathan S. Yedidia

Introduction

In this paper we provide a novel set of algorithmic building blocks (proximal operators) to plan paths for a system
of multiple independent robots that need to move optimally
across a set of locations and avoid collisions with obstacles
and each other. This problem is crucial in applications involving automated storage, exploration and surveillance.
Even if each robot has few degrees of freedom, the joint
system is complex and this problem is hard to solve (Reif
1979; Hopcroft, Schwartz, and Sharir 1984). We can divide
existing algorithms for this problem into global planners,
if they find collision-free beginning-to-end paths connecting
two desired configurations, or local planners, if they find
short collision-free paths that move the system only a bit
closer to the final configuration.
We briefly review two of the most rigorous approaches.
Random sampling methods, first introduced in (Kavraki and
Latombe 1994; Kavraki et al. 1996), are applicable to global
planning and explore the space of possible robot configurations with discrete structures. The rapidly-exploring random
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†A special thanks to Lucas Foguth for valuable discussions.

3657

