Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On the Decreasing Power of Kernel and Distance Based
Nonparametric Hypothesis Tests in High Dimensions
Aaditya Ramdas,1,2,∗ Sashank J. Reddi,1,∗ Barnabás Póczos,1 Aarti Singh,1 Larry Wasserman2
Machine Learning Department1 and Department of Statistics2
Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA - 15213, USA

joint distribution PXY supported on X × Y ⊆ Rp+q , we
would to tell which of the following hypotheses is true:
H0 : PXY = PX × PY vs. H1 : PXY 6= PX × PY
where PX , PY are the marginals of PXY w.r.t. X, Y .
In both cases, H0 is called the null hypothesis and H1
is called the alternate hypothesis. Both problems are considered in the nonparametric setting, in the sense that no
parametric assumptions are made about any of the aforementioned distributions.
A recent class of popular approaches for this problem
(and a related two-sample testing problem) involve the use
of test statistics based on quantities defined in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSs) (Gretton et al. 2012a;
Eric, Bach, and Harchaoui 2008; Gretton et al. 2005; Fukumizu et al. 2008) that are computed using kernels evaluated
on pairs of points. A related set of approaches were developed in parallel based on pairwise distances between points,
as exemplified for independence testing by distance correlation, introduced in (Székely, Rizzo, and Bakirov 2007) and
further discussed or extended in (Székely and Rizzo 2009;
Lyons 2013; Székely and Rizzo 2013; Sejdinovic et al.
2013). We summarize these in the next subsection.
This paper is about existing folklore that these methods
“work well” in high-dimensions. We will identify and address the different sources of misconception which lead to
this faulty belief. One of the main misconceptions is that
while it is true for the normal means problem, estimating
the mean of Gaussian is harder than deciding whether the
mean is non-zero or not, this is not true in general. Indeed,
the test statistics that we will deal with have the opposite
behavior - they have low estimation error that is independent of dimension, but the decision problem of whether they
are nonzero or not gets harder in higher dimensions, causing the tests to have low power. Indeed, we will demonstrate
that against a class of “fair” alternatives, the power of both
sets of approaches degrades with dimension for both types
of problems (two-sample or independence testing).
The takeaway message of this paper is - kernel and distance based hypothesis tests do suffer from decaying power
in high dimensions (even though the current literature is often misinterpreted to claim the opposite). We provide some
mathematical reasoning accompanied by solid intuitions as
to why this should be the case. However, settling the issue
completely and formally is important future work.

Abstract
This paper is about two related decision theoretic problems, nonparametric two-sample testing and independence testing. There is a belief that two recently proposed solutions, based on kernels and distances between
pairs of points, behave well in high-dimensional settings. We identify different sources of misconception
that give rise to the above belief. Specifically, we differentiate the hardness of estimation of test statistics from
the hardness of testing whether these statistics are zero
or not, and explicitly discuss a notion of ”fair” alternative hypotheses for these problems as dimension increases. We then demonstrate that the power of these
tests actually drops polynomially with increasing dimension against fair alternatives. We end with some theoretical insights and shed light on the median heuristic
for kernel bandwidth selection. Our work advances the
current understanding of the power of modern nonparametric hypothesis tests in high dimensions.

1

Introduction

Nonparametric two-sample testing and independence testing are two related problems of paramount importance in
statistics. In the former, we have two sets of samples and
we would like to determine if these were drawn from the
same or different distributions. In the latter, we have one set
of samples from a multivariate distribution, and we would
like to determine if the joint distribution is the product of
marginals or not. The two problems are related because an
algorithm for testing the former can be used to test the latter.
More formally, the problem of two-sample or homogeneity testing can be described as follows. Given m samples
x1 , ..., xm drawn from a distribution P supported on X ⊆
Rd and n samples y1 , ..., yn drawn from a distribution Q
supported on Y ⊆ Rd , we would like to tell which of the
following hypotheses is true:
H0 : P = Q vs. H1 : P 6= Q
Similarly, the problem of independence testing can be described as follows. Given n samples (xi , yi ) for i ∈
{1, ..., n} where xi ∈ Rp , yi ∈ Rq , that are drawn from a
∗

Both authors had equal contribution.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3571

