Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Leveraging Common Structure to Improve Prediction across Related Datasets
Matt Barnes

Nick Gisolfi

Madalina Fiterau

Artur Dubrawski

mbarnes1@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

ngisolfi@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

mfiterau@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

awd@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract

it is more representative of the other available datasets. The
‘clipped model’ we obtain has improved accuracy compared
to the standard model trained on all the data.
Assume the training data is given in the form of N
datasets, each coming from a different source: Xi ∈ Rni ×m ,
Yi ∈ {0, 1}ni , where i ∈ {1 . . . N }. We will refer to the rth
sample of dataset i as (xi,r , yi,r ). Each sample is drawn from
a distribution pi as follows:
 0
p (x, y) with prob. qi0 (y)
pi (x, y) =
(1)
p1i (x, y) with prob. 1 − qi0 (y)

In many applications, training data is provided in the
form of related datasets obtained from several sources,
which typically affects the sample distribution. The
learned classification models, which are expected to
perform well on similar data coming from new sources,
often suffer due to bias introduced by what we call ‘spurious’ samples – those due to source characteristics and
not representative of any other part of the data. As standard outlier detection and robust classification usually
fall short of determining groups of spurious samples,
we propose a procedure which identifies the common
structure across datasets by minimizing a multi-dataset
divergence metric, increasing accuracy for new datasets.

The distribution p0 is common to all datasets, whereas the
distributions p1i for i ∈ {1 . . . N } are responsible for the
spurious samples. If the sample distribution was identical
across datasets, then qi0 (y) = 1, that is, there would be no
spurious samples. By removing the spurious samples from
the distributions p1i (x, y), we have the opportunity to improve classification accuracy on samples drawn from p0 . We
use the notation (X̄i , Ȳi ) to identify only the samples of
dataset i which belong to the common distribution p0 . Consider two models from hypothesis class H, h̄ and h, where
h̄ is learned from training data sampled only from distribution p0 and h is learned from training data sampled from
all distributions present. Within the previously-established
framework, we have that, for a test set (Xt , Yt ) ∼ p0 :

Problem statement
Often, the data available for learning is collected from different sources, making it likely that the differences between
these groups break typical assumptions such as the samples
being independent and identically distributed. In general,
when data is collected from different sources, the data inherits idiosyncrasies of its source - for instance, in an intensive
care environment, what should be considered alarming vital
measurements may not be the same for all patients. We will
refer to samples which are specific to the collection source
as ‘spurious’, as they are not representative of data for which
the model will be used.
The focus of this paper is the identification and removal
of spurious samples from related training sets collected from
multiple sources, with the objective of improving model performance on data from sources yet unobserved, under the
assumption that the majority of samples come from a distribution common across all sources. This problem is an arises
in a multitude of scenarios. One example involves building a
predictive clinical model meant to be applied to all patients
rather than training new models for every new patient.
In practice, we observe that a superior training set can
be constructed using the most representative samples across
datasets, by simply withholding groups of dataset-specific
samples that are substantially different from the common
distribution. We introduce a ‘clipping’ procedure which removes samples from a dataset such that a model learned on

mean(I[h̄(Xt ) 6= Yt ]) ≤ mean(I[h(Xt ) 6= Yt ])

(2)

The key notion of considering the source of each outlier
sets our works apart from standard outlier removal techniques such as Robust Mahalanobis Distance-based detection, Local Outlier Factor (Breunig et al. 2000) and Local
Reconstructive Weights (Onderwater 2010). Some research
does focus on leveraging different training sets, for instance
Zou et al. (2013) proposed using multiple data sets to improve performance of HMMs in contrastive learning. Lee
et al. (2013) recovered underlying structure, assuming the
presence of several samples generated from the same underlying distributions with different mixing weights. However,
our method is designed to work under more general settings.

Spurious sample removal procedure
Our approach builds on the intuitive use of density estimation in outlier detection, while using the information provided by simultaneously analyzing multiple data sets. The

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4144

