Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Structural Learning with Amortized Inference
Kai-Wei Chang, Shyam Upadhyay, Gourab Kundu, and Dan Roth
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{kchang10,upadhya3,kundu2,danr}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Training a structured prediction model involves performing
several loss-augmented inference steps. Over the lifetime of
the training, many of these inference problems, although
different, share the same solution. We propose AI-DCD,
an Amortized Inference framework for Dual Coordinate
Descent method, an approximate learning algorithm, that accelerates the training process by exploiting this redundancy
of solutions, without compromising the performance of the
model. We show the efficacy of our method by training a
structured SVM using dual coordinate descent for an entityrelation extraction task. Our method learns the same model
as an exact training algorithm would, but call the inference
engine only in 10% – 24% of the inference problems encountered during training. We observe similar gains on a
multi-label classification task and with a Structured Perceptron model for the entity-relation task.

Figure 1: The number of inference engine calls by a raw
solver, an oracle solver and our method when training a
structured SVM model on an entity-relation recognition corpus. The raw solver calls an inference engine each time
an inference is needed, while the oracle solver only calls
the engine when the solution is different from all solutions
observed previously. Our method significantly reduces the
number of inference calls required to train a model.

Introduction
The desired output in many machine learning tasks is a structured object such as a tree, an alignment of nodes or a sequence. Learning prediction models for such problems is
considerably difficult, because of the inter-dependence of
the output variables comprising the structure. In the past
decade, several structured learning models have been proposed (Collins 2002; Taskar, Guestrin, and Koller 2004;
Tsochantaridis et al. 2005). Training these models usually
involves performing an inference step repeatedly, where the
algorithm finds the best structure according to the current
model for a training example.
Existing learning algorithms (Tsochantaridis et al. 2005;
Joachims, Finley, and Yu 2009; Shevade et al. 2011; Chang
and Yih 2013; Lacoste-Julien et al. 2013) often treat the inference procedure as a black-box and solve the inference
problems encountered during training independently. However, a learning algorithm makes multiple passes over the
training examples, and updates its parameters for each example several times. Consequently, the inference problems it
encounters may often have identical or similar solutions. To
verify this intuition, we trained a structured SVM model on
a joint entity-relation recognition task (Roth and Yih 2007)
and plotted the numbers of inference engine calls (black

solid line) made in Figure 1. As shown in the figure, a large
fraction of these calls returns identical solutions, as indicated
by the blue dotted line, even when the objective functions
of the inference problems are different. This suggests the
possibility of amortizing these inference steps (see details in
caption of Figure 1).
In this paper, we propose to amortize the inferences during learning, accelerating the training process of a structured model. That is, we measure the overall cost of inference over the life time of the algorithm, and show that this
“amortized” cost can be significantly reduced. Our framework only depends on the fact that the inference is formulated as an Integer Linear Program (ILP), a very general
condition, as discussed below, that does not restrict its applicability. Given a tolerance parameter , we derive a condition which, when satisfied, guarantees that two different
inference problems posed as ILPs will yield similar solutions, such that the optimal solution of one problem is an
(1 + M )-approximation of the other (here M is a problem specific constant). We show that this approximation enjoys sound theoretical guarantees. We further consider adjusting  during training, and provide guarantees that a dual
coordinate descent solver (DCD) with amortized inference

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2525

