Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Efficient Task Sub-Delegation for Crowdsourcing
Han Yu1 , Chunyan Miao1 , Zhiqi Shen1 , Cyril Leung1,2 , Yiqiang Chen3 , Qiang Yang4
1

School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
2

Abstract
Figure 1: A trust network of resource constrained agents.

Reputation-based approaches allow a crowdsourcing
system to identify reliable workers to whom tasks can
be delegated. In crowdsourcing systems that can be
modeled as multi-agent trust networks consist of resource constrained trustee agents (i.e., workers), workers may need to further sub-delegate tasks to others if they determine that they cannot complete all
pending tasks before the stipulated deadlines. Existing reputation-based decision-making models cannot
help workers decide when and to whom to sub-delegate
tasks. In this paper, we proposed a reputation aware task
sub-delegation (RTS) approach to bridge this gap. By
jointly considering a worker’s reputation, workload, the
price of its effort and its trust relationships with others,
RTS can be implemented as an intelligent agent to help
workers make sub-delegation decisions in a distributed
manner. The resulting task allocation maximizes social welfare through efficient utilization of the collective capacity of a crowd, and provides provable performance guarantees. Experimental comparisons with
state-of-the-art approaches based on the Epinions trust
network demonstrate significant advantages of RTS under high workload conditions.

similar reputation (Grubshtein et al. 2010; Yu et al. 2013a;
2013b; 2014).
These existing approaches all assume that agents’ reputation information is commonly known to and agreed by all
agents in an MAS. However, in MASs where agents have
different views about the trustworthiness of other agents,
and form trust networks where only the reputation information of a limited number of agents is known to an agent
(Massa and Avesani 2005), this assumption is no longer
valid. An example of a trust network formed by resource
constrained agents is shown in Figure 1. The nodes in the
network represent agents (which can initiate new tasks and
work on task requests from other agents) while the arrows
represent trust relationships. Each agent can only spend
limited effort in any given period of time to work on the
tasks in its pending task queue. In this type of MAS environment, being able to sub-delegate tasks becomes crucial
to the efficient utilization of the collective productivity of
the MAS (Liu, Wang, and Orgun 2011; Burnett and Oren
2012). Each agent needs to make its own decisions on 1)
task acceptance: how much new workload should be accepted and 2) task sub-delegation: how much pending workload should be sub-delegated based on the assessment of
its current situation. Existing works only addressed the first
challenge (Grubshtein et al. 2010; Yu et al. 2013a; 2013b;
2014). The second challenge remains open.
In practice, task sub-delegation is a useful technique
for distributing workload in trust networks. For example,
sub-delegation often occurs in hierarchical crowdsourcing
(Pickard et al. 2011). In this paper, we propose a distributed
reputation-aware task sub-delegation (RTS) approach to address both challenges simultaneously. By jointly considering
the reputation and workload of an individual agent and its
trust relationships with other agents, RTS helps the agent
with task sub-delegation decisions so as to minimize the
agent’s cost associated with task sub-delegation while maximizing its time averaged reward in the long term.
To the best of our knowledge, RTS is the first approach to
help an individual trustee agent make situation-aware task
sub-delegation decisions for crowdsourcing systems which
can be modeled as multi-agent trust networks. The result-

Introduction
Existing crowdsourcing systems can be modeled as multiagent systems (MASs) where tasks need to be delegated
to workers (i.e., agents). Currently, much research effort
has been devoted into computing the agents’ reputation
and acting based on different levels of trust among agents
(Jøsang, Ismail, and Boyd 2007; Yu et al. 2010; 2013c).
Commonly used techniques for evaluating agents’ reputation include fuzzy neural approaches (Miao et al. 2002;
Song et al. 2009; Man et al. 2011) and inference-based approaches (Miao et al. 2001; Li et al. 2009). These approaches
have been shown to reduce the potential harm caused by
untrustworthy agents in various fields (Pan et al. 2009;
Yu et al. 2011). In practice, crowdsourcing workers are resource constrained in terms of having limited productive capacity (Yu et al. 2012). To address this issue, a number of
reputation-based task allocation approaches have been proposed to balance the workload among trustee agents with
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1305

