Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploring Information Asymmetry in Two-Stage Security Games
Haifeng Xu1 , Zinovi Rabinovich2 , Shaddin Dughmi1 , Milind Tambe1
1

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90007, USA
{haifengx,shaddin,tambe}@usc.edu
2

Independent Researcher, Jerusalem, Israel
zr@zinovi.net

Abstract

be computed efficiently? As our main contribution, we answer both questions in the affirmative in a natural two-stage
game model. Our main technique is to exploit the information asymmetry between the defender and attacker — the defender has more information. Specifically, we note that the
attacker only observes the deployed mixed strategy by longterm surveillance, but the defender further knows its realization in each deployment. We show that the defender can
strictly benefit by revealing such information to the attacker
strategically.
Optimal information structures have been studied in many
contexts, including auctions (Milgrom and Weber 1982;
Milgrom 2008; Levin and Milgrom 2010), persuasion (Kamenica and Gentzkow 2009), voting (Alonso and Câmara
2014), and general games (Bergemann and Morris 2013). In
security domains, researchers have realized the importance
of the information asymmetry between the defender and attacker, however they have focused mainly on whether and
how to hide private information by secrecy and deception
(Brown et al. 2005; Powell 2007; Zhuang and Bier 2010). A
common argument is that more defense is not always beneficial, since it may lead the attacker to suspect the importance
of a target. This departs from the Stackelberg security game
framework. (Yin et al. 2013) consider optimal allocation of
deceptive resources (e.g., hidden cameras) in the Stackelberg game model, and introduce asymmetric information regarding deployments of resources between the defender and
attacker. However, they do not consider strategically revealing such information. Rather, they model the failure of deceptive resources by a probability and feed it to a resource
allocation formulation.
In this paper, we initiate the study of strategic information revelation in security games. One particular model relevant to our work is the Bayesian Persuasion (BP) model
introduced in (Kamenica and Gentzkow 2009). The basic
BP model describes a two-person game between a sender
and a receiver with random payoff matrices. The sender can
observe the realization of the payoff matrices, while the receiver only knows the prior distribution. The BP model studies how the sender (defender in our case) can design a signaling scheme to strategically reveal this information and
convince a rational receiver (attacker in our case) to take
a desired action. Back to security games, we observe that
there is usually a timing gap between the attacker’s choice

Stackelberg security games have been widely deployed to
protect real-world assets. The main solution concept there
is the Strong Stackelberg Equilibrium (SSE), which optimizes the defender’s random allocation of limited security
resources. However, solely deploying the SSE mixed strategy has limitations. In the extreme case, there are security
games in which the defender is able to defend all the assets
“almost perfectly” at the SSE, but she still sustains significant
loss. In this paper, we propose an approach for improving the
defender’s utility in such scenarios. Perhaps surprisingly, our
approach is to strategically reveal to the attacker information
about the sampled pure strategy.
Specifically, we propose a two-stage security game model,
where in the first stage the defender allocates resources and
the attacker selects a target to attack, and in the second stage
the defender strategically reveals local information about that
target, potentially deterring the attacker’s attack plan. We then
study how the defender can play optimally in both stages.
We show, theoretically and experimentally, that the two-stage
security game model allows the defender to achieve strictly
better utility than SSE.

Introduction
Security games continue to gain popularity within the research community, and have led to numerous practical applications (Tambe 2011). The basic model is a Security Stackelberg Game (SSG) played between a defender (leader) and
an attacker (follower). In the past decade, most research on
security games has focused on computing or approximating the Strong Stackelberg Equilibrium (SSE), which optimizes the defender’s random allocation of limited resources.
A few examples include (Basilico, Gatti, and Amigoni 2009;
Jain 2012; An et al. 2012; Vorobeychik and Letchford 2014;
Blum, Haghtalab, and Procaccia 2014). However, solely deploying the SSE mixed strategy is insufficient for a good
defense in many games. As we will show later, in the extreme case there are security games in which the defender is
able to defend all the assets “almost perfectly” at the SSE,
but she still sustains significant loss. This raises a natural
question: can the defender do better than simply deploying
the SSE mixed strategy, and if so can his optimal strategy
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1057

