Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Tensor-Variate Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Tu Dinh Nguyen†, Truyen Tran†‡, Dinh Phung†, Svetha Venkatesh†
†Center for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics
School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
‡Institute for Multi-Sensor Processing and Content Analysis
Curtin University, Australia
{ngtu,truyen.tran,dinh.phung,svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) are an important
class of latent variable models for representing vector data.
An under-explored area is multimode data, where each data
point is a matrix or a tensor. Standard RBMs applying to such
data would require vectorizing matrices and tensors, thus resulting in unnecessarily high dimensionality and at the same
time, destroying the inherent higher-order interaction structures. This paper introduces Tensor-variate Restricted Boltzmann Machines (TvRBMs) which generalize RBMs to capture the multiplicative interaction between data modes and
the latent variables. TvRBMs are highly compact in that the
number of free parameters grows only linear with the number
of modes. We demonstrate the capacity of TvRBMs on three
real-world applications: handwritten digit classification, face
recognition and EEG-based alcoholic diagnosis. The learnt
features of the model are more discriminative than the rivals,
resulting in better classification performance.

1

Figure 1: An EEG trial represented as a tensor of
hchannel, time, frequencyi and its the matricization and vectorization.
could be excessively large even for short observation periods and low-sampling rates - as example, a 64 × 64 × 64
hchannel, time, frequencyi tensor has 262, 144 pixels). Each
patient has multiple episodes, and each episode is a tensor.
What is required is a modeling of distribution over N-mode
tensor space, for N ≥ 2. Our intuition to do this is to model
the associative weights between the structured data and the
hidden units as a (N + 1)-mode tensor. The tensor decomposition is learnt automatically. No previous work has explored
the use of RBM for tensor data.
We propose Tensor-variate Restricted Boltzmann Machine (TvRBM) that generalizes the RBM to capture interactions among data modes. We employ multiway factoring of
mapping parameters that link data modes and hidden units.
Modes interact in a multiplicative fashion gated by hidden
units. Using a tensor data and the hidden layer to construct a
(N + 1)-mode tensor, we start from a similar decomposition
to (Memisevic and Hinton 2010; Taylor and Hinton 2009;
Ranzato, Krizhevsky, and Hinton 2010), but tie the parameters across each mode of variation. Efficient parameter estimation is derived for this model. This model has the following advantages: first, the number of mapping parameters
grows linearly with the number of modes rather than exponentially. Second, the intra-layer conditional independence
is retained and thus not affect the efficiency of model parameter learning. We demonstrate the capacity of our proposed
model through comprehensive experiments on three diverse
real-world datasets: handwritten digits, facial images, and
EEG signals. The experimental results show that the classification performance of the TvRBM is more competitive
than the standard RBM and existing tensor decomposition
methods. Our main contributions are: (i) a new way of com-

Introduction

Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) are important generative models that are capable of modeling diverse data
types and affording fast inference and efficient MCMCbased learning procedures (Smolensky 1986; Hinton 2002;
Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009c; Tieleman and Hinton
2009; Ranzato, Krizhevsky, and Hinton 2010; Memisevic
and Hinton 2010). RBMs, crucially, can serve as building
blocks for deep architectures (Hinton and Salakhutdinov
2006; Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009a).
RBMs, however, have been largely designed for vector data. Consider EEG recordings wherein each trial collects signals from multiple channels. Each channel data can
be represented as a 2D htime, frequencyi spectrogram. The
hchannel, time, frequencyi data can be represented as a 3mode tensor. Applying RBMs on this data has two problems: first, this data needs to be flattened into a linear vector (see Fig. 1) - thereby, the vectorization breaks the explicit multimode structures, losing vital information about
interactions across modes. Second, this flattened data representation leads to a increase in number of parameters to
be estimated, requiring solutions that are not optimal. For
a typically EEG trial, the number of spectrogram pixels
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2887

