Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Approximating Optimal Social Choice under Metric Preferences
Elliot Anshelevich and Onkar Bhardwaj and John Postl
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th Street, Troy NY 12180
eanshel@cs.rpi.edu, bhardo@rpi.edu, postlj@rpi.edu

Abstract

Work). Another common approach in fields like welfare
economics and algorithmic mechanism design, and which
we follow in this paper, is to use a utilitarian view (Boutilier
et al. 2012). Instead of assuming that agents only have ordinal preferences over the alternatives, this approach assumes
that every agent has (possibly latent or implicit) utility or
cost values over the alternatives. These values are cardinal,
and represent how happy the agent is with each alternative.
The quality of an alternative can then be defined simply as
the sum (or some other objective function) of the utility received by each agent for that alternative. Thus the best, or
optimal, alternative is simply the one that maximizes the total social welfare (or minimizes total cost), as measured by
the total utility received by the agents.
Utilitarian approach has recently received renewed attention in the study of social choice (Procaccia and Rosenschein
2006; Caragiannis and Procaccia 2011; Boutilier et al. 2012;
Branzei et al. 2013). Indeed, as argued in Boutilier et
al. (2012), although not all social choice problems are
amenable to the utilitarian approach (especially the ones
where it is unnatural to assume that agent utilities or costs
can be compared) there are many real-life settings which
fit the utilitarian view. For example, in recommender systems and many similar domains from mechanism design and
e-commerce, the computational agents typically use realvalued rather than ordinal utilities (see Related Work and
Boutilier et al. (2012)).
If the social choice mechanism knew exactly what utilities
the agents receive from each alternative, then it could simply pick the alternative maximizing social welfare directly.
An important point here, however, is that while we assume
that some underlying utility structure exists, it is unreasonable to assume that we (or even the agents themselves) know
exactly what it is. As discussed in Boutilier et al. (2012), it
is often difficult for agents to determine their exact cardinal
utilities, and most social choice mechanisms thus take only
the ordinal preference orderings of the agents as input, even
when latent utilities exist. Thus, a social choice function will
not simply output the alternative that maximizes global utility, but instead may choose another alternative, since it only
has access to ordinal preferences. As a result, one can think
of a social choice function as an approximation algorithm
which attempts to choose the best possible alternative (maximize social welfare or minimize social cost), but only has

We examine the quality of social choice mechanisms using a
utilitarian view, in which all of the agents have costs for each
of the possible alternatives. While these underlying costs determine what the optimal alternative is, they may be unknown
to the social choice mechanism; instead the mechanism must
decide on a good alternative based only on the ordinal preferences of the agents which are induced by the underlying costs.
Due to its limited information, such a social choice mechanism cannot simply select the alternative that minimizes the
total social cost (or minimizes some other objective function).
Thus, we seek to bound the distortion: the worst-case ratio
between the social cost of the alternative selected and the optimal alternative. Distortion measures how good a mechanism is at approximating the alternative with minimum social
cost, while using only ordinal preference information. The
underlying costs can be arbitrary, implicit, and unknown; our
only assumption is that the agent costs form a metric space,
which is a natural assumption in many settings. We quantify the distortion of many well-known social choice mechanisms. We show that for both total social cost and median
agent cost, many positional scoring rules have large distortion, while on the other hand Copeland and similar mechanisms perform optimally or near-optimally, always obtaining
a distortion of at most 5. We also give lower bounds on the
distortion that could be obtained by any deterministic social
choice mechanism, and extend our results on median agent
cost to more general objective functions.

1

Introduction

Social choice theory deals with aggregating agent preferences over a set of alternatives into a collective decision via
a social choice mechanism. The social choice mechanism
takes as input the preferences of agents, which are usually
total orderings over the set of alternatives, and typically outputs a single alternative as the winner. It is natural to now
ask about the quality of different social choice mechanisms;
to do this one needs to define what it means for a chosen
alternative to be “good” or to accurately represent the consensus of the agent preferences. A popular way of achieving
this is to define criteria or axioms for social choice mechanisms, which guarantee that the alternatives selected by
these mechanisms satisfy desirable properties (see Related
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

777

