Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Incremental Update of Datalog Materialisation:
The Backward/Forward Algorithm
Boris Motik, Yavor Nenov, Robert Piro and Ian Horrocks
Department of Computer Science, Oxford University
Oxford, United Kingdom
firstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

much harder. Fact insertion can be efficiently handled using the standard seminaı̈ve algorithm (Abiteboul, Hull, and
Vianu 1995): datalog (without negation-as-failure) is monotonic, so one can just ‘continue’ materialisation from E + ;
hence, in this paper we usually assume that E + = ∅. In contrast, fact deletion is much more involved since one must
identify and retract all facts in I not derivable from E \ E − .
Gupta and Mumick (1995) presents an extensive overview
of the existing approaches to incremental update, which can
be classified into two groups.
The approaches in the first group keep track of auxiliary information during materialisation to efficiently delete
facts. In particular, truth maintenance systems (Doyle 1979;
de Kleer 1986) track dependencies between facts; many can
handle nonmonotonic datalog extensions, but their space and
time overheads are often prohibitive on large datasets. Alternatively, one can count the derivations of facts during
materialisation, and then delete facts when their derivation
counter drops to zero (Gupta, Katiyar, and Mumick 1992);
however, Nicolas and Yazdanian (1983) show in Section 6.2
that this technique may not correctly handle recursive rules.
Urbani et al. (2013) applied this technique (with its inherent
limitation regarding recursion) to the Semantic Web.
The approaches in the second group do not gather any
additional information. The Delete/Rederive (DRed) algorithm (Gupta, Mumick, and Subrahmanian 1993; Staudt and
Jarke 1996) generalises approaches by Harrison and Dietrich
(1992), Küchenhoff (1991), and Urpı́ and Olivé (1992) and
is the state of the art in this group. The DRed algorithm first
overestimates and deletes all facts in I that might need to be
deleted due to removing E − , and then it rederives the facts
still derivable from E \ E − . The DRed algorithm has been
adapted to RDF data (Barbieri et al. 2010; Urbani et al. 2013;
Ognyanov and Velkov 2014) and incremental ontology classification (Ren and Pan 2011; Kazakov and Klinov 2013).

Datalog-based systems often materialise all consequences
of a datalog program and the data, allowing users’ queries
to be evaluated directly in the materialisation. This process,
however, can be computationally intensive, so most systems
update the materialisation incrementally when input data
changes. We argue that existing solutions, such as the wellknown Delete/Rederive (DRed) algorithm, can be inefficient
in cases when facts have many alternate derivations. As a possible remedy, we propose a novel Backward/Forward (B/F)
algorithm that tries to reduce the amount of work by a combination of backward and forward chaining. In our evaluation,
the B/F algorithm was several orders of magnitude more efficient than the DRed algorithm on some inputs, and it was
never significantly less efficient.

1

Introduction

Datalog (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995) is a widely
used rule language capable of expressing recursive dependencies. A prominent application of datalog is answering
queries over ontology-enriched data: datalog can capture
OWL 2 RL (Motik et al. 2012) ontologies extended with
SWRL (Horrocks et al. 2004) rules, so modern Semantic
Web systems often use datalog ‘behind the scenes’.
When the performance of query answering is critical, datalog systems often materialise (i.e., compute and explicitly
store) all consequences of datalog rules and the data in a
preprocessing step so that users’ queries can then be evaluated directly over the stored facts; systems such as Owlgres
(Stocker and Smith 2008), WebPIE (Urbani et al. 2012), Oracle’s RDF store (Wu et al. 2008), OWLIM SE (Bishop et al.
2011), and RDFox (Motik et al. 2014) all use this technique.
Materialisation is computationally intensive, so recomputing
all consequences whenever input data changes is usually unacceptable, and most systems employ an incremental maintenance algorithm: given a datalog program Π, a set E of explicitly given facts, materialisation I = Π∞ (E) of E w.r.t.
Π, and sets of facts E − and E + to be deleted and added, respectively, such an algorithm uses the precomputed set I to
compute Π∞ ((E \ E − ) ∪ E + ) more efficiently. Note that
we consider only updates of explicitly given facts: changing
derived facts does not have a unique semantics and is usually

The overdeletion phase of the DRed algorithm can be a
source of inefficiency. As a simple example, let Π contain
rules (1)–(3), and let E = {A(a), B(a)}.
C1 (x) ← A(x)
(1)
C1 (x) ← B(x)
(2)
Ci (x) ← Ci−1 (x) for i ∈ {2, . . . , n}
(3)
Let I = Π∞ (E) be the materialisation of E w.r.t. Π, and
let E − = {A(a)}. Each fact Ci (a) ∈ I is derived once

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1560

