Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Preference Planning for Markov Decision Processes
Meilun Li and Zhikun She

School of Mathematics and Systems Science
Beihang University, China

Andrea Turrini and Lijun Zhang

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China

Abstract

1

The classical planning problem can be enriched with quantitative and qualitative user-defined preferences on how the
system behaves on achieving the goal. In this paper, we
propose the probabilistic preference planning problem for
Markov decision processes, where the preferences are based
on an enriched probabilistic LTL-style logic. We develop
P4Solver, an SMT-based planner computing the preferred
plan by reducing the problem to quadratic programming
problem, which can be solved using SMT solvers such as Z3.
We illustrate the framework by applying our approach on two
selected case studies.

1
21

2

3

l
n

1

3

0.05
2

6

0.1
0.7

0.1
0.05

Figure 1: The robot MDP

Introduction
Classical planning problem focuses on finding a sequence
of actions leading from initial state to the user-defined set
of goal states. For many problems in reality, however, users
may have preferences over some special actions than other
ones, or willingness to touch some special group of states
before reaching the goal. This leads to the promotion of
preference-based planning to integrate planning with user
preferences (Baier and McIlraith 2009).
Planning with preferences has been studied for decades
and becomes even more attractive in recent years. Many
researchers have proposed preference languages to effectively and succinctly express user’s preferences (CosteMarquis et al. 2004; Delgrande, Schaub, and Tompits 2004;
Boutilier et al. 2004), algorithms for designing preferencebased planners corresponding to the different preference languages, or algorithms to increase planning efficiency (Bacchus and Kabanza 2000; Edelkamp 2006; Sohrabi, Baier,
and McIlraith 2009; Tu, Son, and Pontelli 2007; Baier, Bacchus, and McIlraith 2009).
The above mentioned work is essentially based on nondeterministic transition systems. For most systems in reality,
however, the effect of system actions is often unpredictable.
Even though we cannot precisely know what will follow after an action, some event is more (or less) frequent than other
events. This motivates incorporating probability to planning
problems to capture this kind of uncertainty. Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Bellman 1957) provide a mathematical framework for modelling decision making in situations

where outcomes are partly stochastic and partly under the
control of a decision maker. It is a unifying model for many
classes of planning problems studied in AI (Boutilier, Dean,
and Hanks 1999).
In this paper, we propose the probabilistic preferencebased planning problem on MDPs, which we refer to as
P4. Derived from probabilistic linear-time temporal logic
(probabilistic LTL) (Hansson and Jonsson 1994; Baier and
Katoen 2008), we propose a preference language allowing
us to specify the goal and preferences in terms of probabilistic formulas. Using the language, we can for instance
express the property “the goal states are eventually reached
with probability at least 0.95” (in probabilistic LTL style,
P≥0.95 (F(goal ))) and, among all ways, we prefer those
such that “with probability at least 0.99 the system never enters a forbidden state” (P≥0.99 (G(¬forbidden))). Further,
we propose P4Solver, a planner for P4, in which we reduce
P4 to a quadratic programming problem. We use the nonlinear real arithmetic of Z3 (de Moura and Bjørner 2008) to
solve the problem, after having encoded it in the SMT-LIB
format (Barrett, Stump, and Tinelli 2010). The experimental
results confirm in general the effectiveness of the approach.

A Motivating Example
As an example of problems our technique addresses, consider a robot moving in one direction on a ring rail surrounded by N loading and unloading areas (or positions),
depicted in Figure 1. The task of the robot is to sort B boxes
between these areas, with B < N . The robot alternates be-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3313

