Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Graphical Representation for Games in Partition Function Form
Oskar Skibski1 , Tomasz P. Michalak2,3 , Yuko Sakurai1,4 , Michael Wooldridge2 , Makoto Yokoo1
1

2

Department of Informatics, Kyushu University, Japan
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
3
Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland
4
JST PRESTO, Japan

Abstract

2008), the McQuillin value (McQuillin 2009; Skibski 2011),
the Bolger value (Bolger 1989), Macho-Stadler et al. value
(Macho-Stadler et al. 2007), the Hu-Yang value (Hu and
Yang 2010), and the Myerson value (Myerson 1977). Unlike other extensions, these preserve the spirit of the original
Shapley axiomatization, and will be the focus of this paper.
The standard formalism for coalitional games with externalities, called Partition Function Games (Thrall and Lucas
1963), is computationally challenging. It requires the consideration of all partitions of agents, i.e., coalition structures, into coalitions and the specification of the values of
all coalitions for every coalition structure in which they are
1
embedded, the complexity of which is ω(n 2 n ) and O(nn )
(where n is the number of agents) (Sandholm et al. 1999).
Given that the Partition Function Games model has prohibitive time and space requirements, alternative representations of games with externalities were developed in the computer science literature (Michalak et al. 2009; 2010a; 2010b;
Ichimura et al. 2011). These representations aim to balance
expressiveness, compactness, and computational tractability. Unfortunately, the formalisms designed to facilitate efficient computation of the Shapley value extensions to games
with externalities (see Related Work for more details), facilitate polynomial algorithms only for the externality-free
value and the McQuillin value. In other words, no representation that allows for efficient computation of the remaining
extensions has been discovered so far.
In this paper, we address this issue. We propose a
novel representation for coalitional games with externalities,
called Partition Decision Trees. This representation is based
on rooted directed trees, in which non-leaf nodes are labelled
with agents’ names, leaf nodes are labelled with payoff vectors, and edges indicate membership of agents in coalitions.
We show that this representation is fully expressive, i.e., it
can represent any game with externalities. It can also be
significantly more concise than the extensive representation.
Most importantly, our representation is the first concise formalism in the literature that facilitates polynomial computation of almost all the aforementioned extensions of the Shapley value. In particular, the externality-free, the McQuillin,
the Macho-Stadler et al. and the Myerson values can all be
computed in time O(n × |T |), whereas the Hu-Yang value
can be computed in time O(n3 × |T |), where |T | is the size
of the representation.

We propose a novel representation for coalitional games
with externalities, called Partition Decision Trees. This
representation is based on rooted directed trees, where
non-leaf nodes are labelled with agents’ names, leaf
nodes are labelled with payoff vectors, and edges indicate membership of agents in coalitions. We show that
this representation is fully expressive, and for certain
classes of games significantly more concise than an extensive representation. Most importantly, Partition Decision Trees are the first formalism in the literature under which most of the direct extensions of the Shapley
value to games with externalities can be computed in
polynomial time.

Introduction
Many models of coalitional games considered in the computer science literature assume that when a coalition of
agents forms, it does not impact other coalitions in the system (Chalkiadakis et al. 2011). This assumption does not
hold in many important settings. For example, oligopolistic markets are a common economic setting in which coalitions have a non-negligible influence on one other. This influence, called externalities, is also commonplace in taskbased multi-agent systems with overlapping agent preferences. If a coalition achieves a desired goal, then this goal
may become unachievable by other coalitions (Rahwan et al.
2012; Yokoo et al. 2005; Bachrach and Rosenschein 2008).
Coalitional games with externalities raise considerable
game-theoretic and computational challenges. Despite many
efforts, there is currently no consensus in the literature on
how to extend key game-theoretic solution concepts to this
more complex setting. The concept that has attracted the
most attention is the Shapley value—the unique payoff division scheme for coalitional games without externalities
that satisfies certain intuitive axioms (Shapley 1953). Unfortunately, extending the Shapley value to games with externalities is non-trivial, since the original axioms are too
weak to guarantee uniqueness. Among a number of proposals,1 six extensions are especially appealing: the externalityfree value (Do and Norde 2007; de Clippel and Serrano
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See Skibski et al. (2013) for a recent overview.

1036

