Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Resolving Over-Constrained Probabilistic Temporal Problems
through Chance Constraint Relaxation
Peng Yu and Cheng Fang and Brian Williams
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
32 Vassar Street, Cambridge, MA 02139
{yupeng,cfang,williams}@mit.edu
Abstract

pSTP) formulation, first presented in (Fang, Yu, and
Williams 2014). A solution to a cc-pSTP is a strategy for
executing its activities such that the chance of violating any
temporal constraints is lower than the chance constraint. If,
however, no feasible solution exists for the problem, we
would like to pinpoint sources of risk, and to explore resolutions to the problem that trade off risk with performance.
Acceptable risk levels in a mission may be negotiable: in
some urgent situations, the scientists are willing to make
compromises by taking more risk in order to complete a top
priority task. This motivates us to develop a decision aid that
can automatically identify the causes of failure and recommend good resolutions in such over-constrained situations. It
works like an experienced mission planner and helps the scientists tackle problems of larger scale and complexity, find
better solutions, and speed up the mission planning process.
In this paper, we present the key algorithm of the decision aid, Conflict-Directed Chance-constraint Relaxation
(CDCR), which computes preferred trade-offs between temporal and chance constraint relaxations for over-constrained
cc-pSTPs. In the literature, several methods have been introduced for scheduling cc-pSTPs (Fang, Yu, and Williams
2014; Tsamardinos 2002), or resolving over-constrained
temporal problems (STPs (Beaumont et al. 2001; 2004),
DTPs (Moffitt and Pollack 2005), CCTPs (Yu and Williams
2013) and STNUs (Yu, Fang, and Williams 2014)). Our approach leverages prior work on both probabilistic scheduling and temporal relaxation. The key idea is to diagnose the
source of risks by grounding pSTPs to STNUs through risk
allocation over probabilistic uncertain durations, then apply
controllability checking and conflict extraction algorithms to
identify conflicting constraints from the grounded problem.
Resolutions to these conflicts can then guide us to find (1)
adjustments for the risk allocation; (2) relaxations for temporal constraints; or (3) relaxations for the chance constraint.
This resolution process is iterative: CDCR continues to discover and resolve new conflicts, until (a) a feasible grounded
STNU is found, which indicates that the current resolution
repairs all conflicts in the problem; or (b) no resolution can
be found for all known conflicts, which indicates that the
cc-pSTP cannot be resolved.
For example, a scientist is planning to deploy an underwater robot to survey a volcano eruption on the sea floor.
The eruption will occur at around 10:00, following a normal

When scheduling tasks for field-deployable systems,
our solutions must be robust to the uncertainty inherent
in the real world. Although human intuition is trusted to
balance reward and risk, humans perform poorly in risk
assessment at the scale and complexity of real world
problems. In this paper, we present a decision aid system that helps human operators diagnose the source of
risk and manage uncertainty in temporal problems. The
core of the system is a conflict-directed relaxation algorithm, called Conflict-Directed Chance-constraint Relaxation (CDCR), which specializes in resolving overconstrained temporal problems with probabilistic durations and a chance constraint bounding the risk of
failure. Given a temporal problem with uncertain duration, CDCR proposes execution strategies that operate at acceptable risk levels and pinpoints the source
of risk. If no such strategy can be found that meets the
chance constraint, it can help humans to repair the overconstrained problem by trading off between desirability
of solution and acceptable risk levels. The decision aid
has been incorporated in a mission advisory system for
assisting oceanographers to schedule activities in deepsea expeditions, and demonstrated its effectiveness in
scenarios with realistic uncertainty.

Introduction
From transit times to weather changes, uncertainty exists
in every real world scheduling problems. For example, in
deep-sea expeditions, the unbounded uncertainty in the environment, the underwater vehicles and the crew performance
make it impossible to find a plan that offers a 100% guarantee of success. Therefore, correct handling of uncertainties
and management of risk are essential requirements for the
ocean scientist who manages expedition plans. The scientist
should use models of uncertainty to generate schedules that
will operate successfully within specified risk bounds. When
the problem is over-constrained, that is, no solution exists
that satisfies all temporal constraints within the acceptable
risk level, the scientist should make trade-offs between risk
and performance to restore the feasibility of the mission.
Such a problem can be modeled by the chanceconstrained probabilistic simple temporal problem (ccCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3425

