Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

What Is the Longest River in the USA?
Semantic Parsing for Aggregation Questions ∗
Kun Xu1 , Sheng Zhang1 , Yansong Feng1 , Songfang Huang2 , Dongyan Zhao1
1

Institute of Computer Science & Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
IBM China Research Lab, Beijing, China
{xukun, evancheung, fengyansong, zhaodongyan}@pku.edu.cn, huangsf@cn.ibm.com
Abstract

the longest(river) \ in.USA:relation
the longest(river):category

Answering natural language questions against structured
knowledge bases (KB) has been attracting increasing
attention in both IR and NLP communities. The task
involves two main challenges: recognizing the questions’ meanings, which are then grounded to a given
KB. Targeting simple factoid questions, many existing
open domain semantic parsers jointly solve these two
subtasks, but are usually expensive in complexity and
resources. In this paper, we propose a simple pipeline
framework to efficiently answer more complicated questions, especially those implying aggregation operations,
e.g., argmax, argmin. We first develop a transitionbased parsing model to recognize the KB-independent
meaning representation of the user’s intention inherent in
the question. Secondly, we apply a probabilistic model to
map the meaning representation, including those aggregation functions, to a structured query. The experimental
results showe that our method can better understand aggregation questions, outperforming the state-of-the-art
methods on the Free917 dataset while still maintaining
promising performance on a more challenging dataset,
WebQuestions, without extra training.

in.USA:relation

the longest:function
what

is

the

longest

river

in

USA

Figure 1: The meaning representation of a natural language
question
in aggregation questions. However, it is really hard to enumerate all sort of rules or patterns for those challenging but
common questions, e.g., argmax and argmin. A more
tough case is that, as shown in Figure 1, the model may have
to resolve the phrase the longest to function argmax and
KB predicate RiverLength at the same time.
As indicated in Kwiatkowski et al., we find that recognizing the meaning representation of user’s intention in a question is naturally KB-independent, while the mapping phase
is indeed KB-related. We thus propose a pipeline paradigm
involving two steps: recognizing the KB-independent meaning representations inherent in the questions, and then converting the meaning representations into KB-related structured queries. Firstly, we use the basic simple Lambda
Dependency-Based Compositional Semantics (λ-DCS) as
the KB-independent meaning representation language, except that each predicate is a natural language phrase, as shown
in Figure 1. We build an efficient transition-based semantic
parser to perform the structure prediction, which recognizes
and introduces functional phrases into the meaning representation. Secondly, we propose a probabilistic model to
determine the probabilities of mapping between natural language phrases and KB items as well as aggregation functions.
Specifically, we propose a distant supervision method to
solve the mappings between natural language phrases and
KB predicates with their preferred aggregation functions by
mining the context of Wikipedia pages and WordNet. The
experimental results showed our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art parsers by 3% on Free917, and can still maintain a competitive result of 42.6% on WebQuestions, without
any extra training.

Introduction
The open domain semantic parsing (Berant et al. 2013;
Cai and Yates 2013; Berant and Liang 2014) involves two
main challenges: understanding the meaning of the question
and instantiating the meaning against a KB. The existing
semantic parsers try to model the two aspects in a nice uniform model, but usually have difficulties when: (i) simultaneously learning the meaning representations and the mappings
against KB items will lead to a huge search space, thus it is
often inefficient to train such a parser in open domain, e.g.,
taking several days to train over 3000 sentences, and difficult to adapt to other KBs, let alone retrieving multiple KBs
within one query (some questions in the QALD task are answered via querying over both DBpedia and Yago (Cimiano
et al. 2013)). (ii) current joint models may be appropriate
for simple factoid questions, and mainly rely on hand-crafted
rules to answer more complex but real questions, e.g., count
∗

The Transition-based Semantic Parser

This work was supported by the National High Technology R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2012AA011101,
2014AA015102), National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 61272344, 61202233, 61370055) and the joint project
with IBM Research.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Our transition-based parser will take a natural language sentence as input and output a tree-like meaning representation
of the sentence, where phrases of different types and the
structures among them are recognized. Following the convention in the transition-based dependency parsing, our parser

4222

