Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning to Describe Video with Weak Supervision
by Exploiting Negative Sentential Information
Haonan Yu and Jeffrey Mark Siskind
Purdue University
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
465 Northwestern Ave.
West Lafayette, IN 47907-2035 USA
haonan@haonanyu.com, qobi@purdue.edu
Abstract
Most previous work on video description trains individual
parts of speech independently. It is more appealing from a linguistic point of view, for word models for all parts of speech
to be learned simultaneously from whole sentences, a hypothesis suggested by some linguists for child language acquisition. In this paper, we learn to describe video by discriminatively training positive sentential labels against negative ones
in a weakly supervised fashion: the meaning representations
(i.e., HMMs) of individual words in these labels are learned
from whole sentences without any correspondence annotation
of what those words denote in the video. Textual descriptions
are then generated for new video using trained word models.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Word classification example from Guadarrama
et al. (2013): verbs are modeled by hierarchies with each
leaf represented by Dense Trajectories. (b) Word grounding
example: verbs are modeled by HMMs. Each state outputs
distributions that have semantic meaning, such as:
move(agent,horizontally),
move(patient,horizontally),
close(agent,patient),
and bigger(agent,patient).

Introduction
Generating textual description of video is attracting increasing attention both in the natural-language-processing and
computer-vision communities. Prior work mainly falls into
three categories. First, some methods craft rule-based systems in which language generation is treated as an engineering task (Kojima, Tamura, and Fukunaga 2002; Lee et
al. 2008; Khan, Zhang, and Gotoh 2011a; 2011b; Hanckmann, Schutte, and Burghouts 2012; Siddharth, Barbu, and
Siskind 2014). With ad hoc rules, they manually establish
the correspondence between linguistic terms and visual elements, and then analyze the events or relations among the
visual elements to generate sentences. Second, other work
trains statistical models for lexical entries, where the trained
word models mainly serve to eliminate the tedious effort of
rule design when the problem size becomes large (Das et al.
2013; Guadarrama et al. 2013; Krishnamoorthy et al. 2013;
Sun and Nevatia 2014). In these approaches, the word models are pretrained individually and separately; models of different parts of speech may have different mathematical representations or training strategies. Nouns, verbs, and prepositions are then mosaiced together to yield sentences. Hybrid
approaches, such as Barbu et al. (2012), learn some of the
words while engineering ad hoc rules for the others. Third,
another line of work does not train word models explicitly
(Rohrbach et al. 2013). Instead, they construct a structured
model (e.g., Conditional Random Field, CRF) which formu-

lates the interaction among the words in a sentence by treating words as latent labels. Sentence generation is done by
inferring the latent labels given the observed variables, i.e.,
visual features. It is unclear, however, when a sentence is
generated, whether the words capture the semantic meanings of the visual concepts or are produced simply due to
the high correlations encoded in the structured model.
All the above methods that learn to describe video treat
words merely as categories for the purpose of visual-feature
classification. In essence, they learn to match visual features extracted from test video against those extracted from
training video, to get the most likely key words from the
sentences paired with the best matched training video. Then
a language model is employed to generate sentences from
those key words. None of them learn the actual language
semantics. To truly understand video content and describe
that content with natural language, a computer-vision system should aim at learning to ground words in video concepts, i.e., map words to meanings. The distinction between
using words for visual-feature classification and grounding

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3855

