Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Budgeted Prediction With Expert Advice
Kareem Amin∗

Satyen Kale∗

University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
akareem@seas.upenn.edu

Yahoo! Labs, New York, NY
satyen@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract

Deepak Turaga

IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY
{gtesauro, turaga}@us.ibm.com

volve evaluating each and every model, draining machine
resources.
There are two trivial, but suboptimal solutions. One solution is to simply cull the total number of models. This decreases the performance that one might hope to ever achieve:
by removing experts, the performance of the best expert has
worsened. The other trivial solution is to use a large number
of models N , but to only request a prediction from a single model on every round. Since only a single prediction is
observed, only the loss of a single expert/model can be computed, and we are in the so-called bandit information setting.
√
While computationally efficient, this comes at a cost of N
cumulative regret. Moreoever, such an approach may be too
conservative with respect to resource consumption: if the
system is able to accomodate more consumption, a bandit
approach leaves unused budget on the table.
Motivated by these settings, we study a bounded cost variant of the problem of learning from expert advice problem (Cesa-Bianchi et al. 1997). In this variant, there is a
specified cost for obtaining the advice of a given expert.
There is a budget on the total cost of experts that can be
queried in any prediction round. An online learning algorithm queries a subset of experts (respecting the budget constraint) for advice on each round, uses this advice to make
its own prediction, and suffers the associated loss. The algorithm also observes losses of the queried experts (and gets
no information on the loss of the unqueried experts). The
goal of the algorithm is to minimize regret, where regret is
defined, as is standard in online learning, to be the difference
between the total loss incurred by the algorithm and the loss
of the best expert in hindsight.
In the first part of this paper, we prove our main theoretical results, stated below. We then demonstrate our algorithm’s performance on real data in a setting emulating the
aforementioned motivation for this work.

We consider a budgeted variant of the problem of learning from expert advice with N experts. Each queried expert incurs a cost and there is a given budget B on the
total cost of experts that can be queried in any prediction
round. We provide an online learning algorithm for this
setting
q with regret after T prediction rounds bounded by
C
O
log(N )T , where C is the total cost of all experts.
B
We complement
this upper
 bound with a nearly matching
q
C
T on the regret of any algorithm for
lower bound Ω
B
this problem. We also provide experimental validation of our
algorithm.

1

Gerald Tesauro

Introduction

In many real world domains, systems must make real-time
predictions, but have natural contraints on the resources
that can be devoted to making such a prediction. For example, an autonomous vehicle may need to predict the
future location of objects in its environment in order to
avoid collision. Since slight changes in lighting or reflection can drastically change the optimal choice of model for
object-tracking (see (Grabner, Grabner, and Bischof 2006;
Wu, Lim, and Yang 2013)), this model selection must happen while the system is online. At the same time the realtime characteristics of such systems imply a natural constraint (i.e., a “budget”) on machines resources (processing
cycles, memory, bandwidth, etc.) that can be devoted to
making a prediction. In other real world applications such
as health care and financial trading, there may also be explicit financial costs that limit acquisition of data relevant to
making predictions.
One might hope to make predictions in the above scenarios using an online learning algorithm, such as learning from
expert advice. However, in real systems “experts” are frequently just learned models themselves. Budget constraints
can therefore preclude the possibility of using a traditional
experts algorithm with a large number of experts. In the full
information setting, running an experts algorithm might in-

Theorem 1 In the setting where we have access to N experts with total cost C and budget B ≤ C, there is an online
learning algorithm
whose expected regret is bounded by

q
C
O
B log(N )T after T prediction rounds. Furthermore,
any
algorithm
q
 for the problem must incur expected regret of

∗

Ω

Work done while the authors were at IBM Research.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

C
BT

on some sequence of expert advices and losses.

The regret bound proved here interpolates between two ex-

2490

