Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks for Text Classification
Siwei Lai, Liheng Xu, Kang Liu, Jun Zhao
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{swlai, lhxu, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

people who are not particularly knowledgeable about London to take it as a financial institution. After we obtain the
greater context “stroll along the South Bank” (5-gram), we
can easily distinguish the meaning. Although high-order ngrams and more complex features (such as tree kernels (Post
and Bergsma 2013)) are designed to capture more contextual
information and word orders, they still have the data sparsity
problem, which heavily affects the classification accuracy.
Recently, the rapid development of pre-trained word embedding and deep neural networks has brought new inspiration to various NLP tasks. Word embedding is a distributed
representation of words and greatly alleviates the data sparsity problem (Bengio et al. 2003). Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig
(2013) shows that pre-trained word embeddings can capture meaningful syntactic and semantic regularities. With the
help of word embedding, some composition-based methods
are proposed to capture the semantic representation of texts.
Socher et al. (2011a; 2011b; 2013) proposed the Recursive Neural Network (RecursiveNN) that has been proven
to be efficient in terms of constructing sentence representations. However, the RecursiveNN captures the semantics of
a sentence via a tree structure. Its performance heavily depends on the performance of the textual tree construction.
Moreover, constructing such a textual tree exhibits a time
complexity of at least O(n2 ), where n is the length of the
text. This would be too time-consuming when the model
meets a long sentence or a document. Furthermore, the relationship between two sentences can hardly be represented
by a tree structure. Therefore, RecursiveNN is unsuitable for
modeling long sentences or documents.
Another model, which only exhibits a time complexity
O(n), is the Recurrent Neural Network (RecurrentNN).
This model analyzes a text word by word and stores the semantics of all the previous text in a fixed-sized hidden layer
(Elman 1990). The advantage of RecurrentNN is the ability
to better capture the contextual information. This could be
beneficial to capture semantics of long texts. However, the
RecurrentNN is a biased model, where later words are more
dominant than earlier words. Thus, it could reduce the effectiveness when it is used to capture the semantics of a whole
document, because key components could appear anywhere
in a document rather than at the end.
To tackle the bias problem, the Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN), an unbiased model is introduced to NLP

Text classification is a foundational task in many NLP
applications. Traditional text classifiers often rely on
many human-designed features, such as dictionaries,
knowledge bases and special tree kernels. In contrast
to traditional methods, we introduce a recurrent convolutional neural network for text classification without human-designed features. In our model, we apply
a recurrent structure to capture contextual information
as far as possible when learning word representations,
which may introduce considerably less noise compared
to traditional window-based neural networks. We also
employ a max-pooling layer that automatically judges
which words play key roles in text classification to capture the key components in texts. We conduct experiments on four commonly used datasets. The experimental results show that the proposed method outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on several datasets, particularly on document-level datasets.

Introduction
Text classification is an essential component in many applications, such as web searching, information filtering, and
sentiment analysis (Aggarwal and Zhai 2012). Therefore, it
has attracted considerable attention from many researchers.
A key problem in text classification is feature representation, which is commonly based on the bag-of-words
(BoW) model, where unigrams, bigrams, n-grams or some
exquisitely designed patterns are typically extracted as features. Furthermore, several feature selection methods, such
as frequency, MI (Cover and Thomas 2012), pLSA (Cai and
Hofmann 2003), LDA (Hingmire et al. 2013), are applied
to select more discriminative features. Nevertheless, traditional feature representation methods often ignore the contextual information or word order in texts and remain unsatisfactory for capturing the semantics of the words. For
example, in the sentence “A sunset stroll along the South
Bank affords an array of stunning vantage points.”, when
we analyze the word “Bank” (unigram), we may not know
whether it means a financial institution or the land beside
a river. In addition, the phrase “South Bank” (bigram), particularly considering the two uppercase letters, may mislead
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2267

