Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

CORPP: Commonsense Reasoning and Probabilistic Planning,
as Applied to Dialog with a Mobile Robot
Shiqi Zhang and Peter Stone
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712 USA
{szhang,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

ASP by allowing both logical and probabilistic arguments in
its reasoning (Baral, Gelfond, and Rushton 2009). However,
ASP and its extensions are ill-equipped to plan toward maximizing long-term rewards under uncertainty. Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) generalize
Markov decision processes (MDPs) by assuming the partial
observability of underlying states (Kaelbling, Littman, and
Cassandra 1998). POMDPs can model the nondeterministic
state transitions and unreliable observations using probabilities, and plan toward maximizing long-term rewards under
such uncertainties. However, POMDPs are not designed to
reason about commonsense knowledge. Furthermore, from a
practical perspective due to the computational complexity of
solving POMDPs, it is necessary to limit the modeled state
variables as much as possible.
This paper presents an algorithm called CORPP that
stands for combining COmmonsense Reasoning and Probabilistic Planning. CORPP combines P-log with POMDPs
to, for the first time, integrate reasoning with (logical and
probabilistic) commonsense knowledge and planning under
probabilistic uncertainty. The key idea is to calculate possible worlds and generate informative priors for POMDPbased planning by reasoning with logical and probabilistic commonsense knowledge. In so doing, the logical reasoning component is able to shield state variables from the
POMDP that affect the priors, but that are irrelevant to the
optimal policy given the prior. The proposed approach has
been implemented and evaluated both in simulation and on
a physical robot tasked with identifying shopping requests
through spoken dialog. Results show significant improvements on both efficiency and accuracy compared to existing
approaches using only P-log or POMDPs.

In order to be fully robust and responsive to a dynamically
changing real-world environment, intelligent robots will need
to engage in a variety of simultaneous reasoning modalities.
In particular, in this paper we consider their needs to i) reason with commonsense knowledge, ii) model their nondeterministic action outcomes and partial observability, and iii)
plan toward maximizing long-term rewards. On one hand,
Answer Set Programming (ASP) is good at representing and
reasoning with commonsense and default knowledge, but is
ill-equipped to plan under probabilistic uncertainty. On the
other hand, Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs) are strong at planning under uncertainty toward
maximizing long-term rewards, but are not designed to incorporate commonsense knowledge and inference. This paper introduces the CORPP algorithm which combines Plog, a probabilistic extension of ASP, with POMDPs to integrate commonsense reasoning with planning under uncertainty. Our approach is fully implemented and tested on a
shopping request identification problem both in simulation
and on a real robot. Compared with existing approaches using
P-log or POMDPs individually, we observe significant improvements in both efficiency and accuracy.

1

Introduction

Intelligent robots are becoming increasingly useful across
a wide range of tasks. In real-world environments, intelligent robots need to be capable of representing and reasoning with logical and probabilistic commonsense knowledge.
Additionally, due to the fundamental dynamism of the real
world, intelligent robots have to be able to model and reason about quantitative uncertainties from nondeterministic
action outcomes and unreliable local observations. While
there are existing methods for dealing separately with either
reasoning with commonsense knowledge or planning under
uncertainty, to the best of our knowledge, there is no existing
method that does both.
Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a non-monotonic
logic programming language that is good at representing and
reasoning with commonsense knowledge (Gelfond and Kahl
2014). ASP in its default form cannot reason with probabilities. A non-monotonic probabilistic logic (P-log) extends

2

Background

This section briefly reviews the two substrate techniques
used in the paper (ASP and POMDPs) and POMDP-based
spoken dialog systems. In addition, the syntax of P-log, a
probabilistic extension of ASP, is described.

2.1

Answer Set Programming and P-log

An ASP program can be described as a five-tuple
hΘ, O, F, P, Vi of sets. These sets contain names of the
sorts, objects, functions, predicates, and variables used in
the program, respectively. Variables and object constants are

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1394

