Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Aligning Mixed Manifolds
Thomas Boucher,† , CJ Carey,
Sridhar Mahadevan

M. Darby Dyar
Department of Astronomy
Mount Holyoke College
South Hadley, MA 01075

School of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003
†
boucher@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

more non-overlapping manifolds. This assumption stems
from the use of distance-weighted local neighborhoods for
embedding construction, a technique that fails when the data
are drawn from an intersecting mixture of manifolds. As
data sets begin to use representations that employ thousands
or millions of features (Ma et al. 2009), the assumption of
non-mixing manifolds becomes increasingly tenuous.
This mixture of manifolds problem is demonstrated in
Figure 1: when input manifolds are poorly separated, local neighborhood information is insufficient for recovering
the true structure at manifold junctions. Thus, the use of traditional nearest neighbor graph construction algorithms induce incorrect connections at these intersection points, distorting the manifold representation.
This shortcoming of conventional manifold methods has
given rise to a number of unsupervised clustering algorithms
which attempt to segment input data by identifying the individual manifold components of a mixed manifold structure
(Souvenir and Pless 2005; Wang et al. 2010). One such algorithm is low rank embedding (LRE) (Liu, Hao, and Su
2011), which notably avoids the construction of a nearest
neighbor graph.
In this paper, we present a novel manifold learning algorithm, low rank alignment (LRA), which builds on the ideas
of manifold alignment and LRE to align data sets drawn
from mixtures of manifolds. LRA does not suffer from the
sensitive nearest neighbor hyperparameter present in traditional manifold alignment, nor does it require prior knowledge of the number of manifolds, a common input to many
manifold clustering techniques.

Current manifold alignment methods can effectively
align data sets that are drawn from a non-intersecting
set of manifolds. However, as data sets become increasingly high-dimensional and complex, this assumption may not hold. This paper proposes a novel manifold alignment algorithm, low rank alignment (LRA),
that uses a low rank representation (instead of a nearest
neighbor graph construction) to embed and align data
sets drawn from mixtures of manifolds. LRA does not
require the tuning of a sensitive nearest neighbor hyperparameter or prior knowledge of the number of manifolds, both of which are common drawbacks with existing techniques. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our algorithm in two real-world applications: a transfer
learning task in spectroscopy and a canonical information retrieval task.

Introduction
As machine learning practitioners tackle increasingly large
and complex data sets, better data representations are necessary to improve task performance while reducing computational burden. Manifold learning techniques, which aim to
uncover the underlying geometry of a data set, have proven
to be especially useful in combating the curse of dimensionality (Ma and Fu 2011).
One task that has especially benefited from manifoldbased approaches is data set alignment, a semi-supervised
task in which correspondences are learned between multiple
data sets based on intra-set geometry and a provided partial
set of pairwise correspondences between the data sets. Manifold alignment is a class of techniques that solves the alignment problem when these data sets are assumed to share
a common underlying structure, by embedding each input
set into a shared latent manifold space (Ham, Lee, and Saul
2005).
Manifold alignment was introduced as a semi-supervised,
nonlinear extension of canonical correlation analysis (CCA)
(Hotelling 1936) that aimed to preserve both local geometry
and inter-set correspondences (Wang and Mahadevan 2009).
One drawback of existing manifold alignment approaches is
their assumption that all data sets are drawn from one or

Manifold Alignment
The general manifold alignment framework for two data sets
(Ma and Fu 2011; Wang and Mahadevan 2009) is the following. We are given the data sets X and Y of shapes NX ×DX
and NY × DY , where each row is a sample (or instance)
and each column is a feature, and a correspondence matrix
C (X,Y ) of shape NX × NY , where

1 : Xi is in correspondence with Yj
(X,Y )
Ci,j
=
. (1)
0 : otherwise
Manifold alignment calculates the embedded matrices
F (X) and F (Y ) of shapes NX × d and NY × d for d ≤

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2511

