Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Pattern-Based Variant-Best-Neighbors Respiratory Motion
Prediction Using Orthogonal Polynomials Approximation
Kin Ming Kam and Shouyi Wang

Stephen R Bowen

Department of Radiology and
Department of Industrial, Manufacturing
& Systems Engineering, University of Texas Integrated Brain Imaging Center,
University of Washington,
at Arlington, TX 76019
Seattle, WA 98195

Wanpracha Chaovalitwongse
Department of Industrial and
Systems Engineering and the Integrated
Brain Imaging Center, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195

Table 1: A list of latancies of different systems.

Abstract
Motion-adaptive radiotherapy techniques are promising
to deliver truly ablative radiation doses to tumors with
minimal normal tissue exposure by accounting for realtime tumor movement. However, a major challenge of
successful applications of these techniques is the realtime prediction of breathing-induced tumor motion to
accommodate system delivery latencies. Predicting respiratory motion in real-time is challenging. The current respiratory motion prediction approaches are still
not satisfactory in terms of accuracy and interpretability due to the complexity of breathing patterns and
the high inter-individual variability across patients. In
this paper, we propose a novel respiratory motion prediction framework which integrates four key components: a personalized monitoring window generator, an
orthogonal polynomial approximation-based pattern library builder, a variant best neighbor pattern searcher,
and a statistical prediction decision maker. The four
functional components work together into a real-time
prediction system and is capable of performing personalized tumor position prediction during radiotherapy.
Based on a study of respiratory motion of 27 patients
with lung cancer, the proposed prediction approach generated consistently better prediction performances than
the current respiratory motion prediction approaches,
particularly for long prediction horizons.

Position acquisition
Position calculation
Gimbals/MLS/robot control cycle
Other
total

VERO
25
2
20
47

MLC
309
20
52
38
420

MAD
30
45
100
175

CyberKnife
25
15
75
115

always suffers from some system time delay from real-time
position tracking to therapeutic beam delivery. The system
latency is the required response time of the whole system
involving tasks such as image acquisition, motion estimation, hardware control and other factors (Keall et al. 2006;
Ernst et al. 2013). As shown in Table 1, different real-time
systems have different system latencies. The system latencies of four popular real-time radiotherapy systems range
from 115 ms to 420 ms (Ernst 2011; Ernst et al. 2013).
Such system latencies can lead to unnecessary irradiation
of healthy tissues around the tumors. Accordingly, prediction of respiratory motion becomes a very critical issue in
external beam radiotherapy to account for system specific
latencies. However, predicting respiratory motion in realtime is challenging. The current respiratory motion prediction approaches are still not satisfactory in terms of accuracy
and interpretability due to the complexity of breathing patterns and the high inter-individual variability across patients.
In this study, we focused on the real-time respiratory motion prediction problem and developed a novel pattern-based
variant-best-neighbors respiratory motion prediction system
using orthogonal polynomial approximations and statistical
analysis.

Introduction
In real-time image guided radiotherapy, respiratory motion
can be a dominant factor for tumor movement (Ruan 2008).
Without accounting for respiratory motion, critical misalignment between irradiated field and the target tumor volume
in a treatment fraction may occur during radiotherapy, and
impose significant radiation dose to normal body tissues.
To account for respiratory motion in radiotherapy, real-time
tumor-tracking systems have been developed to monitor tumor position in real-time and deliver therapeutic beam to the
tumor accurately. Basically, a real-time tumor tracking system is designed to to perform three steps: (1) identify tumor
position in real time; (2) reposition the beam; and (3) adapt
the dosimetry to allow for changing lung volume and critical
structure locations during the breathing cycle. However, it

The main contributions of this work are: (1) formulate the
respiratory motion prediction problem as a personalized pattern learning and recognition problem to fully account for
the high inter-individual pattern variability across patients.
(2) successful implementation of orthogonal polynomial approximations to achieve efficient real-time monitoring and
recording respiratory patterns, (3) a variant-best-neighbors
approach was developed to search the most significant predictive patterns using statistical analysis. Compared with the
existing methods, the proposed prediction system achieved
the most accurate and stable prediction performance according to the experiment of 27 patients.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1364

