Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

OMNI-Prop: Seamless Node Classification on Arbitrary Label Correlation
Yuto Yamaguchi† , Christos Faloutsos‡ and Hiroyuki Kitagawa†
†University of Tsukuba; ‡Carnegie Mellon University
yuto ymgc@kde.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp, christos@cs.cmu.edu, kitagawa@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract
If we know most of Smith’s friends are from Boston, what can
we say about the rest of Smith’s friends? In this paper, we focus on the node classification problem on networks, which is
one of the most important topics in AI and Web communities. Our proposed algorithm which is referred to as OMNIProp has the following properties: (a) seamless and accurate;
it works well on any label correlations (i.e., homophily, heterophily, and mixture of them) (b) fast; it is efficient and guaranteed to converge on arbitrary graphs (c) quasi-parameter
free; it has just one well-interpretable parameter with heuristic default value of 1. We also prove the theoretical connections of our algorithm to the semi-supervised learning (SSL)
algorithms and to random-walks. Experiments on four real,
different network datasets demonstrate the benefits of the
proposed algorithm, where OMNI-Prop outperforms the top
competitors.

(a) The main idea.

(b) The main result
POKEC-G network.

on

Figure 1: (a) Hypothesis: If the most of followers are males,
then the rest is also male. (b) Proposed OMNI-Prop wins:
against top competitors on the network with neither homophily nor heterophily.
the collective classification, has been one of the most active and important research fields in AI and Web communities (Neville and Jensen 2000)(Zhu et al. 2003)(Sen et al.
2008).
There are two major research issues on this problem,
which we tackle with in this paper.
Label correlation types. Node classification is often solved
based on the label correlations known as homophily (i.e.,
love of similar) or heterophily (i.e., love of different). On
the homophily networks, nodes with similar characteristics
tend to connect to each other, while the reverse is true on
the heterophily networks. As well as the above two popular
cases, there is also the case of mixture of homophily and heterophily. For example, on social networks, talkative people
tend to prefer talkative friends but some talkative people prefer silent friends. In contrast to homophily and heterophily,
this mixed correlation depends on the preference of each
node and therefore no clear correlation is observed at the
network level. Most of node classification algorithms (Zhu
et al. 2003)(Goldberg, Zhu, and Wright 2007) assume one of
these label correlations and propagate signals on the graph.
However, as pointed out by (Bilgic and Getoor 2010), propagating signals in the wrong way causes misclassifications.
Hence, we need the seamless node classification algorithm
that can be applied to any kind of label correlations without
any assumption about it.
Evidence sufficiency. The majority of nodes have the small
number of degrees on most of real-world networks with
power law degree distributions (Faloutsos, Faloutsos, and

Introduction
If most of Smith’s friends are from Boston, what would you
say about the rest of Smith’s friends? Most people would
say that the rest of friends are also from Boston. In this paper, we address the problem of node classification on networks where nodes are classified into one of the predefined labels. There are various kinds of labels people may
concern: demographic labels of people on social networks
such as gender, locations, and education (Mislove et al.
2010); research areas of researchers on co-authorship networks (Sun et al. 2009); and political leanings of blogs on
blogosphere (Adamic and Glance 2005). Although these labels are important for many practical applications (e.g., marketing products and forecasting the election outcome), a significant part of labels on networks are typically unavailable,
meaning that a lot of practical applications benefit from node
classification.
The node classification problem can be formulated as follows: A number of important tasks have been solved in the
form of node classification problem: user profiling (Jurgens
2013), blog classification (Ikeda, Takamura, and Okumura
2008), recommendations (Ha et al. 2012), and word sense
disambiguation (Pham, Ng, and Lee 2005). For this reason,
the node classification on networks, which is also known as
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3122

