Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Intent Prediction and Trajectory Forecasting
via Predictive Inverse Linear-Quadratic Regulation
Mathew Monfort

Anqi Liu

Brian D. Ziebart

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
mmonfo2@uic.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
aliu33@uic.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
bziebart@uic.edu

Abstract

performed within high-dimensional control spaces where
there are a variety of ways for a human to reasonably accomplish the task. Behavior modelling techniques for intent
recognition and trajectory forecasting must scale to these
high-dimensional control spaces and incorporate uncertainty
over inherently ambiguous human behavior.
We present an inverse optimal control (IOC) approach using Linear-Quadratic Regulation (LQR) for intention recognition and trajectory forecasting of tasks involving hand motion trajectories. We apply the recently developed technique of maximum entropy IOC for LQR (Ziebart, Bagnell, and Dey 2010; Ziebart, Dey, and Bagnell 2012; Levine
and Koltun 2012), allowing us to efficiently scale the inverse optimal control approach to continuous-valued threedimensional positions, velocities, accelerations, etc.. Our
formulation is inherently probabilistic and enables the inference of the user’s intent based on partial behavior observations and forecasts of future behavior.

To facilitate interaction with people, robots must not only recognize current actions, but also infer a person’s intentions and
future behavior. Recent advances in depth camera technology
have significantly improved human motion tracking. However, the inherent high dimensionality of interacting with the
physical world makes efficiently forecasting human intention
and future behavior a challenging task. Predictive methods
that estimate uncertainty are therefore critical for supporting
appropriate robotic responses to the many ambiguities posed
within the human-robot interaction setting.
We address these two challenges, high dimensionality and
uncertainty, by employing predictive inverse optimal control
methods to estimate a probabilistic model of human motion
trajectories. Our inverse optimal control formulation estimates quadratic cost functions that best rationalize observed
trajectories framed as solutions to linear-quadratic regularization problems. The formulation calibrates its uncertainty
from observed motion trajectories, and is efficient in highdimensional state spaces with linear dynamics. We demonstrate its effectiveness on a task of anticipating the future trajectories, target locations and activity intentions of hand motions.

Related Work
There has been a significant amount of recent work on forecasting the future behavior of people to improve intelligent systems. In the robotic navigation domain, this has
been manifested in robots that plan paths that are complementary to a pedestrian’s future movements (Ziebart et al.
2009b) or navigate through crowds based on anticipated
movements (Henry et al. 2010; Trautman and Krause 2010;
Kuderer et al. 2012). In robotic manipulation, techniques
that interpret and aid in realizing a teleoperator’s intentions
to complete a task (Hauser 2013) have had success.
Our work is most closely related, but complementary, to
anticipatory temporal conditional random fields (ATCRF)
(Koppula and Saxena 2013). Under that approach, discriminative learning is employed to model the relationships between object affordances and sub-activities at the “discrete”
level and a simple generative model (based on a Gaussian
distribution) of human pose and object location trajectories
is employed at the “continuous” level.
We extend discriminative learning techniques, in the form
of inverse optimal control, to the continuous level of human
pose trajectories. The two approaches are complementary in
that any inferred object affordances and sub-activities at the
discrete level can be employed to shape the prior distributions at the continuous level, and the posterior inferences at

Introduction
There has been an increasing desire for co-robotic applications that situate robots as partners with humans in cooperative and tightly interactive tasks (Trafton et al. 2013;
Strabala et al. 2013; Kidokoro et al. 2013). Unlike previous generations of human-robot interaction applications,
which might need to respond to recognized human behavior (Pineau et al. 2003), co-robotics requires robots to act in
anticipation of future human behavior to realize the desired
levels of seamless interaction.
Depth cameras, like the Microsoft Kinect, have been used
to detect human activities (Koppula, Gupta, and Saxena
2013; Ni, Wang, and Moulin 2013; Sung et al. 2012) and
provide rich information including human skeleton movement data and 3D environment maps. Improved methods
for reasoning about human pose and intentions are therefore needed. Critical to this task are the roles of highdimensionality and uncertainty. Many co-robotics tasks are
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3672

