Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Optimal Column Subset Selection by A-Star Search
Hiromasa Arai

Crystal Maung

Haim Schweitzer

The University of Texas at Dallas
800 W Campbell Road
Richardson, Texas 75080
hxa112430@utdallas.edu

The University of Texas at Dallas
800 W Campbell Road
Richardson, Texas 75080
Crystal.Maung@gmail.com

The University of Texas at Dallas
800 W Campbell Road
Richardson, Texas 75080
hschweitzer@utdallas.edu

Abstract

areas. These include the computation of stable and rank revealing QR factorizations (e.g. (Golub and Van-Loan 1996;
Gu and Eisenstat 1996; Boutsidis, Mahoney, and Drineas
2009)), unsupervised feature selection (e.g. (Drineas, Lewis,
and Paschou 2010; Maung and Schweitzer 2013), and data
mining and knowledge representation (e.g. (Kumar, Mohri,
and Talwalkar 2012; Drineas, Lewis, and Paschou 2010)).
Recent studies suggest that the CSSP is most likely NPhard (Çivril and Magdon-Ismail 2009), and that the optimal
solution is closely related to the dominant eigenvectors of
Y Y T . Let Sk∗ denote the best selection of k columns for
minimizing the error in (2), and let Ek∗ denote the error of
the best approximation of Y in terms of a rank-k matrix.
Then the following inequalities hold:

Approximating a matrix by a small subset of its columns
is a known problem in numerical linear algebra. Algorithms that address this problem have been used in areas which include, among others, sparse approximation,
unsupervised feature selection, data mining, and knowledge representation. Such algorithms were investigated
since the 1960’s, with recent results that use randomization. The problem is believed to be NP-Hard, and
to the best of our knowledge there are no previously
published algorithms aimed at computing optimal solutions. We show how to model the problem as a graph
search, and propose a heuristic based on eigenvalues of
related matrices. Applying the A∗ search strategy with
this heuristic is guaranteed to find the optimal solution.
Experimental results on common datasets show that the
proposed algorithm can effectively select columns from
moderate size matrices, typically improving by orders
of magnitude the run time of exhaustive search.

1

Ek∗ ≤ E(Sk∗ ) ≤ (k + 1)Ek∗

Calculating Ek∗ is easy, since the best rank-k matrix has the k
dominant eigenvectors of Y Y T as its columns. In particular:

Introduction

Ek∗ =

Let Y be an m × n data matrix. Consider the problem of
linearly estimating Y from k of its columns:
Y ≈ SA

A

m
X
t=k+1

λt (Y Y T ) = Trace(Y Y T ) −

k
X

λt (Y Y T )

t=1

where λt (Y Y T ) is the t largest eigenvalue of Y Y T . This
fact, and the left-hand side inequality in (3) follow from the
Courant Fischer theorem (Golub and Van-Loan 1996). The
right-hand side inequality is a recent result (Deshpande and
Rademacher 2010) and holds only in the Frobenius norm.
Our main result is an A∗ search algorithm that uses a generalized form of the inequalities in (3) to compute heuristic estimates. The search algorithm operates on a directed
graph, where nodes correspond to column subsets. There is
a directed edge from node n1 to node n2 if n2 can be created
by adding a single column to n1 . We generalize the inequalities in (3) to the case where some columns have already been
selected, so that the inequalities can be applied in intermediate nodes. The left-hand side inequality enables computing
a non-decreasing lower bound on the error of the optimal selection, which we use as the heuristic. The right-hand side is
used to prune nodes that cannot lead to an optimal solution.
A direct implementation of the above idea requires a huge
number of eigenvalue calculations, which makes the algorithm impractical. We are able to exploit a special structure of the relevant matrices that enables a fast calculation

(1)

The matrix S = (ys1 , . . . , ysk ) is formed by the selected
columns, and A is the coefficients matrix. Finding S in (1)
is known as the “Column Subset Selection Problem” (CSSP).
In Frobenius norm the approximation error is:
E(S) = min kY − SAk2F

(3)

(2)

Some previous studies of the CSSP with the Frobenius
norm include (Cotter et al. 2005; Frieze, Kannan, and Vempala 2004; Dasgupta et al. 2007; Deshpande et al. 2006;
Deshpande and Rademacher 2010; Boutsidis, Mahoney,
and Drineas 2009; Guruswami and Sinop 2012; Çivril and
Magdon-Ismail 2012). Obtaining approximations in other
norms, such as the spectral norm or the l1 norm is considered to be harder. See, e.g. (Gu and Eisenstat 1996; Tropp
2004). Column subset selection gives a sparse approximation to the data matrix, and has found applications in many
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1079

