Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Large Margin Metric Learning for Multi-label Prediction
Weiwei Liu and Ivor W. Tsang∗
Center for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems
University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
liuweiwei863@gmail.com, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

compressed sensing (CS) is used to decode the labels from
the regression outputs of each testing instance.

Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) and maximum
margin output coding (MMOC) methods have shown
promising results for multi-label prediction, where each
instance is associated with multiple labels. However,
these methods require an expensive decoding procedure to recover the multiple labels of each testing instance. The testing complexity becomes unacceptable
when there are many labels. To avoid decoding completely, we present a novel large margin metric learning
paradigm for multi-label prediction. In particular, the
proposed method learns a distance metric to discover label dependency such that instances with very different
multiple labels will be moved far away. To handle many
labels, we present an accelerated proximal gradient procedure to speed up the learning process. Comprehensive
experiments demonstrate that our proposed method is
significantly faster than CCA and MMOC in terms of
both training and testing complexities. Moreover, our
method achieves superior prediction performance compared with state-of-the-art methods.

Many works have recently been developed in this
encoding-decoding paradigm. These works mainly use different projection methods to transform the original label
space into another effective label space as encoding. For
example, principal label space transformation (PLST) (Tai
and Lin 2012) uses principal component analysis (PCA)
to project the output labels into a lower dimension. Zhang
and Schneider propose the use of canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (2011) and maximum margin output coding
(MMOC) (2012) to encode the original label space. Learning models are then trained in the transformed label space.
To accurately recover the labels from the prediction of the
learning models, expensive decoding schemes are usually
required. Due to the combinatorial nature of the label space,
exact decoding is usually intractable. Even when approximate inference (Zhang and Schneider 2011) is used, the
decoding step is still very time-consuming when there are
many labels.
Motivation Comprehensive experiments on large scale
image databases show that the k nearest neighbor (kNN) algorithm achieves superior performance when handling many
class problems (Deng et al. 2010). Moreover, Kwok and
Tsang (2003) and Weinberger and Saul (2009) show that
the single-label prediction performance of kNN can be improved by learning a distance metric to satisfy the following
constraint: Two nearby instances from different classes will
be pushed further apart with a large margin. However, in a
multi-label setting, nearby instances may differ by only a
few labels, or hundreds. It is non-trivial to define a proper
scaling of the margin for any two nearby instances. To learn
a distance metric for multi-label problems, we require two
conditions: 1) The output labels of an instance can be determined by that instance. 2) The output labels of an instance
can be predicted by the nearest neighbors of that instance.
To be specific, for a testing instance x(a) , an instance x(b)
from the training set is very similar to x(a) based on their
embeddings, and their corresponding labels are y (a) and y (b)
respectively. In the embedding space, y (b) and x(b) are similar, x(b) and x(a) are similar, x(a) and y (a) are also similar,
so y (b) is similar to y (a) . Hence, we can use the labels of the
k nearest neighbors of x(a) to predict y (a) .

Introduction
Multi-label prediction has been applied to various applications ranging from document classification and gene function prediction, to automatic image annotation. Each instance is associated with multiple labels that is represented
by a sparse label vector. For instance, a document can be associated with a range of topics, such as News, Finance and
Sports (Schapire and Singer 2000); a gene belongs to the
functions of protein synthesis, metabolism and transcription
(Barutcuoglu, Schapire, and Troyanskaya 2006); an image
may have both beach and urban tags (Boutell et al. 2004).
A simple approach to multi-label learning is binary relevance (BR) (Tsoumakas, Katakis, and Vlahavas 2010),
which trains a binary classifier for each label independently.
To deal with many labels, Hsu et al. (2009) assume that label
vectors have a little support. In other words, each label vector can be projected into a lower dimensional compressed
label space, which can be deemed as encoding. A regression is then learned for each compressed label. Lastly, the
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2800

