Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi-Source Domain Adaptation: A Causal View
Kun Zhang

Mingming Gong

Bernhard Schölkopf

MPI for Intelligent Systems
72076, Tübingen, Germany
kzhang@tuebingen.mpg.de

QCIS, University of Technology Sydney
Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia
gongmingnju@gmail.com

MPI for Intelligent Systems
72076, Tübingen, Germany
bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract

Scott 2011). DA approaches have many applications in varies
areas including natural language processing, computer vision, and biology. For surveys on DA, see, e.g., (Jiang 2008;
Pan and Yang 2010; Candela et al. 2009).
In this paper, we consider the situation with n source
domains on which both the features X and label Y are
(i) (i)
i
given, i.e., we are given (x(i) , y(i) ) = (xk , yk )m
k=1 , where
i = 1, ..., n, and mi is the sample size of the ith source
domain. Our goal is to find the classifier for the target domain, on which only the features xt = (xtk )m
k=1 are available.
Here we are concerned with a difficult scenario where no
labeled point is available in the target domain, known as unsupervised domain adaptation. Since PXY changes across
domains, we have to find what knowledge in the source
domains should be transferred to the target one. Previous
work in domain adaptation has usually assumed that PX
changes but PY |X remain the same, i.e., the covariate shift
situation; see, e.g., (Shimodaira 2000; Huang et al. 2007;
Sugiyama et al. 2008; Ben-David, Shalev-Shwartz, and Urner
2012). It is also known as sample selection bias (particularly
on the features X) in (Zadrozny 2004).
In practice it is very often that both PX and PY |X change
simultaneously across domains. For instance, both of them
are likely to change over time and location for a satellite image classification system. If the data distribution
changes arbitrarily across domains, clearly knowledge from
the sources may not help in predicting Y on the target domain (Rosenstein et al. 2005). One has to find what type
of information should be transferred from sources to the
target. One possibility is to assume the change in both PX
and PY |X is due to the change in PY , while PX|Y remains
the same, as known as prior probability shift (Storkey 2009;
Plessis and Sugiyama 2012) or target shift (Zhang et al. 2013).
The latter further models the change in PX|Y caused by a
location-scale (LS) transformation of the features for each
class. The constraint of the LS transformation renders PX|Y
t
on the target domain, denoted by PX|Y
, identifiable; however,
it might be too restrictive.
Fortunately, the availability of multiple source domains
t
provides more hints as to find PX|Y
, as well as PYt |X . Several
algorithms have been proposed to combine knowledge from
multiple source domains. For instance, (Mansour, Mohri, and
Rostamizadeh 2008) proposed to form the target hypothesis

This paper is concerned with the problem of domain
adaptation with multiple sources from a causal point of
view. In particular, we use causal models to represent
the relationship between the features X and class label Y , and consider possible situations where different
modules of the causal model change with the domain.
In each situation, we investigate what knowledge is appropriate to transfer and find the optimal target-domain
hypothesis. This gives an intuitive interpretation of the
assumptions underlying certain previous methods and
motivates new ones. We finally focus on the case where
Y is the cause for X with changing PY and PX|Y , that
is, PY and PX|Y change independently across domains.
Under appropriate assumptions, the availability of multiple source domains allows a natural way to reconstruct
the conditional distribution on the target domain; we propose to model PX|Y (the process to generate effect X
from cause Y ) on the target domain as a linear mixture
of those on source domains, and estimate all involved
parameters by matching the target-domain feature distribution. Experimental results on both synthetic and
real-world data verify our theoretical results.

Traditional machine learning relies on the assumption that
both training and test data are from the same distribution. In
practice, however, training and test data are probably sampled
under different conditions, thus violating this assumption, and
the problem of domain adaptation (DA) arises. Consider remote sensing image classification as an example. Suppose
we already have several data sets on which the class labels
are known; they are called source domains here. For a new
data set, or a target domain, it is usually difficult to find the
ground truth reference labels, and we aim to determine the
labels by making use of the information from the source
domains. Note that those domains are usually obtained in
different areas and time periods, and that the corresponding
data distribution various due to the change in illumination
conditions, physical factors related to ground (e.g., different
soil moisture or composition), vegetation, and atmospheric
conditions. Other well-known instances of this situation include sentiment data analysis (Blitzer, Dredze, and Pereira
2007) and flow cytometry data analysis (Blanchard, Lee, and
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3150

