Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Transition Constraints for Parallel Planning
Nina Ghanbari Ghooshchi1 , Majid Namazi1 , M.A.Hakim Newton2 , Abdul Sattar2
1

Computer Engineering Department, Urmia University, West Azarbaijan, Iran
Institute for Integrated and Intelligent Systems (IIIS), Griffith University, Australia
{n.ghanbari, m.namazi}@urmia.ac.ir, {mahakim.newton, a.sattar}@grffith.edu.au

2

Abstract

singleton consistency, lifting and nogood learning has further improved the performance (Barták and Toropila 2009a;
2009b). Recent constraint-based planners (Cesta and Fratini
2008; Verfaillie, Pralet, and Lemaı̂tre 2010; Barták 2011a)
are based on time lines. The planner in (Gregory, Long,
and Fox 2010) uses dominance constraints, and another one
in (Judge and Long 2011) applies goal and variable/value
heuristics and uses meta-CSP variables.
Inspired by the SAT-based planner SASE (Huang, Chen,
and Zhang 2010) that exploits the structural information
of SAS+ formalism, we develop a new constraint model
for planning problems. Our planner named Transition Constraints for Parallel Planning (TCPP) extracts domain transition graphs (DTG) from the SAS+ representation and translates them into constraint models. We follow (Barták and
Toropila 2008) to choose table constraints in our encoding
model. Table constraints are efficient when the number of
valid assignments is small with respect to the total number
of assignments. However, we additionally and more importantly use don’t cares or wild cards in table cells to allow
a compact representation for many constraints that would
otherwise need consideration of all possible combination
of certain column values. To solve the encoded constraint
problem, we use Minion the constraint solver (Gent, Jefferson, and Miguel 2006) that can handle table constraints with
don’t cares through algorithms for short support enabled
general arc consistency propagation. This improves the efficiency of our planner over the state-of-the-art constraintbased planners on a set of standard benchmark domains.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: next two sections discuss constraint-based planning and DTGs; the following section describes our new constraint model and our
new constraint-based planner; the last two sections present
our experimental results and conclusions.

We present a planner named Transition Constraints for Parallel Planning (TCPP). TCPP constructs a new constraint model
from domain transition graphs (DTG) of a given planning
problem. TCPP encodes the constraint model by using table
constraints that allow don’t cares or wild cards as cell values. TCPP uses Minion the constraint solver to solve the constraint model and returns the parallel plan. Empirical results
exhibit the efficiency of our planning system over state-ofthe-art constraint-based planners.

Introduction
Constraint-based planners translate a planning problem into
a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) and then apply CSP
techniques. These planners thus allow to take advantage of
enhanced propagation machineries and better pruning mechanisms in CSP to solve planning problems. However, in
terms of performance, constraint-based planners do not yet
match the state-of-the-art heuristic search planners. One key
reason is that with the increase of plan length, the impact
of propagation and pruning reduces greatly. Another main
reason is that we still need a suitable constraint model that
allows the best exploitation of the advanced CSP techniques.
In this paper, we develop a new constraint model for planning problems to leverage the advancements in CSP.
Considerably little work has been done in solving planning problems by using CSP techniques. The first constraint
models for planning problems were designed manually (van
Beek and Chen 1999). Other models have been proposed in
(Do and Kambhampati 2001), (Lopez and Bacchus 2003),
and (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004). Most of these models translate the so called planning graph structures (Blum
and Furst 1995) into CSPs with a view to generating parallel
plans. Following the propositional nature of PDDL language
(Ghallab et al. 1998), these planners mostly use Boolean
variables and constraints with logical formulas.
Based on Fast Downward’s (Helmert 2006) use of SAS+
formalism that is a member of the Simplified Action Structure family (Bäckström and Nebel 1995), constraints of a
planning problem are encoded by table constraints (Barták
and Toropila 2008). This has showed a great improvement in the efficiency. Inclusion of symmetry breaking,

Constraint-Based Planning
Besides the most successful family of forward chaining
heuristic search planners, an alternative approach developed
for planning is based on translation of the problem into a
different formalism such as satisfiability (SAT) or CSP and
then using respective solution techniques. One key issue in
this approach is that SAT or CSP requires a static problem
model whereas in planning the plan length is not known beforehand. A typical solution (Kautz and Selman 1992) to this

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3268

