Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

COT: Contextual Operating Tensor
for Context-Aware Recommender Systems
Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, Liang Wang
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{qiang.liu, shu.wu, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

with his wife. He may prefer to read novels during weekend
while may tend to read professional books during weekdays.
Due to the fundamental effect of contextual information in
recommender systems, many different kinds of context modeling methods have been developed. Some existing works
(Karatzoglou et al. 2010; Rendle et al. 2011) incorporate the
contextual information in a factorization model via treating
the context as one or several dimensions which have similar properties as dimensions of users and items. However,
treating contexts as same as users and items, these methods
cannot model the semantic operation of contexts. Moreover,
some works on multi-domain relation prediction (Zhang,
Agarwal, and Chen 2011; Jamali and Lakshmanan 2013)
can also be implemented for the context-aware recommendation. These methods incorporate transfer matrix to map latent vectors of entities from one domain to another domain.
To deal with context-aware recommendation, using transfer
matrix, latent vectors can be mapped from one context to
another context. However, since there are multiple contexts
in the real world (e.g., location, time, companion), using a
transfer matrix for each specific context combination, these
methods have problem in confronting with large amount of
contextual information.
To overcome the shortages mentioned above, we propose
a novel context modeling method, which uses contextual operating tensor to capture the operation of contexts. In the research of natural language processing, a noun has semantic
information as a latent vector, and an adjective has semantic
operation on nouns as an operating matrix (Baroni and Zamparelli 2010). For instance, in the phrase “excellent product”, the noun “product” has a latent vector, while the adjective “excellent” has the semantic operating matrix which
operate the vector of the noun “product”. Thus, the phrase
“excellent product” has a new latent vector which represents
a positive attitude to the “product”. In this work, we assume
that context combinations have similar properties of adjectives and can operate the latent characteristics of entities.
For instance, when a man is with children, the context of
this companion operates his latent interests, and then he may
like to watch cartoons. Here, for the context combination in
a user-item rating behavior, we use contextual operating matrix to represent the semantic operation. Inspired by (Socher
et al. 2013) in simplifying the matrix-vector operation, we
use contextual operating tensor to capture common effects

With rapid growth of information on the internet, recommender systems become fundamental for helping
users alleviate the problem of information overload.
Since contextual information can be used as a significant factor in modeling user behavior, various contextaware recommendation methods are proposed. However, the state-of-the-art context modeling methods treat
contexts as other dimensions similar to the dimensions
of users and items, and cannot capture the special semantic operation of contexts. On the other hand, some
works on multi-domain relation prediction can be used
for the context-aware recommendation, but they have
problems in generating recommendation under a large
amount of contextual information. In this work, we propose Contextual Operating Tensor (COT) model, which
represents the common semantic effects of contexts as a
contextual operating tensor and represents a context as a
latent vector. Then, to model the semantic operation of
a context combination, we generate contextual operating matrix from the contextual operating tensor and latent vectors of contexts. Thus latent vectors of users and
items can be operated by the contextual operating matrices. Experimental results show that the proposed COT
model yields significant improvements over the competitive compared methods on three typical datasets, i.e.,
Food, Adom and Movielens-1M datasets.

Introduction
With rapid growth of available information on the internet,
users are getting in trouble with the problem of information
overload. Recommender systems have become important for
helping user to select interesting information in many Web
applications such as social networks, e-commerce, online
reading, review websites and so on. Nowadays, with enhanced ability of systems in collecting information, a great
amount of contextual information in recommender systems
has been collected. The contextual information in real-world
application includes location, time, weather, companion and
so on. These kinds of contexts have significant effect on the
user behavior. For instance, a man may like to watch cartoon
with his children while may like to watch romantic movies
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

203

