Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Controlled School Choice with Soft Bounds and Overlapping Types
Ryoji Kurata1 and Masahiro Goto1 and Atsushi Iwasaki2 and Makoto Yokoo1
1: Kyushu University, Motooka 744, Fukuoka, Japan
{kurata@agent.,goto@agent.,yokoo@}inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp
2: University of Electro-Communications, Chofugaoka 1-5-1, Chofu, Tokyo, Japan
iwasaki@is.uec.ac.jp

Abstract

regional maximum quotas are imposed in the Japan Residency Matching Program, which organizes matching between medical residents and hospitals. To avoid placing too
many doctors in urban areas and causing doctor shortage in
rural areas, the Japanese government now imposes a regional
maximum quota on each region of the country (Kamada and
Kojima 2014). Regional maximum quotas are utilized in various contexts, such as Chinese graduate school admissions,
Ukrainian college admissions, Scottish probationary teacher
matching, among others (Kamada and Kojima 2014). Furthermore, there are many matching problems in which minimum quotas are imposed (Fragiadakis et al. 2012; Goto et
al. 2014). School districts may need at least a certain number
of students in each school in order for the school to operate,
as in college admissions in Hungary (Biró et al. 2010). The
cadet-branch matching program organized by United States
Military Academy imposes minimum quotas on the number
of cadets who can be assigned to each branch (Sönmez and
Switzer 2013).
Yet another type of distributional constraint dealt with in
this paper is diversity constraints in school choice programs.
Such programs are implemented to give students/parents an
opportunity to choose the public school the students attend.
However, a school is required to satisfy balance on the composition of students, typically in terms of socioeconomic
status. Controlled school choice programs need to provide
choices for students/parents while maintaining distributional
constraints.
A seminal work by Abdulkadiroglu and Sonmez (2003)
proposes using the Deferred Acceptance (DA) mechanism
in school choice programs. Kojima (2012) considers a
model where there are two types of students, i.e., minority and majority, and shows that setting hard-bounds for
the number of majority students may hurt the minority
students. To overcome this shortcoming, Hafalir, Yenmez,
and Yildirim (2013) propose soft-bounds for the number
of minority students, i.e., schools give higher priority to
minority students up to a certain number. Kominers and
Sönmez (2012) consider a model where each seat/slot of
one school has a different priority ranking for students. This
model can represent certain types of affirmative action and
can be considered a generalization of (Hafalir, Yenmez, and
Yildirim 2013). Ehlers et al. (2014) generalize the model
in (Hafalir, Yenmez, and Yildirim 2013) to cases where the

School choice programs are implemented to give students/parents an opportunity to choose the public school
the students attend. Controlled school choice programs
need to provide choices for students/parents while
maintaining distributional constraints on the balance on
the composition of students, typically in terms of socioeconomic status. Previous works show that setting
soft-bounds, which flexibly change the priorities of students based on their types, is more appropriate than setting hard-bounds, which strictly limit the number of
accepted students for each type. We consider a case
where soft-bounds are imposed and one student can belong to multiple types, e.g., “financially-distressed” and
“minority” types. We first show that when we apply a
model that is a straightforward extension of an existing model for disjoint types, there is a chance that no
stable matching exists. Thus, we propose an alternative
model and an alternative stability definition, where a
school has reserved seats for each type. We show that
a stable matching is guaranteed to exist in this model,
and develop a mechanism called Deferred Acceptance
for Overlapping Types (DA-OT). The DA-OT mechanism is strategy-proof and obtains the student-optimal
matching within all stable matchings. Computer simulation results illustrate that the DA-OT outperforms an
artificial cap mechanism, where the number of seats for
each type is fixed.

Introduction
The theory of two-sided matching has been developed and
has been applied to various markets in practice.1 Also, there
is a growing interest for this topic among AI and multiagent systems researchers, e.g., handling optimization problems in kidney exchange (Awasthi and Sandholm 2009),
compactly representing preferences (Pini, Rossi, and Venable 2014), handling partial preferences (Drummond and
Boutilier 2013), and so on.
In many application domains, various distributional constraints are often imposed on an outcome. For example,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See Roth and Sotomayor (1990) for a comprehensive survey
of many results in this literature.

951

