Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

The Pricing War Continues: On Competitive Multi-Item Pricing
Omer Lev

Joel Oren and Craig Boutilier

Jeffrey S. Rosenschein

Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
omerl@cs.huji.ac.il

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
oren@cs.toronto.edu

Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
jeff@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract

the prices of the products may affect the resulting revenues
in a complex fashion, which may induce responses by one’s
competitors. Therefore, studying the convergence properties
of such pricing dynamics is of interest.
In this paper, we take a game-theoretic approach to price
competition among multiple sellers, each with a set of items
to sell. As in Babaioff et al. 2014, we study a setting with a
single buyer with a (combinatorial) valuation function, taken
to be a monotone and submodular set function over the set of
items, which is fully known to the vendors. However, unlike
that earlier work, we examine the more general case where
each of the k vendors controls a disjoint set of items Ai ,
rather than a single item. Given the prices of all of the items,
the buyer will buy the set with the highest net-payoff (valuation minus the total price). Our model induces a game in
which the vendors’ strategy is a pricing of their items.

We study a game with strategic vendors (the agents) who own
multiple items and a single buyer with a submodular valuation function. The goal of the vendors is to maximize their
revenue via pricing of the items, given that the buyer will buy
the set of items that maximizes his net payoff.
We show this game may not always have a pure Nash equilibrium, in contrast to previous results for the special case
where each vendor owns a single item. We do so by relating
our game to an intermediate, discrete game in which the vendors only choose the available items, and their prices are set
exogenously afterwards.
We further make use of the intermediate game to provide tight
bounds on the price of anarchy for the subset games that have
pure Nash equilibria; we find that the optimal PoA reached in
the previous special cases does not hold, but only a logarithmic one. Finally, we show that for a special case of submodular functions, efficient pure Nash equilibria always exist.

Contributions We begin by discussing a related twophase game, that serves as a way-station in our study of
the main game. In this intermediate game, vendors can only
modify the sets of items being offered, whereas their prices
for these items are subsequently set by a specific pricing
mechanism. We show that this game, which results only
from this modification of game dynamics (without changing
its parameters), has key properties that its equilibria share
with those of the original game. This allows us to reduce the
pricing decision to a decision over what items to sell, thereby
significantly simplifying the problem.
We next study basic game theoretic properties of our
game. We first show that there are games which admit no
pure Nash equilibrium. To do so, we show that our twophase game admits no pure Nash equilibria, which then implies the nonexistence of a pure Nash equilibrium in the
original game, using Theorem 4 (see Proposition 6). This
result suggests the following question: suppose we restrict
attention to instances of the game that have some pure Nash
equilibria—can we then say anything about their value? To
accomplish this, we analyze the price of anarchy (PoA)
of this subset of games, where the objective function in
question is the social welfare value, taken to be simply the
buyer’s valuation of the set of items that he purchased. We
provide a tight bound of Θ(log m), where m is the maximal
number of items controlled by any of the vendors.
Finally, as an additional way of dealing with the conse-

Introduction
Consider a scenario in the world of e-commerce, where a
single consumer is seeking to buy a set of products through
an online website with multiple vendors, such as Amazon or
eBay. Given the items available for sale and their prices, the
buyer will purchase some subset of them, according to his
valuation of the items and their prices.
Naturally, the vendors (our agents) strive to maximize
their profits.1 A vendor can both competitively tailor the set
of items it offers and adjust the prices of these items to react
to their competitors (pricing an item sufficiently high can
be regarded as not offering it). Indeed, automatic mechanisms for rapid online price optimization exist in many markets and industries (Angwin and Mattioli 2012). This practice, sometimes called competitive price intelligence (Skorupa 2014), is a growing phenomenon within online retail.
The specific question it addresses is how companies should
price products in this competitive environment.
Furthermore, as argued by Babaioff et al. 2014, such a setting introduces subtle algorithmic questions, since changing
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For ease of exposition we assume production costs are zero,
hence profits can be equated with revenues, or the sum of the prices
of their sold items.

972

