Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Temporally Adaptive Restricted Boltzmann
Machine for Background Modeling
Linli Xu, Yitan Li, Yubo Wang and Enhong Chen
School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China
linlixu@ustc.edu.cn, {etali, wybang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

ing each observable background or foreground object with
a Gaussian distribution. Based on the MoG scheme, various attempts have been made to address different issues
and augment the performance (KaewTraKulPong and Bowden 2002; Zivkovic 2004; Chen et al. 2012). Recently, a
parametric approach (He, Balzano, and Szlam 2012) based
on low-rank and subspace learning is also proposed. On
the other hand, non-parametric techniques build background
models from observed pixel values. Among those, various
kernel density estimation approaches are applied to model
the background distribution for each pixel (Elgammal, Harwood, and Davis 2000). In (Kim et al. 2005; Pal, Schaefer, and Celebi 2010), sample background pixel values are
summarized into codebooks which correspond to a compressed background model for a video sequence. Another
non-parametric example is the VIBE model which uses random policy to select samples from the local neighborhood
of a pixel and builds the background model for that pixel
accordingly (Barnich and Van Droogenbroeck 2011).
Most of the traditional approaches discussed above, including MoG, Codebook, VIBE, etc., share the same problem as they ignore the temporal nature of background modeling in video sequences, which may cause problems in situations with dynamic backgrounds and illumination changes.
In this paper we take a temporal perspective and address the
background modeling problem based on the following intuition: the background of a sequence of video frames should
be temporally smooth and stable to noisy fluctuations; more
importantly, if the background changes, the model should
be able to adapt quickly to that. In the meantime, instead of
modeling each pixel independently, we consider the spatial
nature of the problem and exploit possible hidden correlations among pixels. To achieve that, we resort to Restricted
Boltzmann Machines (RBMs).
An RBM is a generative two-layer neural network that can
learn a probability distribution from data. Recent advances
in various problem domains demonstrate the superior performance of RBMs in unsupervised tasks including feature
learning (Coates, Ng, and Lee 2011) and dimensionality reduction (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006), as well as supervised tasks including classification (Larochelle and Bengio
2008) and collaborative filtering (Salakhutdinov, Mnih, and
Hinton 2007). Moreover, an RBM enjoys efficient training
and exact inference due to the “restriction” that the network

We examine the fundamental problem of background
modeling which is to model the background scenes in
video sequences and segment the moving objects from
the background. A novel approach is proposed based
on the Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) while exploiting the temporal nature of the problem. In particular, we augment the standard RBM to take a window of sequential video frames as input and generate
the background model while enforcing the background
smoothly adapting to the temporal changes. As a result,
the augmented temporally adaptive model can generate
stable background given noisy inputs and adapt quickly
to the changes in background while keeping all the advantages of RBMs including exact inference and effective learning procedure. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in modeling the temporal nature in background.

1

Introduction

Background modeling is one of the fundamental problems
in automatic video content analysis. The major task involves
modeling the relatively stationary background scene based
on sequential video frames. This can be followed by subtracting each frame from the background which entails background subtraction and foreground detection. Background
modeling is an important preprocessing step for many vision tasks including background subtraction, foreground detection, object tracking, activity recognition, and especially
video surveillance.
Various methods have been proposed to tackle the background modeling or subtraction problems over the past
decade (Piccardi 2004). Most of these techniques follow a
general pixel-level recipe that assumes pixels are statistically
independent and build models to estimate the background
distributions of pixels.
There are roughly two categories of background modeling techniques: parametric and non-parametric. Among the
parametric approaches, a simple yet effective example is
the mixture of Gaussians (MoG) model (Stauffer and Grimson 1999) which models the pixel distributions in a multimodal background and dynamic environment by describCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1938

