Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Approximating Model-Based ABox
Revision in DL-Lite: Theory and Practice
Guilin Qi1,2 Zhe Wang3 Kewen Wang3 Xuefeng Fu Zhiqiang Zhuang3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Australia
2

Abstract

posed by the ontologies. This problem can be formalized as
the problem of ABox revision in description logics, which
deals with the removal of assertions in the old ABox to accommodate the new ABox and to resolve inconsistencies,
under the assumption that the new ABox is more reliable.
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in ontology revision in DL-Lite. Some model-based revision operators in DL-Lite are proposed (Qi and Du 2009; Kharlamov
and Zheleznyakov 2011), which select models of newly received ontology that are ‘closest’ to the existing ontology.
However, model-based operators for ontology revision often suffer from two drawbacks: the inexpressibility problem,
i.e., in general, the result of revision cannot be expressed in
the same DL, and the computation problem, i.e., the computation of revision is inefficient except for some special
cases. In (Calvanese et al. 2010), the authors propose a
syntactic algorithm for ABox revision in DL-LiteF R which
runs in polynomial time. It has been shown in (Kharlamov,
Zheleznyakov, and Calvanese 2013) that for a fragment of
DL-Litecore , the core language of DL-Lite, this algorithm
outputs the result of two model-based revision operators.
However, this result is only shown to hold for the restricted
language. An open problem is whether the equivalence of
model-based and syntactic revisions still holds in more expressive languages, such as DL-LiteF R , and whether similar
result holds for other model-based revision operators.
In this paper, we present the first theoretical work on approximation of two well-known model-based revision operators in DL-LiteF R , as well as a practical graph-based algorithm and some experimental results. We first show that
the result of the syntactic revision algorithm given in (Kharlamov, Zheleznyakov, and Calvanese 2013) can be used
to approximate two model-based revision operators in DLLiteR . While both revision operators suffer from the inexpressibility problem, their approximations can be computed
efficiently. We then give a counterexample to illustrate that
our results on approximation breaks down when role functionality axioms are included. In order to accommodate role
functionality axioms, we propose to either disallow the appearance of some role names or modify the syntactic algorithm by removing some axioms. On the practical aspect,
we propose a way of implementing the algorithm by transforming a DL-LiteF R ontology to a graph, and making use
of graph database techniques to compute ontology revisions.

Model-based approaches provide a semantically well
justified way to revise ontologies. However, in general, model-based revision operators are limited due to
lack of efficient algorithms and inexpressibility of the
revision results. In this paper, we make both theoretical and practical contribution to efficient computation
of model-based revisions in DL-Lite. Specifically, we
show that maximal approximations of two well-known
model-based revisions for DL-LiteR can be computed
using a syntactic algorithm. However, such a coincidence of model-based and syntactic approaches does
not hold when role functionality axioms are allowed.
As a result, we identify conditions that guarantee such
a coincidence for DL-LiteF R . Our result shows that
both model-based and syntactic revisions can co-exist
seamlessly and the advantages of both approaches can
be taken in one revision operator. Based on our theoretical results, we develop a graph-based algorithm for the
revision operators and thus graph database techniques
can be used to compute ontology revisions. Preliminary
evaluation results show that the graph-based algorithm
can efficiently handle revision of practical ontologies
with large data.

Introduction
The latest version of OWL (Ontology Web Language) recommended by W3C is OWL 21 , which has three profiles
with fine-tuned expressive power to support tractable reasoning. OWL 2 QL, one of the three profiles, is designed for
ontology-based data access. The logic that underpins OWL
2 QL is DL-Lite, which is a family of tractable description
logics2 . With the development of the Semantic Web, more
and more data are published as linked data, and the data is
often accompanied with lightweight ontologies3 which provide extended vocabularies and logical constraints for the
data. With new data published and incorporated into the existing data, one typical problem is how to deal with logical inconsistencies caused by the violation of the constraints
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-profiles/
2
http://dl.kr.org/
3
Here we take ontologies as schema of the data.

254

