Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploiting Variable Associations to Configure Efficient Local Search
in Large-Scale Set Partitioning Problems
Shunji Umetani
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University
2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, Japan
umetani@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract

to optimize the empirical performance of a highly parameterized algorithm for a set of training instances (AdensoDı́az and Laguna 2006; Balaprakash, Birattari, and Stützle
2007; Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2009; KhudaBukhsh
et al. 2009; Kadioglu et al. 2010; Crawford et al. 2013;
Monfroy et al. 2013). A big advantage of this is that automated configuration approaches require no domain knowledge or human effort to tackle a new domain. However, an
important drawback of these approaches is that they require
many training instances and much computation time for offline learning. For example, it has been reported that it took
28 CPU days to learn 300 training instances of set partitioning problems (SPPs) with up to 50 constraints and 2000
variables (Kadioglu, Malitsky, and Sellmann 2012). This is
particularly critical when solving large-scale combinatorial
problems in a limited period of time.
In this paper, we consider how to extract useful features
from the instance to be solved with the aim to reduce the
search space of local search algorithms for large-scale SPP
instances.
In designing local search algorithms for large-scale combinatorial problems, improvements in computational efficiency become more effective than improvements in sophisticated search strategy as the instance size increases.
The quality of locally optimal solutions typically improves
if a larger neighborhood is used. However, the computation time to search the neighborhood also increases exponentially. To overcome this, ways to efficiently implement neighborhood search have been studied extensively,
and can be broadly classified into three types: (i) reducing the number of candidates in the neighborhood (Pesant
and Gendreau 1999; Yagiura and Ibaraki 1999; Shaw 2002;
Yagiura, Kishida, and Ibaraki 2006), (ii) evaluating solutions
by incremental computation (Yagiura and Ibaraki 1999;
Michel and Van Hentenryck 2000; Voudouris et al. 2001;
Van Hentenryck and Michel 2005), and (iii) reducing the
number of variables to be considered by using linear programming (LP) and/or Lagrangian relaxation (Ceria, Nobili, and Sassano 1998; Caprara, Fischetti, and Toth 1999;
Yagiura, Kishida, and Ibaraki 2006; Umetani, Arakawa, and
Yagiura 2013).
As an alternative, we have developed a data mining approach for reducing the search space of local search algorithms. I.e., we construct a k-nearest neighbor graph by ex-

We present a data mining approach for reducing the
search space of local search algorithms in large-scale set
partitioning problems (SPPs). We construct a k-nearest
neighbor graph by extracting variable associations from
the instance to be solved, in order to identify promising pairs of flipping variables in the large neighborhood
search. We incorporate the search space reduction technique into a 2-flip neighborhood local search algorithm
with an efficient incremental evaluation of solutions and
an adaptive control of penalty weights. We also develop
a 4-flip neighborhood local search algorithm that flips
four variables alternately along 4-paths or 4-cycles in
the k-nearest neighbor graph. According to computational comparison with the latest solvers, our algorithm
performs effectively for large-scale SPP instances with
up to 2.57 million variables.

1

Introduction

Automated methods for designing algorithms called autonomous search (Hamadi, Monfroy, and Subion 2011) have
recently emerged which improve both the efficiency and applicability of algorithms by extracting useful features from
the instance to be solved. It would certainly be difficult
to extract the useful features for improving the efficiency
of algorithms from the general form of constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) and mixed integer programming
problems (MIPs). However, we note that most of the instances arising from real-world applications have representative features individually. Many MIP benchmark instances
contain many special constraints that represent their combinatorial structures (Achterberg, Koch, and Martin 2006;
Koch et al. 2011). We also note that it is not necessary to
configure all program parameters of algorithms in advance,
and instead it is possible to make some of them configurable
at runtime. Autonomous search is an automated system that
configures an algorithm for the instance to be solved by combining various components and tuning program parameters
at runtime.
A major direction of autonomous search as found in the
literature is automated algorithm configuration based on supervised learning approaches. This is commonly formulated
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1226

