Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 2015)

Plurality Voting under Uncertainty
Reshef Meir
Harvard University

vote. Moreover, even for a given belief there may be several different actions that can be justiﬁed as rational. Hence
any model of voting behavior and equilibrium must state explicitly its epistemic and behavioral assumptions.
A simple starting point would be to apply some “standard” assumptions from game-theory, for example that voters play a Nash equilibrium of the game induced by their
preferences. However, such a prediction turns out to be very
uninformative: a single voter can rarely affect the outcome,
and thus almost any way the voters vote is a Nash equilibrium (including, for example, when all voters vote for their
least preferred candidate). It is therefore natural to consider
the role of uncertainty in voters’ decisions.

Abstract
Understanding the nature of strategic voting is the holy grail
of social choice theory, where game-theory, social science
and recently computational approaches are all applied in order to model the incentives and behavior of voters. In a recent
paper, Meir et al. (2014) made another step in this direction,
by suggesting a behavioral game-theoretic model for voters
under uncertainty. For a speciﬁc variation of best-response
heuristics, they proved initial existence and convergence results in the Plurality voting system.
This paper extends the model in multiple directions, considering voters with different uncertainty levels, simultaneous
strategic decisions, and a more permissive notion of bestresponse. It is proved that a voting equilibrium exists even
in the most general case. Further, any society voting in an
iterative setting is guaranteed to converge to an equilibrium.
An alternative behavior is analyzed, where voters try to minimize their worst-case regret. As it turns out, the two behaviors
coincide in the simple setting of Meir et al. (2014), but not in
the general case.

Probabilistic and strict uncertainty A classical economic approach is to assume that voters maximize some expected utility, given some prior distribution on other voters’
preferences and actions (see e.g. the MW model in Related
Work). However the assumption that voters have access to an
accurate, or even approximate, distribution of this sort seems
hard to justify. Furthermore, studies in behavioral psychology show, human decision makers often ignore probabilistic information even when it is given, employing various
heuristics instead (Tversky and Kahneman 1974). It is thus
unlikely that people are able to represent complex distributions, or to compute and optimize their own expected utility,
let alone the equilibria of such games.
In a recent effort to reconcile well-founded decision making approaches with a formal game-theoretic analysis, Meir
et al. (2014) suggested a model for Plurality voting relying on strict uncertainty and local dominance. Informally,
voters’ beliefs can be described by a single vector of candidates’ scores. This prospective score vector may be the result
of a poll, derived from acquaintance with the other voters,
from the outcome of a previous round of voting, etc. Each
voter has a single uncertainty level, reﬂecting how sure she
is in the correctness of the prospective scores—higher uncertainty means the voter considers a larger range of outcomes
(score vectors) as “possible.”
In the example introduced above, a voter with an intermediate uncertainty level will consider a tie between A and B
as “possible,” but will reject any outcome where C wins as
impossible.
Given this uncertain, non-probabilistic view, it is not a-

Introduction
Suppose that ALICE, BOB, and CHARLIE run for ofﬁce. A
and B are currently leading the polls with 45% and 40%,
respectively. Your favorite candidate C is currently trailing
behind with 15% (see Fig. 1, left).
A game-theorist advice in such a case might be to “vote
strategically,” by supporting your next-preferred candidate
(say, B). Indeed, desertion of candidates that seem to lose
height on polls in common in the real world, even if they are
still perceived as suitable.
However, there is no consensus whatsoever regarding how
to generalize this straight-forward compromise to an arbitrary situation: should you leave C if he has 25% of the
votes? and what if there are three or more candidates that
are more popular than your favorite? does the source of the
poll matter? and so on.
This lack of a conclusive notion for strategic voting is
partly due to the fact that there are many ways to describe
the information voters have, as well as their beliefs over
other voters’ preferences and actions when casting their
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2103

