Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploiting Task-Feature Co-Clusters in Multi-Task Learning
Linli Xu† , Aiqing Huang† , Jianhui Chen‡ and

Enhong Chen†

†

School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China
‡
Yahoo Labs, Sunnyvale, CA 94089, USA
linlixu@ustc.edu.cn, cassie89@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jianhui@yahoo-inc.com, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn
†

Abstract

tering approaches (Thrun and O’Sullivan 1996; Jacob, Bach,
and Vert 2008; Kang, Grauman, and Sha 2011) assume that
tasks are clustered into groups and tasks within a group are
similar to each other, while robust multi-task learning (Chen,
Zhou, and Ye 2011; Gong, Ye, and Zhang 2012) groups relevant tasks such that they share a common representation and
identifies irrelevant or outlier tasks. On the other hand, the
multi-task relationship learning approach (Zhang and Yeung
2010) is able to model negative task correlations in addition
to positive task relationships, which is a generalization of
the regularization methods in multi-task learning.
In this paper, we consider the multi-task learning problem
with the assumption that tasks can be clustered into different
groups which are not known a priori. With this task clustering structure, the problem of negative information transfer
among dissimilar and outlier tasks can be avoided. Therefore a natural advantage of the task clustering approaches is
the improved robustness when learning from multiple tasks.
Existing task clustering methods include the clustered multitask learning formulation (Jacob, Bach, and Vert 2008) that
enforces the grouping structure with a regularization term;
and the mixed integer programming approach (Kang, Grauman, and Sha 2011) that incorporates the integer cluster
indicators into the multi-task feature learning framework;
while in an earlier piece of work (Thrun and O’Sullivan
1996), task similarities are measured by how well the model
for one task performs in the other task.
The task clustering methods discussed above consider the
grouping structure at a general task-level, which assumes
that tasks within a group are close to each other on all the
features. This assumption could be restrictive in practice.
For example, in a document classification problem, different
tasks may be relevant to different sets of words; or in a recommender system, two users with similar tastes on one feature subset may have totally different preference on another
subset. To address the above issue, in recent work of (Zhong
and Kwok 2012) an additional regularization term on task
clusters regarding each feature is introduced, which essentially results in clustering of tasks in a feature-by-feature
manner. However, this method only considers features individually and neglects the relationship between features.
On the other hand, recent work on feature grouping (Shen
and Huang 2010; Yang, Yuan, and Lai 2012) exploits relationships of features in the learning procedure, which moti-

In multi-task learning, multiple related tasks are considered simultaneously, with the goal to improve the generalization performance by utilizing the intrinsic sharing
of information across tasks. This paper presents a multitask learning approach by modeling the task-feature relationships. Specifically, instead of assuming that similar tasks have similar weights on all the features, we
start with the motivation that the tasks should be related in terms of subsets of features, which implies a
co-cluster structure. We design a novel regularization
term to capture this task-feature co-cluster structure. A
proximal algorithm is adopted to solve the optimization
problem. Convincing experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm and justify
the idea of exploiting the task-feature relationships.

Introduction
Multi-task learning (Caruana 1997) has emerged as a
promising discipline with empirical success and theoretical justification in the past decades. In multi-task learning, a
number of related tasks are considered simultaneously, with
the goal to improve the generalization performance by utilizing the intrinsic sharing of information across tasks.
In most of the existing work on multi-task learning, a key
assumption is that there is some certain structure of how the
tasks are related to each other, which includes hidden units
in neural networks (Caruana 1997), a common prior in hierarchical Bayesian models (Bakker and Heskes 2003), an
underlying model shared across tasks (Evgeniou and Pontil 2004), a low-dimensional subspace in tasks (Argyriou,
Evgeniou, and Pontil 2007) or a low rank structure of the
parameters (Ji and Ye 2009).
The above methods are restricted in the sense that they
assume all the tasks are close to each other, or share a common underlying representation, which may not be the case in
real problems. When this assumption does not hold, outlier
tasks can impair the overall generalization predictive performance, or negative information transfer would occur among
dissimilar tasks.
To address this issue, various methods have further been
proposed along different directions. For example, task clusCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1931

