Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Recovering Causal Effects from Selection Bias
Elias Bareinboim∗

Jin Tian∗

Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA. 90095
eb@cs.ucla.edu

Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
Ames, IA. 50011
jtian@iastate.edu

Abstract

come (Y), P(y|do(x)), whenever only an observational, nonexperimental distribution P(v) is available (where V represents all observable variables). This is not always possible,
however, and the difference between P(y|do(x)) and its probabilistic counterpart, P(y|x), is known as confounding bias
(Pearl 2000, Ch. 3; pp. 202-212). In Fig. 1(a), for example,
the effect P(y|do(x)) can be computed by cutting the incoming arrows towards X to simulate the intervention, but if the
probabilistic estimate P(y|x) is considered, the path going
through the backdoor X ← Z → Y will also be present in
the estimand yielding bias – the variable Z generates extraneous variations of the outcome that are not due to X. There
is a well-known method for removing confounding bias in
examples of this kind, which is given by the expression
X
P(y|x, Z = z)P(Z = z).
(1)
P(y|do(x)) =

Controlling for selection and confounding biases are
two of the most challenging problems that appear in
data analysis in the empirical sciences as well as in
artificial intelligence tasks. The combination of previously studied methods for each of these biases in isolation is not directly applicable to certain non-trivial
cases in which selection and confounding biases are
simultaneously present. In this paper, we tackle these
instances non-parametrically and in full generality. We
provide graphical and algorithmic conditions for recoverability of interventional distributions for when selection and confounding biases are both present. Our treatment completely characterizes the class of causal effects
that are recoverable in Markovian models, and is sufficient for Semi-Markovian models.

z

Introduction

This identity is known as the “adjustment formula” or “backdoor formula” (Pearl 1995) and represents a special case in
which a mapping from P(v) to P(y|do(x)) exists.
The problem of confounding has been broadly studied in
the literature and a number of conditions for non-parametric
identification had emerged, for instance (Spirtes, Glymour,
and Scheines 1993; Galles and Pearl 1995; Pearl and Robins
1995; Halpern 1998; Kuroki and Miyakawa 1999). A general mathematical treatment was given in (Pearl 1995) and
culminated in the do-calculus, which was shown to be complete (Tian and Pearl 2002a; Huang and Valtorta 2006;
Shpitser and Pearl 2006; Bareinboim and Pearl 2012a).
Another major challenge that needs to be addressed when
evaluating the effect of interventions is the problem of selection bias, which arises due to the preferential exclusion of
units from the sample. For instance, in a typical study of the
effect of training program on earnings, subjects achieving
higher incomes tend to report their earnings more frequently
than those who earn less. The data-gathering process in this
case will reflect this distortion in the sample proportions and,
since the sample is no longer a faithful representation of the
population, biased estimates will be produced regardless of
how many samples were collected.
It is instructive to depict this phenomenon graphically, so
consider the model in Fig. 1(b) in which X represents a treatment, Y represents an outcome, and S represents a binary
indicator of entry into the data pool (S = 1 indicates that

Computing the effects of interventions is one of the fundamental problems in the empirical sciences. Whenever data
collection is performed, the goal is almost invariably to evaluate causal effect relationships – for instance, what is the impact of a new taxation program, how should a robot react to
unanticipated situations, will a new advertisement campaign
change the propensity of users buying a product, or what is
the effect of a new drug for curing cancer?
The first challenge that needs to be addressed when computing these effects is to control for confounding bias, which
may arise when randomized experiments are infeasible to
conduct due to costs, ethical, or technical considerations.
This implies that the data is collected under an observational
regime, where the population follows its natural tendency.
Our goal, however, is to compute how the population reacts when its undergoes a change (intervention), following a
new, compulsory protocol. For instance, one is not interested
in estimating the correlation between smoking and cancer,
which follows a process of self-selection (associational), but
whether the incidence of cancer would decrease if smoking
were banned in this population (interventional).
More formally, the identifiability problem is concerned
with determining the effect of a treatment (X) on an out∗

These authors contributed equally to this paper.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3475

