Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Multivariate Timeseries Modeling Approach to Severity of Illness Assessment
and Forecasting in ICU with Sparse, Heterogeneous Clinical Data
Marzyeh Ghassemi

Marco A.F. Pimentel ∗

Tristan Naumann

Computer Science
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
mghassem@mit.edu

Engineering Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
marco.pimentel@eng.ox.ac.uk

Computer Science
MIT
Cambridge, MA
tjn@mit.edu

Thomas Brennan

David A. Clifton

Peter Szolovits

Mengling Feng †

Health Science Technology
MIT
Cambridge, MA
tpb@mit.edu

Engineering Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
davidc@robots.ox.ac.uk

Computer Science
MIT
Cambridge, MA
psz@mit.edu

Health Science Technology
MIT
Cambridge, MA
mfeng@mit.edu

Abstract

Goal High quality clinical care depends on the ability to
combine heterogeneous clinical data to understand the severity of illness (acuity) in patients. Clinical research often
uses risk of mortality as a surrogate for patient acuity, often
evaluated at a single end point, such as after 28-days postdischarge. Most acuity scores rely on static snapshots of a
patient and do not incorporate evolving clinical information
such as new notes, lab values, etc. Our goal is to provide
a concise representation of these multiple related timeseries
so that they can be compared and assessed.

The ability to determine patient acuity (or severity of
illness) has immediate practical use for clinicians. We
evaluate the use of multivariate timeseries modeling
with the multi-task Gaussian process (GP) models using
noisy, incomplete, sparse, heterogeneous and unevenlysampled clinical data, including both physiological signals and clinical notes. The learned multi-task GP
(MTGP) hyperparameters are then used to assess and
forecast patient acuity. Experiments were conducted
with two real clinical data sets acquired from ICU patients: firstly, estimating cerebrovascular pressure reactivity, an important indicator of secondary damage for
traumatic brain injury patients, by learning the interactions between intracranial pressure and mean arterial
blood pressure signals, and secondly, mortality prediction using clinical progress notes. In both cases, MTGPs
provided improved results: an MTGP model provided
better results than single-task GP models for signal interpolation and forecasting (0.91 vs 0.69 RMSE), and
the use of MTGP hyperparameters obtained improved
results when used as additional classification features
(0.812 vs 0.788 AUC).

1

Challenge The general issue of comparing signals that are
not aligned and irregularly sampled has been considered before (see 2.2). Establishing similarity metrics among timeseries data is an important part of many learning tasks and
often is achieved using a variety of summarization methods.
However, many modeling methods fail when applied to irregularly sampled data unless strong assumptions are made
about the functional form present in the underlying data
source. Furthermore, in cases where such methods work,
data imputation is often necessary, which can introduce additional sources of error and bias. Finally, many methods
work on a single timeseries, but fail to generalize to (or take
advantage of) other related time-series data. In the remainder of this paper, we refer to noisy, sparse, heterogeneous,
irregularly sampled data as ”irregularly-sampled” data.

Introduction

Motivation Decisions in the intensive care unit (ICU) are
frequently made in settings with a high degree of uncertainty
based on a wide variety of data sources, such as vital signs,
clinical notes, fluids, medications, etc. Clinical data collection is rapidly expanding, but these data are often sparse and
irregularly sampled, and contaminated by a variety of noise
interference and human error. The ICU is playing an expanding role in acute hospital care (Vincent 2013), and in such
data-heavy settings, a more concise representation of patient
records would help clinical staff to quickly assess patient
state and plan care.

Solution Our proposed technique transforms a variety of
irregularly-sampled clinical data into a new latent space using the hyperparameters of multi-task GP (MTGP) models.
Patients are compared based on their similarity in the new
hyperparameter space. Our work differs from other work
in that it: 1) uses the correlation between and within multiple time-series to estimate parameters instead of considering
each timeseries separately; 2) infers a compact latent representation of the source data, rather than finding patterns that
are common within different timeseries; and 3) leverages the
information contained in the inferred model hyperparameters for supervised learning, whereas others use the predicted
mean function of the GP as a pre-processing or smoothing

∗

The first two authors contributed equally on this work.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

446

