Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Spectral Label Refinement for Noisy and Missing Text Labels
Yangqiu Songa Chenguang Wangb Ming Zhangb Hailong Sunc Qiang Yangd
a

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign b Peking University
Beihang University d Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
a
yqsong@illinois.edu b {wangchenguang,mzhang cs}@pku.edu.cn c sunhl@act.buaa.edu.cn d qyang@cse.ust.hk
c

Abstract

al. 2010). Even with certain processing of the labels annotated by the non-expert labelers, such as voting, the resulting labels could be still noisy (Sheng, Provost, and Ipeirotis
2008). Moreover, in social networks, such as Facebook and
Twitter, users are often allowed to provide certain tags or
profile information to gain attention from the others sharing the similar interests. However, not all of the users want
to publicly annotate their private profile information. In addition, the provided labels could be very noisy (Law, Settles, and Mitchell 2010), since different users have different
habits or preferences. For example, for the labels “movie”
and “film,” they are same, but can appear in two users’
tags. Another example is that a user may be an expert on
artificial intelligence and she tags herself with the term,
but she only publishes movie related content. In this case,
the tag does not perfectly characterize the contents that are
published. Thus, noisy and missing labels are common in
social networks. Furthermore, traditional natural language
processing (NLP) tasks can also benefit from noisy data
labeled by non-experts, as if there are some mechanisms
to reduce the label noise (Pal, Mann, and Minerich 2007;
Snow et al. 2008). However, in some of more difficult tasks,
such as event extraction, the mutual agreement of human
labels is only around 40 − 50% (Ji and Grishman 2008).
In such cases, non-expert annotations could be much worse.
Therefore, all the above examples indicate that more effective algorithms to deal with the noisy and missing label problem should be developed.

With the recent growth of online content on the Web, there
have been more user generated data with noisy and missing
labels, e.g., social tags and voted labels from Amazon’s Mechanical Turks. Most of machine learning methods, which require accurate label sets, could not be trusted when the label
sets were yet unreliable. In this paper, we provide a text label
refinement algorithm to adjust the labels for such noisy and
missing labeled datasets. We assume that the labeled sets can
be refined based on the labels with certain confidence, and
the similarity between data being consistent with the labels.
We propose a label smoothness ratio criterion to measure the
smoothness of the labels and the consistency between labels
and data. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the label refining algorithm on eight labeled document datasets, and validate that the results are useful for generating better labels.

Introduction
With the recent growth of the online content generation,
there are lots of datasets with noisy and missing labels. Supervised machine learning methods, such as classification
and ranking, have demonstrated their effectiveness in broad
applications, such as recommendation systems, natural language processing tasks. On one hand, the more labeled and
accurate label sets are input to a supervised learning method,
the more improvement on the performance one can gain. On
the other hand, noisy and missing labels could hurt the performance in a considerable way with different learning algorithms, e.g., naive Bayes being better than support vector machines with sequential minimal optimization (SMO)
trained on noisy labels (Nettleton, Orriols-Puig, and Fornells 2010). However, in real world, the situation can be even
worse. The labeled data on the Web can be extremely noisy
and missing.
For example, online crowdsourcing systems such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk1 and Rent-A-Coder2 can facilitate
the labeling tasks, by matching “labelers” with well defined “tasks.” However, since the labelers may lack expertise, dedication, and interest, the resulting labels are often
noisy and will affect the decisions of learners (Raykar et

In this paper, we deal with the noisy and missing label problem with a label refinement mechanism. Instead of
proposing a supervised learning algorithm that can handle
the noise, we propose an algorithm that can modify the labels themselves. Then the refined labels can be used for
other machine learning and data mining tasks. With the assumption that the data samples are static and i.i.d., and the
labels of data are consistent with their nearest neighborhoods, we propose a label smoothness ratio criterion to refine the noisy and missing labels. Our approach considers
both the content of data (by constraining the refined labels to
be smooth on content graph) and the initial labels (by constraining the refined label being smooth on the graph constructed by the initial labels). We relax the estimated labels
to the real values and use spectral analysis to solve the problem. The final solution is given by a generalized eigenvalue

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome
2
https://www.freelancer.com/

2972

