Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

CrowdMR: Integrating Crowdsourcing
with MapReduce for AI-Hard Problems ∗
Jun Chen, Chaokun Wang, and Yiyuan Bai
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P.R. China
chenjun14@mails.thu.edu.cn, chaokun@tsinghua.edu.cn, eldereal@gmail.com

Abstract

In this paper, we propose CrowdMR — an extended
MapReduce model based on crowdsourcing to handle AIhard problems effectively. Different from pure crowdsourcing solutions, CrowdMR introduces confidence into MapReduce. For a common AI-hard problem like classification
and recognition, any instance of that problem will usually
be assigned a confidence value by machine learning algorithms. CrowdMR only distributes the low-confidence instances which are the troublesome cases to human as HITs
via crowdsourcing. This strategy dramatically reduces the
number of HITs that need to be answered by human.
To showcase the usability of CrowdMR, we introduce an
example of gender classification using CrowdMR. For the
instances whose confidence values are lower than a given
threshold α, CrowdMR distributes HITs in the form of
CAPTCHA which automatically discriminates machine and
human (Ahn et al. 2008). With gradual completion of HITs,
the quality of results is getting better. Due to the flexibility
of CrowdMR, we can easily extend it to other AI-hard problems, e.g., word-sense disambiguation and face recognition.
We summarize our major contributions as follows: (1)
We integrated crowdsourcing with MapReduce in our
CrowdMR model, and the confidence was employed to dissect machine and human computation. (2) An incremental
scheduling algorithm based on users’ votes was proposed
to deal with the non-real-time property of crowdsourcing.
(3) An online gender classification application based on
face detection was developed to showcase the usability of
CrowdMR.

Large-scale distributed computing has made available
the resources necessary to solve “AI-hard” problems.
As a result, it becomes feasible to automate the processing of such problems, but accuracy is not very high due
to the conceptual difficulty of these problems. In this
paper, we integrated crowdsourcing with MapReduce
to provide a scalable innovative human-machine solution to AI-hard problems, which is called CrowdMR. In
CrowdMR, the majority of problem instances are automatically processed by machine while the troublesome
instances are redirected to human via crowdsourcing.
The results returned from crowdsourcing are validated
in the form of CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public Turing test to Tell Computers and Humans Apart)
before adding to the output. An incremental scheduling method was brought forward to combine the results
from machine and human in a “pay-as-you-go” way.

Introduction
Although machine learning does a good job on many problem instances in AI research, there are always instances for
which automatic analysis does not provide good answers,
e.g. face detection and optical character recognition (OCR).
Crowdsourcing alleviates this issue by dissecting a complex
problem into pieces of simple questions (often called HITs,
abbr. Human Intelligence Tasks) which are answered by human in parallel with high accuracy (Howe 2006).
MapReduce (Dean and Ghemawat 2008) provides a
model and an architecture to decompose problems in a way
that allows them to be solved independently. It offers a software framework to solve data-centric problems with distributed computing and is already applied to many research
fields, such as multimedia application and security (Yu et al.
2012).
AI-hard problems (Yampolskiy 2012) are informally defined as difficult problems which need artificial intelligence
that matches or exceeds human intelligence to be solved. It
includes problems of computer vision or NLP in a common
sense. Computer alone is not enough to solve AI-hard problems, and human participation is still needed.

Overview of CrowdMR
Questions in CrowdMR
In CrowdMR, the original AI-hard problem is dissected into
pieces of sub-problems. These sub-problems must meet the
following criteria: (1) Clarity. The answer to sub-problems
must be objective and certain. (2) Simplicity. Sub-problems
must be answerable to all participants, even those without
sufficient knowledge in specific fields. (3) Convenience. It
needs to be convenient throughout the answering process.

CrowdMR Model

∗

Corresponding author: Chaokun Wang.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In order to combine human computation with the conventional MapReduce, our CrowdMR model consists of five

4272

