Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

TrustSVD: Collaborative Filtering with Both the Explicit and
Implicit Influence of User Trust and of Item Ratings
Guibing Guo, Jie Zhang, Neil Yorke-Smith∗
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
∗
American University of Beirut, Lebanon; and University of Cambridge, UK
{gguo1,zhangj}@ntu.edu.sg, ∗ nysmith@aub.edu.lb

Abstract

also very sparse, yet complementary to rating information.
Hence, focusing too much on either one kind of information
may achieve only marginal gains in predictive accuracy. Second, users are strongly correlated with their trust neighbors
whereas they have a weakly positive correlation with their
trust-alike neighbors (e.g., friends). Given that very few trust
networks exist, it is better to have a more general trust-based
model that can well operate on both trust and trust-alike relationships. These observations motivate us to consider both
explicit and implicit influence of ratings and of trust in a
trust-based model. The influence can be explicit (real values
of ratings and trust) or implicit (who rates what (for ratings)
and who trusts whom (for trust)). The implicit influence of
ratings has been demonstrated useful in providing accurate
recommendations (Koren 2008). We will later show that implicit trust can also provide added value over explicit trust.
Thus we propose a novel trust-based recommendation
model TrustSVD. Our approach builds on top of a state-ofthe-art model SVD++ (Koren 2008) where both the explicit
and implicit influence of user-item ratings are involved to
generate predictions. To the authors’ knowledge, our work
is the first to extend SVD++ with social trust information.
Specifically, on one hand the implicit influence of trust (who
trusts whom) can be naturally added to the SVD++ model by
extending the user modeling. On the other hand, the explicit
influence of trust (trust values) is used to constrain that userspecific vectors should conform to their social trust relationships. This ensures that user-specific vectors can be learned
from their trust information even if a few or no ratings are
given. In this way, the data sparsity and cold start issues
can be better alleviated. Our novel model thus incorporates
both explicit and implicit influence of item ratings as well
as user trust. In addition, a weighted-λ-regularization technique is used to further avoid over-fitting for model learning. Experimental results on the four real-world data sets
demonstrate that our approach achieves significantly better
accuracy than other trust-based counterparts as well as other
ratings-only well-performing models (ten approaches in total), and is more capable of coping with cold start situations.

Collaborative filtering suffers from the problems of data sparsity and cold start, which dramatically degrade recommendation performance. To help resolve these issues, we propose
TrustSVD, a trust-based matrix factorization technique. By
analyzing the social trust data from four real-world data sets,
we conclude that not only the explicit but also the implicit
influence of both ratings and trust should be taken into consideration in a recommendation model. Hence, we build on
top of a state-of-the-art recommendation algorithm SVD++
which inherently involves the explicit and implicit influence
of rated items, by further incorporating both the explicit and
implicit influence of trusted users on the prediction of items
for an active user. To our knowledge, the work reported is
the first to extend SVD++ with social trust information. Experimental results on the four data sets demonstrate that our
approach TrustSVD achieves better accuracy than other ten
counterparts, and can better handle the concerned issues.

Introduction
Incorporating trust into recommender systems has demonstrated potential to improve recommendation performance
(Yang et al. 2013; Fang, Bao, and Zhang 2014), and to help
mitigate some well-known issues, such as data sparsity and
cold start (Guo, Zhang, and Thalmann 2012). Such trustaware approaches are developed based on the phenomenon
that friends often influence each other by recommending
items. However, even the best performance reported by the
latest work (Fang, Bao, and Zhang 2014) can be inferior to
that of other state-of-the-art models which are merely based
on user-item ratings. For instance, a well-performing trustbased model (Yang et al. 2013) obtains 1.0585 on data set
Epinions.com in terms of Root Mean Square Error (RMSE),
whereas the performance of a user-item baseline (see Koren
(2008), Sect. 2.1) can achieve 1.0472 in terms of RMSE.1
To investigate this phenomenon, we conduct an empirical
trust analysis based on four real-word data sets (FilmTrust,
Epinions, Flixster and Ciao) through which two important observations are concluded. First, trust information is
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Work
Trust-aware recommender systems have been widely studied, given that social trust provides an alternative view of
user preferences other than item ratings (Guo, Zhang, and

1

Smaller RMSE values indicate better predictive accuracy. Result reported
by the recommendation toolkit MyMediaLite (mymedialite.net/examples/
datasets.html).

123

