Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Building Effective Representations for Sketch Recognition
Jun Guo

Changhu Wang

Hongyang Chao

Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, P.R.China

Microsoft Research,
Beijing, P.R.China

Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, P.R.China

Abstract
As the popularity of touch-screen devices, understanding a user’s hand-drawn sketch has become an increasingly important research topic in artificial intelligence
and computer vision. However, different from natural
images, the hand-drawn sketches are often highly abstract, with sparse visual information and large intraclass variance, making the problem more challenging.
In this work, we study how to build effective representations for sketch recognition. First, to capture
saliency patterns of different scales and spatial arrangements, a Gabor-based low-level representation is proposed. Then, based on this representation, to discovery
more complex patterns in a sketch, a Hybrid Multilayer
Sparse Coding (HMSC) model is proposed to learn midlevel representations. An improved dictionary learning
algorithm is also leveraged in HMSC to reduce overfitting to common but trivial patterns. Extensive experiments show that the proposed representations are highly
discriminative and lead to large improvements over the
state of the arts.

Figure 1: Examples of hand-drawn sketches.
existing algorithms for natural images cannot be directly applied to this problem. The sparsity of visual information and
complexity of internal structures make the problem more
challenging. In fact, even humans can only achieve a recognition accuracy of 73.1% (Eitz, Hays, and Alexa 2012).
Some prior research on sketch-based retrieval favors nonvector-based representations. (Cao et al. 2011) and (Sun
et al. 2012) employed a global sketch matching approach
to measure similarity between two sketches via the improved Chamfer distance, and proved to work well in webscale databases. However, such methods are more appropriate for retrieval rather than recognition, since lots of
widely-used classifiers require vector-based input. On the
other hand, existing vector-based representations on sketch
recognition usually rely on dense sampling and large local patches to deal with the sparsity problem in sketches.
(Eitz et al. 2011) provided a detailed comparison of these
representations including Shape Context (Belongie, Malik,
and Puzicha 2002), Histogram of Oriented Gradients (Dalal
and Triggs 2005) and their variants. The comparison result
showed that HOG-like representations by summing up gradients of strokes in a grid generally outperform others in
sketch-related tasks. (Hu and Collomosse 2013) also conducted experiments on SIFT (Lowe 2004) and Self Similarities (Shechtman and Irani 2007), and obtained consistent results. Based on these conclusions, (Eitz, Hays, and
Alexa 2012) designed robust gradient-based visual descriptors to form a low-level representation, and fed them into
the Bag-of-Words (BoW) framework with soft assignment
(van Gemert et al. 2008) to build a mid-level representa-

Introduction
Sketching is a natural way for users to record, express, and
communicate. Compared with texts, it provides a more expressive way to render users’ rough ideas via natural drawing. Thus, in the era of touch screens, how a computer can
recognize a user’s hand-drawn sketch, as a basic problem
in artificial intelligence, has attracted more and more attentions.
Although sketch recognition has been studied for more
than twenty years, most of existing work was limited to
some narrow domains, such as chemical drawings (Ouyang
and Davis 2011), diagrams (Peterson et al. 2010), or simple hand-drawn shapes such as circles and rectangles (Paulson and Hammond 2008; Jie et al. 2014). In recent years,
some algorithms (Eitz, Hays, and Alexa 2012; Sun et al.
2012) were developed to recognize sketches of general objects without any domain knowledge, as shown in Fig. 1. We
will also focus on recognizing general sketches in this work.
Different from natural images, the hand-drawn sketches
are often highly abstract and lack of color and textures. Thus,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3776

