Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Impact of Modeling Languages on the
Theory and Practice in Planning Research
Jussi Rintanen∗
Aalto University, Department of Information and Computer Science
Helsinki, Finland

Abstract

framework for developing, expressing and sharing planning
problems for evaluating and comparing planning algorithms.
The initial impact of PDDL after its introduction in 1998
was positive, as it allowed direct comparisons between algorithm implementations for classical planning, and led to
the development of standard benchmark problem sets. The
ICAPS community felt early on the need to extend PDDL
to handle more general classes of planning problems, including temporal planning and probabilistic planning. Of
these extensions, the most lasting impact has been by the
timed/temporal extension, known as PDDL 2.1 (Fox and
Long 2003). Both the original PDDL definition and PDDL
2.1 have been used without major changes for over ten years.
In this paper, we evaluate the impact of PDDL on the research practice in the ICAPS community. We will be arguing that there is a mismatch between the concepts being represented in PDDL and the modeling capabilities of PDDL,
and that this mismatch is having a negative impact on the
whole research area. The main cause of the mismatch is the
low abstraction level of PDDL with respect to important core
concepts. In the case of the classical (1998) PDDL, the low
abstraction level is most clearly visible in the restriction to
Boolean (two-valued) state variables which has made it necessary to encode ubiquitous n-valued state variables as sets
of Boolean variables. In temporal versions of PDDL the low
abstraction level is visible in the lack of an explicit notion of
resources, which has forced representing (simple forms of)
resources as manipulation of state variables.
These issues have had consequences on the type of
research done in the ICAPS/IPC community. In some
cases where the higher level concepts are preferable, the
ICAPS/IPC community has been developing automated
means to recover the higher level concepts from the lowlevel PDDL representations. A prime example of this is the
research topic of invariants or mutexes, which is primarily
motivated by implicit n-valued state variables represented
as Boolean variables. In a number of works this is the sole
motivation. In other cases, the lack of important high level
concepts has meant that only simple problems have ended
up being modeled: the lack of resources as an explicit modeling concept has eliminated the consideration of temporal
planning problems with anything but the simplest resource
constraints. We will be further arguing that this has led to an
unnecessary, unproductive and harmful disconnect from the

We propose revisions to the research agenda in Automated
Planning. The proposal is based on a review of the role of the
Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) in the activities of the AI planning community and the impact of PDDL
on parts of its research agenda. We specifically show how
specific properties of PDDL have impacted research on planning, by putting emphasis on certain research topics and complicating others. We argue that the development of more advanced modeling languages would be – analogously to the
impact PDDL has had – a low overhead and smooth route for
the ICAPS community shift its research focus to increasingly
promising and relevant research topics.

Introduction
Planning in Artificial Intelligence covers a wide range of
sequential decision-making problems of intelligent agents,
including single-agent, multi-agent, deterministic, nondeterministic, perfect information, imperfect information, and
other problem categories. Many of these problems are
shared between multiple research communities. For example, papers on planning with uncertainty and incomplete information are regularly published in the conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS), the conference on
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), the general AI
conferences, all the leading conferences on Machine Learning such as NIPS, ICML, and ECML, and they are equally
investigated in other areas, for example in Intelligent Control in Control Theory.
The research community that is mostly associated with
the so-called classical planning problem (perfect information, no uncertainty) and its direct extensions such as temporal planning, is the one that has formed around the ICAPS
conference and especially its planning competitions (IPC).
This community has adopted the Planning Domain Description Language (PDDL) (Ghallab et al. 1998) as the modeling
language used in the competitions and but also as the main
∗
Also affiliated with Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia,
and the Helsinki Institute of Information Technology, Finland. This
work was funded by the Academy of Finland (Finnish Centre of
Excellence in Computational Inference Research COIN, 251170).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4052

