Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Policy Tree: Adaptive Representation for Policy Gradient
Ujjwal Das Gupta

Erik Talvitie

Michael Bowling

Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
ujjwal@ualberta.ca

Department of Computer Science
Franklin & Marshall College
erik.talvitie@fandm.edu

Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
mbowling@ualberta.ca

Wall above?

Abstract
0.13 0.25

Much of the focus on finding good representations in
reinforcement learning has been on learning complex
non-linear predictors of value. Policy gradient algorithms, which directly represent the policy, often need
fewer parameters to learn good policies. However, they
typically employ a fixed parametric representation that
may not be sufficient for complex domains. This paper
introduces the Policy Tree algorithm, which can learn
an adaptive representation of policy in the form of a decision tree over different instantiations of a base policy.
Policy gradient is used both to optimize the parameters
and to grow the tree by choosing splits that enable the
maximum local increase in the expected return of the
policy. Experiments show that this algorithm can choose
genuinely helpful splits and significantly improve upon
the commonly used linear Gibbs softmax policy, which
we choose as our base policy.

1

0.5

1.0

No

Yes

0.07

Up

Right

Figure 1: A simple world, and a corresponding policy tree

1. The agent is equipped with four sensors to detect whether
there is a wall in each direction. Assuming a discount factor of 0.5, the values of the states are shown in each grid
cell. To represent an accurate value function, a decision tree
would need to split on the current as well as past observations, and eventually distinguish between all the states. In
complex domains, one would end up learning a very large
tree. In contrast, if we were to represent the policy itself as
a function over the observations, we could get a simple and
optimal policy in the form of the decision tree on the right.
Policy gradient algorithms are an alternate approach to
control in reinforcement learning, which directly optimize
a parameterized policy, instead of indirectly optimizing
the policy via a value function. Some commonly used algorithms of this type are REINFORCE (Williams 1992),
GPOMDP (Baxter and Bartlett 2000) and Natural Actor
Critic (Peters and Schaal 2008). Unlike value-based methods, they are guaranteed to converge even when complete
information about the state is unavailable. As the previous
example demonstrates, the policy function is often simpler
and requires fewer parameters than the value function. However, state of the art policy gradient algorithms use a fixed
parameterization, and less work has focused on how the policy representation could be learned or improved.
One notable work on adaptive representation for policy gradient includes the NPPG algorithm (Kersting and
Driessens 2008). In each iteration of the algorithm, a regression model is learned over a batch of data, with the functional gradient as its target. The final policy is a weighted
sum of these models. The regression model can be any complex function of the data, including decision trees. A disadvantage of this method is that each gradient step adds a
new model to the policy, increasing the computational cost
of action selection, and degrading the generalization ability

Introduction

The search for a good state representation in reinforcement
learning is a challenging problem. Value function based algorithms are not guaranteed to work well in the presence
of partial observability (Singh, Jaakkola, and Jordan 1994)
or when function approximation is used (Boyan and Moore
1995), and so learning an accurate representation of state is
important.
One way to get an adaptive representation of state is to
learn a decision tree over the history of observations. The
U-Tree algorithm (McCallum 1996) is an example of this. It
starts with a single node to represent state, and recursively
performs statistical tests to check if there exists a split for
which the child nodes have significantly different value. The
resulting tree represents a piecewise constant estimation of
value.
Such an algorithm would grow the tree whenever doing
so improves the value estimate. It is possible for an entire
branch of the tree to contain multiple splits over fine distinctions of value, even if the optimum action from each of
the nodes in the branch is the same. For example, Figure 1
shows a simple grid world with a single terminal state, indicated by a circle, transitioning to which gives a reward of
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2547

