Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Face Hallucination in the Wild
Erjin Zhou ∗ and Haoqiang Fan∗

Zhimin Cao and Yuning Jiang and Qi Yin

Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{zej11,fhq13}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Megvii Technology, Beijing, China
{jyn,czm,yq}@megvii.com

Abstract

2. Uncontrolled blur. Due to the motion or unfocused problem, the face images captured in the wild are often blurred
with uncertain kernels.

Face hallucination method is proposed to generate highresolution images from low-resolution ones for better visualization. However, conventional hallucination
methods are often designed for controlled settings and
cannot handle varying conditions of pose, resolution degree, and blur. In this paper, we present a new method
of face hallucination, which can consistently improve
the resolution of face images even with large appearance variations. Our method is based on a novel network architecture called Bi-channel Convolutional Neural Network (Bi-channel CNN). It extracts robust face
representations from raw input by using deep convolutional network, then adaptively integrates two channels
of information (the raw input image and face representations) to predict the high-resolution image. Experimental results show our system outperforms the prior stateof-the-art methods.

1

Conventional face hallucination methods conduct extensive studies on the choice of low-level features, such as
global eigen-faces (Wang and Tang 2005), or local texture patches (Baker and Kanade 2000; Liu, Shum, and
Zhang 2001; Li and Lin 2004). Unfortunately, since the
low-level features are not robust to the appearance variations (e.g., pose and expression), these methods are strictly
limited to the frontal face images of constrained conditions. Recently, some algorithms are proposed to handle the
variations in poses and expression (Tappen and Liu 2012;
Yang, Liu, and Yang 2013). These methods rely on highly
similar faces matched in training set (Tappen and Liu 2012)
or face structural features extracted by an accurate facial
landmark detector (Yang, Liu, and Yang 2013), as shown
in Fig. 1. Moreover, these algorithms are unable to well handle variances of blur effects, since either low-level feature
or structural feature is not descriptive enough for the blurred
patches.
Therefore, it can be summarized that an ideal face hallucination algorithm should satisfy the following requirements:
(1) it should take advantages of highly descriptive features,
which is able to handle the large appearance variations and
provide blur-robust face representations for face images; (2)
it should not rely on other prior knowledge such as the location of facial landmarks, which may be unavailable in LR
situation.
In this paper, we propose a novel Bi-channel Convolutional Neural Network (Bi-channel CNN). Convolutional
neural network is proved to be successful in computer vision
areas, such as image classification, facial landmark detection, and face recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Sun, Wang, and Tang 2013; Yaniv et al. 2014;
Sun, Wang, and Tang 2014). Benefitting from the multilayer model, the convolutional architecture can well handle
large appearance variations and provide robust representations for the following module. Our model consists of two
modules: a feature extractor, and an image generator. The
deep convolutional extractor learns from raw LR images and
extracts descriptive face representations. The image generator takes two channels of information as inputs: the representations extracted by feature extractor and raw LR image

Introduction

One of the most common challenges to practical face recognition systems is that most face images captured in the wild
are of low resolutions. Especially in the standard-definition
surveillance videos, a detectable face may be of 20 × 20
pixels or even smaller. Such low-resolution (LR for short)
face images not only bring down the human visual experience but also adversely affect the performance of the followed face recognition and analysis. For this reason, how
to infer high-resolution (HR for short) face images from
LR ones, namely face hallucination, has attracted great research interests in the past years (Baker and Kanade 2000;
Liu, Shum, and Zhang 2001; Li and Lin 2004; Wang and
Tang 2005; Liu, Shum, and Freeman 2007; Tappen and
Liu 2012; Yang, Liu, and Yang 2013; Dong et al. 2014;
Cui et al. 2014).
Face hallucination remains an unsolved problem due to
the following characteristics of face images in the wild:
1. Large variations. Realistic face images are often with
large appearance variations, e.g., the changes in poses, expression and illumination;
∗
This work was done when Erjin Zhou and Haoqiang Fan were
visiting students at Megvii Technology.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3871

