Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Stable Feature Selection from Brain sMRI
∗

Bo Xin∗ , Lingjing Hu† , Yizhou Wang∗ and Wen Gao∗
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
†
Yanjing Medical College, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 101300, China

the model. (These perturbations include the often used Jacknife, bootstrap and cross-validation.) This unstable behavior
of the lasso model is critical in high dimensional data analysis. The resulting irreproducibility of the feature selection
are especially undesirable in neuroimage analysis/diagnosis.
However, unlike the problems such as registration and classiﬁcation, the stability issue of feature selection is much less
studied in this ﬁeld.
In this paper we propose a model to induce more stable feature selection from high dimensional brain structural
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (sMRI) images. Besides sparsity, the proposed model harnesses two important additional
pathological priors in brain sMRI: (i) the spatial cohesion of
lesion voxels (via inducing fusion terms) and (ii) the positive correlation between the features and the disease labels. The correlation prior is based on the observation that
in many brain image analysis problems (such as AD, frontotemporal dementia, corticobasal degeneration, etc), there
exist strong correlations between the features and the labels.
For example, gray matter of AD is degenerated/atrophied.
Therefore, the gray matter values (indicating the volume)
are positively correlated with the cognitive scores or disease labels {-1,1}. That is, the less gray matter, the lower
the cognitive score. Accordingly, we propose nonnegative
constraints on the variables to enforce the prior and name the
model as “non-negative Generalized Fused Lasso” (n2 GFL).
It extends the popular generalized fused lasso and enables it
to explore the intrinsic structure of data via selecting stable features. To measure feature stability, we introduce the
“Estimation Stability” recently proposed in (Yu 2013) and
the (multi-set) Dice coefﬁcient (Dice 1945). Experiments
demonstrate that compared with existing models, our model
selects much more stable (and pathological-prior consistent)
voxels. It is worth mentioning that the non-negativeness per
se is a very important prior of many practical problems,
e.g. (Lee and Seung 1999). Although n2 GFL is proposed
to solve the diagnosis of AD in this work, the model can be
applied to more general problems.
Incorporating these priors makes the problem novel w.r.t
the lasso or generalized fused lasso from an optimization
standpoint. Although off-the-shelf convex solvers such as
CVX (Grant and Boyd 2013) can be applied to solve the
optimization, it hardly scales to high-dimensional problems
in feasible time. In this regard, we propose an efﬁcient algo-

Abstract
Neuroimage analysis usually involves learning thousands or even millions of variables using only a limited number of samples. In this regard, sparse models,
e.g. the lasso, are applied to select the optimal features
and achieve high diagnosis accuracy. The lasso, however, usually results in independent unstable features.
Stability, a manifest of reproducibility of statistical results subject to reasonable perturbations to data and the
model (Yu 2013), is an important focus in statistics,
especially in the analysis of high dimensional data. In
this paper, we explore a nonnegative generalized fused
lasso model for stable feature selection in the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. In addition to sparsity, our
model incorporates two important pathological priors:
the spatial cohesion of lesion voxels and the positive
correlation between the features and the disease labels.
To optimize the model, we propose an efﬁcient algorithm by proving a novel link between total variation
and fast network ﬂow algorithms via conic duality. Experiments show that the proposed nonnegative model
performs much better in exploring the intrinsic structure of data via selecting stable features compared with
other state-of-the-arts.

Introduction
Neuroimage analysis is challenging due to its high feature dimensionality and data scarcity. Sparse models such
as the lasso (Tibshirani 1996) have gained great reputation in statistics and machine learning, and they have been
applied to the analysis of such high dimensional data by
exploiting the sparsity property in the absence of abundant data. As a major result, automatic selection of relevant variables/features by such sparse formulation achieves
promising performance. For example, in (Liu, Zhang, and
Shen 2012), the lasso model was applied to the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and showed better performance than the support vector machine (SVM), which is one
of the state-of-the-arts in brain image classiﬁcation. However, in statistics, it is known that the lasso does not always
provide interpretable results because of its instability (Yu
2013). “Stability” here means the reproducibility of statistical results subject to reasonable perturbations to data and
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1910

