Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Building Strong Semi-Autonomous Systems
Shlomo Zilberstein
School of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
shlomo@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

2009; Markoff 2012). A good example is autonomous driving, which has attracted growing attention since Google revealed its autonomous car. The car can complete an entire trip autonomously, but—at least for now—California’s
DMV requires it to include a steering wheel and brake pedals, and the presence of a “test driver” who is capable of
taking over control at any time. Sergey Brin, the co-founder
of Google, predicted in 2012 that self-driving cars will be
available for all within five years (Thomson 2012). Nissan
expects to market self-driving cars by 2020 (White 2013).
But there are significant challenges before such cars can
drive without human supervision. In his IAAI’12 invited
talk, Sebastian Thrun, who led the early stages of the Google
project, acknowledged that sensing and real-time inference
technologies are not yet reliable enough to handle correctly
certain situations, such as a plastic bag blowing in the wind
in front of the car (that may be ignored) or a policeman signaling traffic to stop (should not be ignored). To be successful, autonomous cars operating in an environment populated
with human drivers will have to be able to read, and eventually respond with, human social cues (Fong, Nourbakhsh,
and Dautenhahn 2003).
When full autonomy is not feasible, it is still desirable
to implement it even partially. But what does it mean for
a system to be partially autonomous? What is the role of
the person who controls it? What can the system guarantee
without human assistance?
We refer to systems that can operate autonomously under
some conditions, but cannot always complete an entire task
on their own as semi-autonomous systems (SAS). There are
many reasons for a SAS to require human intervention. For
example, a Roomba vacuum cleaning robot could be trapped
in a tight corner; or it may need to move to another floor
that requires climbing stairs; or it may diagnose a sensor
failure that requires a professional technician to repair. In
other words, many autonomous systems currently under development are in fact semi-autonomous as they require human intervention under a range of conditions. Examples include semi-autonomous wheelchairs (Marsland, Nehmzow,
and Duckett 2001), robotic tractors (Chaffins 2008), and
General Motor’s EN-V city vehicle (Woodyard 2010).
Semi-autonomous driving, in particular, is progressing
rapidly. In some new car models, adaptive forms of cruise
control can automatically maintain a desired speed as well

The vision of populating the world with autonomous
systems that reduce human labor and improve safety
is gradually becoming a reality. Autonomous systems
have changed the way space exploration is conducted
and are beginning to transform everyday life with a
range of household products. In many areas, however,
there are considerable barriers to the deployment of
fully autonomous systems. We refer to systems that require some degree of human intervention in order to
complete a task as semi-autonomous systems. We examine the broad rationale for semi-autonomy and define basic properties of such systems. Accounting for
the human in the loop presents a considerable challenge
for current planning techniques. We examine various
design choices in the development of semi-autonomous
systems and their implications on planning and execution. Finally, we discuss fruitful research directions for
advancing the science of semi-autonomy.

Introduction
A fundamental goal of early AI projects has been to build
intelligent systems, such as Shakey the Robot, that would
operate in the world autonomously and perform some useful tasks (Nilsson 1984). Today, autonomous systems offer
transformational impact on society as they help reduce human labor and improve productivity and safety. They have
been deployed in a wide range of domains from household products such as the Roomba vacuum cleaners to space
exploration vehicles such as Deep Space 1 (Muscettola et
al. 1998; Pell et al. 1996). There is no standard definition of autonomy in AI, but generally a system is considered autonomous if it can construct and execute a plan
to achieve its assigned goals, without human intervention,
even when it encounters unexpected events (Doyle 2003;
Frost 2010).
As the field of AI matured and produced numerous fielded
systems and applications, it became apparent that there are
still considerable barriers to the deployment of fully autonomous systems. These barriers range from technological
and economical constraints to ethical and legal issues (Arkin
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4088

