Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Truthful Mechanisms without Money for
Non-Utilitarian Heterogeneous Facility Location
Paolo Serafino

Carmine Ventre

School of Computing
Teesside University
p.serafino@tees.ac.uk

School of Computing
Teesside University
c.ventre@tees.ac.uk

Abstract

the nodes, declare what content (e.g., tables) of the database
they need to use and seek to minimize their individual connection cost (defined as length of paths in G) to access their
data. From the company’s perspective, instead, the desideratum is to compute an allocation (i.e., assign each content
to a node of the graph) for which the maximum overall connection cost is minimized. The mechanism should then be
truthful: the strategy maximizing the “happiness” of agents,
called utility, is truthtelling. Truthfulness is typically guaranteed by means of monetary transfers between designer
and agents. However, in this setting, it is not conceivable
to charge a payroll office because it does not need customer
data or to compensate a remote sales office that has to endure
a slow access to distantly located customer records. We then
want to study truthful (or strategyproof (SP)) mechanisms
without monetary transfers.
Generally speaking, this work belongs to the research
agenda of approximate mechanism design without money,
recently proposed in (Procaccia and Tennenholtz 2013). In
this family of mechanisms, truthfulness is typically enforced
by exploiting the approximation ratio of the mechanism in
those cases where the optimal outcome is not truthful. Our
motivating scenario above bears some similarities with the
archetypal problem in this agenda, facility location. Our
model has however two sources of novelty. With respect to
the main stream of works on facility location, we do not consider “homogeneous” (i.e., serving the same purpose) facilities, wherein the cost of an agent is defined as the cost of
connecting to the nearest facility, but rather heterogeneous
(i.e., serving different purposes) facilities, and hence the cost
of an agent is defined as the cost of accessing the facilities
she bids for. Such a model has been introduced very recently
in (Serafino and Ventre 2014) where we focused only on the
utilitarian objective function of minimizing the total connection cost of the agents (i.e., minimizing the social cost). We
differentiate from our previous work in that Min-Max, the
objective in the present paper, sits on the other end of the
spectrum.
Min-Max is a popular objective function in optimization, mechanism design with (cf., e.g., the rich literature
on scheduling selfish machines dating back to (Nisan and
Ronen 2001)) and without money (see, e.g., (Koutsoupias
2014)), and studied already for homogeneous facility location (Procaccia and Tennenholtz 2013). In particular, this

In this paper, we consider the facility location problem under a novel model recently proposed in the literature, which
combines the no-money constraint (i.e. the impossibility to
employ monetary transfers between the mechanism and the
agents) with the presence of heterogeneous facilities, i.e. facilities serving different purposes. Agents thus have a significantly different cost model w.r.t. the classical model with
homogeneous facilities studied in literature. We initiate the
study of non-utilitarian optimization functions under this
novel model. In particular, we consider the case where the optimization goal consists of minimizing the maximum connection cost of the agents. In this setting, we investigate both deterministic and randomized algorithms and derive both lower
and upper bounds regarding the approximability of strategyproof mechanisms.

1

Introduction

This work is motivated by a scenario of big data distribution in clouds. Consider a multinational company having to
decide how to distribute the data contained in its databases
over its data network. Not all the various offices working for
the company need access to the whole data, e.g., a payroll
office arguably needs access to employees’ data but not the
customers’, whilst sales offices need customers’ data but not
employees’. Thus, a demand-based allocation seems a sensible approach. However, beside all the problems that replication might involve, space might be too limited a resource
to allow a replication of requested data to all the demanding offices. Fast data access becomes then competitive and,
guided by their willingness to have prompt access to the data
they need, offices might strategize and amend their demands
accordingly. The company, however, wants to minimize the
maximum access time in order to guarantee a decent quality
of service so that each office can work efficiently.
Mechanism design is the typical answer to situations in
which agents can act selfishly and there is a divergence between designer’s and agents’ objectives. Indeed, we can cast
the aforementioned scenario into a mechanism design problem. We are given a graph G = (V, E) representing the data
network of the company, wherein the edges represent direct
links between data servers. Offices (selfish agents) reside on
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1029

