Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Content-Based Collaborative Filtering
for News Topic Recommendation
Zhongqi Lu† , Zhicheng Dou∗ , Jianxun Lian‡ , Xing Xie‡ and Qiang Yang†
†

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
∗
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
†
{zluab, qyang}@cse.ust.hk, ∗ dou@ruc.edu.cn, ‡ {v-lianji, xing.xie}@microsoft.com
Abstract

Filtering, where the contents of the news are analyzed before presented to the users. When the users have sufficient
news reading records, Content-based Filtering approaches
can usually perform well. The second major challenge is due
to the scarce clicking feedbacks from users. Because news
reading usually may not be the main functions for the web
portals, users do not intend to see the news at these portals,
even though the news may be of interest to them. A solution
to this problem lies in the fact that there are always users
who read some news, and these users may serve as a basis
to help to predict the interests of the long-tail users. This
intuition leads to the Collaborative Filtering approach.
Web search portals are starting to recognize the importance of news topic recommendation, where both previously mentioned challenges exist. We propose to bring
both Content-based Filtering approach and Collaborative
Filtering approach together to make recommendations. Intuitively, the key to both approaches is to find similarities and
do clustering implicitly. Content-based Filtering approach
relies on the similarity of contexts and clusters the items,
while Collaborative Filtering approach finds similarity in
user-item links and clusters the links. A difficulty is that
these two kinds of similarities are measured under absolutely different scales and cannot be simply summed up.
In this paper, we propose to combine both similarities by
a neighborhood model. Specifically, from the contexts of
news, we obtain similarity between items. In the optimization phase, we cluster the user-item links by jointly considering the similarity between items. In our proposed model, we
combine both advantages of the Content-based Filtering approach and the Collaborative Filtering approach. We present
a kernel to capture the contextual information in the news
and then integrate the kernel into a Collaborative Filtering
framework. On one hand, the proposed model tries to understand the emerging news by learning the contextual meanings. On the other hand, by clustering with the similarity of
the user-item links, the long-tail users are properly handled.
In the following, we start by discussing the related works.
Then we introduce some preliminary notations and frameworks. We illustrate the motivation by presenting a unique
Bing news topic recommendation setting, and then propose
our Content-based Collaborative Filtering (CCF) approach,
focusing on the two previously mentioned challenges. Finally, we demonstrate the experimental results on the Bing

News recommendation has become a big attraction with
which major Web search portals retain their users. Two effective approaches are Content-based Filtering and Collaborative Filtering, each serving a specific recommendation scenario. The Content-based Filtering approaches inspect rich
contexts of the recommended items, while the Collaborative
Filtering approaches predict the interests of long-tail users
by collaboratively learning from interests of related users.
We have observed empirically that, for the problem of news
topic displaying, both the rich context of news topics and
the long-tail users exist. Therefore, in this paper, we propose
a Content-based Collaborative Filtering approach (CCF) to
bring both Content-based Filtering and Collaborative Filtering approaches together. We found that combining the two is
not an easy task, but the benefits of CCF are impressive. On
one hand, CCF makes recommendations based on the rich
contexts of the news. On the other hand, CCF collaboratively
analyzes the scarce feedbacks from the long-tail users. We
tailored this CCF approach for the news topic displaying on
the Bing front page and demonstrated great gains in attracting users. In the experiments and analyses part of this paper,
we discuss the performance gains and insights in news topic
recommendation in Bing.

Introduction
News topic recommendation has been an important
attraction offered by many major web portals, such
as Yahoo! (www.yahoo.com), Excite (www.excite.com),
MSN (www.msn.com), Bing (www.bing.com) and AOL
(www.aol.com). News displaying provides an important service that can help keeping the users on the portals. Therefore, it is important for these search portals to understand
users’ interests and display the “right” news at the right time.
Brute-force recommendation methods such as expert
edited rules had been adopted traditionally (Bobadilla et al.
2013), but had shown poor performance due to two major
challenges. The first and traditional challenge is that users
often prefer to view new items. When a piece of news is just
emerging, the recommender system may find it hard to tell
whether users are interested in it or not, as the topic may not
be in the users’ history. A typical solution is Content-based
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

217

