Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Steering Evolution Strategically:
Computational Game Theory and Opponent Exploitation
for Treatment Planning, Drug Design, and Synthetic Biology

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract

can include various drugs and cocktails of drugs, as well as
other activities such as surgeries, exercise prescriptions, and
so on. Treatments can also include gene interference and disruption therapies; nowadays it is even possible to turn off individual genes in a cell and to turn them back on. The treater
may also be able to conduct tests. The disease can change
over time. For example, the HIV virus mutates. The treatments affect how the disease changes over time.
I propose that this be modeled as a (zero-sum) game between the treater and disease, with potentially both sequential and simultaneous moves. Then, solving the game model
for Nash equilibrium (or its refinements) provides an optimal treatment plan assuming the disease plays rationally,
that is, in the worst possible way for the treater. This is a
safe approach. Another advantage is that it does not require
a probabilistic model of the disease.
However, this may be overly conservative: the disease
may not behave rationally. I propose that opponent exploitation techniques be used to take advantage of the disease’s
suboptimal play. Various approaches can be used for this, as
I will discuss—ranging all the way to modeling the setting
as a single-agent domain where the only player is the treater.
Furthermore, biological opponents have a distinct characteristic that we can exploit. Evolution is myopic: it does not
look ahead in the game tree. That begets dramatic opponent
exploitation opportunities. An example of this is evolving a
disease into a trap where it can be easily attacked so that
it is destroyed or becomes less powerful (e.g., less virulent,
less contagious, or less able to evolve in bad ways). More
generally, the task is to compute a strategy for the treater in
the (typically incomplete-information) game that causes the
myopic opponent to obtain low utility.

Living organisms adapt to challenges through evolution and adaptation. This has proven to be a key
difficulty in developing therapies, since the organisms develop resistance. I propose the wild idea
of steering evolution/adaptation strategically—using
computational game theory for (typically incompleteinformation) multistage games and opponent exploitation techniques. A sequential contingency plan for steering is constructed computationally for the setting at
hand. In the biological context, the opponent (e.g., a
disease) has a systematic handicap because it evolves
myopically. This can be exploited by computing trapping strategies that cause the opponent to evolve into
states where it can be handled effectively. Potential application classes include therapeutics at the population,
individual, and molecular levels (drug design), as well
as cell repurposing and synthetic biology.1

Brief description of the main ideas
Living organisms adapt to challenges through evolution and
adaptation. These survival mechanisms have proven to be a
key difficulty in developing therapies, since the challenged
organisms develop resistance.
It would be desirable to be able to harness evolution and
adaptation for therapeutic and technological goals. For example, through a sequence of appropriate manipulations,
could we get a heterogeneous population of cancer cells to
evolve to benign ones? Or, could we steer the evolution of
the population to a state where we can destroy it? Could we
evolve bacteria that eat toxins from the environment?
In this paper I propose the wild idea of steering evolution/adaptation strategically. I propose that this be done using computational game theory and opponent exploitation
techniques. A sequential contingency plan for steering evolution is constructed computationally for the setting at hand.
For example, in the context of medical therapeutics, consider a setting where there is treater (e.g., a doctor) treating a patient (e.g., an individual or a population of people). The patient may have some disease, such as HIV, cancer, influenza, ebola, diabetes, schizophrenia, or obesity. The
treater’s task is to treat the patient over time. The treatments

Benefits
Algorithms can often solve games better than humans can—
and in many cases optimally—so there is potential to generate better treatment plans than doctors and policy committees generate. Today’s manual planning is rather ad hoc and
unsophisticated from the perspective of the state of the art
in game-solving algorithms—for instance in the ability to
generate high-quality sequential plans. Most medical treatment today is myopic: the treater tries to take an action
that improves the patient’s health immediately. This puts the
treater at the very same disadvantage that the opponent—
evolution—has! In contrast, the treatment plans proposed in

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Patent pending, 2012.

4057

