Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Topical Word Embeddings
Yang Liu1 , Zhiyuan Liu1∗ , Tat-Seng Chua2 , Maosong Sun1,3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Lab for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Competence, Jiangsu 221009, China

Abstract

complicated correlations among words as well as their contexts. (2) In multi-prototype setting, contexts of a word are
divided into clusters with no overlaps. In reality, a word’s
several senses may correlate with each other, and there is
not clear semantic boundary between them.
In this paper, we propose a more flexible and powerful
framework for multi-prototype word embeddings, namely
topical word embeddings (TWE), in which topical word
refers to a word taking a specific topic as context. The basic
idea of TWE is that, we allow each word to have different
embeddings under different topics. For example, the word
apple indicates a fruit under the topic food, and indicates an
IT company under the topic information technology (IT).
We employ the widely used latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) to obtain word topics, and perform collapsed Gibbs sampling (Griffiths and
Steyvers 2004) to iteratively assign latent topics for each
word token. In this way, given a sequence of words D =
{w1 , . . . , wM }, after LDA converges, each word token wi
will be discriminated into a specific topic zi , forming a
word-topic pair hwi , zi i, which can be used to learn topical
word embeddings. We design three TWE models to learn
topical word vectors, as shown in Figure 1, where the window size is 1, and wi−1 and wi+1 are contextual words of
wi .
TWE-1. We regard each topic as a pseudo word, and learn
topic embeddings and word embeddings separately. We then
build the topical word embedding of hwi , zi i according to
the embeddings of wi and zi .
TWE-2. We consider each word-topic pair hwi , zi i as a
pseudo word, and learn topical word embeddings directly.
TWE-3. We reserve distinct embeddings for each word
and each topic. We build the embedding of each word-topic
pair, by concatenating the corresponding word and topic embeddings, for learning.
Among three TWE models, TWE-1 does not consider
the immediate interaction between a word and its assigned
topic for learning. TWE-2 considers the inner interaction of
a word-topic pair by simply regarding the pair as a pseudo
word, but it suffers from the sparsity issue because the occurrences of each word are rigidly discriminated into different
topics. as compared to TWE-2, TWE-3 provides trade-off
between discrimination and sparsity. But during the learning
process of TWE-3, topic embeddings will influence the cor-

Most word embedding models typically represent each
word using a single vector, which makes these models indiscriminative for ubiquitous homonymy and polysemy. In order to enhance discriminativeness, we employ latent topic models to assign topics for each word
in the text corpus, and learn topical word embeddings
(TWE) based on both words and their topics. In this
way, contextual word embeddings can be flexibly obtained to measure contextual word similarity. We can
also build document representations, which are more
expressive than some widely-used document models
such as latent topic models. In the experiments, we evaluate the TWE models on two tasks, contextual word
similarity and text classification. The experimental results show that our models outperform typical word embedding models including the multi-prototype version
on contextual word similarity, and also exceed latent
topic models and other representative document models on text classification. The source code of this paper can be obtained from https://github.com/largelymfs/
topical word embeddings.

Introduction
Word embedding, also known as word representation, plays
an increasingly vital role in building continuous word vectors based on their contexts in a large corpus. Word embedding captures both semantic and syntactic information of
words, and can be used to measure word similarities, which
are widely used in various IR and NLP tasks.
Most word embedding methods assume each word
preserves a single vector, which is problematic due to
homonymy and polysemy. Multi-prototype vector space
models (Reisinger and Mooney 2010) were proposed to
cluster contexts of a word into groups, then generate a distinct prototype vector for each cluster. Following this idea,
(Huang et al. 2012) proposed multi-prototype word embeddings based on neural language models (Bengio et al. 2003).
Despite of their usefulness, multi-prototype word embeddings face several challenges: (1) These models generate
multi-prototype vectors for each word in isolation, ignoring
∗

Corresponding author: Zhiyuan Liu (liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2418

