Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Family of Latent Variable Convex Relaxations for IBM Model 2
Andrei Simion

Michael Collins

Clifford Stein

Columbia University
IEOR Department
New York, NY, 10027
aas2148@columbia.edu

Columbia University
Computer Science
New York, NY, 10027
mc3354@columbia.edu

Columbia University
IEOR Department
New York, NY, 10027
cs2035@columbia.edu

Abstract

our
Qn approach relies on approximating the product function
i=1 xi with a concave function and as a supplement we
present some theoretical analysis characterizing concave
functions h that approximate this function.

Recently, a new convex formulation of IBM Model 2
was introduced. In this paper we develop the theory further and introduce a class of convex relaxations for latent variable models which include IBM Model 2. When
applied to IBM Model 2, our relaxation class subsumes
the previous relaxation as a special case. As proof of
concept, we study a new relaxation of IBM Model 2
which is simpler than the previous algorithm: the new
relaxation relies on the use of nothing more than a
multinomial EM algorithm, does not require the tuning
of a learning rate, and has some favorable comparisons
to IBM Model 2 in terms of F-Measure. The ideas presented could be applied to a wide range of NLP and
machine learning problems.

• As a specific application, we introduce a generalized
family of convex relaxations for IBM Model 2.1 Essentially, the relaxation is derived by replacing the product
t(fj |ei ) × d(i|j) with h(t(fj |ei ), d(i|j)) where h(x1 , x2 )
is a concave upper envelope for x1 x2 . We show how our
results encompass the work of (Simion, Collins, and Stein
2013) as a special case.
• We detail an optimization algorithm for a particularly simple relaxation of IBM Model 2. Unlike the previous work
in (Simion, Collins, and Stein 2013) which relied on a
exponentiated subgradient (EG) optimization method and
required the tuning of a learning rate, this relaxation can
be approached in a much simpler fashion and can be optimized by an EM algorithm that is very similar to the one
used for IBM Models 1 and 2. We show that our method
achieves a performance very similar to that of IBM Model
2 seeded with IBM 1.

Introduction
The IBM translation models (Brown et al. 1993) were the
first Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) systems; their
primary use in the current SMT pipeline is to seed more sophisticated models which need alignment tableaus to start
their optimization procedure. Although there are several
IBM Models, only IBM Model 1 can be formulated as
a convex optimization problem. Other IBM Models have
non-concave objective functions with multiple local optima, and solving a non-convex problem to optimality is
typically a computationally intractable task. Recently, using a linearization technique, a convex relaxation of IBM
Model 2 was proposed (Simion, Collins, and Stein 2013;
2014). In this work we generalize the methods introduced
in (Simion, Collins, and Stein 2013) to yield a richer set of
relaxation techniques. Our algorithms have comparable performance to previous work and have the potential for more
applications.
We make the following contributions in this paper:

Notation. Throughout this paper, for any positive integer
N , we use [N ] to denote {1 . . . N } and [N ]0 to denote
{0 . . . N }. We denote by Rn+ and Rn++ the set of nonnegative and strictly positive n dimensional vectors, respectively.
We denote by [0, 1]n the n−dimensional unit cube.

Related Work
The IBM Models were introduced in (Brown et al. 1993)
and since then there has been quite a bit of research on
them and their variants (e.g. (Vogel, Ney, and Tillman 1996;
Och and Ney 2003; Toutanova and Galley 2011; Moore
2004; Liang, Taskar, and Klein 2006)). For example, (Dyer,
Chahuneau, and Smith 2013) recently proposed a (nonconvex) variant of IBM Model 2 that focuses on generating “diagonal” alignments, allows for very fast parameter
optimization, and empirically was shown to be superior to
IBM Model 4 in generating quality translations. Moreover,

• We introduce a convexification method that may be applicable to a wide range of probabilistic models in NLP
and machine learning. In particular, since the likelihood
we are optimizing and the metric we are testing against
are often not the same (e.g. for alignment tasks we want
to maximize F-Measure, but F-Measure is not directly in
the likelihood function), different relaxations should potentially be considered for different tasks. The crux of

1

We note that there are negative results which show that certain
latent variable problems will have convex relaxations having the
uniform solution as optimal (Guo and Schuurmans 2007). However, for IBM Model 2, the data breaks such symmetries, so any
relaxation will be nontrivial.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2318

