Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Facility Location with Double-Peaked Preferences
Aris Filos-Ratsikas

Minming Li

Jie Zhang

Aarhus University, Denmark
filosra@cs.au.dk

City University of Hong Kong, HK
minming.li@cityu.edu.hk

University of Oxford, UK
jie.zhang@cs.ox.ac.uk

Qiang Zhang
University of Warsaw, Poland
qzhang@mimuw.edu.pl
from xi on opposite sides, where her cost is minimum. Traditionally, preferences in facility location problems are assumed to be single-peaked, i.e. each agent’s location is her
most preferred point on the line and her cost increases linearly (at the same rate) to the left and the right of that
peak. Sometimes however, single-peaked preferences do not
model real-life scenarios accurately. Take for instance the
example mentioned above, where the government plans to
build a primary school on a street. An agent with singlepeaked preferences would definitely want the school built
next to her house, so that she wouldn’t have to drive her
children there everyday. However, it is quite possible that
she is also not very keen on the inevitable drawbacks of
having a primary school next to her house either, like unpleasant noise or trouble with parking. On the other hand,
a five-minute walking distance is sufficiently far for those
problems to no longer be a factor but also sufficiently close
for her children to be able to walk to school. There are two
such positions, (symmetrically) in each direction, and those
would be her two peaks.
Our primary objective is to explore double-peaked preferences in facility location settings similar to the ones studied extensively for single-peaked preferences throughout
the years (Procaccia and Tennenholtz 2009; Schummer and
Vohra 2002; Lu, Wang, and Zhou 2009; Lu et al. 2010;
Alon et al. 2010; Fotakis and Tzamos 2010; Escoffier et
al. 2011; Fotakis and Tzamos 2012; Dokow et al. 2012;
Feldman and Wilf 2013). For that reason, following the literature we assume that the cost functions are the same for all
agents and that the cost increases linearly, at the same rate, as
the output moves away from the peaks. The straightforward
extension to the double-peaked case is piecewise-linear cost
functions, with the same slope in all intervals, which gives
rise to the natural model of symmetric agents, i.e. the peaks
are equidistant from the agent’s location. Note that this symmetry is completely analogous to the single-peaked case (for
facility location problems, e.g. see (Procaccia and Tennenholtz 2009)), where agents have exactly the same cost on
two points equidistant from their peaks. Our lower bounds
and impossibility results naturally extend to non-symmetric
settings, but some of our mechanisms do not. We discuss
those extensions in Section 5.
Our model also applies to more general spaces, beyond
the real line. One can imagine for instance that the goal is

Abstract
We study the problem of locating a single facility on a
real line based on the reports of self-interested agents,
when agents have double-peaked preferences, with the
peaks being on opposite sides of their locations. We observe that double-peaked preferences capture real-life
scenarios and thus complement the well-studied notion
of single-peaked preferences. We mainly focus on the
case where peaks are equidistant from the agents’ locations and discuss how our results extend to more general
settings. We show that most of the results for singlepeaked preferences do not directly apply to this setting;
this makes the problem essentially more challenging.
As our main contribution, we present a simple truthfulin-expectation mechanism that achieves an approximation ratio of 1+b/c for both the social and the maximum
cost, where b is the distance of the agent from the peak
and c is the minimum cost of an agent. For the latter
case, we provide a 3/2 lower bound on the approximation ratio of any truthful-in-expectation mechanism. We
also study deterministic mechanisms under some natural conditions, proving lower bounds and approximation
guarantees. We prove that among a large class of reasonable mechanisms, there is no deterministic mechanism that outpeforms our truthful-in-expectation mechanism.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of locating a single facility on a real
line, based on the input provided by selfish agents who wish
to minimize their costs. Each agent has a location xi ∈ R
which is her private information and is asked to report it
to some central authority, which then decides where to locate the facility, aiming to optimize some function of the
agents’ reported locations. This model corresponds to problems such as finding the ideal location for building a primary
school or a bus stop along a street, so that the total distance
of all agents’ houses from the location is minimized, or so
that no agent’s house will lie too far away from that location.
In our setting, we assume that agents have double-peaked
preferences, i.e. we assume that each agent i has two unique
most preferred points or peaks, located at some distances
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

893

