Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Mining Query Subtopics from Questions
in Community Question Answering
Yu Wu,†∗ Wei Wu,‡ Zhoujun Li,† Ming Zhou‡
†

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{wuyu,lizj}@buaa.edu.cn {wuwei,mingzhou}@microsoft.com

Abstract

many users are still used to issuing short queries on CQA
portals. For example, in a one-day search log of Yahoo! Answers, 24% of queries were shorter than 4 words and were
incomplete sentences (Wu et al. 2014). In contrast to long
question queries, short queries are usually ambiguous and
multi-faceted. Users who issue short queries may either have
difficulty in formulating a full-fledged question or just want
to browse some relevant questions and learn related knowledge. Therefore, for these queries, rather than throwing a
bulk of questions with mixed topics to users, it is better to
organize the returned questions into different clusters and
summarize each cluster with one or several keywords. The
clusters and keywords represent subtopics of a short query
and can quickly guide users to what they are looking for.
In addition to facilitating browsing in question search,
subtopics from questions also reflect users’ informational intent and thus describe queries from a question-answer perspective. The information is particularly useful for navigational queries and transactional queries in web search.
For example, “twitter” is a navigational query, and the top
subtopics mined from query logs and top search results are
“twitter.com,” “login,” “news,” etc. However, even for these
queries, people sometimes still want to seek useful information and learn knowledge about a specific aspect of the
queries. Currently, they usually post questions in CQA portals and wait for others’ help. Therefore, CQA is a valuable
resource for capturing users’ informational intent. From
questions in Yahoo! Answers, we clearly observed subtopics
for query “twitter” such as “technology,” “celebrities,” and
“search.” These subtopics clarify the aspects people would
like to ask concerning “twitter” and are valuable for query
suggestion and question recommendation in CQA search.
Table 1 gives more examples for comparing subtopics mined
from CQA, query logs, and top search results.
We propose mining query subtopics from questions in
community question answering (CQA). The subtopics are
represented as a number of clusters of questions with keywords summarizing the clusters. As far as we know, we are
the first to study the problem of query subtopic mining in
CQA. The task of subtopic mining consists of three subtasks: question retrieval, question clustering, and keyword
extraction. For question retrieval, we employ the method
proposed by Wu et al. (2014), which represents the stateof-the-art method in question retrieval for short queries.

This paper proposes mining query subtopics from questions
in community question answering (CQA). The subtopics are
represented as a number of clusters of questions with keywords summarizing the clusters. The task is unique in that the
subtopics from questions can not only facilitate user browsing in CQA search, but also describe aspects of queries from
a question-answering perspective. The challenges of the task
include how to group semantically similar questions and how
to find keywords capable of summarizing the clusters. We
formulate the subtopic mining task as a non-negative matrix
factorization (NMF) problem and further extend the model of
NMF to incorporate question similarity estimated from metadata of CQA into learning. Compared with existing methods,
our method can jointly optimize question clustering and keyword extraction and encourage the former task to enhance the
latter. Experimental results on large scale real world CQA
datasets show that the proposed method significantly outperforms the existing methods in terms of keyword extraction,
while achieving a comparable performance to the state-ofthe-art methods for question clustering.

Introduction
Community question answering (CQA) has become a popular platform for people to share their knowledge and learn
from each other. Large CQA portals like Yahoo! Answers
and Baidu Knows have integrated the functions of search engines and social media. They not only allow their users to
search and browse existing content, but also encourage them
to share and interact with others. Recently, Quora and Zhihu
have emerged as a new type of CQA service. These web
sites further enhance the social features of Yahoo! Answers
and Baidu Knows with social links between users.
With the flourishing of CQA service, researchers have
studied how to leverage the content in CQA to fulfill users’
information needs. A typical way is to let users search existing questions. A lot of work has been done along this
line (Jeon, Croft, and Lee 2005; Xue, Jeon, and Croft 2008;
Cao et al. 2009). Although existing work mainly focuses on
handling long question queries, recently, it was reported that
∗
The work was done when the first author was an intern in Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

339

