Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Graph-Sparse LDA: A Topic Model with Structured Sparsity
Finale Doshi-Velez

Byron C Wallace

Ryan Adams

Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
finale@seas.harvard.edu

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78701
byron.wallace@utexas.edu

Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
rpa@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract

understand why a certain topic within their patient’s data is
correlated with mortality (Ghassemi et al. 2012).
Applications in which interpretation is paramount present
unique challenges and opportunities for topic modeling.
Typically, topics are distributions over the words in a (very
large) vocabulary that is usually assumed to be unstructured, i.e., words do not have a priori relationships. Sparse
topic models, e.g., (Archambeau, Lakshminarayanan, and
Bouchard 2011; Williamson et al. 2010), offer some interpretability via the constraint that many of a topic’s word
probabilities should be zero. Unfortunately, when vocabularies are large, there may still be hundreds of words with
non-zero probabilities. Enforcing sparsity alone is therefore
not sufficient to induce interpretable topics.
We propose a new strategy for achieving interpretability: exploiting controlled structured vocabularies, which
exist in many technical domains. These structures encode
known relationships between words. For example, diseases
are organized into billing hierarchies, and clinical concepts
are related by directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) (Bodenreider 2004). Keywords for biomedical publications are organized in a hierarchy known as MeSH (Lipscomb 2000).
Genes are organized into pathways and interaction networks.
Such structures often summarize large bodies of scientific
research and human thought. While these structured vocabularies are necessarily imperfect, they have the important
property that they (by definition) represent how domain experts codify knowledge, and thus might help to create models
that such experts can meaningfully use and interpret. And
because they were designed to be understood by humans,
these relationships provide a form of information unique
from any learned ontology.
Existing topic modeling machinery is not equipped to
leverage controlled structured vocabularies. We propose
Graph-Sparse LDA (GS-LDA), a new model that exploits
DAG-structured vocabularies to induce interpretable topics
that still summarize the data well. Our approach is appropriate when documents are annotated with structured vocabulary terms, e.g., biomedical articles with MeSH headers, genes with known interactions, and species with known
taxonomies. GS-LDA introduces an additional layer of hierarchy into the standard LDA model: instead of topics being distributions over observed words, they are distributions
over concept-words, which then generate observed words

Topic modeling is a powerful tool for uncovering latent
structure in many domains, including medicine, finance,
and vision. The goals for the model vary depending
on the application: sometimes the discovered topics are
used for prediction or another downstream task. In other
cases, the content of the topic may be of intrinsic scientific interest. Unfortunately, even when one uses modern
sparse techniques, discovered topics are often difficult
to interpret due to the high dimensionality of the underlying space. To improve topic interpretability, we introduce Graph-Sparse LDA, a hierarchical topic model that
uses knowledge of relationships between words (e.g.,
as encoded by an ontology). In our model, topics are
summarized by a few latent concept-words from the underlying graph that explain the observed words. GraphSparse LDA recovers sparse, interpretable summaries
on two real-world biomedical datasets while matching
state-of-the-art prediction performance.

Introduction
Probabilistic topic models (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003;
Steyvers and Griffiths 2007) were originally developed to
discover latent structure in unorganized text corpora. However these models provide a powerful general framework
for uncovering structure in data drawn from many domains
(e.g., medicine, finance and vision, to name a few). In the
popular Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and
Jordan 2003) model, topics are distributions over the words
in a vocabulary, and documents are summarized by the mixture of topics that they contain. Here, a “word” is anything
that can be counted and a “document” is an observation.
LDA has been applied to a diverse set of tasks, including
finding scientific topics in articles (Griffiths and Steyvers
2004), classifying images (Fei-Fei and Perona 2005), and
recognizing human actions (Wang and Mori 2009). The
modeling objective varies depending on the application: in
some cases, topic models are used to provide compact summaries of documents that can then be used for downstream
tasks such as prediction, classification, or recognition. In
other situations, the discovered topics themselves may be of
independent interest. For example, a clinician may want to
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2575

