Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Optimal Machine Strategies to Commit to in
Two-Person Repeated Games∗
Song Zuo and Pingzhong Tang

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
zuos13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,kenshin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Sandholm 2006; Letchford and Conitzer 2010; Conitzer and
Korzhyk 2011). In such games, one player is able to convince the other that she can commit to a strategy, before
the actual game starts. Clearly, in a two-person normal form
game, being able to commit to an optimal mixed strategy
never hurts, sometimes increases the player’s utility, compared with Nash equilibrium utility. Optimal commitment
finds important application in the real-world security domain (cf. (Tambe 2011) for a comprehensive introduction).
A common scenario for such applications is to allocate a
small number of defenders to protect a relatively large number of targets, each of whom can protect one target, from
being attacked. The problem is then to compute an optimal
strategy to commit to in the induced security game.
For the commitment to be credible, one practical way is
to carry out this commitment repeatedly over time. In other
words, what the players actually engage is a repeated game.
As a result, what the leader should optimize is the commitment in a repeated game rather than the one-shot game.
In this paper, we consider the problem of computing
optimal commitment in two-person repeated game. One
straightforward observation is that the set of strategies in
an infinitely repeated game is infinite and thus previous approaches in (Conitzer and Sandholm 2006; Letchford and
Conitzer 2010; Marecki, Tesauro, and Segal 2012) do not
apply. Yet, there is a subset of strategies in such games called
automata strategies that are particularly sensible. Automata
strategy has first been studied by Rubinstein (1986) to analyze repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma and then studied extensively (Abreu and Rubinstein 1988; Banks and Sundaram
1990; Ben-Porath 1993; Neyman and Okada 2000) under
the scope of “bounded rationality”1 . Simply put, a state in
the automata represents an equivalent class of histories, over
which the player chooses the same action. State transition
function of the automata takes the action profile from the
previous round as input and transits the player to the next
state. In other words, automata is an abstracted, compact
representation of player’s strategy in repeated games. We
generalize this representation to the one allowing for infinite
number of states, which we coin machine strategies.
We make the following contributions. We begin with the

Abstract
The problem of computing optimal strategy to commit
to in various games has attracted intense research interests and has important real-world applications such
as security (attacker-defender) games. In this paper, we
consider the problem of computing optimal leader’s machine to commit to in two-person repeated game, where
the follower also plays a machine strategy.
Machine strategy is the generalized notion of automaton strategy, where the number of states in the automaton can be possibly infinite. We begin with the simple
case where both players are confined to automata strategies, and then extend to general (possibly randomized)
machine strategies.
We first give a concise linear program to compute the
optimal leader’s strategy and give two efficient implementations of the linear program: one via enumeration
of a convex hull and the other via randomization. We
then investigate the case where two machines have different levels of intelligence in the sense that one machine is able to record more history information than
the other. We show that an intellectually superior leader,
sometimes considered being exploited by the follower,
can figure out the follower’s machine by brute-force and
exploit the follower in return.

Introduction
The problems of computing game-theoretical solution concepts are of central importance to algorithmic game theory
and AI system design that adopt these solution concepts.
Examples abound, such as computation of Mixed-strategy
Nash equilibrium (Chen and Deng 2006; Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2006), correlated equilibrium (Jiang
and Leyton-Brown 2011) and Nash equilibrium in large
extensive-form game (Sandholm 2010).
Recently, much work has focused on computing optimal
strategy to commit to (aka. Stackelberg leader strategy) in
two-person games (Stengel and Zamir 2004; Conitzer and
∗

This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China Grant 2011CBA00300, 2011CBA00301, the Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61033001, 61361136003,
61303077, a Tsinghua Initiative Scientific Research Grant and a
China Youth 1000-talent program.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For introduction of automation strategy, refer to (Parkes and
Seuken 2013, Chapter 3)

1071

