Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Spatio-Temporal Signatures of User-Centric Data: How Similar Are We?
Samta Shukla

Aditya Telang, Salil Joshi, L Venkat Subramaniam

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th St, Troy, NY 12180
+1-5183346895, shukls@rpi.edu

IBM Research Lab, India

Abstract
Much work has been done on understanding and predicting human mobility in time. In this work, we are
interested in obtaining a set of users who are spatiotemporally most similar to a query user. We propose an
efficient way of user data representation called SpatioTemporal Signatures to keep track of complete record
of user movement. We define a measure called SpatioTemporal similarity for comparing a given pair of users.
Although computing exact pairwise Spatio-Temporal
similarities between query user with all users is inefficient, we show that with our hybrid pruning scheme
the most similar users can be obtained in logarithmic
time with in a (1 + ) factor approximation of the optimal. We are developing a framework to test our models
against a real dataset of urban users.

1

Figure 1: Casting user’s data traces to a ST-Signature. The traces
used here are not complete for the purpose of illustration.

activity in a user-space-time format. A Spatio-temporal Signature is a directed weighted graph where each node represents a hangout, i.e., spatial location (discretised using
an appropriate spatial index such as base-station network,
road-network, labelled grid, etc.), and each edge represents
the movement pattern, i.e., the transition between any two
hangouts. A metadata is associated with each node (and
edge) that captures frequency of visits, duration of a visit
using timestamps (duration of a timestamp can be domaindependent). In Figure 1 we illustrate how spatio-temporal
traces of a user traslates to a ST-Signature. We then give
a mathematical framework that uses ST-signature to identify similar users. Our framework leverages the observations
that 1) The frequency of a user of visiting a location exhibits
rapid decay as the location slides down the list of the user’s
preferred locations (Hasan et al. 2013) and 2) human trajectory shows a high degree of spatial regularity with a high
correlation between latitude-longitude and time, day of the
week (Sadilek and Krumm 2012).

Introduction

Humongous growth in the availablity of location tracking
devices over the last decade is making accurate humancentric data analytics a reality. Models of human spatiotemporal mobility find applications in various domains such
as targeted marketing, traffic monitoring and public safety.
For example, security agencies are interested in tracking the
common hangouts of a known suspect, determining possible
suspects whose behaviour matches the patterns of a given
suspect, predicting future hangouts of a potential suspect,
etc. An objective of interest in these cases is to identify
a group of users (e.g., potential suspects) who are spatiotemporally similar to a query user (e.g., given suspect).
Traditionally, user’s spatio-temporal traces were recorded
as unstructured trajectories in a user-time-space representation. The trajectories could be a result of (some or) all events
when an individual makes a call, uses a credit card, uses public transport, etc. The traces of user coordinates are collected
over a few months or years. Naturally, aggregating data in
this way makes it unsuitable for applications that require
continuous traces of coordinate information of all individuals. Motivated by this, we propose to represent data using
Spatio-Temporal Signature (ST-Signature) where a user’s
signature contains a complete record of their spatio-temporal

2

Spatio-temporal similarity

Let
s(u)
denotes
the
collection
of
sets
{Vu (t1 ), Vu (t2 ), . . . , Vu (tT )}, where Vu (ti ) denotes
the set of nodes (i.e., the locations) visited by user u during
timestamp ti . Let s(v) denote likewise for user v. We define
the similarity coefficient between user x and y as:

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

T (u, v) =

X |Vu (ti ) ∩ Vv (ti )|
ti

4208

|Vu (ti ) ∪ Vv (ti )|

.

