Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Blended Planning and Acting: Preliminary Approach, Research Challenges
Dana S. Nau

Malik Ghallab

Paolo Traverso

Department of Computer Science
and Institute for Systems Research
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA

LAAS/CNRS
University of Toulouse
Toulouse, France

FBK ICT IRST
Trento, Italy

tasks

Abstract
In a recent position paper in Artificial Intelligence, we argued
that the automated planning research literature has underestimated the importance and difficulty of deliberative acting,
which is more than just interleaving planning and execution.
We called for more research on the AI problems that emerge
when attempting to integrate acting with planning.
To provide a basis for such research, it will be important
to have a formalization of acting that can be useful in practice. This is needed in the same way that a formal account of
planning was necessary for research on planning. We describe
some first steps toward developing such a formalization, and
invite readers to carry out research along this line.

Methods

d
Planning
ea
ah ies
k
r
o
s
d
lo que
ho
et
m
Facts
Acting

commands

events

Execution platform

Environment

Figure 1: Acting with continual online planning.

Introduction

specialized tasks. Planning for such an actor goes beyond existing hierarchical planning techniques; its requirements and scope are significantly different. Different
modules may have different notions of what constitutes a
state or an action, and what actions are available in what
states. To integrate the modules effectively, the actor must
have ways to translate among these representations.

Research on automated planning (the automatic generation
of plans of action) has led to numerous impressive research
accomplishments by an active community of researchers.
Despite the large potential of these accomplishments, their
deployment into fielded applications has unfortunately been
relatively low. In (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2014), we argued that the acting part is more important and more difficult than researchers have realized, and that more research
is needed on the numerous AI problems that emerge when
attempting to integrate acting with planning.
AI planning research has focused mostly on offline planning. Substantial work has been done on execution control
(see the Related Work section); but most of it has treated
actions as atomic. This underestimates the importance and
difficulty of the deliberation needed to carry out the actions.
More specifically:

This focus of this paper is the long-term challenge of developing a formalization of acting that can be useful in practice. Such a formal account is needed, in the same way that
a formal account of planning was necessary for research on
planning. As steps toward developing such an account, we
propose preliminary versions of a hierarchical representation for both planning and acting, and acting and planning
algorithms using this representation. We discuss the challenges that must be overcome to extend this work.

• Acting requires continual online planning and deliberation. Throughout the acting process, an actor must refine
its actions into lower-level steps, monitor and react to unexpected events, update and repair its plans. (see Fig. 1).
Plans remain partial and abstract as long as the cost of
possible mistakes is lower than the cost of modeling, information gathering, and thorough planning.

Related Work
Our ideas build on prior research by many authors including (Rosenschein and Kaelbling 1986), (Dean and Wellman 1991), and (Pollack and Horty 1999). These problems
have been particularly of interest to the robotics community, e.g., (Despouys and Ingrand 1999; Ingham, Ragno, and
Williams 2001; Kortenkamp and Simmons 2007; Effinger,
Williams, and Hofmann 2010; Beetz, Mösenlechner, and
Tenorth 2010) and the multi-agent community, e.g., (desJardins et al. 1999; Pappachan and Durfee 2000; Brenner
and Nebel 2009).

• Actors typically are heterogeneous hierarchies: organized collections of heterogeneous modules for various
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4047

