Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

tBurton: A Divide and Conquer Temporal Planner
David Wang and Brian Williams
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

Abstract

plete set of features. Model-based planners, such as Burton
(Williams and Nayak 1997; Chung and Williams 2003), the
namesake of our planner, have exploited the causal structure of the problem in order to be fast and generative, but
lack the ability to reason over time. Timeline-based planners, such as EUROPA (Frank and Jónsson 2003) and ASPEN (Chien et al. 2000), can express rich notions of metric time and resources, but have traditionally depended on
domain-specific heuristics to efficiently guide backtracking
search. Finally, metric-time heuristic planners (Coles et al.
2010; Benton, Coles, and Coles 2012; Röger, Eyerich, and
Mattmüller 2008) have been developed that are domainindependent, fast and scalable, but lack support for important problem features, such as timed and periodic transitions.

Planning for and controlling a network of interacting
devices requires a planner that accounts for the automatic timed transitions of devices, while meeting deadlines and achieving durative goals. Consider a planner
for an imaging satellite with a camera that cannot tolerate exhaust. The planner would need to determine
that opening a valve causes a chain reaction that ignites the engine, and thus needs to shield the camera.
While planners exist that support deadlines and durative
goals, currently, no planners can handle automatic timed
transitions. We present tBurton, a temporal planner that
supports these features, while additionally producing a
temporally least-commitment plan. tBurton uses a divide and conquer approach: dividing the problem using
causal-graph decomposition and conquering each factor with heuristic forward search. The ‘sub-plans’ from
each factor are then unified in a conflict directed search,
guided by the causal graph structure. We describe why
this approach is fast and efficient, and demonstrate its
ability to improve the performance of existing planners
on factorable problems through benchmarks from the
International Planning Competition.

tBurton is a fast and efficient partial-order, temporal planner designed for networked devices. Our overall approach is
divide and conquer, a.k.a factored planning (Amir and Engelhardt 2003), but we leverage insights from model, timeline, and heuristic-based planning. Like Burton, tBurton factors the planning problem into an acyclic causal-graph and
uses this structure to impose a search ordering from child to
parent. Associated with each factor is a timeline on which
the plan will be constructed. Timelines help maintain locality of the causal information, thereby reducing the need for
time-consuming threat-detection steps common in partialorder planning. To find a plan, we use a conflict directed
search that leverages the efficiency of a heuristic-based subplanner to completely populate the timeline of a factor, before regressing the sub-goals of that plan to the timeline of
its parent.

Introduction
Embedded machines are being composed into ever more
complex networked systems, including earth observing systems and transportation networks. The complexity of these
systems require automated coordination, but controlling
these systems pose unique challenges: timed transitions –
after turning a projector off a cool-down period must be
obeyed before the projector will turn on again; periodic
transitions – a satellite’s orbit provides predictable timewindows over when it will be able to observe a phenomenon;
required concurrency (Cushing et al. 2007), – a communication channel must be open for the duration of a transmission. Furthermore, a user may wish to specify when different states need to be achieved (time-evolved goals) and may
expect a plan that allows flexibility in execution time (a temporally least-commitment plan).
While there has been a long history of planners developed for these systems, no single planner supports this com-

The contributions of this paper are three fold: first, we
introduce a planner for networked devices that supports a
set of features never before found in one planner. Second,
we introduce a new approach to factored planning based
on timeline-based regression and heuristic forward search.
Third, we demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach on
planning benchmarks.
We start by elaborating upon tBurton’s approach in the
context of prior work and introduce a running example. We
then define our notation, before presenting the algorithms
underlying tBurton. Finally, we close with an empirical validation on International Planning Competition (IPC) benchmarks.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3409

