Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Low-Rank Multi-View Learning
in Matrix Completion for Multi-Label Image Classiﬁcation
†

Meng Liu† , Yong Luo†§ , Dacheng Tao‡ , Chao Xu† , and Yonggang Wen§

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, PKU, Beijing 100871, China
Center for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, UTS, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
§
Division of Networks and Distributed Systems School of Computer Engineering, NTU, 639798, Singapore
{lemolemac, yluo180}@gmail.com, dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, ygwen@ntu.edu.sg
‡

features are missing or parts of training data labels are unknown. In addition, most algorithms are not sufﬁciently robust to outliers and background noise. To tackle these problems, matrix completion (MC) has recently been introduced
as an alternative methodology for multi-label classiﬁcation
(Goldberg et al. 2010; Cabral et al. 2011; Xu, Jin, and Zhou
2013; Yu et al. 2014). In MC-based multi-label classiﬁcation, a feature-by-item and label-by-item stacked matrix is
ﬁrst concatenated, and then the unknown feature or label entries in the concatenated matrix are completed in accordance
with the rank minimization criterion. In this way, the MCbased methods infer the labels of unlabeled data, estimate
the values of missing features, and de-noise the observed
features.
Although MC-based algorithms have many advantages
for general multi-label classiﬁcation tasks, they cannot directly handle image classiﬁcation problems (Luo et al.
2014a) when images are represented by multiple views. An
intuitive solution is to concatenate multi-view features into
a long vector, but this strategy neglects the fact that these
views are extracted from different feature spaces with different statistical properties, and as a consequence this approach
suffers from an over-ﬁtting problem when the dimension of
image features is much larger than the sample size. In addition, feature concatenation often leads to high time complexity in matrix completion and, sometimes, this time cost
is intolerable (Cai, Candès, and Shen 2010).
Here, we present a novel multi-view learning model,
termed low-rank multi-view matrix completion (lrMMC),
which effectively fuses different kinds of features in matrix
completion. Speciﬁcally, the different views are ﬁrst projected into a low-dimensional subspace by the proposed lowrank multi-view learning (lrMVL) algorithm; the subspace is
forced to be low rank to satisfy the assumption in MC. By
simultaneously minimizing the reconstruction errors and the
subspace rank, a common representation of all the views is
learned. To further explore the complementarity of different
views, a weight for the reconstruction of each view is also
learned. The optimization problem is efﬁciently solved using
an alternating algorithm, in which the sub-problem of learning the common representation is based on ﬁxed-point continuation (FPC). The learned representation is then utilized
as feature data for MC-based multi-label image classiﬁcation. The main advantages of the proposed lrMMC model

Abstract
Multi-label image classiﬁcation is of signiﬁcant interest due
to its major role in real-world web image analysis applications such as large-scale image retrieval and browsing. Recently, matrix completion (MC) has been developed to deal
with multi-label classiﬁcation tasks. MC has distinct advantages, such as robustness to missing entries in the feature and
label spaces and a natural ability to handle multi-label problems. However, current MC-based multi-label image classiﬁcation methods only consider data represented by a singleview feature, therefore, do not precisely characterize images
that contain several semantic concepts. An intuitive way to
utilize multiple features taken from different views is to concatenate the different features into a long vector; however,
this concatenation is prone to over-ﬁtting and leads to high
time complexity in MC-based image classiﬁcation. Therefore, we present a novel multi-view learning model for MCbased image classiﬁcation, called low-rank multi-view matrix
completion (lrMMC), which ﬁrst seeks a low-dimensional
common representation of all views by utilizing the proposed
low-rank multi-view learning (lrMVL) algorithm. In lrMVL,
the common subspace is constrained to be low rank so that
it is suitable for MC. In addition, combination weights are
learned to explore complementarity between different views.
An efﬁcient solver based on ﬁxed-point continuation (FPC) is
developed for optimization, and the learned low-rank representation is then incorporated into MC-based image classiﬁcation. Extensive experimentation on the challenging PASCAL VOC’ 07 dataset demonstrates the superiority of lrMMC compared to other multi-label image classiﬁcation approaches.

Introduction
Multi-label image classiﬁcation (Ciresan et al. 2011; Ma et
al. 2013), in which multiple labels are assigned to a given
image, is critical for many web-based image analysis applications. For example, a multi-label image classiﬁer might
be used to annotate a newly uploaded image to facilitate retrieval by a text-based search engine.
Over the last decade, a number of multi-label algorithms
have been proposed (Boutell et al. 2004; Tsoumakas and
Katakis 2007; Hariharan et al. 2010). However, none of
these methods are able to handle situations in which some
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2778

