Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

DeepTutor: An Effective, Online Intelligent
Tutoring System that Promotes Deep Learning
Vasile Rus, Nobal B. Niraula, Rajendra Banjade
Department of Computer Science/Institute for Intelligent Systems
The University of Memphis
{vrus,nbnraula,rbanjade}@memphis.edu

conversational intelligent tutoring is possible 24/7 at this
moment in time (Rus et al, 2014).
Our DeepTutor system is a dialogue-based system that
targets conceptual, as opposed to quantitative, problem
solving and reasoning (Rus et al., 2013). An important
reason for targeting conceptual aspects of science topics is
the fact that they are more challenging. We integrate selfexplanation learning strategies, advanced scaffolding
methods through dialogue, feedback, and the framework of
learning progressions (LPs) proposed by the science
education research community. For instance, learning
progressions are used to build advanced domain models
that organize the domain knowledge from the learner
perspective. Deep dialogue management and natural
language understanding components are needed in order to
manage the dialogue between students and the system and
understand students’ natural language utterances.
Understanding students’ natural language utterances is
crucial for assessing their knowledge level with respect to
the target domain which in turn guides the type and
frequency of feedback the system gives students.
DeepTutor offers both macro-adaptivity (instructional
tasks are selected appropriately for each student based on
her level of mastery) and micro-adaptivity (once working
on a task, students are offered help as needed based on
their individual performance on that task). Intelligent
tutoring systems that emphasize micro-adaptivity only
have been shown to induce very good learning gains in
students. These systems do offer a one-size-fits-all type of
macro-adaptivity in the sense that researchers through a
careful cognitive analysis select tasks for the target
population as a whole. That is, all students will be assigned
the same set of tasks regardless of their knowledge state.
Furthermore, results reported by these systems are from
experiments conducted in the lab while in

Abstract
We present in this paper an innovative solution to the
challenge of building effective educational technologies that
offer tailored instruction to each individual learner. The
proposed solution in the form of a conversational intelligent
tutoring system, called DeepTutor, has been developed as a
web application that is accessible 24/7 through a browser
from any device connected to the Internet. The success of
several large scale experiments with high-school students
using DeepTutor is a solid proof that conversational
intelligent tutoring at scale over the web is possible.

Introduction
We describe the intelligent tutoring system DeepTutor
(www.deeptutor.org) that aims at fortifying students’
knowledge by scaffolding their learning process while
engaging in problem-solving activities. That is, the
proposed system assists learners while applying concepts
through problem solving. A problem solving tutoring
service fits well with after-school activities in which
students typically reinforce their understanding of concepts
(first presented in the classroom) through problem solving
after school, e.g. by accessing our intelligent tutor.
Fully-online, 24/7 tutoring is possible because we
developed our system as a web service which makes it
possible for learners to access the system from anywhere,
anytime using Web-enabled devices. In two large scale
experiments with DeepTutor involving close to 1,000 high
school students, students accessed the system through a
browser from a device of their choice including
smartphones and tablets (we have an HTML5 interface).
The success of these experiments is a solid proof that

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4294

