Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Optimal Cost Almost-Sure Reachability in POMDPs∗
Krishnendu Chatterjee

Martin Chmelı́k

IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
kchatterjee@ist.ac.at

IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
mchmelik@ist.ac.at

Raghav Gupta

Ayush Kanodia

IIT Bombay
India
raghavgupta93@gmail.com

IIT Bombay
India
kanodiaayush@gmail.com

Abstract

itriou and Tsitsiklis 1987). POMDPs provide the appropriate model to study a wide variety of applications such as
in computational biology (Durbin et al. 1998), speech processing (Mohri 1997), image processing (Culik and Kari
1997), robot planning (Kress-Gazit, Fainekos, and Pappas
2009; Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998), reinforcement learning (Kaelbling, Littman, and Moore 1996), to
name a few. POMDPs also subsume many other powerful
computational models such as probabilistic finite automata
(PFA) (Rabin 1963; Paz 1971) (since PFA are a special case
of POMDPs with a single observation).
Classical optimization objectives. In stochastic optimization problems related to POMDPs, the transitions in the
POMDPs are associated with integer costs, and the two classical objectives that have been widely studied are finitehorizon and discounted-sum objectives (Filar and Vrieze
1997; Puterman 1994; Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1987).
For finite-horizon objectives, a finite length k is given and
the goal is to minimize the expected total cost for k steps. In
discounted-sum objectives, the cost in the j-th step is multiplied by γ j , for 0 < γ < 1, and the goal is to minimize the
expected total discounted cost over the infinite horizon.
Reachability and total-cost. In this work we consider a
different optimization objective for POMDPs. We consider
POMDPs with a set of target states, and the optimization
objective is to minimize the expected total cost till the target
set is reached. First, note that the objective is not the discounted sum, but the total sum without discounts. Second,
the objective is not a finite-horizon objective, as there is no
bound apriori known to reach the target set, and along different paths the target set can be reached at different time
points. The objective we consider is very relevant in many
control applications such as in robot planning: for example,
the robot has a target or goal; and the objective is to minimize the number of steps to reach the target, or every transition is associated with energy consumption and the objective
is to reach the target with minimal energy consumption.
Our contributions. In this work we study POMDPs with a
set of target states, and costs in every transition, and the goal
is to minimize the expected total cost till the target set is

We consider partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) with a set of target states and every transition
is associated with an integer cost. The optimization objective we study asks to minimize the expected total cost till
the target set is reached, while ensuring that the target set is
reached almost-surely (with probability 1). We show that for
integer costs approximating the optimal cost is undecidable.
For positive costs, our results are as follows: (i) we establish
matching lower and upper bounds for the optimal cost and the
bound is double exponential; (ii) we show that the problem of
approximating the optimal cost is decidable and present approximation algorithms developing on the existing algorithms
for POMDPs with finite-horizon objectives. While the worstcase running time of our algorithm is double exponential, we
present efficient stopping criteria for the algorithm and show
experimentally that it performs well in many examples.

1

Introduction

POMDPs. Markov decision processes (MDPs) are standard models for probabilistic systems that exhibit both
probabilistic as well as nondeterministic behavior (Howard
1960). MDPs are widely used to model and solve control
problems for stochastic systems (Filar and Vrieze 1997;
Puterman 1994): nondeterminism represents the freedom of
the controller to choose a control action, while the probabilistic component of the behavior describes the system response to control actions. In perfect-observation (or perfectinformation) MDPs the controller observes the current state
of the system precisely to choose the next control actions,
whereas in partially observable MDPs (POMDPs) the state
space is partitioned according to observations that the controller can observe, i.e., given the current state, the controller can only view the observation of the state (the partition the state belongs to), but not the precise state (Papadim∗
The research was partly supported by Austrian Science Fund
(FWF) Grant No P23499-N23, FWF NFN Grant No S11407-N23
(RiSE), ERC Start grant (279307: Graph Games), and Microsoft
faculty fellows award.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3496

