Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Complex Event Detection via Event Oriented Dictionary Learning
Yan Yan,1,∗ Yi Yang,2 Haoquan Shen,2
Deyu Meng,3 Gaowen Liu,1 Alex Hauptmann,4 Nicu Sebe1
1

University of Trento, Italy 2 University of Technology Sydney, Australia
Xi’an Jiao Tong University, China 4 Carnegie Mellon University, USA
yan@disi.unitn.it, yee.i.yang@gmail.com, shenhaoquan@gmail.com,
dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, gaowen.liu@unitn.it, alex@cs.cmu.edu, sebe@disi.unitn.it
3

Abstract

or even in a single frame but an event is usually contained in
a longer video clip.
Traditional approaches for complex event detection rely
on fusing multiple low-level features classification outputs
(Tamrakar et al. 2012), i.e. SIFT, STIP, MOSIFT (Chen
and Hauptmann 2009). Recently, representing videos using
high-level features, such as concept detectors (Snoek and
Smeulders 2010), appears promising for the complex event
detection task. However, the state-of-the-art concept detector based approaches (Jiang, Hauptmann, and Xiang 2012;
Snoek and Smeulders 2010; Ma et al. 2013; Sun and Nevatia 2013) for complex event detection have not considered
which concepts should be included in the training concept
list. This always conducts the redundancy of concepts (Ma
et al. 2013; Sun and Nevatia 2013) in the concept list for
the vocabulary construction. For example, it is highly impossible for some concepts to help detect certain event, e.g.
‘cows’, ‘football’ are not helpful to detect events like ‘Landing a fish’ or ‘Working on a sewing project’. Therefore, removing the uncorrelated concepts from the vocabulary construction inclines to eliminate such redundancy and boost
the complex event detection performance.
Intuitively, it is highly expected to be more accurate and
faster for complex event detection when we build specific
dictionary representation for each event. In this paper, we investigate how to learn a concept-driven event oriented representation for complex event detection. There are mainly twofold important issues to be considered to accomplish this
goal. The first issue is which concepts should be included
in the vocabulary construction of the learning framework.
Since we want to learn an event oriented dictionary representation, how to properly select qualified concepts for each
event in the learning framework is the key issue. This raises
the problem of how to optimally select necessary and meaningful concepts from a large pool of concepts for each event.
The second issue is how can we design an effective dictionary learning framework to seamlessly learn the common
knowledge from both the low-level features and the highlevel concept features.
To facilitate reading, we first describe some abbreviations
used in the paper. SIN stands for Sematic Indexing which
is a dataset1 containing 346 different categories (concepts)

Complex event detection is a retrieval task with the
goal of finding videos of a particular event in a largescale unconstrained internet video archive, given example videos and text descriptions. Nowadays, different
multimodal fusion schemes of low-level and high-level
features are extensively investigated and evaluated for
the complex event detection task. However, how to effectively select the high-level semantic meaningful concepts from a large pool to assist complex event detection is rarely studied in the literature. In this paper, we
propose two novel strategies to automatically select semantic meaningful concepts for the event detection task
based on both the events-kit text descriptions and the
concepts high-level feature descriptions. Moreover, we
introduce a novel event oriented dictionary representation based on the selected semantic concepts. Towards
this goal, we leverage training samples of selected concepts from the Semantic Indexing (SIN) dataset with
a pool of 346 concepts, into a novel supervised multitask dictionary learning framework. Extensive experimental results on TRECVID Multimedia Event Detection (MED) dataset demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed method.

Introduction
Complex event detection in unconstrained videos has received much attention in the research community recently
(Tamrakar et al. 2012; Ma et al. 2013; Natarajan et al. 2012).
It is a retrieval task with the goal of detecting videos of a particular event in a large-scale internet video archive, given an
event-kit. An event-kit consists of example videos and text
descriptions of the event. Unlike traditional action recognition of atomic actions, such as ‘walking’ or ‘jumping’ from
videos, complex event detection aims to detect more complex events such as ‘Birthday party’, ‘Changing a vehicle
tire’, etc.
An event is a higher level semantic abstraction of video
sequences than a concept and consists of many concepts.
For example, a ‘Birthday party’ event can be described by
multiple concepts, such as objects (e.g., boy, cake), actions
(e.g., talking, walking) and scene (e.g., at home, in a restaurant). A concept can be detected in a shorter video sequence
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3841

http://www-nlpir.nist.gov/projects/tv2013/tv2013.html#sin

