Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

SoF: Soft-Cluster Matrix Factorization for Probabilistic Clustering
Han Zhao† , Pascal Poupart† , Yongfeng Zhang§ and Martin Lysy‡
†

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
‡
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of Waterloo, Canada
†‡
{han.zhao, ppoupart, mlysy}@uwaterloo.ca, § zhangyf07@gmail.com
§

Abstract

In this paper, we propose a novel probabilistic clustering
algorithm based on Soft-cluster Matrix Factorization (SoF).
Different from previous approaches, SoF does not make assumptions about the data density distribution. Instead, SoF
employs a distance function between pairs of input points
to induce their co-cluster probabilities. By directly considering the co-cluster probabilities, SoF can model clusters
with various patterns, including both convex and non-convex
clusters. The input to SoF consists of a set of data points, a
distance function L over these data points, and the number
of clusters, K. As we will see later, the choice of distance
function L reflects our prior knowledge about the clustering
task.
SoF has a close connection with constrained symmetric NMF. In the past few years, algorithms for solving
NMF have been studied extensively (Seung and Lee 2001;
Kim and Park 2008a; 2008b; 2008c; Kuang, Park, and Ding
2012) and applied to clustering tasks. However, to the best
of our knowledge, the connection between NMF and probabilistic clusterings is not well understood. The objective
function in our framework reveals an intrinsic connection
between probabilistic clustering and constrained symmetric
NMF, hence giving a theoretical justification for the application of symmetric NMF techniques to clustering tasks. Furthermore, we will show that the true pairwise co-cluster matrix for probabilistic clustering is actually a completely positive matrix, which is NP-hard to determine (Berman and
Shaked-Monderer 2003). Our clustering algorithm can then
be viewed as approximating the completely positive matrix
in a relaxed cone space, which is a better approximation than
other existing NMF based algorithms. To solve SoF efficiently, we derive a sequential minimization framework to
optimize the objective. Experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets show that SoF is able to find non-convex
clusters due to the absence of any density assumption and
its probabilistic nature can be used to detect boundaries between multiple clusters.

We propose SoF (Soft-cluster matrix Factorization), a probabilistic clustering algorithm which softly assigns each data
point into clusters. Unlike model-based clustering algorithms,
SoF does not make assumptions about the data density distribution. Instead, we take an axiomatic approach to define 4
properties that the probability of co-clustered pairs of points
should satisfy. Based on the properties, SoF utilizes a distance measure between pairs of points to induce the conditional co-cluster probabilities. The objective function in
our framework establishes an important connection between
probabilistic clustering and constrained symmetric Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF), hence providing a theoretical interpretation for NMF-based clustering algorithms.
To optimize the objective, we derive a sequential minimization algorithm using a penalty method. Experimental results
on both synthetic and real-world datasets show that SoF significantly outperforms previous NMF-based algorithms and
that it is able to detect non-convex patterns as well as cluster
boundaries.

Introduction
Clustering algorithms have played an important role in various research tasks, including but not limited to document
clustering (Steinbach et al. 2000; Xu, Liu, and Gong 2003),
image segmentation (Shi and Malik 2000) and gene clustering (Thalamuthu et al. 2006). Recently, probabilistic clustering has gained in popularity and application (He et al. 2011;
Jain 2010; Aggarwal and Reddy 2013) because the probabilistic nature of the clusters facilitates their integration into
several tasks including latent semantic indexing (Ding, Li,
and Peng 2008), probabilistic pre-training in deep learning
techniques (Erhan et al. 2010), etc. Most of the existing
probabilistic clustering algorithms attempt to infer the posterior cluster distribution by assuming a family of density
distributions, typical examples include the Gaussian mixture
model, the Dirichlet process (Biernacki, Celeux, and Govaert 2000), the Wishart-Dirichlet process (Vogt et al. 2010),
etc. However, the assumed family may not include the distribution of the data, hence a flexible and data-driven approach
is desirable.

Preliminaries
Given a set of input points I = {vi ∈ Rd | i = 1, . . . , N }
and the number of clusters K, the task of probabilistic clustering is to associate a probability vector p ∈ RK to each
point v ∈ I, where the jth component of p represents the
probability that v is assigned to the jth cluster. The proba-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3188

