Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Active Learning by Learning
Wei-Ning Hsu

Hsuan-Tien Lin

Department of Electrical Engineering,
National Taiwan University
mhng1580@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering,
National Taiwan University
htlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

Consider the scenario when we were children. We were
not commanded to ask questions based on a single philosophy. Instead, it is our nature to experiment with several
different (perhaps given) philosophies, and gradually determine the advantages and disadvantages of each philosophy in different situations by evaluating our learning performance along the way. That is, we learn our own powerful
strategy as we grow, rather than merely implementing one
fixed strategy. In other words, we conduct active learning by
learning, as opposed to active learning by acting.
In this paper, we study how the machines can likewise
conduct active learning by learning, instead of merely acting with a single human-designed strategy. We consider a
practical task that mimics our childhood learning scenario:
letting the machine learn to adaptively choose among some
existing strategies based on their estimated contributions to
the performance measure of interest. We connect the task to
the multi-armed bandit problem for adaptive decision making (Beygelzimer et al. 2011). Consequently, we propose a
novel approach for active learning that involves modifying a
state-of-the-art method to solve the problem, and deriving a
reward scheme that closely relates to the performance measure of interest. The proposed approach, shorthanded A LBL
for active learning by learning, essentially results in a clever
probabilistic blending of the strategies subject to their timevarying performance on the given data set, and echoes adaptive blending approaches for other machine learning problems (Jacobs et al. 1991).
We also empirically compare A LBL with several humandesigned strategies, and demonstrate that A LBL is indeed
able to use the derived reward to adaptively choose the best
strategy and therefore achieve the best performance. Furthermore, experimental results show that A LBL is not only
significantly better than a naive blending approach, but is
also often better than the state-of-the-art adaptive blending
approach C OMB (Baram, El-Yaniv, and Luz 2004), which is
based on a human-designed criterion during blending. The
results indicate that A LBL is a superior choice for blending
human-designed strategies adaptively.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the active learning problem and reviews related work. Section 3 presents and illustrates the proposed
A LBL approach. We discuss experimental results in Section 4 and conclude in Section 5.

Pool-based active learning is an important technique
that helps reduce labeling efforts within a pool of
unlabeled instances. Currently, most pool-based active learning strategies are constructed based on some
human-designed philosophy; that is, they reflect what
human beings assume to be “good labeling questions.”
However, while such human-designed philosophies can
be useful on specific data sets, it is often difficult to establish the theoretical connection of those philosophies
to the true learning performance of interest. In addition,
given that a single human-designed philosophy is unlikely to work on all scenarios, choosing and blending
those strategies under different scenarios is an important
but challenging practical task. This paper tackles this
task by letting the machines adaptively “learn” from the
performance of a set of given strategies on a particular
data set. More specifically, we design a learning algorithm that connects active learning with the well-known
multi-armed bandit problem. Further, we postulate that,
given an appropriate choice for the multi-armed bandit learner, it is possible to estimate the performance of
different strategies on the fly. Extensive empirical studies of the resulting A LBL algorithm confirm that it performs better than state-of-the-art strategies and a leading blending algorithm for active learning, all of which
are based on human-designed philosophy.

1

Introduction

Active learning is a machine learning setup that enables machines to cleverly “ask questions” to reduce the amount of
labeling efforts (Settles 2010). The vast majority of research
work on active learning is focused on transforming the
human philosophy of asking questions into programmable
strategies (Tong and Koller 2002; Donmez and Carbonell
2008; Huang, Jin, and Zhou 2010). When the philosophy
happens to match the characteristics of the data set on hand,
the corresponding strategy can result in promising practical performance. However, there are many different philosophies behind different “human-asked” questions, and no single philosophy is likely to satisfy the characteristics of every
data set. For any given data set, properly choosing the strategies is thus an important practical task.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2659

