Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Knowledge-Based Probabilistic Logic Learning
Reid Porter

Tushar Khot

Phillip Odom
Dept. of Computer Science
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN

Intelligence and
Dept. of Computer Science
Space Research Division
University of Wisconsin
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Madison, WI
Los Alamos, NM

Abstract

Sriraam Natarajan
School of Informatics
and Computing
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN

and Shavlik 1994), Knowledge-based Support Vector Machines (Fung, Mangasarian, and Shavlik 2002) and their recent adaptations (Kunapuli et al. 2010; 2013) have explored
the combination of knowledge and data to handle systematic
noise. While specific adaptations differ, all these methods
take as advice Horn clauses and convert them to their corresponding representation. We on the other hand, aim at better
integrating the advice (as Horn clauses) with a probabilistic
logic model (PLM). Our work can thus be viewed as preference elicitation (Boutilier 2002; Drummond and Boutilier
2014) for PLMs.
Specifically, we consider a recently successful PLM formalism called as Relational Functional Gradient Boosting
(RFGB) (Natarajan et al. 2012) as the underlying base
learner and provide human guided advice to this learning
framework. Our advice consists of preferred and avoided
target labels (labels that should have higher probability than
other labels) defined over spaces of examples. The space of
examples where the advice applies is given by horn clauses
which can be thought of as if-then rules specified by experts.
Since our underlying representation is also based on firstorder logic, the system can more faithfully exploit the advice compared to converting it to a different representation
internally by the learning algorithm.
We show that the proposed framework is not restricted
to a particular type of PLM model. Specifically, we show
that several formalisms and tasks such as Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) (Domingos and Lowd 2009), Relational Dependency Networks (RDNs) (Neville and Jensen 2007), relational imitation learning (Natarajan et al. 2011) and relational transfer can benefit from this framework. Our framework uses both the advice and the data throughout learning process and allows for sequential interaction where the
expert could potentially add more advice as learning progresses.
We make the following contributions - (1) We present the
first work on exploiting human advice while learning several
PLMs (2) We outline a natural framework for the human to
provide general advice about the domain as well as specific
advice about particular examples (3) Our method naturally
integrates human input with examples in a boosting formalism and (4) Finally, our experiments on a several data sets
demonstrate that the framework efficiently exploits the human advice in learning effective models.

Advice giving has been long explored in artificial intelligence
to build robust learning algorithms. We consider advice giving in relational domains where the noise is systematic. The
advice is provided as logical statements that are then explicitly considered by the learning algorithm at every update. Our
empirical evidence proves that human advice can effectively
accelerate learning in noisy structured domains where so far
humans have been merely used as labelers or as designers of
initial structure of the model.

Introduction
Advice taking methods have a rich and long history in artificial intelligence - from the time of explanation based learning (DeJong and Mooney 1986) to theory refinement (Baffes
and Mooney 1996). The key motivation underlying this research direction is that the experts possess a vast amount of
knowledge in their respective fields of which many purely
data-driven machine learning techniques (Mitchell 1997;
Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor 2000; Schapire and Freund
2012) fail to take full advantage. Exploiting advice in various forms has yielded successful learning algorithms particularly in the context of reinforcement learning (Torrey et
al. 2005; Wiewiora, Cottrell, and Elkan 2003; Ng, Harada,
and Russell 1999) where the advice is essentially used as
reward shaping. In supervised learning, typically, advice is
provided as feature selection and/or as inductive bias on initial models. In graphical models, advice is typically used as
an initial structure that is refined (Heckerman 1999).
A key assumption (particularly in supervised learning approaches) is that the data can be used to refine or fix human
advice. In several tasks however, the noise in the data can be
systematic. For instance, while driving it is quite common to
run stop signs or in segmentation tasks, it is often possible
to miss small minute segments. The key issue is that noise
in such cases is not random. However, a human expert could
provide robust advice in such cases - for instance, “stop at
stop signs without fail” and “the small blurb on the image
should be a segment in itself” etc. We address such systematic noise and targeted advice.
Incorporating prior knowledge in machine learning has
a rich history. Knowledge-based Neural Networks (Towell
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3564

