Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Automatic Assessment of OCR Quality in Historical Documents
Anshul Gupta1, Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna1, Matthew Christy2, Boris Capitanu3,
Loretta Auvil3, Liz Grumbach2, Richard Furuta1, and Laura Mandell2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
Initiative for Digital Humanities, Media, and Culture, Texas A&M University
3
Illinois Informatics Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{anshulg,rgutier,mchristy,egrumbac,furuta,mandell}@tamu.edu, {capitanu,lauvil}@illinois.edu
2

Abstract

and three generations away from the originals.
Motivated by these issues, in 2013 we started the Early
Modern OCR Project (eMOP; http://emop.tamu.edu) with
funding from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. eMOP is
a two-year mass digitization project that seeks to improve
OCR for some 45 million pages from the Eighteenth
Century Collections Online (ECCO) and Early English
Books Online (EEBO) proprietary database products. Our
goal extends beyond producing accurate transcriptions for
these collections, and also aims to create tools
(dictionaries, workflows, and databases) to support
scholarly research at libraries and museums. Much like our
team, these organizations lack the resources to manually
transcribe their collections or contract with commercial
OCR services (e.g., Prime Recognition Corp.) As such,
and as required by our sponsor, all tools used and produced
by eMOP must remain free or open-source.
As a step towards this goal, this paper describes an
approach to assess the quality of historical documents that
does not require image processing or human tagging. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, when a document has poor quality, the
OCR engine generally produces a large number of spurious
bounding boxes (BBs) in addition to those that correspond
to words in the document. As we will show, it is possible
to discriminate between noisy and text BBs by analyzing
statistical differences in their shape, size, position and
confidence score returned by the OCR engine. This
approach is advantageous for two main reasons. First, it
does not require dedicated image processing algorithms
(Farahmand, Sarrafzadeh et al. 2013), which can become
prohibitive for large document collections. Second, the
approach is language-agnostic because it relies exclusively
on geometrical properties of BBs rather than the text
transcription associated with them.
In the sections that follow, we propose an iterative
relabeling algorithm to classify BBs into text or noise, and
validate it on a dataset containing 159 mid-to-poor quality
documents (over 72,000 manually-labeled BBs). Then, we
illustrate how the algorithm can be used to obtain an

Mass digitization of historical documents is a challenging
problem for optical character recognition (OCR) tools.
Issues include noisy backgrounds and faded text due to
aging, border/marginal noise, bleed-through, skewing,
warping, as well as irregular fonts and page layouts. As a
result, OCR tools often produce a large number of spurious
bounding boxes (BBs) in addition to those that correspond
to words in the document. This paper presents an iterative
classification algorithm to automatically label BBs (i.e., as
text or noise) based on their spatial distribution and
geometry. The approach uses a rule-base classifier to
generate initial text/noise labels for each BB, followed by
an iterative classifier that refines the initial labels by
incorporating local information to each BB, its spatial
location, shape and size. When evaluated on a dataset
containing over 72,000 manually-labeled BBs from 159
historical documents, the algorithm can classify BBs with
0.95 precision and 0.96 recall. Further evaluation on a
collection of 6,775 documents with ground-truth
transcriptions shows that the algorithm can also be used to
predict document quality (0.7 correlation) and improve
OCR transcriptions in 85% of the cases.

Introduction
Optical character recognition (OCR) of historical texts in
the hand-press period (roughly 1475-1800) is a challenging
task due to the characteristics of the physical documents
and the quality of their scanned images. Early printing
processes (printing presses, mass paper production, handmade typefaces) produced texts with fluctuating baselines,
mixed fonts, and varied concentrations of ink, among many
other irregularities. To make matters worse, the existing
digital collections for documents of that period largely
consist of binary (i.e., as opposed to grayscale), lowquality and low-resolution images, the result of digitization
from microfilm converted from photographs –four decades



Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1735

