Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Deep Representation Learning with Target Coding
Shuo Yang1 , Ping Luo2,1 , Chen Change Loy1,2 , Kenneth W. Shum1 , and Xiaoou Tang1,2
1

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Key Lab of CVPR, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
{ys014,pluo,ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {wkshum}@inc.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

30

2

1

20

We consider the problem of learning deep representation when target labels are available. In this paper, we
show that there exists intrinsic relationship between target coding and feature representation learning in deep
networks. Specifically, we found that distributed binary
code with error correcting capability is more capable of
encouraging discriminative features, in comparison to
the 1-of-K coding that is typically used in supervised
deep learning. This new finding reveals additional benefit of using error-correcting code for deep model learning, apart from its well-known error correcting property.
Extensive experiments are conducted on popular visual
benchmark datasets.

0

10

-1

-2

0
-3

-10

-4

-5

-20
-6

-30
-10

0

10

20

30

40

(a) 1-of-K coding

50

-7
-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

(b) Hadamard coding

Figure 1: Is 1-of-K the best target coding? To examine the feature
representation when a deep model is trained with different coding
schemes, we project the features extracted from a deep convolutional neural network’s penultimate layer to a two-dimensional embedding using multi-dimensional scaling. Hadamard coding is capable of separating all visually ambiguous classes {9, 8, 6}, which
are confused in 1-of-K coding.

Introduction
Learning robust and invariant representation has been a
long-standing goal in computer vision. In comparison to
hand-crafted visual features, such as SIFT or HoG, features learned by deep models have recently been shown
more capable of capturing abstract concepts invariant to
various phenomenon in visual world, e.g. viewpoint, illumination, and clutter (Girshick et al. 2014; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Ouyang et al. 2014; Sun, Wang,
and Tang 2014; Sun et al. 2014; Zhu et al. 2014; 2013;
Luo, Wang, and Tang 2012). Hence, an increasing number
of studies are now exploring the use of deep representation (Razavian et al. 2014) on vision problems, particularly
on classification tasks.
Existing studies first learn a deep model, e.g. convolutional neural network, in a supervised manner. The 1-of-K
coding, containing vectors of length K, with the k-th element as one and the remaining zeros, is typically used along
with a softmax function for classification. Each element in a
1-of-K code represents a probability of a specific class. Subsequently, the features of a raw image are extracted from the
penultimate layer (the layer before the output layer) or shallower layers, to form a high-dimensional feature vector as
input to classifiers such as Support Vector Machine (SVM).
Is 1-of-K the best target coding method? The goal of this
paper is to investigate an alternative target coding approach
for the aforementioned deep feature learning pipeline. There

have been intensive efforts to improve supervised learning
of deep models, e.g. joint learning of embedding task using
unlabeled data (Weston, Ratle, and Collobert 2008), multitask learning (Zhang et al. 2014), introducing intermediate
training phase (Goh et al. 2013), and replacing softmax layer
with SVM (Tang 2013). Nevertheless, the influence of target
coding is little explored in deep representation learning. We
believe that feature representation can be influenced by the
training signals encoded in the target formation. We therefore hypothesize that better features can be induced if we
design the target code appropriately through coding theory.
Target coding is gaining popularity in machine learning
community for the multi-label prediction problem (Hsu et
al. 2009; Cisse et al. 2013). The studies that are closer to
our work are (Dietterich and Bakiri 1994; Langford and
Beygelzimer 2005), which solve multi-class learning problems via error-correcting output codes. The key idea of these
studies is to exploit error-correcting codes as target vectors,
so that a classifier can recover from constant fraction of binary errors in target prediction. Our work has a different focus: we wish to investigate how a target coding would influence the feature representation in a deep network, beyond its
current use for error correcting. This perspective is new.
We present our interesting observation in Figure 1 to
demonstrate what one could achieve by replacing 1-of-K

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3848

