Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Congestion Games with Distance-Based Strict Uncertainty
Reshef Meir and David Parkes∗
Harvard University

Abstract

and other biases, often applying heuristics rather than optimization. Such alternative approaches to decision making in
general, and to uncertainty in particular, have deep roots in
the AI literature, largely due to the works of Herbert Simon
on bounded rationality and procedural rationality (Simon
1957; 1987).
Having adopted a non-probabilistic approach, we must
make two crucial modeling decisions. First, we must decide
how each agent acts in the face of strict uncertainty. The
simplest behavior follows a minimax approach (Wald 1939;
Simon 1957), and assumes that the decision maker is trying
to minimize her worst-case cost (WCC). Another approach
seeks to minimize the worst-case regret (WCR) of the decision maker, which goes back to Savage (1951), and has been
also applied to games (Hyafil and Boutilier 2004). Both cost
measures are worst-case approaches, and suitable as an abstraction for the behavior of a rational but risk-averse agent.
Second, we need to determine which states are considered possible by the agents. To construct the set of possible
states, we adopt the recent model of distance-based uncertainty (Meir, Lev, and Rosenschein 2014). All agents share
the same belief about the current “reference state” of the network (i.e., the load on every edge in a routing game), which
may be available for example from an external source such
as traffic reports, or from an agent’s previous experience.
However agents vary in the accuracy they attribute to the
reference state. Each agent i has an uncertainty parameter,
ri , which reflects a belief that the actual load is within some
distance ri of the reference load. A higher ri may reflect either that an agent is less informed about the true congestion,
or, alternatively, that she is more risk-averse.
From each heuristic (WCC or WCR) we can derive a natural equilibrium concept. Intuitively, every action profile induces a reference state s, and we consider the heuristic best
response of every agent to the set of possible states around s.
State s is an equilibrium if every agent minimizes her worst
case cost (or regret) by keeping her current action.
As a simple example, if in some profile 100 players are
using a resource, then agent i believes the actual load to be
anywhere between 100/ri and 100ri . If ri = 1 for all agents,
we get the standard complete information model as a special
case: both minimax cost and minimax regret collapse to simple cost minimization, and our equilibrium notion coincides
with Nash equilibrium.

We put forward a new model of congestion games where
agents have uncertainty over the routes used by other agents.
We take a non-probabilistic approach, assuming that each
agent knows that the number of agents using an edge is within
a certain range. Given this uncertainty, we model agents who
either minimize their worst-case cost (WCC) or their worstcase regret (WCR), and study implications on equilibrium
existence, convergence through adaptive play, and efficiency.
Under the WCC behavior the game reduces to a modified congestion game, and welfare improves when agents have moderate uncertainty. Under WCR behavior the game is not, in
general, a congestion game, but we show convergence and
efficiency bounds for a simple class of games.

Introduction
Congestion games (Rosenthal 1973) provide a good abstraction for a wide spectrum of scenarios where self-interested
agents contest for resources, and can be conveniently analyzed using game-theoretic tools.
Recently, more complex models of congestion games
have been suggested, taking into account the incomplete
information agents may have when making a decision
(e.g. Ashlagi et al. (2009) and Piliouras et al. (2013); see Related Work). Uncertainty may stem from multiple sources,
including uncertainty about the state of nature– and thus
the cost of resources –or about other agents’ actions. We
can imagine commuters choosing routes home from work
and facing uncertainty about road conditions (e.g., weather,
roadworks) as well as about the routes selected by others.
Rather than model uncertainty through a distributional
model, we adopt a non-probabilistic approach of strict
uncertainty. Indeed, extensive experimental and empirical
studies have demonstrated that people have difficulties in
representing probabilities, and often adopt other heuristics
in place of probabilistic reasoning (Tversky and Kahneman 1974; Slovic, Fischhoff, and Lichtenstein 1980). With
strict uncertainty, each player faces a set of possible states,
where the cost of each action depends on the (unknown)
actual state, and decisions take into account risk attitudes
∗
Parkes is supported in this work by the TomKat Charitable
Trust.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

986

