Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Predicting the Quality of User Experiences to Improve Productivity and Wellness
Priya L. Donti and Jacob Rosenbloom and Alex Gruver and James C. Boerkoel Jr.
Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, CA
{pdonti, jrosenbloom, agruver, boerkoel}@g.hmc.edu

Introduction

them during immersive experiences. Second, we found that
participants enjoyed becoming more self aware by responding to ESM surveys, but that surveys were sometimes overly
invasive or occurred when users could not respond (for example, during class). This information led us to hypothesize
that using an adaptive ESM notification scheme that adapts
to a user’s calendar as part of PaWPal would allow users to
train the application without being excessively interrupted.
Finally, we learned that there are easily identifiable features
such as time of day, day of the week, location, and interaction with others that are correlated with flow, leading us to
hypothesize that we can accurately predict user efficacy.

College students often struggle to balance their work with
personal wellness. In part, this occurs because students work
when they are unable to focus. While there are many successful scheduling agents deployed worldwide (Berry et al.
2011; Pollack 2005), these applications require users to predict and specify their own schedules and preferences, which,
due to the cognitive load placed on the user, is an inherent
source of inaccuracies when characterizing productivity.
An alternative approach to increasing both productivity
and wellness is to help users achieve flow. Flow is a state in
which people feel focused, motivated, and fully immersed
in their activity, resulting in feelings of satisfaction and
even joy (Csikszentmihalyi 1991). The Experience Sampling Method (ESM), in which users are randomly surveyed
throughout the day about their experiences, is a well-studied
mechanism for characterizing flow (Hektner, Schmidt, and
Csikszentmihalyi 2007).
We hypothesize that we can adapt ESM to build a model
of users’ efficacy and predict when they will be most likely
to experience flow. We also hypothesize that we can present
this information effectively to users, allowing them to understand when they are most likely to achieve flow. Instead of
creating a full schedule, we strive to inform users about their
own work habits so they can schedule their activities more
effectively. In order to test these hypotheses, we introduce
the Productivity and Wellness Pal (PaWPal), a smartphonebased application that seeks to make users aware of their
efficacy at various tasks as well as which courses of action
are likely to lead to immersive experiences.

PaWPal’s Design
PaWPal’s current design as an Android application reflects
our takeaways from the ESM study. The application incorporates adaptive ESM and learns on collected data to make
predictions about a user’s efficacy.

Adaptive ESM
Currently, PaWPal uses Google Calendar data to analyze
when a user is free or busy. Then, it randomly schedules survey notifications during users’ free time or, if the user does
not have enough free time, randomly throughout the day in
a classic ESM style. The number of notifications is initially
set to six, reduced from our preliminary ESM study due to
the shorter sampling window. The eventual goal is that once
PaWPal collects enough data about a particular individual, it
can intelligently issue notifications only in moments where
it needs more information. Although users may fill out their
calendars inaccurately, we hope to additionally use inference
and location-based methods to improve data accuracy.

Refining Our Hypothesis Using ESM
To understand the factors influencing student productivity
and wellness, we conducted a weeklong study at Harvey
Mudd College in April 2014. Using the ESM app PACO
(Evans 2012), we surveyed twenty-five participants at eight
randomly selected times each day about contextual and situational information informing their current experience.
Our study resulted in three takeaways about how PaWPal
could improve users’ decision making processes. First, users
reported that smartphone-based ESM surveys did not disrupt

Predicting Users’ Experiences
PaWPal uses Support Vector Regression to predict a user’s
efficacy at four different activity types: curricular, extracurricular, social, and restorative. To do this, PaWPal trains
three regression models which predict effectiveness, immersion, and emotional state. High levels of each of these
qualities produce a state where the user is more likely to
work quickly without being easily distracted or emotionally
strained—in other words, a state of flow. The advantage of
using SVR is that the technique is easily extensible, allowing

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4154

