Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Unsupervised Phrasal Near-Synonym Generation from Text Corpora
Dishan Gupta

Jaime Carbonell

Anatole Gershman

Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
dishang@cs.cmu.edu

Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
jgc@cs.cmu.edu

Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
anatole.gershman@gmail.com

Steve Klein

David Miller

Meaningful Machines, LLC
steve@applecoreholdings.com

Meaningful Machines, LLC
dave@applecoreholdings.com

Abstract

may involve no more than a thesaurus lookup, the general
case of finding near-synonymous multi-word phrases requires a generative process based on analysis of large corpora. For instance our method finds the following synonyms/near-synonyms for “it is fair to say”: “it’s safe to
say”, “we all understand”, “it’s pretty clear”, “we believe”,
“it’s well known”, “it’s commonly accepted”, and so on.
The meanings of these phrases are quite close, yet that is
not the case for many of their corresponding words individually. Moreover, for proper nouns our method finds orthographic variants (after all they are the best synonyms)
as well as descriptive near-synonyms, e.g. for “Al Qaeda”
it finds: “Al Qaida”, “Al-Qaeda network”, “jihadist group”,
“terrorist organization”, “Bin Laden’s followers”. It is
clear how near-synonym phrases help in text mining, such
as finding occurrences of entities of interest in text corpora
or text streams, and discovering relations expressed in different ways in large and diverse natural language corpora.
The importance of near-synonymy has been noted by
many researchers, such as Metzler and Hovy (2011) in
many tasks such as processing Twitter feeds. It is also crucial in information retrieval, especially if recall truly matters, where searching for synonyms of queries may be of
high value. For instance if one wants “cheap housing” then
also searching for “affordable homes” might prove useful.
Or if typing “heart attack” one might also want “cardiac
arrest” or “heart failure” to also be searched via query expansion. Search engines are starting to offer expanded
search automatically, but in so far as one can observe, only
via highly-related single-word substitutions. Moreover, to
emulate a phrasal thesaurus, a live (scalable) system is essential since a precompiled database (Ganitkevitch et al.
2013) no matter how large, cannot achieve full coverage.
This paper develops a new method for discovering near
synonym phrases based on common surrounding context
relying on an extension of Harris’ Distributional Hypothesis (Harris 1985) – the more instances of common context,
the more specific said context, and the longer the shared
contexts, the stronger the potential synonymy relation, relying only on a large monolingual corpus, and thus can be
applied to any language without the need of pre-existing

Unsupervised discovery of synonymous phrases is useful in
a variety of tasks ranging from text mining and search engines to semantic analysis and machine translation. This paper presents an unsupervised corpus-based conditional
model: Near-Synonym System (NeSS) for finding phrasal
synonyms and near synonyms that requires only a large
monolingual corpus. The method is based on maximizing
information-theoretic combinations of shared contexts and
is parallelizable for large-scale processing. An evaluation
framework with crowd-sourced judgments is proposed and
results are compared with alternate methods, demonstrating
considerably superior results to the literature and to thesaurus look up for multi-word phrases. Moreover, the results
show that the statistical scoring functions and overall scalability of the system are more important than language specific NLP tools. The method is language-independent and
practically useable due to accuracy and real-time performance via parallel decomposition.

Introduction
Synonymy is recognized as having various degrees that
range from complete contextual substitutability or absolute
synonymy through to near-synonymy or plesionymy (Curran 2004). Hirst (1995) summarizes the definition of plesionyms (near-synonyms) as words that are close in meaning, not fully inter-substitutable but varying in their shades
of denotation, connotation, implicature, emphasis or register. The above definition can be extended to multi-word
phrases, for example the pair “extremely difficult” and
“very challenging”. In particular, synonymy is a much narrower subset as compared to the general task of paraphrasing, as the latter may encompass many forms of semantic
relationships (Barzilay and McKeown 2001).
Phrasal near-synonym extraction is extremely important
in domains such as natural language processing, information retrieval, text summarization, machine translation,
and other AI tasks. Whereas finding near-synonyms for individual words or possibly very common canned phrases
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2253

