Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Trust Models for RDF Data: Semantics and Complexity∗
Valeria Fionda and Gianluigi Greco
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
University of Calabria, Italy
{fionda,ggreco}@mat.unical.it

Abstract

to data and being able to reason about them. To this end,
the starting point of our analysis is the trust model proposed
by (Hartig 2009), who firstly advocated the need of a uniform way to rate the trustworthiness of RDF data and of
mechanisms to access and use these ratings. In fact, the analysis of (Hartig 2009) has been mainly carried out from the
conceptual viewpoint, so that a number of the properties of
the trust model, related to semantic and complexity issues,
remain unexplored. In this paper we fill the gap.
In more detail, we first propose a model-theoretic semantics for the trust model by (Hartig 2009). The semantics is
based on the concept of trust aggregation functions, which
are functions designed to aggregate trust values coming from
different RDF triples (Section 3.1). We then analyze the
computational properties exhibited by the proposed framework (Section 3.2), and it turns out that:
I Even simple reasoning problems, such as checking
whether there is a model for a given RDF graph, become
intractable, formally NP-hard, in presence of trust information for general trust aggregation functions.
Motivated by the above bad news, we focus on specific
classes of trust aggregation functions computable via binary
trust operators, in the spirit of the general framework for
annotated RDF data by (Zimmermann et al. 2012) and some
proposals in relational (Karvounarakis and Green 2012) and
RDF databases (Buneman and Kostylev 2010) where commutative semirings are considered. Within these classes, we
analyze the concepts of entailment, equivalence, and core
as suitable adaptations of corresponding concepts for RDF
data (Gutierrez et al. 2011) and we study their intrinsic computational complexity (Section 4). It turns out that:
I The syntactic restriction introduced by trust operators is a
key for the tractability of the reasoning problems in presence of trust information.
I While entailment, equivalence, and core are grounded on
the semantics of the representation language, tight syntactic characterizations can be exhibited for them.
I Islands of tractability for these concepts can be singled
out based on the structural properties of the interactions
among the data. In particular, tractability can be established for acyclic or nearly-acyclic RDF graphs.
Finally, we point out that the trust framework and all the
algorithms proposed in the paper have been implemented

Due to the openness and decentralization of the Web, mechanisms to represent and reason about the reliability of RDF
data become essential. This paper embarks on a formal analysis of RDF data enriched with trust information by focusing
on the characterization of its model-theoretic semantics and
on the study of relevant reasoning problems. The impact of
trust values on the computational complexity of well-known
concepts related to the entailment of RDF graphs is studied.
In particular, islands of tractability are identified for classes of
acyclic and nearly-acyclic graphs. Moreover, an implementation of the framework and an experimental evaluation on real
data are discussed.

1

Introduction

The Resource Description Framework (RDF) is the basic
representation language for the Semantic Web, where data
is exposed as a set of triples expressing the properties that
hold among a given universe of resources, identified by
URIs (Hayes and Patel-Schneider 2014). In fact, RDF is
not suited, in its basic form, to represent meta-information.
Therefore, efforts have been made to define extensions for
dealing with time (Gutierrez, Hurtado, and Vaisman 2007),
provenance (Dividino et al. 2009), fuzzy (Straccia 2009),
and trust (Hartig 2009; Tomaszuk, Pak, and Rybinski 2013).
These ad-hoc extensions come in the form of annotations
over the triples and general frameworks for annotated Semantic Web data have been proposed, too (Udrea, Recupero,
and Subrahmanian 2010; Zimmermann et al. 2012).
In this paper, we consider RDF data enriched with trust
information, and we study specific reasoning problems that
arise within this setting. Indeed, RDF links between resources can be unilaterally set and be part of any data source
as in the spirit of Tim Berners Lee’s words: “Anyone can say
anything about any topic and publish it anywhere”. However, the lack of central control on the publishing of RDF
data on the Web can have an impact on their accuracy, and
it therefore becomes essential to associate trust information
∗
V. Fionda’s work was supported by the European Commission,
the European Social Fund and the Calabria region. G. Greco’s work
was also supported by a Kurt Gödel Research Fellowship, awarded
by the Kurt Gödel Society.
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

95

