Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Reduction of the Elastic Net to Support Vector Machines
with an Application to GPU Computing

∗

Quan Zhou∗† , Wenlin Chen‡ , Shiji Song∗† , Jacob R. Gardner‡ ,
Kilian Q. Weinberger‡ , Yixin Chen‡
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
†
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 China
‡
Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Drive, MO 63130
zhouq10@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, shijis@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
{wenlinchen, gardner.jake, kilian, ychen25}@wustl.edu

words, we show how any Elastic Net regression problem can
be transformed into a binary SVM classiﬁcation problem,
which lead to identical weight vectors (up to scaling). We
make several concrete contributions:
We provide a rigorous derivation of the reduction from
the Elastic Net to the SVM. This reduction sheds new light
onto both algorithms and offers a valuable opportunity to
translate results from one research community to the other.
Although our contribution is ﬁrst and foremost theoretical,
we derive a practical linear-time algorithm to perform this
reduction and state it in 11-lines of MatlabT M code.
We also demonstrate the high impact potential of our
reduction by transferring recent breakthroughs in parallel
SVM solvers with graphics processing unit (GPU) support (Tyree et al. 2014; Cotter, Srebro, and Keshet 2011)
directly to the Elastic Net and the Lasso. We thoroughly
evaluate the correctness and speed of the resulting parallel
Elastic Net implementation on twelve real-world data sets
(covering the p  n and the n  p scenarios) and show that
it outperforms the most efﬁcient existing implementations
consistently in all settings by up-to two orders of magnitude
— making it the fastest Elastic Net and Lasso solver that we
are aware of.
We believe that our result should be of interest to many
members of the machine learning community. Our theoretical reduction could give rise to similar reductions of variations of the Elastic Net to other known versions of the SVM.
It may also lead to entirely new algorithmic discoveries on
both sides. Our application to utilize GPU hardware and its
associated speedup could be of great use to practitioners,
e.g. in computational biology, neuroscience or sparse coding. Finally, the fact that utilizing SVM implementations for
the Elastic Net leads to drastically faster implementations
proves that there is still a lot of room to improve Elastic Net
solvers by incorporating parallelism and modern hardware.

Abstract
Algorithmic reductions are one of the corner stones of
theoretical computer science. Surprisingly, to-date, they
have only played a limited role in machine learning. In
this paper we introduce a formal and practical reduction
between two of the most widely used machine learning algorithms: from the Elastic Net (and the Lasso as
a special case) to the Support Vector Machine. First, we
derive the reduction and summarize it in only 11 lines
of MATLABTM . Then, we demonstrate its high impact
potential by translating recent advances in parallelizing
SVM solvers directly to the Elastic Net. The resulting
algorithm is a parallel solver for the Elastic Net (and
Lasso) that naturally utilizes GPU and multi-core CPUs.
We evaluate it on twelve real world data sets, and show
that it yields identical results as the popular (and highly
optimized) glmnet implementation but is up-to two orders of magnitude faster.

Introduction
The discovery and rigorous analysis of Algorithmic reductions is arguably amongst the biggest achievements in theoretical computer science (Cormen et al. 2001). It enabled the
rise of modern complexity theory and the establishment of
complexity equivalence-classes (such as P and NP). Reductions provide important links between seemingly different
algorithms, and often allow for theoretical results about one
algorithm to be transferred to another.
Despite this undeniable success in traditional theoretical computer science, reductions have found little traction
within the machine learning community (with only few notable exceptions (Langford and Zadrozny 2005)). In this paper, we present a formal reduction of the Elastic Net (Zou
and Hastie 2005) and Lasso (as a special case) (Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2009) to the Support Vector Machine
with squared hinge loss1 (Cortes and Vapnik 1995). In other
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this work, as we do not use the standard SVM with linear
hinge loss, we refer to the SVM with squared hinge loss simply as
SVM.

Notation and Background
Throughout this paper we type vectors in bold (x), scalars
in regular (C or b), matrices in capital bold (X). Speciﬁc
entries in vectors or matrices are scalars and follow the cor-

3210

