Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Do Capacity Constraints Constrain Coalitions?∗
Michal Feldman

Ofir Geri

Tel Aviv University
michal.feldman@cs.tau.ac.il

Tel Aviv University
ofirgeri@mail.tau.ac.il

Abstract

who use it; each agent desires to minimize his individual
cost. Returning to our motivating example, a large computer
network may be used by different countries, which should
jointly cover its cost. All countries wish to use the network
links, but prefer to do so at minimal cost.
The analysis of these games evolved around the Nash
equilibrium (NE) notion — a profile of strategies from
which no agent can benefit by a unilateral deviation. In
recent years, two interesting variants of these games have
been considered, both inspired by real-life scenarios. First,
a group of agents may form a coalition and collaborate for
the benefit of all the members in the coalition. This scenario
is formalized using the notion of a strong equilibrium (SE)
(Aumann 1959). A SE is a strategy profile from which no
coalition can deviate in a way that benefits each one of its
members. SE in cost-sharing connection games have been
studied in (Epstein, Feldman, and Mansour 2009). The second variant considers capacity constraints on the network
edges (Feldman and Ron 2012). Here, each edge is associated with some capacity that limits the number of agents
who can use it. Both variants can naturally occur in our motivating example. Indeed, countries may collaborate to improve their standing, and capacity constraints may arise due
to bandwidth limits.
While each of these variants has been previously studied
alone, the combination of the two has not been previously
considered. This is the focus of the present paper. Our main
focus is on symmetric games, where all agents share the
same source and sink nodes. Interestingly, the combination
of coalitions and capacities gives rise to new phenomena that
do not occur in any of the previous variants.
Example 1 [Equilibrium existence]. In the plain setting
(i.e., with no capacities or coalitions), the profile in which
all agents use the lowest-cost path from the source to the
sink is clearly a NE. Now consider the variants of coalitions and capacities. The profile just mentioned is clearly
a SE as well, as no coalition can benefit by deviating from
the lowest-cost path. As for capacities, while capacity constraints may limit the use of the lowest-cost path, it has been
proven that every (feasible) capacitated game admits a NE,
due to the existence of an exact potential function (Feldman
and Ron 2012). Consider next the combination of coalitions
and capacities. Here, even the mere existence problem becomes non-trivial. Consider, for example, the game depicted

We study strong equilibria in symmetric capacitated costsharing games. In these games, a graph with designated
source s and sink t is given, and each edge is associated
with some cost. Each agent chooses strategically an s-t path,
knowing that the cost of each edge is shared equally between
all agents using it. Two variants of cost-sharing games have
been previously studied: (i) games where coalitions can form,
and (ii) games where edges are associated with capacities;
both variants are inspired by real-life scenarios. In this work
we combine these variants and analyze strong equilibria (profiles where no coalition can deviate) in capacitated games.
This combination gives rise to new phenomena that do not
occur in the previous variants. Our contribution is two-fold.
First, we provide a topological characterization of networks
that always admit a strong equilibrium. Second, we establish
tight bounds on the efficiency loss that may be incurred due to
strategic behavior, as quantified by the strong price of anarchy
(and stability) measures. Interestingly, our results are qualitatively different than those obtained in the analysis of each
variant alone, and the combination of coalitions and capacities entails the introduction of more refined topology classes
than previously studied.

1

Introduction

In recent years, a significant portion of AI research has departed from focusing on single agents to revolving around
the study of multiagent systems. The construction of networks by autonomous agents is a typical example of this
shift in focus. These situations can be modeled as costsharing connection games, which have been extensively
studied (Anshelevich et al. 2003; 2004; Epstein, Feldman,
and Mansour 2009; Albers 2009; Feldman and Ron 2012).
For example, consider the construction of a large computer
network used by different countries, where each country is
an autonomous system that serves its own strategic interests.
In cost-sharing games, a network is given and each edge
is associated with a cost. Each one of n agents wishes to
construct a path between its source and sink nodes, where
the cost of each edge is shared equally between the agents
∗

This work was partially supported by the European Research
Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC grant agreement number 337122.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

879

