Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Achieving Intelligence Using Prototypes, Composition, and Analogy
Vinay K. Chaudhri
Artificial Intelligence Center, SRI International
Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA

Abstract

The project team has authored several papers describing
the effort showing contributions in different sub-areas of AI.
In offering my personal synthesis of the work through this
paper, I have two overarching goals: (1) to summarize the
central ideas that constituted the project vision providing
one reference that serves as an entry into the body of literature; and (2) to share what worked and what did not in
the project, to relate the work to current research by others,
and to articulate some problems for future research.
AURA implementation was done by using a representation system called Knowledge Machine or KM (Clark and
Porter 1999). KM offered basic support for prototypes and
composition before the project started. During Project Halo,
we made substantial refinements to the implementation of
prototypes and composition facilities and their formalization
as presented here. KM did not provide any support for analogical reasoning, and we developed special purpose problem solvers to perform such reasoning during the project.
This paper includes three major sections:(1) prototypes,
(2) composition and (3) analogy. I begin each section with a
definition, then discuss a realization in the context of AURA
and finally follow with a discussion of the successes and
challenges, related work, and problems open for future research. Prototypes, composition and analogy are big longterm problems, and I do not claim that they have been solved
completely. My focus is on explaining what was accomplished during the project. Towards the the paper’s end, I
describe the KB construction undertaken using AURA, an
end-user application built by using the KB and the challenges faced in transitioning it into a commercial setting.

In this paper, I summarize the results of a decade-plus of
research and development driven by the vision that human knowledge can be grounded in a small number of
prototypical components that can be extended through
composition and analogy. This vision has been embodied in a system called AURA, which has been used to
engineer an expressive knowledge base for an intelligent biology textbook. The focus of the current paper is
to abstract away from the specifics and, to instead describe the core ideas in such a manner that they can be
transferred and applied in different contexts, and to relate those ideas to the ongoing research by others.

Introduction
Our work is based on the hypothesis that, for a program to
answer questions, explain the answers, and engage in a dialog just as a human does, it must have an explicit representation of knowledge (Smith 1982). A challenging task requiring such representation is capturing the knowledge found in
a textbook with the goal of answering the questions that a
student could answer after reading the book. Clearly, this
task requires deep knowledge, because it is not just limited
to answering questions, but also requires an explanation of
those answers, and a conversational dialog that is sensitive
to the knowledge of the two parties.
To create a program of the sort suggested above, we have
been driven by the vision that knowledge can be grounded
in a small number of prototypical components that can be
extended through composition and analogy. We started to
embody this vision in a functioning system called SHAKEN
where the evaluation task was to model and reason with one
page of knowledge from a biology textbook (Clark et al.
2001). This work evolved into the AURA system as part
of Project Halo (Gunning et al. 2010). During 2003-2013,
AURA was generalized to the domains of physics, chemistry and biology, was used to engineer a biology knowledge
base (KB), and culminated with the demonstration of an intelligent textbook (Chaudhri et al. 2013a).

Prototypes
Prototype theory is a mode of graded categorization in cognitive science, where some members of a category are more
central than others (Rosch 1983). For example, when asked
to give an example of the concept furniture, chair is more
frequently cited than, say, stool. A prototype of a class is the
most salient member of that class.

Formalizing Prototypes
We reduced the idea of capturing the most salient member
of a class to capturing universally true properties for the in-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4093

