Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Fair Information Sharing for Treasure Hunting
Yiling Chen

Kobbi Nissim

Bo Waggoner

Harvard SEAS
yiling@seas.harvard.edu

Ben-Gurion University and Harvard CRCS
kobbi@cs.bgu.ac.il

Harvard SEAS
bwaggoner@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract

to all agree to give her their maps and abide by her assignments?
Our story abstracts settings where agents with heterogeneous information compete to solve a search problem. An
example is when different research labs try to locate a gene
corresponding to a genetic disease, and credit is only given
to the first discoverer. Each of the researchers begins their
search based on prior knowledge they acquired. Combining
the researchers’ prior information could speed up discoveries and reduce wasted effort.
This tension underlies the difficulties of cooperation in a
competitive environment. A solution to the competing search
problem must take into account many factors: incentives
(agents must want to report accurate information); fairness
(rewarding agents based on the progress made toward finding the answer to the search problem); and welfare (it should
improve on the status quo by shortening the search).
We consider a basic setting where an agent’s information consists of a set of possible locations where the solution (“treasure”) may be found, and each location is equally
likely to be the correct one. This simple model does not
capture cases where agents have complex distributional beliefs. However, this setting already raises many interesting
questions and difficulties. We believe that it can highlight
the tension between cooperation and competition in situations such as the scientific credit example, although it may
not capture cases with complex information structures.
A scenario where the assumptions of our model fit reality
more closely is the Bitcoin digital currency protocol. The
process of “mining” or creating new Bitcoins requires inverting a cryptographic hash function: We begin with a target output and some large set of possible inputs and search
until we find the input that hashes to the output. Many miners may be searching in parallel to find the preimage first;
they each have a list of possible values they have not yet
tried; and each input is (approximately) equally likely. Although we will not suggest that our mechanisms should be
directly applied to Bitcoin in practice, the example shows
that the simple treasure-hunting model can already closely
match some real-world settings. Indeed, “mining pools” or
groups of cooperative Bitcoin searchers exist in practice in
order to save unnecessary trials, save time, and improve their
probability of winning. Our approaches are inspired by the
same motivations.

In a search task, a group of agents compete to be the first to
find the solution. Each agent has different private information to incorporate into its search. This problem is inspired
by settings such as scientific research, Bitcoin hash inversion,
or hunting for some buried treasure. A social planner such as
a funding agency, mining pool, or pirate captain might like
to convince the agents to collaborate, share their information,
and greatly reduce the cost of searching. However, this cooperation is in tension with the individuals’ competitive desire
to each be the first to win the search. The planner’s proposal
should incentivize truthful information sharing, reduce the total cost of searching, and satisfy fairness properties that preserve the spirit of the competition.
We design contract-based mechanisms for information sharing without money. The planner solicits the agents’ information and assigns search locations to the agents, who may
then search only within their assignments. Truthful reporting of information to the mechanism maximizes an agent’s
chance to win the search. -voluntary participation is satisfied for large search spaces. In order to formalize the planner’s goals of fairness and reduced search cost, we propose a
simplified, simulated game as a benchmark and quantify fairness and search cost relative to this benchmark scenario. The
game is also used to implement our mechanisms. Finally, we
extend to the case where coalitions of agents may participate
in the mechanism, forming larger coalitions recursively.

1

Introduction

A group of selfish pirates land on a forsaken island in search
of a hidden treasure, an indivisible item of inestimable value.
Each pirate has gathered limited information – a personal
map marking certain locations on the island where the treasure might be located. Every day, each pirate can dig in a
single location; whoever finds the treasure first will keep it
forever. The pirate captain knows that, if only the pirates
would share their information, many days of useless digging
could be averted. If only she, as the wise and trusted leader,
could convince the pirates to lend her their maps, then she
could pool the collective knowledge and assign digging locations to minimize wasted effort. But can she assign locations in a way that is fair and just? And equally important,
can she convince the pirates that it is in their best interests
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

851

