Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Active Advice Seeking for Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Phillip Odom and Sriraam Natarajan
School of Informatics and Computing
Indiana University Bloomington
phodom,natarasr@indiana.edu

Abstract

While active learning has
been traditionally applied
to soliciting example labels, it has not been considered in the realm of
seeking advice from an
expert which is crucial in
reducing the burden of the
expert when providing the
combination of trajectoFigure 1: Advice for the
ries and advice. The goal
WumpusWorld domain. A1
now is to select areas in
and A2 mark the pieces of adthe feature space to sovice about which the learning
licit advice from the exalgorithm might ask.
pert. Actively seeking advice has two distinct advantages over active learning. While active learning is constrained to selecting a single example to label, an active advice seeker can get advice over a larger section of the feature space. This allows the learner to query about similar
areas of the feature space together potentially reducing the
number of advice that the learning algorithm requires. Traditional active learning is also limited in the communication
with the expert as the only information the expert is allowed
to give is a label for a given example. Advice can be much
more expressive, for example by allowing a set of potential classes instead of a single class. Consider the example
in figure 1 which shows a WumpusWorld domain common
in reinforcement learning. In WumpusWorld, the goal is to
navigate from the starting state (S) to the goal state (G) while
avoiding the obstacles. Two potential advice areas are labeled. Notice how with advice you can query over multiple
states that are deemed to be similar. An example of advice
for A1 would be that the agent should prefer to move right
and should not prefer to move up, down or left.

Intelligent systems that interact with humans typically
require demonstrations and/or advice from the expert
for optimal decision making. While the active learning formalism allows for these systems to incrementally
acquire demonstrations from the human expert, most
learning systems require all the advice about the domain
in advance. We consider the problem of actively soliciting human advice in an inverse reinforcement learning setting where the utilities are learned from demonstrations. Our hypothesis is that such solicitation of advice reduces the burden on the human to provide advice
about every scenario in advance.

Learning from demonstrations in a sequential decisionmaking setting has recently received much attention under
the formalism of Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Ng
and Russell 2000; Abbeel and Ng 2004). These methods assumed that the given demonstrations were optimal and potentially required a significant number of examples before
they were able to learn a suitable reward function. Kunpauli
et al. (2013) built on this work by allowing an expert to provide advice about certain scenarios in addition to the demonstrations. This resulted in learning from significantly fewer
and (possibly) even sub-optimal demonstrations. While their
framework succeeded in reducing the effort of the expert
when providing demonstrations, the expert was required to
identify the quantity of advice as well as the important features of states where advice might help. Thus it removed the
burden of trajectories while introducing a lesser burden of
providing targeted advice. An ideal IRL algorithm should
determine where to solicit advice and when it has accumulated sufficient advice. We propose to employ the concept of
active learning (Settles 2012) for this task.
Active Learning is a paradigm that has been extensively
applied to supervised learning where the learning algorithm works by (actively) selecting a small but representative set of examples to be labeled by the expert. They are
able to learn a more accurate classifier while at the same
time minimizing the number of expert labeled examples.

Active Advice Seeking
The main difficulty for active advice seeking is deciding the
parts of the state/action space where advice would be most
beneficial. A common method in traditional active learning
is the uncertainty (using entropy or some other uncertainty
measure) w.r.t each state in the feature space (Settles 2012).
The idea is to ask for more information about states about
which the learner is more uncertain. While the first step of

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4186

