Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Just-in-Time Hierarchical Constraint Decomposition
Valentin Mayer-Eichberger

NICTA and University of New South Wales
Valentin.Mayer-Eichberger@nicta.com.au
Level 4, 223 Anzac Parade, Sydney, Australia
Website: vale1410.github.io Phone: +610405338860

positions tend to enforce higher consistency (more propagation). Thus, the key to a good decomposition is a good
trade-off between size and consistency.
Contrary to the constraint decomposition approach we
have the space-efficient propagation algorithms that often
achieve higher consistency than a decomposition. Especially
when domains are large, eager CNF compilation often exceed reasonable size restrictions. The drawback with pure
propagation is the lack of auxiliary variables that often benefit the learning mechanism. To find the right balance between
global constraint propagation and decomposition we want to
take advantage of a fine-grained view on different levels of
decomposition. Constraints can be decomposed into other
simpler global constraints that maintain a middle way of representation size and consistency. Furthermore, such extensive analysis will be a fruitful source for auxiliary variables
for learning beneficial clauses.
The lazy decomposition approach profits from extensive
knowledge in constraint decompositions and SAT encodings. The next step in this direction of research is to target a healthy mix of global constraint propagation, explanations for conflict clause learning and decompositions into
both non-clausal constraints and CNF. In the next section we
will show such a hierarchy by listing decompositions of the
A LL -D IFFERENT constraint. In addition to decomposition
hierarchies, we will consider various criteria to support the
decision of when to decompose and when to propagate such
constraints (due to space limitation not mentioned in this extended abstract). We coin the name Just in Time Hierarchical
Constraint Decomposition (JIT-HCD) for this methodology.

Abstract
Lazy Clause Generation (LCG) solvers dominate the
current constraint programming competitions. These
solvers successfully combine systematic propagation
based search, global constraints and conflict clause
learning from SAT solving into a hybrid approach. My
research project extends the LCG methodology by using a mix of eager and lazy encodings and a richer set of
constraint decompositions. Global Constraints exhibit a
whole hierarchy of different decomposition into more
basic constraints. In our work we want to take advantage
of such hierarchies and identify criteria on how constraints could be decomposed before and during search.

Lazy Clause Generation and Extensions
Boolean Satisfiability Solving (SAT) and finite domain
Constraint Programming (CP) solve hard combinatorialstructured problems. Pracical SAT solving emerged from the
Model Checking and Verification community and constraint
programming has some of its success in solving scheduling
problems. One attempt to integrate both paradigms into a
hybrid solver came with the idea of LCG solvers by (Ohrimenko, Stuckey, and Codish 2009). Early LCG systems
collect a clause for each domain filtering of a constraint
propagator which can then be used in SAT-style conflict
clause resolution. The work of (Abı́o and Stuckey 2012;
Abı́o et al. 2013) extends this approach to reactively decompose Pseudo-Boolean constraints lazily during search. If the
number of generate clauses during search exceeds a certain
limit they decompose to a compact encoding using auxiliary
variables. We want to follow up on this strategy and extend
it to other constraints.
Constraint decomposition faces two challenges: Firstly,
the size of the decomposition might be to large. This is especially true in case of decompositions to conjunctive normal
form (CNF). Encodings of size O(n3 ) in the domain size of
integer variables might already exceed moderate size restrictions. Secondly, the decomposition loses the global view on
the constraint and this might hinder propagation, i.e. not all
inferences can be found by the filtering algorithms on the decomposed constraints. It is not surprising that larger decom-

A Concrete Example: A LL -D IFFERENT
The constraint A LL -D IFFERENT([x1 , . . . xn ]) enforces that
the values taken by the integer variables are all different, i.e.
that xi 6= xj for i < j. This is a well studied constraint in the
CP community and many filtering algorithms and decompositions are known. In this section we describe the hierarchy
of A LL -D IFFERENT decompositions.
The standard domain representation in LCG solvers uses
the Boolean variables [[x = v]] and [[x ≥ v]] for each value
v ∈ D(x) in the domain of variable x, with [[x ≤ v]] ⇔
¬[[x ≥ v + 1]]. Let D be union of all domains.
The following decompositions are direct translations of
the definition of A LL -D IFFERENT:

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4182

