Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Predicting Emotion Perception Across Domains:
A Study of Singing and Speaking
Biqiao Zhang, Emily Mower Provost, Robert Swedberg, Georg Essl
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2260 Hayward St.
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109

Abstract

emotion expression across communication domains. Withindomain analyses build separate models for the singing and
speaking domains, whereas cross-domain analyses focus on
generalizing a model from one domain to the other. The ability of a model to generalize gives us insight into the link
between emotion perception in the singing and speaking expression domains.
Significant progress has been made on both speech and
music emotion recognition (Schuller et al. 2011; El Ayadi,
Kamel, and Karray 2011; Kim et al. 2010). Some researchers have studied the similarity between music and
speech emotion perception (Juslin and Laukka 2003; Ilie
and Thompson 2006; 2011), yet few works (Scherer et al.
2013) have concentrated on comparing speaking and unaccompanied singing. Since music is generally only acoustically recorded, prior works primarily focus on acoustic features. Therefore, analysis on the role of visual features in
cross-domain emotion perception is under-explored.
In this work, we collected a corpus of singing and speaking audio-visual recordings of three performers with experimental control over lexical content and melody to ensure the consistency of the data across communication types
and target emotions. We assessed the emotion content using Amazon Mechanical Turk. We estimated the distribution of human evaluations using kernel density estimation to
model emotion as a probability distribution on the valenceactivation space (Yang and Chen 2011). We selected features relevant to within-domain and cross-domain emotion
perception using mRMR (minimum Redundancy Maximum
Relevance), with the correlation coefficient as the relevance
measure for the former and the cross-domain correlation coefficient (Weninger et al. 2013) for the latter. We built regression models using the selected features for valence and activation, both individually and jointly as a two-dimensional
emotion distribution, to assess the extent to which emotion
perception can be predicted by the selected features.
The results demonstrated that activation can be modeled
more accurately both within and across domains, compared
to valence. Further, results suggest that visual features capture cross-domain emotion more accurately than acoustic
features. The results provide additional evidence for a shared
mechanism underlying spoken and sung emotion perception.
The novelty of this paper includes: (1) the construction of the
first dataset consisting of lexically and musically consistent

Emotion affects our understanding of the opinions and
sentiments of others. Research has demonstrated that
humans are able to recognize emotions in various domains, including speech and music, and that there are
potential shared features that shape the emotion in both
domains. In this paper, we investigate acoustic and visual features that are relevant to emotion perception in
the domains of singing and speaking. We train regression models using two paradigms: (1) within-domain,
in which models are trained and tested on the same domain and (2) cross-domain, in which models are trained
on one domain and tested on the other domain. This
strategy allows us to analyze the similarities and differences underlying the relationship between audio-visual
feature expression and emotion perception and how
this relationship is affected by domain of expression.
We use kernel density estimation to model emotion as
a probability distribution over the perception associated with multiple evaluators on the valence-activation
space. This allows us to model the variation inherent
in the reported perception. Results suggest that activation can be modeled more accurately across domains,
compared to valence. Furthermore, visual features capture cross-domain emotion more accurately than acoustic features. The results provide additional evidence for
a shared mechanism underlying spoken and sung emotion perception.

1

Introduction

Emotion expression and perception are vital components
of social and musical communication (Cowie et al. 2001;
Scherer 2003; Juslin and Sloboda 2001). Research in emotion perception has demonstrated that humans are able to
recognize emotions in various domains, including speech
and music. However, the relationship between audio-visual
cues and emotion perception across domains is still an open
question. In this paper, we aim to provide clarity by investigating the acoustic and visual features that are relevant to
the perceived emotion of two types of vocal communications: singing and speaking. We conducted within-domain
and cross-domain regression and feature correlation studies to analyze the commonalities and differences present in
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1328

