Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Matching with Dynamic Ordinal Preferences
Hadi Hosseini

Kate Larson

Robin Cohen

Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON, Canada
h5hossei@uwaterloo.ca

Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON, Canada
klarson@uwaterloo.ca

Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON, Canada
rcohen@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

namic social choice (Parkes and Procaccia 2013)) assume
an underlying utility function with possible utility transfers.
We study dynamic matching problems in which a sequence of decisions must be made for agents whose private
underlying preferences may change over time. In each period, the mechanism elicits ordinal preferences from agents,
and each agent declares his preferences (truthfully or strategically) so as to improve his overall assignment, now or in
the future. We propose a generic model to study the various properties of such environments including the strategic behavior of agents. Our model captures a diverse set
of scenarios in real-life settings: assigning members to subcommittees each year, tasks among team members on various projects, nurses to various hospital shifts, teaching loads
among faculty, and students to college housing each year.
Consider the problem of scheduling nurses to shifts (nurse
rostering) in multiple planning periods.1 Self rostering is
one of the most advocated methods in nurse scheduling that
caters to individual preferences (Siferd and Benton 1992;
Burke et al. 2004). Each nurse has some internal preference over hospital shifts at various times. At each planning period (typically 4–6 weeks), an assignment decision
is made based on the self-reported preferences. Although
self rostering reduces administrative burden and improves
nurse satisfaction, there is evidence that it encourages strategic behavior among nurses (Alsheddy and Tsang 2011;
De Grano, Medeiros, and Eitel 2009). The preferences of
nurses may change dynamically according to their internal desires and past assignments and “those who are savvy
enough to game the system will always have an advantage
over the procrastinators” (Bard and Purnomo 2005). This example and many other real-life applications raise several intriguing questions when designing matching mechanisms in
dynamic and uncertain settings.

We consider the problem of repeatedly matching a set of alternatives to a set of agents with dynamic ordinal preferences.
Despite a recent focus on designing one-shot matching mechanisms in the absence of monetary transfers, little study has
been done on strategic behavior of agents in sequential assignment problems. We formulate a generic dynamic matching problem via a sequential stochastic matching process.
We design a mechanism based on random serial dictatorship
(RSD) that, given any history of preferences and matching decisions, guarantees global stochastic strategyproofness while
satisfying desirable local properties. We further investigate
the notion of envyfreeness in such sequential settings.

Introduction
One-sided matching problems have been extensively studied in the context of microeconomics, artificial intelligence,
and mechanism design. These problems arise in various reallife application domains such as assigning dormitory rooms
to college students, teaching load among faculty, college
courses to students, medical residents to hospitals, scarce
medical resources and organs to patients, etc. (Sönmez
and Ünver 2010a; 2010b; Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver 2004;
Ünver 2010; Dickerson, Procaccia, and Sandholm 2012;
Ashlagi et al. 2013; Krysta et al. 2014).
Despite the interest in matching problems, little has been
done in dynamic settings where agents’ preferences evolve
over time. In the real world, decisions do not exist in isolation, but rather are situated in a temporal context with other
decisions and possibly stochastic events. Dynamic mechanism design (Parkes 2007) is a compelling research area
that has attracted attention in recent years. In these settings,
agents act to improve their outcomes over time, and decisions both in the present and in the past influence how the
world and preferences look in the future. The dynamic pivot
mechanism for dynamic auctions (Bergemann and Välimäki
2010), dynamic Groves mechanisms (Cavallo 2009), and
many others (Vohra 2012; Athey and Segal 2013) are a few
of myriad examples of mechanisms in dynamic settings that
consider agents with private dynamic preferences. However,
almost all of these works (excluding a recent study on dy-

Our model and results We consider a setting where a sequence of assignments should be made for fixed number of
agents and alternatives. Agents’ preferences are represented
as strict orderings over a set of alternatives, where these preferences may change over time. We formulate a general dynamic matching problem using a history-dependent matching process. The state of the matching process corresponds
1
Assume skill category and hospital constraints are incorporated into shift schedules.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

936

