Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Transfer Learning-Based Co-Run Scheduling
for Heterogeneous Datacenters
Wei Kuang, Laura E. Brown and Zhenlin Wang
Department of Computer Science, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI 49931
{wkuang,lebrown,zlwang}@mtu.edu

Abstract

Previous studies have shown that an application’s sensitivity and pressure can be obtained by profiling; an application is co-run with a carefully designed probe program to
generate both metrics (Mars et al. 2011; Yang et al. 2013).
The performance degradation due to co-run interference can
be predicted with relative low error. However, this method
has two limitations: the sensitivity curve is interpolated from
the profiling results rather than fit to a model and the prediction from the sensitivity and pressure is only for the machine
on which the profiling was run. Collaborative filtering was
used to predict interference of programs on machines with
different hardware configurations, yet the latent model needs
to be further explored (Delimitrou and Kozyrakis 2013).
Our motivation is to develop a method to accurately characterize the sensitivity curves for different applications via a
general, mathematical model, and also ensure that the models continue be effective from architecture to architecture.
The process will be initiated with initial offline profiling and
training of the model, yet it must be able to evolve or adapt
for new architectures becoming available; employing ideas
from transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2010).

Today’s data centers are designed with multi-core CPUs
where multiple virtual machines (VMs) can be colocated into one physical machine or distribute multiple
computing tasks onto one physical machine. The result
is co-tenancy, resource sharing and competition. Modeling and predicting such co-run interference becomes
crucial for job scheduling and Quality of Service assurance. Co-locating interference can be characterized
into two components, sensitivity and pressure, where
sensitivity characterizes how an application’s own performance is affected by a co-run application, and pressure characterizes how much contentiousness an application exerts/brings onto the memory subsystem. Previous studies show that with simple models, sensitivity
and pressure can be accurately characterized for a single machine. We extend the models to consider crossarchitecture sensitivity (across different machines).

Introduction
Each year more computation moves to data centers deploying thousands of heterogeneous, modern machines to provide customers with computing and storage services. Most
modern machines have multiple cores on a single chip; thus,
multiple tasks/applications can be executed simultaneously
so that resource utilization can be optimized. Though each
CPU core can have a dedicated task, co-locating does require resource sharing, such as last level cache and memory
bandwidth. The diversity of application behavior will have
some programs be more aggressive towards the shared resources resulting in interference. Co-locating interference
can be characterized into two components, sensitivity and
pressure, where sensitivity characterizes how an application’s own performance is affected by a co-run application,
and pressure characterizes how much contentiousness an application exerts/brings to the system. Currently, the focus is
on the shared memory subsystem, but other shared resources
can be considered such as memory bandwidth and network
I/O. Without modeling and predicting this interference, the
data center scheduler may have to dedicate a whole multicore machine to a single time sensitive application, leaving
some cores idle, in order to guarantee Quality of Service.

Preliminary Results
The sensitivity curve of an application on a specific machine
is found by using the “Bubble-up” methodology (Mars et al.
2011). A program called bubble is co-run with a target application on the machine. The bubble is a simple program that
can exert different levels of pressure onto the memory subsystem. By careful design, the bubble can take up increasing
levels (MBs) of cache space, thus making the co-run application slow down (degraded performance). The target application’s performance, often referred to as normalized execution time, is recorded at different level of bubble pressure.
From a collection of bubble size versus performance degradation value pairs, a model can be fit (e.g., polynomial or
logistic function). In a pending submission, we collect the
sensitivity curves of several sets of benchmarks including
SPEC CPU2006 integer and floating point programs and a
subset of Parsec 3.0 and CloudSuite 2.0 programs. We found
that a logistic function achieves the lowest generalizable error in modeling such sensitivity curves.
The profiling process of each individual program was repeated on machines with different hardware. Hence, each
application has multiple sensitivity curves corresponding to

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4247

