Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Query Abduction for ELH⊥ Ontologies
Mahsa Chitsaz, Zhe Wang, Kewen Wang
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Australia
mahsa.chitsaz@griffithuni.edu.au, {zhe.wang,k.wang}@griffith.edu.au

approximately 105 n ABox assertions. Our experimental results show that the algorithm is capable of handling query
abduction problems for LSTW(n) where n is up to 100.

Introduction
With the current upward trend in semantically annotated
data, ontology-based data access (OBDA) was formulated to
tackle the problem of data integration and query answering,
where an ontology is formalized as a description logic (DL)
TBox. In order to meet usability requirements set by users,
efforts have been made to equip OBDA system with explanation facilities. One important explanation tool for DL ontologies, referred to as query abduction, can be formalised as
abductive reasoning. In particular, given an ontology and an
observation (i.e., a query with an answer that called boolean
query), an explanation to the observation is a set of facts that
together with the ontology can entail the observation.
Several query abduction algorithms have been proposed
in the literature. One major stream of such algorithms are the
tableau-based ones, which are however not efficient enough
to deal with realistic ontologies and large data sets. Query
abduction algorithms could rarely scale over relative large
data sets until the work of Du et al.(2011; 2014). The algorithm of Du et al. (2011) supports conjunctive queries (CQs)
without existentially quantified variables, but it is not guaranteed to compute all explanations for general CQs. In a
more recent work (2014), the authors suggested representative explanations to reduce the number of computed explanations. However, the approach applies only to a special
class of ontologies, name first-order(FO) rewritable ones,
which does not include all ELH⊥ ontologies.
In this paper, we develop a practical algorithm of query
abduction for general CQs in ELH⊥ ontologies. This is
achieved through ontology approximation and query rewriting. First, we approximate a given ELH⊥ ontology into a
plain datalog program which is complete but not necessarily sound. We adapt a query rewriting technique to rewrite
the observation so as to filter out those incorrect explanations. As a result, our approach is sound and complete for
query abduction with general CQs as observations. We implemented a prototypical system using the highly optimized
Prolog engine XSB1 . We evaluated our algorithm over some
realistic ontologies with reasonably large data sets such as
extended university benchmark ontology LSTW(n) that has

Query Abduction Problem
We consider countably infinite and mutually disjoint sets
NC , NR , NI and NV of concept names, role names, individuals, and variables respectively. For details of ELH⊥ readers can refer to (Baader, Brandt, and Lutz 2005). A conjunctive query Q(~x) is of the form ∃~y .φ(~x, ~y ), where φ is a conjunction of atoms with predicates and terms from NC ∪ NR
and NI ∪ NV , respectively. A boolean conjunctive query
(BCQ) is a CQ that answer variables ~x are empty. In Definition 1, we formally introduce a query abduction problem. In
contrast to the definition in (Calvanese et al. 2013), our definition has a finite domain ∆ as an additional attribute, and
contains all the constants occurring in a solution in order to
avoid infinitely many (minimal) solutions for a QAP.
Definition 1 (QAP) An instance of a query abduction problem (QAP) in ELH⊥ is a tuple hK, Q(~a), Σ, ∆i, where K
is an ELH⊥ KB, Q(~a) is a BCQ called the observation.
Σ ⊆ NC ∪ NR is a finite set of predicates called abducibles,
and ∆ ⊆ NI is a finite set of constants called the domain.
A solution E to the QAP is a set of facts over Σ such that
(1) pred(E) ⊆ Σ, (2) const(E) ⊆ ∆, (3) K ∪ E is consistent, and (4) K ∪ E |= Q(~a). Let sol(K, Q(~a), Σ, ∆) be the
set of solutions to the QAP. Moreover, we call E set minimal
iff there is no solution E 0 ∈ sol(K, Q(~a), Σ, ∆) s.t. E 0 ⊂ E.
For a datalog program D, a QAP in datalog and its (minimal)
solutions are defined in the same way, so the set of solutions
are denoted as sol(D, Q(~a), Σ, ∆).

Computing Minimal Solutions
For an ELH⊥ KB K = (T , A), we will first transform T
into a datalog program DT in a similar way to (Stefanoni,
Motik, and Horrocks 2013). The program DK = DT ∪ A
is referred to as its datalog approximation. By this approximation, each solution to the QAP w.r.t. KB K is a solution
to the corresponding QAP w.r.t. datalog program DK which
formally presents as follows.
Proposition 1 Let K be an ELH⊥ KB, Q(~a) be a BCQ,
Σ ⊆ NC ∪ NR , and ∆ ⊆ NI . Then, sol(K, Q(~a), Σ, ∆) ⊆
sol(DK , Q(~a), Σ, ∆).

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://xsb.sourceforge.net/

4148

