Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Recursive Best-First Search with Bounded Overhead
Matthew Hatem and Scott Kiesel and Wheeler Ruml
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH 03824 USA
mhatem and skiesel and ruml at cs.unh.edu

Abstract

the same best-first search order as WA* and returns cheaper
solutions than WIDA*.
Like IDA*, RBFS suffers from node regeneration overhead in return for its linear space complexity. While the
node regeneration overhead of IDA* is easily characterized
in terms of the heuristic branching factor (Korf 1985), the
overhead of RBFS depends on how widely the promising
nodes are separated in the search tree. Moreover, as we
explain below, RBFS fails on domains that exhibit a large
range of f values. The main contribution of this paper is a
set of techniques for improving the performance of RBFS.
We start with two simple techniques that perform well in
practice but provide no theoretical guarantees on performance. We present a third technique that is more complex
to implement but performs well in practice and comes with
a bound on reexpansion overhead, making it the first linear
space best-first search robust enough to solve a variety of
domains with varying operator costs. Because of RBFS’s
best-first search order, it also leads to a better anytime algorithm. While IDA* enjoys widespread popularity, we hope
this work encourages further investigation of linear-space
techniques that maintain a best-first search order.

There are two major paradigms for linear-space heuristic
search: iterative deepening (IDA*) and recursive best-first
search (RBFS). While the node regeneration overhead of
IDA* is easily characterized in terms of the heuristic branching factor, the overhead of RBFS depends on how widely the
promising nodes are separated in the search tree, and is harder
to anticipate. In this paper, we present two simple techniques
for improving the performance of RBFS while maintaining
its advantages over IDA*. While these techniques work well
in practice, they do not provide any theoretical bounds on the
amount of regeneration overhead. To this end, we introduce
RBFSCR , the first method for provably bounding the regeneration overhead of RBFS. We show empirically that this improves its performance in several domains, both for optimal
and suboptimal search, and also yields a better linear-space
anytime heuristic search. RBFSCR is the first linear space
best-first search robust enough to solve a variety of domains
with varying operator costs.

Introduction
Linear-space search algorithms only require memory that is
linear in the depth of the search. Iterative Deepening A*
(IDA*, Korf 1985) is a linear space analog to A* that does
not keep an open or closed list. If its evaluation function
f is monotonic (f is nondecreasing along every path), then
IDA* expands nodes in best-first order. However, if f is
non-monotonic, IDA* tends to expand nodes in depth-first
order (Korf 1993).
Weighted A* (WA*, Pohl 1973) is a popular bounded
suboptimal variant of A* that uses a non-monotonic evaluation function to find w-admissible solutions, solutions
with cost bounded by a specified factor w of an optimal
solution. Weighted IDA* (WIDA*) is the corresponding
bounded suboptimal variant of IDA* and it uses the same
non-monotonic function. Unlike WA*, which converges to
greedy search as its suboptimality bound increases, WIDA*
behaves more like depth-first search, resulting in longer,
more costly solutions and in some cases, longer solving
times than WA*. Thus WIDA* is not an ideal analog for
WA*. Recursive Best-First Search (RBFS, Korf 1993) on
the other hand, is a better linear space analog to WA*. It uses

Previous Work
Iterative Deepening A*
IDA* performs iterations of bounded depth-first search
where a path is pruned if f (n) becomes greater than the
bound for the current iteration. After each unsuccessful iteration, the bound is increased to the minimum f value among
the nodes that were generated but not expanded in the previous iteration. Each iteration of IDA* expands a superset of
the nodes in the previous iteration. If the size of iterations
grows geometrically, then the number of nodes expanded by
IDA* is O(N ), where N is the number of nodes that A*
would expand (Korf 1985).
In domains with a wide range of edge costs, there can
be few nodes with the same f value and the standard technique of updating the bound to the minimum f value of unexpanded nodes may cause IDA* to only expand a few new
nodes in each iteration. The number of nodes expanded by
IDA* can be O(N 2 ) in the worst case when the number of
new nodes expanded in each iteration is constant (Sarkar et
al. 1991). To alleviate this problem, Sarkar et al. introduce

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1151

