Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Optimal Personalized Filtering Against Spear-Phishing Attacks
Aron Laszka and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik and Xenofon Koutsoukos
Institute for Software Integrated Systems
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN

Abstract

computers with a malware that subsequently stole sensitive
data and sent it to an unknown destination. As another example, in 2012, one of the White House internal networks
was breached using spear phishing (McCullagh 2012). The
attackers, who are believed to have used servers in China,
were allegedly able to access the network of the president’s
military office, which is in charge of, for example, strategic nuclear commands. Finally, computers at the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission (NRC) of the U.S., which contain
sensitive information that could be used for surveillance
or sabotage, were breached three times in the past three
years (Rogers 2014). In the most recent incident, the attackers first compromised an NRC employee’s personal email account, which they then used to send e-mails to 16
other employees. The e-mail contained a malicious PDF attachment, which infected the computer of an employee who
opened the attachment (Rosenblatt 2014).
The defining characteristic of spear-phishing attacks
which differentiates them from regular phishing or spam is
that they are targeted at specific, carefully chosen individuals or groups. Since sending a large number of similar
e-mails (e.g., with the same malicious attachment) would
almost certainly raise an alarm, the attackers focus on a subset of the users who constitute the weakest links of the system. Moreover, the emergence of digital and social media
has made it easier for attackers to know much about their
prospective targets, such as where they work, what they are
interested in, and who their friends are (McAfee Labs 2014;
Jagatic et al. 2007).
Typical mitigation for phishing attacks is the same as for
spam: there is an e-mail filtering system, often based in part
on machine learning, which computes a risk score for each email and filters those for which the risk score exceeds some
pre-specified threshold. The value of this filtering threshold has to be carefully chosen, since overzealous filtering
may also remove many non-malicious e-mails. Hence, defenders have to find the right balance between security and
usability (Sheng et al. 2009). Furthermore, these thresholds
can be personalized, as different users have different levels
of carefullness and different potential to cause damage. For
example, a recent report found – based on a large-scale experiment – that the departments which hold the most sensitive data in a business, such as HR, accounting, and finance,
are the worst at detecting fraud (McAfee Labs 2014).

To penetrate sensitive computer networks, attackers can
use spear phishing to sidestep technical security mechanisms by exploiting the privileges of careless users.
In order to maximize their success probability, attackers have to target the users that constitute the weakest
links of the system. The optimal selection of these target users takes into account both the damage that can
be caused by a user and the probability of a malicious
e-mail being delivered to and opened by a user. Since
attackers select their targets in a strategic way, the optimal mitigation of these attacks requires the defender to
also personalize the e-mail filters by taking into account
the users’ properties.
In this paper, we assume that a learned classifier is given
and propose strategic per-user filtering thresholds for
mitigating spear-phishing attacks. We formulate the
problem of filtering targeted and non-targeted malicious
e-mails as a Stackelberg security game. We characterize the optimal filtering strategies and show how to
compute them in practice. Finally, we evaluate our results using two real-world datasets and demonstrate that
the proposed thresholds lead to lower losses than nonstrategic thresholds.

1

Introduction

To successfully breach highly secure systems, attackers have
to focus on the weakest link in the chain of security, which
is often the users (Sasse, Brostoff, and Weirich 2001). One
particularly pernicious form of attack on users is spear
phishing, that is, targeting specific users (or classes of users)
through malicious e-mail, making use of their individual
characteristics, such as who their bosses or friends are, to
build trust (Hong 2012). In recent years, we have seen several spear-phishing attacks that successfully breached highly
secure organizations. For example, in 2011, the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, which conducts classified and unclassified energy and national security work, was breached by
a spear-phishing attack (Zetter 2011). In this incident, the
attackers sent an e-mail, which claimed to be from human
resources, to the lab employees. This e-mail contained a
link to a malicious website, which infected the employees’
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

958

