Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Conducting Neuroscience to Guide the Development of AI
Jeffrey Mark Siskind
Purdue University
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
465 Northwestern Ave.
West Lafayette, IN 47907-2035 USA
qobi@purdue.edu

Abstract

volved in classifying the constituents. This suggests methods for decomposing brain activity into primitives to investigate the methods employed by the brain when solving a
plethora of standard AI problems. Third, I present novel
methods for performing cross-modal decoding of brain-scan
data: training models on subjects reading text or hearing
speech and then using those models to decode video, and
vice versa. This suggests methods for understanding the semantic KR methods employed by the brain. Fourth, I present
novel methods for probing the time-course of brain processing: how information flows through different brain regions
while processing stimuli. This suggests methods for reverseengineering the algorithms employed by the brain.

Study of the human brain through fMRI can potentially benefit the pursuit of artificial intelligence. Four examples are presented. First, fMRI decoding of the brain activity of subjects
watching video clips yields higher accuracy than state-of-theart computer-vision approaches to activity recognition. Second, novel methods are presented that decode aggregate representations of complex visual stimuli by decoding their independent constituents. Third, cross-modal studies demonstrate
the ability to decode the brain activity induced in subjects
watching video stimuli when trained on the brain activity induced in subjects seeing text or hearing speech stimuli and
vice versa. Fourth, the time course of brain processing while
watching video stimuli is probed with scanning that trades off
the amount of the brain scanned for the frequency at which it
is scanned. Techniques like these can be used to study how
the human brain grounds language in visual perception and
may motivate development of novel approaches in AI.

Related Work
State-of-the-art brain-activity classification involves a small
number of concept classes, where the stimuli are still images
of objects or orthographic presentation of nouns. Just et al.
(2010) classify orthographic nouns, 5 exemplars from each
of 12 classes, achieving a mean rank accuracy of 72.4% on a
1-of-60 classification task, both within and across subjects.
(Note that rank accuracy differs from classification accuracy
and denotes “the normalized rank of the correct label in the
classifier’s posterior-probability-ordered list of classes,” Just
et al. 2010, p. 5.) Pereira, Botvinick, and Detre (2012) reanalyze the preceding data in the context of a prior from
Wikipedia and achieve a mean accuracy of 13.2% on a 1-of12 classification task and 1.94% on a 1-of-60 classification
task. Hanson and Halchenko (2009) classify still images of
2 object classes: faces and houses, and achieve an accuracy
above 93% on a 1-of-2 classification task. Connolly et al.
(2012) classify still images of objects, 2 instances of each
of 3 classes: bugs, birds, and primates, and achieve an accuracy between 60% and 98% on a 1-of-2 within-class classification task and an accuracy between 90% and 98% on a
1-of-3 between-class classification task. Haxby et al. (2011)
classify image and video stimuli cross-subject achieving between 60% and 70% between-subject accuracy on image
data with 6 to 7 classes and video data with all 18s clips
from Raiders of the Lost Ark.

Introduction
A dichotomy exists between two traditional fields that study
intelligence for disjoint purposes. AI attempts to engineer
synthetic intelligent systems, usually without concern for
how natural intelligence works. Psychology and related disciplines attempt to scientifically understand natural intelligence, usually without concern for how to replicate it in engineered systems. Here I advocate a third enterprise: studying neuroscience not for the primary goal of understanding brain function for its own sake but rather as a means
for reverse-engineering brain function to serve the goal of
helping AI—and the related disciplines of computer vision
(CV) and NLP—design better synthetic methods. I present
four examples of this. First, I present a novel comparison
of state-of-the-art action-recognition methods from CV with
state-of-the-art methods for decoding brain scans obtained
with fMRI on the same dataset. This suggests methods for
improving CV action recognition. Second, I present novel
methods for recovering aggregate representations, like Dan
fold shirt on the left, in brain-scan data, from constituent
representations like Dan, fold, shirt, and on the left. Novel
methods show that the brain regions involved in classifying the aggregate constitute a disjoint union of those in-

Comparison of fMRI Decoding with CV
There has been significant research on action recognition
within CV for two decades (see References for a sample).

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4067

