Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Projection in the Epistemic Situation Calculus with Belief Conditionals
Christoph Schwering and Gerhard Lakemeyer
Knowledge-Based Systems Group
RWTH Aachen University
(schwering,gerhard)@kbsg.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract

Lakemeyer 2014), which is a modal variant of the situation
calculus with belief revision proposed earlier by Shapiro et
al. (2011). We further draw on a result from (Levesque and
Lakemeyer 2001) to reduce reasoning about beliefs to (nonmodal) first-order entailments.
While the situation calculus is perhaps the most thoroughly studied action formalism, there are others such as the
event calculus (Kowalski and Sergot 1989), the fluent calculus (Thielscher 1999), and the family of action languages A
(Gelfond and Lifschitz 1993). An alternative to projection
by regression is progression (Lin and Reiter 1997), where
a query about the future is answered by first updating the
initial knowledge base to account for the effects of actions
and then checking whether the query follows from the resulting knowledge base. While progression may be preferable over regression for long sequences of action, it has the
disadvantage that the resulting knowledge base is not always first-order representable. Besides (Shapiro et al. 2011;
Schwering and Lakemeyer 2014), a number of other proposals such as (Demolombe and Pozos Parra 2006; Delgrande
and Levesque 2012; Fang and Liu 2013) have dealt with extending action formalisms with belief revision in the spirit
of AGM (Alchourron, Gärdenfors, and Makinson 1985).
In (Pagnucco et al. 2013) a limited solution to the projection
problem in action theories derived from (Shapiro et al. 2011)
is proposed by a translation to Default Logic extended with
preferences (Baumann et al. 2010), together with an implementation using Answer Set Programming (Gelfond 2008).
The limitations include a finite domain and a restriction to
non-nested beliefs. To the best of our knowledge, there currently are no general solutions to the projection problem in
the context of belief revision.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next
section presents the logic ESB. Next, we define Reiter’s basic action theories within ESB. In Section 4, we devise a regression theorem for ESB. Afterwards we show how beliefs
can be reduced to first-order entailments. Then we conclude.

A fundamental task in reasoning about action and change is
projection, which refers to determining what holds after a
number of actions have occurred. A powerful method for
solving the projection problem is regression, which reduces
reasoning about the future to reasoning about the initial state.
In particular, regression has played an important role in the
situation calculus and its epistemic extensions. Recently, a
modal variant of the situation calculus was proposed, which
allows an agent to revise its beliefs based on so-called belief
conditionals as part of its knowledge base. In this paper, we
show how regression can be extended to reduce beliefs about
the future to initial beliefs in the presence of belief conditionals. Moreover, we show how any remaining belief operators
can be eliminated as well, thus reducing the belief projection
problem to ordinary first-order entailments.

1

Introduction

A fundamental task in reasoning about action and change
is projection, which refers to determining what holds after
a number of actions have occurred. A powerful method
for solving the projection problem is regression, which reduces reasoning about the future to reasoning about the initial state. In particular, regression has played an important
role in the situation calculus (McCarthy 1963; Reiter 2001)
and its epistemic extensions (Scherl and Levesque 2003;
Lakemeyer and Levesque 2011).
One drawback of these epistemic extensions is that beliefs
cannot be revised in the presence of conflicting information.
For example, imagine a person in a restaurant who (mistakenly) believes that the restaurant’s specialty is burger. She
also believes that the specialties of Italian restaurants are
pasta or pizza. If she then figures out that the restaurant
is indeed Italian, she should revise her beliefs about the specialties of this particular restaurant. In (Shapiro et al. 2011)
and, more recently, (Schwering and Lakemeyer 2014), it is
shown how such belief revision scenarios can be modelled in
the framework of the situation calculus using so-called belief
conditionals. However, it remains open how to address the
projection problem in the presence of belief conditionals.
In this paper, we provide a solution using regression. The
work is carried out within the logic ESB of (Schwering and

2

The Logic ESB

ESB is a logic for reasoning about actions and beliefs. It
is based on the modal variant of the situation calculus ES
(Lakemeyer and Levesque 2011) and the belief revision
framework by Shapiro et al. (2011). Only-believing allows
to express all the agent believes through belief conditionals

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1583

