Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Collaboration in Social Problem-Solving:
When Diversity Trumps Network Efficiency
Diego V. Noble, Marcelo O.R. Prates, Daniel S. Bossle and Luı́s C. Lamb
Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul - Porto Alegre, 91501-970, Brazil
dvnoble@inf.ufrgs.br morprates@inf.ufrgs.br dsbossle@inf.ufrgs.br lamb@inf.ufrgs.br

Abstract

context. Unsurprisingly, one of the findings was that humans
behaved in a richer way than their artificial counterparts. Humans considerably outperformed artificial agents. They suggest that this result may indicate a lack of sophistication in
current agent-based models, pointing to the fact that their
agents — and the ones found in the literature — are “insufficiently sophisticated and heterogeneous to reflect real
human responses to changing circumstances” (Mason and
Watts 2012), lacking the dynamic behavior which humans
presented in their problem-solving strategies. They go further and, accordingly to their findings: “the results of both
artificial simulations and artificial experiments should be
generalized with caution” (Mason and Watts 2012).
There is evidence that heterogeneity compensates for low
ability in problem-solving (Marcolino et al. 2014). (Hong
and Page 2004) state that “diversity trumps ability”. In their
paper, they detail how a diverse pool of problem-solvers can
outperform a homogeneous pool of high-ability agents. Although the authors did not address dynamic problem-solving
agents (i.e. agents who change strategies throughout the
solving process) the fact that human agents are likely to be
dynamic and heterogeneous (Mason and Watts 2012) is an
indicator that this question is still open.
This paper addresses the interplay between (1) collective
diversity (heterogeneity), (2) dynamic strategic behavior,
and (3) network efficiency, by extensive agent-based simulations. We show that the dissociation of exploitation from
exploration can influence and change drastically what is an
optimal individual strategy. More importantly, we found out
that, from the three above parameters, collective diversity is
shown more relevant to the collective performance than network efficiency and dynamic strategic behavior.

Recent studies have suggested that current agent-based
models are not sufficiently sophisticated to reproduce
results achieved by human collaborative learning and
reasoning. Such studies suggest that humans are diverse
and dynamic when solving problems socially. However,
despite their relevance to problem-solving, these two
behavioral features have not yet been fully investigated.
In this paper we analyse a recent social problem-solving
model and attempt to address its shortcomings. Specifically, we investigate the effects of separating exploitation from exploration in agent behaviors and explore the
concept of diversity in such models. We found out that
diverse populations outperform homogeneous ones in
both efficient and inefficient networks. Finally, we show
that agent diversity is more relevant than the strategic
behavioral dynamics. This work contributes towards understanding the role of diverse and dynamic behaviors
in social problem-solving as well as the advancement of
state-of-art social problem-solving models.

1

Introduction

Collaborative problem-solving has been the subject of Artificial Intelligence research for over half a century (Newell,
Shaw, and Simon 1959; Newell and Simon 1972; 1976;
Simon 1990). Recent investigations in human computation,
social computing and complex networks have also contributed to new results, tools and technologies for social
and human problem-solving (Easley and Kleinberg 2010;
Hogg and Huberman 2008; Kearns 2012; Law and von
Ahn 2011). The analysis of collaboration has gained attention and several authors have indicated that it is an
essential feature in problem-solving (Amir et al. 2013;
Tabajara et al. 2013). By understanding the dimensions and
patterns of collaborative human problem-solving, we can
improve (human) organizations’ performance, thus devising stronger ones (Araujo and Lamb 2008; March 1991;
Page 2007).
In a recent study, (Mason and Watts 2012) have investigated relevant aspects of human collaborative learning in
networks. They compared how humans and artificial agents
solved the same problem in the same collaborative network

2

Preliminaries and Related Work

Computational social science is currently facing huge research interest (Lazer et al. 2009; Kearns 2012). Research
in social problem-solving predates the recent ubiquity of social technologies. An early example is the work of (Clearwater, Huberman, and Hogg 1991; Clearwater, Hogg, and Huberman 1992), who discuss solving constraint-satisfaction
problems by means of cooperative artificial agents.
More recently, (Hong and Page 2004) investigate how diverse agents teams can outperform high-ability ones. (Lazer
and Friedman 2007) studied the dissemination of informa-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1277

