Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Robustness in Probabilistic Temporal Planning
Jeb Brooks, Emilia Reed, Alexander Gruver and James C. Boerkoel Jr.
Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, CA
{jbrooks,egreed,agruver,boerkoel}@g.hmc.edu

Abstract
Flexibility in agent scheduling increases the resilience
of temporal plans in the face of new constraints. However, current metrics of flexibility ignore domain knowledge about how such constraints might arise in practice,
e.g., due to the uncertain duration of a robot’s transition
time from one location to another. Probabilistic temporal planning accounts for actions whose uncertain durations can be modeled with probability density functions.
We introduce a new metric called robustness that measures the likelihood of success for probabilistic temporal plans. We show empirically that in multi-robot planning, robustness may be a better metric for assessing the
quality of temporal plans than flexibility, thus reframing
many popular scheduling optimization problems.

1

2

α

β

γ

δ
Figure 1: Example Robot-T navigation problem. In order for
Robot 2 to traverse the path γ → β, it must first wait for
Robot 1 to take the path α → β → δ.

Introduction
Temporal plans exist to provide robust directives that agents
can follow to accomplish their goals, while also coordinating when these activities should occur. Figure 1 shows a
two robot coordination problem—the Robot-T problem—
that we will use as a running example throughout the paper.
Here, Robot 1 must make its way to the bottom of the T
(from α to δ via β) without colliding with Robot 2, which is
attempting to traverse across the top of the T (from γ to β).
To guarantee success, the plan enforces that Robot 1 must
vacate location β before Robot 2 can transition into β.
In general, we want temporal plans that are adaptable
to events that are beyond the direct control of agents; e.g.,
Robot 1 may experience slippage and so depart β later than
expected. To do this, we must answer two questions: (1) how
and when do new or unexpected events arise in practice?,
and (2) how ‘good’ is the temporal plan at adapting to unexpected events that might otherwise invalidate the plan?
First, current approaches for modeling how and when unexpected events arise simply capture the ranges of time during which events might occur. Unfortunately, this ignores
important domain knowledge about why such events are uncertain in practice. For instance, the exact amount of time a
robot will take to traverse some portion of the course may be
dependent on factors such as battery life, slippage, or surface

friction. Our approach more accurately models such uncertainty as a probability distribution over possible durations.
Second, the current state of the art in measuring the ‘goodness’ of a schedule is called flexibility. As explained later,
in our Robot-T example, if the robots are given 24 seconds
to complete all the activities, flexibility gives a rating of
21.4 seconds. Although flexibility has a strong mathematical
backing, it lacks intuition for practical applications. What
does having 21.4 seconds of flexibility really mean? Does
this flexibility exist where we need it most? Our hypothesis
in this paper is that where flexibility lies is more important
than how much flexibility there is. Our work introduces a
new metric called robustness, which assesses the likelihood
of temporal plan execution success. We argue that this is a
more useful measure of plan quality.
More specifically, this paper contributes:
• an application of probabilistic temporal planning that captures empirically derived domain knowledge about durational uncertainty as a probability density function;
• a new metric, called robustness, that computes the likelihood that a plan can be executed successfully, thus reframing many scheduling optimization problems; and
• an empirical evaluation that shows that robustness is better suited than previous metrics for assessing plan quality
in deployed multi-robot coordination problems.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3239

