Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Self-Paced Learning for Matrix Factorization
Qian Zhao1 , Deyu Meng1,∗ , Lu Jiang2 , Qi Xie1 , Zongben Xu1 , Alexander G. Hauptmann2
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
timmy.zhaoqian@gmail.com, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, lujiang@cs.cmu.edu
xq.liwu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zbxu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, alex@cs.cmu.edu
∗
Corresponding author

Abstract

Okatani and Deguchi 2007; Mitra, Sheorey, and Chellappa
2010; Okatani, Yoshida, and Deguchi 2011). Another commonly utilized loss function is the least absolute deviation
(LAD), which results in an L1 -norm MF problem (Ke and
Kanade 2005; Eriksson and van den Hengel 2010; Zheng et
al. 2012; Wang et al. 2012; Meng et al. 2013). Solving this
optimization problem has also been attracting much attention since it performs more robust in the presence of heavy
noises and outliers. Other loss functions beyond L2 - or L1 norm have also been considered for specific applications
(Srebro, Rennie, and Jaakkola 2005; Weimer et al. 2007;
Meng and De la Torre 2013).
The main limitation of existing MF methods lies on the
non-convexity of the objective functions they aim to solve.
This deficiency often makes the current MF approaches getting stuck into bad local minima, especially in the presence
of heavy noises and outliers. A heuristic approach for alleviating this problem is to run the algorithm multiple times with
different initializations and pick the best solution among
them. However, this strategy is ad hoc and generally inconvenient to implement in unsupervised setting, since there is
no straightforward criterion for choosing a proper solution.
Recent advances in self-paced learning (SPL) (Kumar,
Packer, and Koller 2010) provide a possible solution to this
local minimum problem. The core idea of SPL is to train
a model on “easy” samples first, and then gradually add
“complex” samples into consideration, which well simulates the process of human learning. This methodology has
been empirically demonstrated to be beneficial in avoiding
bad local minima and achieving a better generalization result (Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010; Tang et al. 2012;
Kumar et al. 2011). Therefore, incorporating it into MF is
expected to alleviate the local minimum issue.
In this paper, we present a novel approach, called selfpaced matrix factorization (SPMF), for the MF task. Specifically, we construct a concise SPMF formulation which can
be easily employed to embed the SPL strategy into general
MF objectives, including the L2 - and L1 -norm MF. We also
design a simple yet effective algorithm for solving the proposed SPMF problem. Experimental results substantiate that
our method improves the performance of the state-of-the-art
L2 - and L1 -norm MF methods. Besides, we theoretically explain the insight for its effectiveness in the L2 -norm case by
deducing an error bound for the weighted MF problem.

Matrix factorization (MF) has been attracting much attention due to its wide applications. However, since MF
models are generally non-convex, most of the existing
methods are easily stuck into bad local minima, especially in the presence of outliers and missing data. To
alleviate this deficiency, in this study we present a new
MF learning methodology by gradually including matrix elements into MF training from easy to complex.
This corresponds to a recently proposed learning fashion called self-paced learning (SPL), which has been
demonstrated to be beneficial in avoiding bad local minima. We also generalize the conventional binary (hard)
weighting scheme for SPL to a more effective realvalued (soft) weighting manner. The effectiveness of the
proposed self-paced MF method is substantiated by a
series of experiments on synthetic, structure from motion and background subtraction data.

Introduction
Matrix factorization (MF) is one of the fundamental problems in machine learning and computer vision, and has
wide applications such as collaborative filtering (Mnih and
Salakhutdinov 2007), structure from motion (Tomasi and
Kanade 1992) and photometric stereo (Hayakawa 1994).
Basically, MF aims to factorize an m × n data matrix Y,
whose entries are denoted as yij s, into two smaller factors
U ∈ Rm×r and V ∈ Rn×r , where r  min(m, n), such
that UVT is possibly close to Y. This aim can be achieved
by solving the following optimization problem:
X
min
`(yij , [UVT ]ij ) + λR(U, V),
(1)
U,V

(i,j)∈Ω

where `(·, ·) denotes a certain loss function, Ω is the index
set indicating the observed data, and R(U, V) is the regularization term to guarantee generalization ability and numerical stability.
Under the Gaussian noise assumption, it is natural to utilize the least square (LS) loss in (1), leading to an L2 -norm
MF problem. This problem has been extensively studied
(Srebro and Jaakkola 2003; Buchanan and Fitzgibbon 2005;
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3196

