Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Stratified Strategy for Efficient Kernel-based Learning
Simone Filice(†) , Danilo Croce(‡) , Roberto Basili(‡)
(†) Dept. of Civil Engineering and Computer Science Engineering
(‡) Dept. of Enterprise Engineering
University of Roma, Tor Vergata, Italy
{filice,croce,basili}@info.uniroma2.it

Abstract

managed by a complex model or, dually, to coarse errors
made by naı̈ve approaches. It is interesting to decompose a
target model into layers, according to a specific notion of
complexity. Ideally, if the complexity of each example were
known a priori, an ad-hoc strategy could be applied to each
example. While, in general, the complexity of an example
is unknown, it could be estimated through the classification
confidence. Let us consider margin classifiers, such as the
Perceptron (Rosenblatt 1958). From a geometric perspective, the confidence can be inferred by the distance of an
example from the classification hyperplane: the higher is the
distance, the higher is the confidence in the response of the
classifier. This intuition can be applied to pick the proper decision from a pool of classifiers, that are stratified according
to their expressivity and complexity. If an example is classified according to a simpler (and more efficient) decision
function with a satisfactory confidence, the analysis ends;
on the contrary, the example is analyzed by the more complex classifiers until a satisfactory confidence is achieved.
The proposed stratifies strategy is applied to two state-ofthe-art algorithms, Support Vector Machine (SVM) and the
Passive Aggressive (PA) algorithm (Crammer et al. 2006),
that is one of the most popular Online Learning algorithms.
Even thought SVM generally achieves better performance,
PA is even more appealing as it incrementally modifies the
learned models without a complete retraining.
Our framework is general and applicable to a variety of
application domains and tasks. However, we focused on Natural Language Processing tasks whereas increasingly complex kernels correspond to increasingly expressive linguistic
representations. Two semantic processing tasks are thus considered in the experimental evaluation, i.e. Question Classification and Sentiment Analysis in Twitter. In both cases,
lower levels of the stratified model are characterized by linear (and efficient) learning algorithms based on just surface
lexical information, while upper levels make use of more
complex kernels able to better generalize lexical and syntactic information. Results suggest that a stratified learning
approach is effective as no significant performance drop is
experimented, while a significant reduction (up to 90%) of
kernel computations is achieved.
In the remaining, first we discuss related works. Then, the
stratified framework is defined and instantiated to SVM and
PA. Finally, the experimental evaluations are reported.

In Kernel-based Learning the targeted phenomenon is
summarized by a set of explanatory examples derived
from the training set. When the model size grows with
the complexity of the task, such approaches are so computationally demanding that the adoption of comprehensive models is not always viable. In this paper, a
general framework aimed at minimizing this problem is
proposed: multiple classifiers are stratified and dynamically invoked according to increasing levels of complexity corresponding to incrementally more expressive
representation spaces. Computationally expensive inferences are thus adopted only when the classification
at lower levels is too uncertain over an individual instance. The application of complex functions is thus
avoided where possible, with a significant reduction of
the overall costs. The proposed strategy has been integrated within two well-known algorithms: Support Vector Machines and Passive-Aggressive Online classifier.
A significant cost reduction (up to 90%), with a negligible performance drop, is observed against two Natural
Language Processing tasks, i.e. Question Classification
and Sentiment Analysis in Twitter.

Introduction
Kernel methods, discussed in (Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini
2004) have been employed in many Machine Learning algorithms, such as Support Vector Machines (Vapnik 1998)
achieving state-of-the-art performances in many tasks. One
drawback of expressive but complex kernel functions, such
as Sequence (Cancedda et al. 2003) or Tree kernels (Collins
and Duffy 2001) is the time and space complexity required
both in the learning and classification phases, that may prevent the kernel adoption in real world applications or in scenarios involving large amount of data.
In this paper, we mitigate this issue by decomposing the
learning process into a sequence of incrementally complex
ones: in this way, a stratified model is acquired, whereas
first layers are always applied to simple examples, and more
expressive representations are employed just when needed.
Notice that learning algorithms usually apply the same inductive inference to each example. This may lead to unnecessarily high computational costs when simple examples are
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2239

