Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

The Hybrid Nested/Hierarchical Dirichlet Process and Its
Application to Topic Modeling with Word Differentiation
Tengfei Ma and Issei Sato and Hiroshi Nakagawa
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
{matf@r., sato@r., nakagawa@}dl.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

for modeling data (Lacoste-Julien, Sha, and Jordan 2008;
Ramage et al. 2009), and finding implicit category structure
is also an important task (Yu, Yu, and Tresp 2005). Teh et
al. (Teh et al. 2006) even demonstrate that ignoring the category information would result in much worse performance
in the multi-corpora topic modeling task.
In this paper, we consider the case that the membership
of the grouped data is unknown. Our aim is to develop a
Bayesian nonparametric model which improves the HDP
by uncovering the latent categories of the data groups and
utilizing them for data modeling simultaneously. We borrow the idea from the nested Dirichlet process (NDP) (Rodriguez, Dunson, and Gelfand 2008) and construct the hybrid nested hierarchical Dirichlet Process (hNHDP). The
NDP is an extension of the Dirichlet Process (DP) to solve
the problem of ”clustering probability distributions and simultaneous multilevel clustering”. It allows us to simultaneously cluster groups and observations within groups. The
NDP and HDP both generalize the DP to allow hierarchical
structures, but they induce fundamentally different dependence among the group distributions. For the HDP, different
group distributions share the same atoms but assign them
different weights. NDP, on the other hand, leads to distributions that have either the same atoms with the same weights
or completely different atoms and weights.
We integrate the advantages of the NDP and the HDP in
our hybrid model. The group distributions are clustered as
in the NDP. However, different from the NDP, our model
allows distributions to share some atoms even when they belong to different clusters; and it clusters the groups using
only the local components (i.e. unshared atoms). We define
the distribution Fk for each cluster k as a mixture of two independently drawn DPs: G0 which is shared by all clusters
and Gk which is cluster-specific. Through some settings, we
make Fk still a realization of the DP. Thus our model can
be transferred into a special case of the NDP. At the same
time, it can be also regarded as a special case of an alternative HDP (Müller, Quintana, and Rosner 2004), which we
call LC-HDP (linear combination based HDP) in this paper. Moreover, the model are very flexible by allowing to
set different base measures (H0 and H1 ) for G0 and Gj . As
a result, Gj can only include useful features for clustering.
This setting in fact induces feature selection in the clustering
process.

The hierarchical Dirichlet process (HDP) is a powerful
nonparametric Bayesian approach to modeling groups
of data which allows the mixture components in each
group to be shared. However, in many cases the groups
themselves are also in latent groups (categories) which
may impact the modeling a lot. In order to utilize the
unknown category information of grouped data, we
present the hybrid nested/ hierarchical Dirichlet process
(hNHDP), a prior that blends the desirable aspects of
both the HDP and the nested Dirichlet Process (NDP).
Specifically, we introduce a clustering structure for the
groups. The prior distribution for each cluster is a realization of a Dirichlet process. Moreover, the set of
cluster-specific distributions can share part of atoms between groups, and the shared atoms and specific atoms
are generated separately. We apply the hNHDP to document modeling and bring in a mechanism to identify
discriminative words and topics. We derive an efficient
Markov chain Monte Carlo scheme for posterior inference and present experiments on document modeling.

Introduction
Bayesian nonparametric models have drawn a lot of attention in the machine learning community recently. Among
them the hierarchical Dirichlet process (HDP) (Teh et al.
2006) has achieved great success for modeling groups of
data. It has been applied to various areas such as topic modeling and hidden Markov models. It constructs multiple DPs
by sharing the base measure which is drawn by another DP.
With this setting, the HDP allows different groups to share
mixture components.
The basic assumption of the HDP is that each group distribution is conditionally independent based on the same base
measure. However, this assumption ignores the latent correlation among groups. If we consider a group of data as an
object; the objects are often organized into categories, such
as documents in multi-corpora data and epileptic seizures
(groups of channels) across patients (Wulsin, Litt, and
Jensen 2012). Intuitively, objects within the same category
should be more similar to each other than to those in other
categories. These kinds of category information are useful
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2835

