Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Target-Dependent Churn Classification in Microblogs
Hadi Amiri and Hal Daume III
Computational Linguistics and Information Processing (CLIP) Lab
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland
{hadi,hal}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract

Oentaryo et al. 2012). In this work, we investigate churn
identification in the context of microblog platforms such as
Twitter and Facebook that provide publicly available usergenerated contents. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work that investigates churn identification in the microblog contexts. Table 1 shows some examples of churny
micro-posts about different brands taken from our Twitter
dataset. Identifying such churny contents will enable companies to provide personalized assistance to their potential
churners, and competitors to hunt new customers.
We formally define the problem of target-dependent churn
classification in microblogs as follows: Given a micro-post
ti posted by user uj about brand bk , determine if ti is churny
or non-churny with respect to bk . Here, we assume that for
each brand bk there exists a list of competing brands bi ,
i = {1 . . . n}, i 6= k. In this paper, we identify three major categories of churn indicators for target-dependent churn
classification in microblogs. In particular, we investigate demographic churn indicators (obtained from users of microposts), content churn indicators (obtained from the textual
content of micro-posts), and context churn indicators (obtained from threads containing the micro-posts). We examine factors that make this problem more challenging and investigate the performance of several state-of-the-art machine
learning techniques on this problem. A challenging aspect
of such classification task is that churny contents can be expressed in a subtle manner. For example the tweet “debating
if I should stay with Verizon” contains no word that is obviously churny, but it represents a potential churn with respect
to the brand. As such, churn classification requires a more

We consider the problem of classifying micro-posts as
churny or non-churny with respect to a given brand. Using Twitter data about three brands, we find that standard machine learning techniques clearly outperform
keyword based approaches. However, the three machine
learning techniques we employed (linear classification,
support vector machines, and logistic regression) do not
perform as well on churn classification as on other text
classification problems. We investigate demographic,
content, and context churn indicators in microblogs and
examine factors that make this problem more challenging. Experimental results show an average F1 performance of 75% for target-dependent churn classification
in microblogs.

Introduction
Understanding customer loyalty is an important part of any
business. Banks, telecommunication companies, airlines, Internet service providers, pay TV companies, and insurance
firms etc., utilize customer churn or attrition rates as one of
their key business metrics. This metric is important as the
churn rate of a business is a good indicator of customer response to services, pricing, and competitions. The ability to
identify churny contents / behaviors can enable early intervention processes (as part of retention campaigns) and ultimately a reduction in customer churn. Retention campaigns
often involve three major steps (Huang, Kechadi, and Buckley 2012): (a) churn identification that indicates if a customer is at the risk of canceling the company’s service, (b)
evaluation that measures if a customer worth retaining, and
(c) execution that identifies the best retention technique for
each potential churner.
Churn identification, the first step of retention campaigns,
is crucial as the cost of retaining an existing customer is
much less than acquiring a new one (Huang, Kechadi, and
Buckley 2012). This problem has been extensively studied
on Call-Record data (CRD) in the context of social graphs
of telecommunication companies (Verbeke, Martens, and
Baesens 2014; Karnstedt et al. 2010) and to a lesser extent on online gaming (Kawale, Pal, and Srivastava 2009)
and chat and forum communities (Karnstedt et al. 2011;

One of my main goals for 2013 is to leave BrandName.
I cant take it anymore, the unlimited data isnt even worth it.
My days with BrandName are numbered.
BrandName: I will change carriers as soon as contract is up.
Really hate to leave BrandName-1 but... Hey BrandName-2?
BrandName your customer service is horrible. this loyal
customer will be gone #awfulcustomerservice
Cant wait to leave BrandName-1 for BrandName-2! One
more bill!!
If I cant keep my unlimited data, then bye BrandName.

Table 1: Sample churny micro-posts (brand names are replaced with the placeholder BrandName).

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2361

