Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Solving Hard Stable Matching Problems via
Local Search and Cooperative Parallelization
Danny Munera

Daniel Diaz

Salvador Abreu

University Paris 1/CRI
danny.munera@malix.univ-paris1.fr

University Paris 1/CRI
daniel.diaz@univ-paris1.fr

University of Évora/CENTRIA/CRI
spa@di.uevora.pt

Francesca Rossi

Vijay Saraswat

Philippe Codognet

University of Padova/Harvard University
frossi@math.unipd.it

IBM TJ Watson Research Center
vsaraswa@us.ibm.com

JFLI-CNRS/UPMC University of Tokyo
codognet@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

tite market sharing, job markets and social networks. Many
of these applications involve very large sets.
We show how to model SMTI problems as permutation
problems and solve them using a local search approach,
based on Adaptive Search (AS) (Codognet and Diaz 2001;
2003). We compare experimentally the sequential version of
our solver with state of the art exact and approximate algorithms to solve such problems, showing significant improvement in performance or solution quality.
Moreover, our implementation uses a parallel framework (Munera et al. 2014) written in X10 (Charles et al.
2005; Saraswat et al. 2012). We show that the independent
parallel version exhibits a significant speedup with increasing number of cores and the cooperative version achieves
super-linear speedup on average and behaves very well on
hard instances.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
provides the necessary background. Section 3 details the
AS modeling of SMTI. In Section 4 we evaluate the performance of the AS implementation. Finally, Section 5 asseses
the parallel performance of our implementation.

Stable matching problems have several practical applications. If preference lists are truncated and contain
ties, finding a stable matching with maximal size is
computationally difficult. We address this problem using a local search technique, based on Adaptive Search
and present experimental evidence that this approach
is much more efficient than state-of-the-art exact and
approximate methods. Moreover, parallel versions (particularly versions with communication) improve performance so much that very large and hard instances can
be solved quickly.

1

Introduction

In 1962, Gale and Shapley introduced the Stable Marriage
(SM) problem (Gale and Shapley 1962). An SM instance
of size n involves a set of n men and a set of n women,
each of whom have ranked all members of the other set in a
strict order of preference. Solving such a problem consists in
finding a marriage, i.e. a one-to-one matching between the
men and the women. In addition the marriage must be stable,
meaning that there is no man-woman pair where both would
rather marry each other than their current partner – such a
pair is called a blocking pair. Gale and Shapley proved that
such a stable marriage always exists and proposed a O(n2 )
algorithm (called GS in what follows) to find one.
However, requiring each member to rank all members of
the opposite sex in a strict order is too restrictive for many
real-life, large-scale applications. A natural variant of SM is
the Stable Marriage with Incomplete List and Ties (SMTI)
problem (Iwama et al. 1999; Manlove et al. 2002). In SMTI,
the preference lists may include ties (to express indifference)
and may be incomplete (to express that some partners are
unacceptable) The goal now is to find the stable matching of
maximal size (that is, with the smallest number of singles).
This problem is NP-hard.
SMTI is a special case of the Hospitals/Residents problem (Manlove et al. 2002), for which there are nation-wide
programmes in several countries. Matching problems can
also be found in other settings, such as car sharing or bipar-

2

Background

Stable Marriage with Ties and Incompleteness
We recall the main definitions for SMTI problems (Scott
2005; Iwama and Miyazaki 2008).
Definition 1. (SMTI problem) An SMTI instance of size n
consists of n men and n women, and a preference list for
each of them, which contains some of the people of the other
gender. Such preference lists are weak orders, that is, total
orders possibly containing ties.
While not required by the theory we assume that the preference list for woman w does not contain man m iff the list
for m does not contain w. This is trivial to establish with
a pre-pass; the generator we use (Gent and Prosser 2002)
already ensures this.
Definition 2. (Marriage) Given an SMTI instance, a marriage M is a set of pairs (m, w) representing a (possibly
partial) one-to-one matching of men and women. If a man
m is not matched in M (i.e. for no w is it the case that
(m, w) ∈ M ), we say that m is single in M (similarly for
women). The size of a marriage M is the cardinality of M .

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1212

