Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Deep Modeling Complex Couplings within Financial Markets
Wei Cao

Liang Hu

Longbing Cao

Advanced Analytics Institute
University of Technology, Sydney
Wei.Cao@student.uts.edu.au

University of Technology, Sydney
and Shanghai Jiaotong University
lianghu@sjtu.edu.cn

Advanced Analytics Institute
University of Technology, Sydney
LongBing.Cao@uts.edu.au

Abstract

verified by the 2008 financial crisis (Longstaff 2010).
Figure 1 illustrates complex couplings across markets. In
addition to other factors, the movement of US stock markets is affected by three major types of cross-market interactions: the intra-market coupling, referring to the interactions between homogeneous markets (e.g. UK stock market
and Chinese stock market); the inter-market coupling, indicating the interactions between heterogeneous markets (e.g.
US currency market and stock market); and the temporary
coupling, describing the transitional influence across different time points in a market. Such couplings are embedded
across different relevant markets and countries, which need
to be considered in estimating the dynamics of a market.
However, it is very difficult to capture such couplings
across financial markets. Let us explore the possible underlying challenges. Firstly, such complex interactions are
driven by features that are not observable directly from market indexes (Chan et al. 2011); while we need to understand
what such hidden factors (which may be abstract) are in order to find out the drivers of couplings. Secondly, the three
types of couplings depicted in Figure 1 make it very difficult to build a model that is not too complex but expressive enough to capture the various interactions. Finally, these
couplings behave in a highly non-linear and dynamic manner, which increases the difficulty to qualify them.
Modeling such couplings fundamentally challenges existing approaches for financial market forecasting, which can
be roughly categorized into two groups: time series analysis represented by typical models including Logistic regression (Laitinen and Laitinen 2001), Autoregressive Integrated
Moving Average (ARIMA) and Generalized AutoRegressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity (GARCH) (Marcucci
2005) models, which use historical observations to infer
future trend behaviors; and machine learning-based methods to forecast financial market movements, such as the applications of Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) and Hidden Markov Models (HMM) (Hassan and Nath 2005). The
main challenges lie in their deficiencies: linear time series
models rely on the linear assumption of financial markets,
which often exhibit nonlinear behaviors; more importantly,
many models predict market trends directly based on observations, while ignoring the underlying complex couplings.
As a result, the outcomes may be either biased or too sensitive to observations available. The machine learning-based

The global financial crisis occurred in 2008 and its
contagion to other regions, as well as the long-lasting
impact on different markets, show that it is increasingly important to understand the complicated coupling relationships across financial markets. This is indeed very difficult as complex hidden coupling relationships exist between different financial markets in
various countries, which are very hard to model. The
couplings involve interactions between homogeneous
markets from various countries (we call intra-market
coupling), interactions between heterogeneous markets
(inter-market coupling) and interactions between current and past market behaviors (temporal coupling).
Very limited work has been done towards modeling
such complex couplings, whereas some existing methods predict market movement by simply aggregating indicators from various markets but ignoring the inbuilt
couplings. As a result, these methods are highly sensitive to observations, and may often fail when financial
indicators change slightly. In this paper, a coupled deep
belief network is designed to accommodate the above
three types of couplings across financial markets. With
a deep-architecture model to capture the high-level coupled features, the proposed approach can infer market
trends. Experimental results on data of stock and currency markets from three countries show that our approach outperforms other baselines, from both technical
and business perspectives.

Introduction
The global financial crisis in 2008 and its contagion from
the US to other regions and from one market to others show
the importance of understanding the interactions across financial markets and the challenge of predicting future market movements. This is because financial markets are complex, evolutionary and non-linear dynamic systems; markets
are no longer as independent as before due to globalization,
there are explicit and implicit couplings between homogeneous and heterogeneous markets within and between countries. Accordingly, the price dynamics of a financial market
cannot be simply informed by itself rather a systematic outcome of complex interactions across all related markets, as
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2518

