Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi-Agent Path Finding on Strongly Biconnected Digraphs
Adi Botea

Pavel Surynek

IBM Research
Dublin, Ireland

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Charles University Prague
Malostranské náměstı́ 25, 11 800, Praha 1

13

Abstract

13

Much of the literature on multi-agent path finding focuses on
undirected graphs, where motion is permitted in both directions along a graph edge. Despite this, travelling on directed
graphs is relevant in navigation domains, such as pathfinding
in games, and asymmetric communication networks.
We consider multi-agent path finding on strongly biconnected
directed graphs. We show that all instances with at least two
unoccupied positions can be solved or proven unsolvable. We
present a polynomial-time algorithm for this class of problems, and analyze its complexity. Our work may be the first
formal study of multi-agent path finding on directed graphs.

11

9

6

7

9

8

10

8
2

12

12

11

1

1

10

6

7

2
3

4

5

3

4

5

Figure 1: An example of uni-directional road network and its
abstraction as a digraph. The elliptic road is uni-directional
as a rule. Other roads are uni-directional, as the centrifugal
force does not allow making sharp turns.

Introduction

In navigation domains, uni-directional edges can arise
from the properties of the environment, such as the existence of one-way entrances, exits, escalators, bridges and
roads. Some agents could be able to travel down the hill
or float down the river, but not the other way around.
Furthermore, the literature shows approaches where unidirectional traffic is imposed on purpose on a game map,
with the goal of avoiding head-to-head collisions between
mobile agents (Wang and Botea 2008). Motion in directed
graphs is also important in asymmetric communication networks (Marina and Das 2002; Jetcheva and Johnson 2006;
Wu and Grumbach 2010).
Uni-directional networks also appear in traffic domains
such as highways and railways. Connection lanes in highway system impose one way routing, as vehicles cannot
make sharp turns when traveling at high speeds (see Figure 1). Similar situations arise at railway switches, which
can switch a train to another track in one direction only
(Bauer and Delling 2008).
We contribute the first tractability analysis of multi-agent
path finding on directed graphs (digraphs). We focus on
strongly biconnected digraphs, i.e., strongly connected digraphs where the undirected graphs obtained by ignoring the
edge orientations have no cutting vertices. We demonstrate
that all instances with at least two unocuppied vertices can
be solved or proven unsolvable in polynomial time. We introduce diBOX, a sub-optimal algorithm, and formally discuss its completeness, correctness, and complexity.
Previous formal studies of multi-agent pathfinding, sometimes also called coordinated pebble motion in graphs, ap-

Multi-agent path finding (MAPF) is an important computational problem, with applications in areas such as robotics
and computer games. Not surprisingly, the problem has received a considerable attention in computer science areas
such as artificial intelligence, robotics and graph theory.
In a common problem formulation, coined as cooperative
path finding, the purpose is to navigate every agent from its
original location to its target location, while avoiding collisions and deadlocks. The navigation environment is typically represented as a graph.
Current sub-optimal, scalable approaches work under the
key assumption that the underlying graph is undirected. For
instance, algorithms Push and Swap (Luna and Bekris 2011)
and Push and Rotate (de Wilde, ter Mors, and Witteveen
2013) implement a core primitive, called swap, where agents
must move in both directions along some graph edges.
Among other moves, the swap primitive involves moving
an agent to an adjacent node, to allow another agent to pass
through, after which the first agent comes back to its former location, traversing the graph edge in the opposite direction. The MAPP algorithm (Wang and Botea 2011) relies on reverting part of the recently performed moves, after
an agent reaches its target. The similar use of edges in both
directions appears in the BIBOX algorithm (Surynek 2009)
where robots in cycles are rotated in order to relocate a selected robot and eventually rotated back after the robot gets
out of the cycle to restore the situation.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2024

