Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Actionable Combined High Utility Itemset Mining
Jingyu Shao, Junfu Yin, Wei Liu and Longbing Cao
Advanced Analytics Institute, Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology
University of Technology, Sydney, 100 Broadway, Ultimo, NSW, AU, 2007
http://www-staff.it.uts.edu.au/ lbcao/publication/publications.htm
{Jingyu.Shao,Junfu.Yin}@student.uts.edu.au; {Wei.Liu,Longbing.Cao}@uts.edu.au

Abstract

two structures, called Utility-Increasing Incremental Itemsets (UIII) and Frequency-Maximum Incremental Itemsets
(FMII), for mining combined actionable high utility itemsets. Figure 1 shows an example of UIII structure: a scatterplot of HUIs, mined by traditional HUIM algorithm (UPGrowth), is firstly built with item-length increasing. The X
axis is the length of each itemset, and the Y axis is the utility of each itemset. For example, X0 is a length-one itemset (only one item included) with utility of 624879, Xa is a
length-two itemset (composed of X0 and ∆X1 ) with utility
of 876934, and Xb is another length-two itemset with utility
of 257377. The dotted lines are linked to each itemset composing several incremental itemset paths. In this figure, only
Xa (from X0 ) and Xc (from Xb ) are UIIIs.

The itemsets discovered by traditional High Utility
Itemsets Mining (HUIM) methods are more useful than
frequent itemset mining outcomes; however, they are
usually disordered and not actionable, and sometime accidental, because the utility is the only judgement and
no relations among itemsets are considered. In this paper, we introduce the concept of combined mining to
select combined itemsets that are not only high utility
and high frequency, but also involving relations between
itemsets. An effective method for mining such actionable combined high utility itemsets is proposed. The
experimental results are promising, compared to those
from traditional HUIM algorithm (UP-Growth).

Introduction
A retail or marketing manager often keeps an eye on which
brand sells well or what commodity has high utility, and a
promotion mixture is proved to be more profitable than a
single item. Here, a good promotion mixture is actionable
if it is not only profitable (high utility) but also well-selling
(high frequency). In this paper, we call such promotion mixtures actionable itemsets (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin 1997).
Unfortunately, this kind of patterns cannot be easily captured
by the existing methods for reasons below.
Typical Frequent Itemsets Mining (FIM) methods only
discover frequent itemsets. High Utility Itemsets Mining
(HUIM) is more useful to discover those goods with high
profits. In UP-growth (Tseng et al. 2010), which is a stateof-the-art algorithm in the HUIM area, the results are disordered, even though a UP-Tree with four strategies is proposed to make it much efficient and lossless.
However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no
method to extract patterns with both above features simultaneously. More importantly, no HUIM methods consider
relations between itemsets, which addresses the disordering issue in outcomes. In Combined Pattern Mining (Cao
2011), the concept of combined mining was proposed for
solving this sort of problems by considering the interactions
between relevant individual itemsets. Involving this concept
in actionable HUIM, this paper proposes a combination of

Figure 1: Example of a 4-item itemset with utility dynamics
Combined High Utility Itemsets (CHUI) consist of different itemsets that are extracted from the same itemset component in terms of their utility and frequency perspectives.

X0 + ∆X1 = Xa
(1)
X0 + ∆X2 = Xb
In the CHUI, we call Xa , Xb Derivative Itemset (DI),
which is denoted as X in the rest of the paper for global
view, X0 Underlying Itemset (UI) and the two variant itemsets ∆X1 and ∆X2 Additional Itemset (AI) (also denoted as
∆X). Furthermore, ∆X1 ∩ ∆X2 = ∅ and thus Xa 6= Xb .

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4206

