Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Personalized Tag Recommendation
through Nonlinear Tensor Factorization Using Gaussian Kernel
Xiaomin Fang and Rong Pan∗

Guoxiang Cao, Xiuqiang He and Wenyuan Dai

Department of Computer Science
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou, China
{fangxmin@mail2, panr@}.sysu.edu.cn

Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
Bantian, Longgang District
Shenzhen, China
{benjamin.cao, hexiuqiang, dai.wenyuan}@huawei.com

Abstract

Some tag recommender systems rank tags by means
of tensor factorization techniques. Tensor factorization is
a high-order extension of matrix factorization. Tensor
factorization-based models decompose the user-item-tag
tensor into three matrices to learn the latent features of
the users, items and tags. Higher Order Singular Vector
Decomposition (HOSVD) (Symeonidis, Nanopoulos, and
Manolopoulos 2008), Multiverse (Karatzoglou et al. 2010)
and RTF (Rendle et al. 2009) are based on Tucker Decomposition (TD), which can improve the state-of-the-art recommenders in prediction quality, but require too much computation power. In contrast, pairwise interaction tensor factorization (PITF) (Rendle and Schmidt-Thieme 2010) is based
on another factorization approach, Canonical Decomposition (CD). It is linear both in the dataset size and the feature
dimensionality. In this paper, we present a novel approach
based on Canonical Decomposition and can be considered
as a nonlinear generalization of CD. We use Gaussian radial
basis function to capture the complex relations between the
users, items and tags. We will analyze why exploiting Gaussian can make better use of the latent features and its relation to the traditional linear tensor factorization techniques.
Our experimental results show that our proposed model outperforms other competitive methods and can achieve good
performance with only a small number of latent features.
The contributions of our work are summarized as follows.

Personalized tag recommendation systems recommend
a list of tags to a user when he is about to annotate
an item. It exploits the individual preference and the
characteristic of the items. Tensor factorization techniques have been applied to many applications, such
as tag recommendation. Models based on Tucker Decomposition can achieve good performance but require
a lot of computation power. On the other hand, models based on Canonical Decomposition can run in linear
time and are more feasible for online recommendation.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for personalized tag recommendation, which can be considered as a
nonlinear extension of Canonical Decomposition. Different from linear tensor factorization, we exploit Gaussian radial basis function to increase the model’s capacity. The experimental results show that our proposed
method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods for tag
recommendation on real datasets and perform well even
with a small number of features, which verifies that our
models can make better use of features.

Introduction
Nowadays, a great amount of information springs up in the
Internet and users struggle to find the items they are really
interested in. To tackle this problem, recommendation systems are designed to recommend appropriate items to the
users according to their habits. Collaborative tagging systems like Delicious, Last.fm and Movielens allow users to
upload resources and annotate them. The activity that users
annotate items, such as movies, songs and pictures with
some keywords, is called tagging. A tag can be viewed as
an implicit rating and be used to identify not only the features of the items, but also the users’ personality. Tag recommendation is a task to suggest tags to a user when he
is about to annotate an item. Given an item, different users
may use different tags to annotate it. Personalized tag recommender systems utilize users’ past tagging behaviors to
predict their future behaviors. For example, if two users annotated an item with the same tag before, it is likely that they
will annotate another item with the same tag in the future.

• We propose a novel nonlinear approach based on Canonical Decomposition, which employs Gaussian radial basis function. The time performance is comparable to PITF
and runs in linear time.
• We compare our nonlinear approach to the traditional linear methods and analyze the reasons why the Gaussianbased method can make better use of the latent features.
• The experimental results demonstrate that our method
outperforms other methods on real datasets and performs
well even with only a small number of latent features.

Related Work
Tag Recommendation Techniques
There is a lot of previous work on tag recommendation.
Work by Krestel, Fankhauser, and Nejdl proposed an approach based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation(LDA). Given a

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

439

