Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Marginalized Denoising for Link Prediction and Multi-label Learning
Zheng Chen1,2 , Minmin Chen3 , Kilian Q. Weinberger2 , Weixiong Zhang2,1
1

2

Institute for Systems Biology, Jianghan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430056, China.
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA.
3
Criteo Lab, Palo Alto, CA, USA
zheng.chen@wustl.edu, m.chen@criteo.com, {kilian, weixiong.zhang}@wustl.edu
Abstract

small fraction of users actually completes the full profile information (missing labels).

Link prediction and multi-label learning on graphs are two
important but challenging machine learning problems that
have broad applications in diverse fields. Not only are the two
problems inherently correlated and often appear concurrently,
they are also exacerbated by incomplete data. We develop a
novel algorithm to solve these two problems jointly under a
unified framework, which helps reduce the impact of graph
noise and benefits both tasks individually. We reduce multilabel learning problem into an additional link prediction task
and solve both problems with marginalized denoising, which
we co-regularize with Laplacian smoothing. This approach
combines both learning tasks into a single convex objective
function, which we optimize efficiently with iterative closedform updates. The resulting approach performs significantly
better than prior work on several important real-world applications with great consistency.

Although LP and MLL are inherently interwoven, so far
they have been mostly considered to be unrelated problems.
In this work we show that both problems can be solved
jointly and can substantially benefit from each other. In biology, for example, the (partially) known protein function annotations (labels) have been exploited as a major source of
information for predicting PPI (edges) (Jansen et al. 2003).
Meanwhile, the functions of a protein are often determined
by which other proteins it interact with to form protein complexies, and thus PPI (edges) are commonly used to predict
protein functions (labels) (Kourmpetis et al. 2010). Similarly in social networks, adding missing friendship edges
will help predict interests of users, which are often shared
amongst friends. Likewise, interests of users can be utilized
to predict hidden links of friendship.

Introduction

The most obvious approach to exploit such reciprocal relationship between LP and MLL is to alternately apply LP
and MLL algorithms and use the output of one method to
facilitate the other (Bilgic, Namata, and Getoor 2007). However, it is non-trivial to determine how frequently and to
what extend information should be exchanged between LP
and MLL. Most importantly, the alternating iterations between the two tasks are not guaranteed to converge.

We study two of the most prominent machine learning tasks
on graphs: link prediction (LP) and multi-label learning
(MLL). On an abstract level the two problems are similar:
LP aims to impute missing links and MLL aims to impute
missing labels. In real world applications, the two problems
do indeed often appear hand-in-hand. Consider as an example protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks, which represent proteins bound to form protein complexes so as to exert
their functions. Here, inferring interactions among proteins
is an LP problem (Jansen et al. 2003) and predicting protein functions or annotations is an MLL task (Vazquez et al.
2003). Similarly, in social networks, LP can be used to recommend friends to one another (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2007), and MLL can be used to infer properties about
users (e.g. age group, profession, and interests) from their
social connections.
Data in such applications is notoriously incomplete and
usually has both, partially observed edges and partially observed labels. In PPI networks, for instance, it is well known
that the function annotations and the link structure of even
the most well-studied genes in model species are still quite
sparse. Similarly, in social networks only a subset of friends
explicitly connect one another (missing edges) and only a

We introduce a highly novel approach to combine
the MLL and LP problem into a single joint objective
with the recently introduced marginalized denoising framework (Chen et al. 2012; Chen, Zheng, and Weinberger 2013;
Chen and Zhang 2014). We phrase both problems as instances of graph denoising and co-regularize the predictions with Laplacian graph regularization. Our resulting algorithm, which we refer to as Marginalized Label and Link
Prediction (MLLP), is jointly convex and can be optimized
very efficiently. Different from prior work (Wang, Huang,
and Ding 2011), which essentially uses LP formulation to
solve a MLL problem, we incorporate both problems into
one single loss function and let them benefit from each
other as information naturally flows both ways. We evaluated MLLP on three real-world applications - one social
network and two PPI networks. MLLP outperforms every
competing prior work consistently across all our benchmark
data sets.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1707

