Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

The Dynamic Chinese Restaurant Process
via Birth and Death Processes
Rui Huang

Fengyuan Zhu∗ and Pheng-Ann Heng

Department of Statistics
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract

all, most models operate in discrete time. This implicitly requires a ‘discretization’ procedure that can lead to loss of
information. Furthermore, all existing models apply homogeneous rules to measure the ‘influence’ of existing data.
For example, the recurrent CRP (Ahmed and Xing 2008)
deletes all data before the previous time period, which implicitly assumes that data created at the same time will have
similar influence on the generation of new data. In this case,
the evolution of clusters is expected to share a statistically
homogeneous feature.
Unfortunately, the homogeneity assumption may not be
valid in many real applications. Intuitively, it is natural to
measure the influence of an existing datum (word) on future
data by its lifetime. That is, a datum is influential as long as
it is “surviving”. The death of a datum could be defined by
some appropriate criteria based on practical considerations
and the death should be observable. In this view, the lifetime
distribution is usually heterogeneous. This could be better illustrated by an Internet news modeling example, in which all
news is assumed to be generated from certain topics (clusters) over time. In this example, we can claim the death of a
word if the news containing it has no more comments from
Internet users for two consecutive days. Moreover, a topic
is considered to be dead if all words generated from it are
dead. From this perspective, we can expect at least two types
of heterogeneities. First, the cluster evolution heterogeneity
occurs. A piece of news is usually triggered by an underlying event. Therefore, some topics based on certain type
of events are expected to be popular for a long time while
others are not, and the difference may be substantial. This
leads to the dynamic change of cluster weights. More importantly, the heterogeneity in the lifetime of words within
a topic occurs. For instance, within the topic “SPORTS”,
words related to “the World Cup” may be hot for several
weeks during the game, while words related to “scandals of
athletes” may only last for a few days. This kind of heterogeneity leads to the dynamic change of cluster parameters.
However, even though such heterogeneities might be complex, the lifetime can be usually observed under some practical criteria in real applications without substantial cost, and
these observations certainly increase our information about
the evolutionary clustering problem. In view of this, we de-

We develop the Dynamic Chinese Restaurant Process
(DCRP) which incorporates time-evolutionary feature
in dependent Dirichlet Process mixture models. This
model can capture the dynamic change of mixture components, allowing clusters to emerge, vanish and vary
over time. All these macroscopic changes are controlled
by tracing the birth and death of every single element.
We investigate the properties of dependent Dirichlet
Process mixture model based on DCRP and develop
corresponding Gibbs Sampler for posterior inference.
We also conduct simulation and empirical studies to
compare this model with traditional CRP and related
models. The results show that this model can provide
better results for sequential data, especially for data with
heterogeneous lifetime distribution.

1

Introduction

Dirichlet Process Mixture (DPM) model has been widely
used in statistical data analysis and machine learning, especially in modeling clustered data. Traditional DPM possesses good properties in many aspects, but its static feature
makes it not applicable in evolutionary clustering problems.
First, the exchangeability assumption embedded in a DPM
is usually questionable for data with time dependency. That
is, data generated at different time points may not be exchangeable. Instead, the “partial exchangeability” is more
realistic (Ahmed and Xing 2008). Second, DPM cannot capture the dynamic change of cluster weights and parameters
for an evolutionary clustering model. Third, the “rich-getricher” phenomenon in DP is problematic in many applications. To solve the evolutionary clustering problem, many
authors developed time varying models on dependent data.
These models include the time-sensitive DPM model (Zhu,
Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2005), the temporal DP mixture
model (Ahmed and Xing 2008), the Generalized Pólya-urn
process mixture model (Caron, Davy, and Doucet 2012) and
the Distance-dependent CRP (Blei and Frazier 2011).
Even though the existing models characterize the dependency of data from different aspects and handle the evolutionary clustering problem, we observe that they share some
features in common that could be further improved. First of
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

∗

2687

Share equal contribution with Huang.

