Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Optimal Estimation of Multivariate ARMA Models
Martha White, Junfeng Wen, Michael Bowling and Dale Schuurmans
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton AB T6G 2E8, Canada
{whitem,junfeng.wen,mbowling,daes}@ualberta.ca

Abstract

ments based estimators for state-space models, which offer computationally efficient estimation strategies and sound
consistency properties (Andersson 2009; Hsu, Kakade, and
Zhang 2012; Anandkumar, Hsu, and Kakade 2012). For
ARMA models, the most applicable such estimators are
the subspace identification methods for estimating statespace models (Katayama 2006; Moonen and Ramos 1993;
Van Overschee and De Moor 1994; Viberg 1995; Song et al.
2010; Boots and Gordon 2012). The statistical efficiency of
moment matching, however, generally does not match that
of maximum likelihood, which is known to be asymptotically efficient under general conditions (Cramér 1946, Ch.
33). In fact, evidence suggests that the statistical efficiency
of current moment matching estimators is quite weak (Foster, Rodu, and Ungar 2012; Zhao and Poupart 2014).
In this paper, we develop a tractable approach to maximum likelihood parameter estimation for stochastic multivariate ARMA models. To efficiently compute a globally
optimal estimate, the problem is re-expressed as a regularized loss minimization, which then allows recent algorithmic advances in sparse estimation to be applied (Shah et al.
2012; Candes et al. 2011; Bach, Mairal, and Ponce 2008;
Zhang et al. 2011; White et al. 2012). Although there has
been recent progress in global estimation for ARMA, such
approaches have either been restricted to single-input singleoutput systems (Shah et al. 2012), estimating covariance matrices for scalar ARMA (Wiesel, Bibi, and Globerson 2013)
or using AR to approximate a scalar ARMA model (Anava
et al. 2013). By contrast, this paper offers the first efficient
maximum likelihood approach to estimating the parameters
of a stochastic multivariate ARMA(p, q) model. This convex optimization formulation is general, enabling generalized distributional assumptions and estimation on multivariate data, which has been much less explored than scalar
ARMA. An experimental evaluation demonstrates that globally optimal parameters under the proposed criterion yield
superior forecasting performance to alternative estimates,
including local minimization for ARMA estimation and
moment-based estimation methods for state-space models.

Autoregressive moving average (ARMA) models are a fundamental tool in time series analysis that offer intuitive modeling capability and efficient predictors. Unfortunately, the lack
of globally optimal parameter estimation strategies for these
models remains a problem: application studies often adopt
the simpler autoregressive model that can be easily estimated
by maximizing (a posteriori) likelihood. We develop a (regularized, imputed) maximum likelihood criterion that admits
efficient global estimation via structured matrix norm optimization methods. An empirical evaluation demonstrates the
benefits of globally optimal parameter estimation over local
and moment matching approaches.

Introduction
A central problem in applied data analysis is time series modeling—estimating and forecasting a discrete-time
stochastic process—for which the autoregressive moving
average (ARMA) and stochastic ARMA (Thiesson et al.
2012) are fundamental models. An ARMA model describes the behavior of a linear dynamical system under
latent Gaussian perturbations (Brockwell and Davis 2002;
Lütkepohl 2007), which affords intuitive modeling capability, efficient forecasting algorithms, and a close relationship to linear Gaussian state-space models (Katayama 2006,
pp.5-6).
Unfortunately, estimating the parameters of an ARMA
model from an observed sequence is a computationally difficult problem: no efficient algorithm is known for computing the parameters that maximize the marginal likelihood of
the observed data in an ARMA, stochastic ARMA or linear
Gaussian state-space model. Consequently, heuristic local
estimators are currently deployed in practice (Hannan and
Kavalieris 1984; Durbin 1960; Bauer 2005; Lütkepohl 2007;
Thiesson et al. 2012), none of which provide a guarantee
of how well the globally optimal parameters are approximated. For estimating linear Gaussian state-space models,
it has been observed that local maximization of marginal
likelihood tends to find local optima that yield poor results
(Katayama 2006, Sec. 1.3).
In response to the difficulty of maximizing marginal likelihood, there has been growing interest in method of mo-

Background
An ARMA model is a simple generative model of the form
depicted in Figure 1(a), where the innovation variables,
εt ∈ Rn , are assumed to be i.i.d. Gaussian, N (0, Σ), and

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3080

