Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploring Social Context for
Topic Identification in Short and Noisy Texts
Xin Wang1,2,3 , Ying Wang1,2 , Wanli Zuo1,2∗ , Guoyong Cai4
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering, Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Computer Technology and Engineering, Changchun Institute of Technology, Changchun 130012, China
4
Guangxi Key Lab of Trusted Software, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China
xinwangjlu@gmail.com;zuowl@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Existing topic identification algorithms can be roughly
categorized into two groups: content-based approaches (Hu
et al. 2009; Nicoletti, Schiaffino, and Godoy 2013; Chen et
al. 2012), and content and link-based approaches (Weng et
al. 2013; Vavliakis, Symeonidis, and Mitkas 2013; Takahashi, Tomioka, and Yamanishi 2014). The content-based
approaches mainly fetch external text to expand the short
text and then build a feature space directly for clustering
and classification. For example, semantic expansion based
on general knowledge (such as Open Directory Project(Bengel et al. 2004), Wordnet(Clifton, Cooley, and Rennie 2004)
and Wikipedia (Egozi, Markovitch, and Gabrilovich 2011;
Coursey, Mihalcea, and Moen 2009)) leverage the concepts
or categories of knowledge sources to discover related topics. While the content and link-based approaches try to infer
topics based on the combination of statistical topic modeling
with network analysis. Many theoretical models and systems
have been developed for topic identification, social network
associated with short texts has rarely been studied.
In social sciences, it is well-perceived that user preferences or behaviors on specific topic categories play an important role in our social life and correlate with our social
relations(Wang et al. 2014). The following two processes are
proposed to explain social phenomena on popular topic categories: people are more likely to have consistent preferences
in a specific short time interval, which has been recognized
as preference consistency; people tend to influence others or
their friends through a consequence of interactions and feedbacks based on specific topic categories, which has been recognized as social contagion. Inspired by these sociological
observations, we explore the utilization of social context to
facilitate topic identification in short and noisy texts.
In this paper, we aim to provide a supervised approach to
topic identification in short and noisy texts by taking advantage of social context in tackling the noisy nature of messages. In particular, we first investigate whether social theories exist in the application of short and noisy texts. Then we
discuss how the social context could be modeled and utilized
for supervised topic identification. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments to verify the proposed model. Our contributions are summarized as follows,

With the pervasion of social media, topic identification in short texts attracts increasing attention in recent years. However, in nature the texts of social media are short and noisy, and the structures are sparse
and dynamic, resulting in difficulty to identify topic categories exactly from online social media. Inspired by
social science findings that preference consistency and
social contagion are observed in social media, we investigate topic identification in short and noisy texts by
exploring social context from the perspective of social
sciences. In particular, we present a mathematical optimization formulation that incorporates the preference
consistency and social contagion theories into a supervised learning method, and conduct feature selection to
tackle short and noisy texts in social media, which result in a Sociological framework for Topic Identification (STI). Experimental results on real-world datasets
from Twitter and Citation Network demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Further experiments are conducted to understand the importance of
social context in topic identification.

Introduction
Topic identification concerns a problem of predicting terms
in text which indicate its subject or category, which has been
extensively studied and applied in many content analysis applications, such as natural language processing (Murnane,
Haslhofer, and Lagoze 2013; Vavliakis, Symeonidis, and
Mitkas 2013), information retrieval (Jayarathna, Patra, and
Shipman 2013), sentiment classification (Zheng et al. 2014;
Li et al. 2014) and data mining (Ren and Wu 2013; Li, Jin,
and Long 2012). With the pervasion of social media, short
texts have become a popular mean of expression, through
which users can easily produce content on various topics.
Unlike a classical text with many words that provides sufficient word occurrences and helps gather sufficient statistics, a short text only consists of a few phrases or 1-2 sentences and may not carry enough contextual clues, even suffers from the severe issue of data sparsity; Hence, inferring
unknown topics in short texts attracts increasing attention in
recent years.

• Demonstrate the existence of preference consistency theory and social contagion theory, and build messagemessage correlation relations;

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1868

