Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Discretization of Temporal Models
with Application to Planning with SMT
Jussi Rintanen∗
Department of Information and Computer Science
Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland

Abstract

2002). The Shin and Davis framework is very general, addressing planning in complex timed systems with continuous change and far exceeding both the complexity of typical
temporal planning problems and the capabilities of existing
search methods for timed and continuous systems. This suggests that parts of the generality may impede efficient implementations, which has motivated various hybrid approaches
that perform action selection in the first phase and action
scheduling in a separate phase. A representative of such
approaches is that of Rankooh and Ghassem-Sani (2012;
2013). Other planners replace the first phase with other
search paradigms (Vidal and Geffner 2006).
Similarly to classical planning (Kautz and Selman 1992;
Rintanen 2009), a problem instance in temporal planning
can be reduced to a sequence of constraint-satisfaction problems. Each of these problems represents a sequence of steps,
which correspond to those states encountered during the execution of a plan in which a (discrete) change takes place
(Shin and Davis 2005). In contrast to classical planning,
temporal planning involves choosing the absolute times for
each of the steps as well as the scheduling of the actions and
their effects to these steps. Most notably, the effects of an
action taken at step i are not necessarily at step i or the most
closely following steps, but could be arbitrarily far, depending on the duration of the action and the number of other
actions taken before or after. Standard encodings have to allow for arbitrary scheduling of actions’ start and end points
on the sequence of all steps. The difficult combinatorics of
this incurs a high computational cost.
In this work we investigate the possibilities of replacing
the real or rational timeline with an integer timeline, and
devise methods for simplifying the encoding of planning as
constraints when the integer timeline can be used. Our experimental results demonstrate the efficiency gains that are
possible with simpler and more effective encodings.
The structure of the paper is as follows. We first present a
simple yet general model of temporal planning, and sketch
constraint-based encodings for it. As the main result of the
work we prove that for important classes of temporal planning problems, time can be discretized in the sense that the
continuous or dense real or rational timeline can be replaced
by an integer timeline. Then we show how for actions with
short durations this allows dramatically simpler encodings,
with substantial performance improvements. We conclude

The problem of planning or discrete control for timed system
has earlier been solved with various constraint-based solution
methods, including Constraint Programming, SAT solvers,
SAT modulo Theories solvers, and Mixed Integer-Linear Programming. In this work we investigate the encoding of time
in such constraint-based representations. A main issue with
existing encodings is the necessity to allow arbitrary interleavings of concurrent actions’ starting and ending times. The
complex combinatorics of this can lead to poor scalability of
leading search methods. We show how real or rational time
in temporal models can in many practically important cases
be replaced by integer time, and how this leads to far simpler
encodings of planning as constraints. We demonstrate that
the simplified encodings substantially improve the scalability
of constraint-based planning.

Introduction
Temporal planning, similarly to other important problems
about timed systems, can be reduced to constraint-based
languages such as Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSP),
Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) and Satisfiability modulo Theories (SMT), and solved with generalpurpose solvers for these languages. Encodings of planning
in SMT are in several respects similar to encodings of classical planning in SAT, but the far more complex model of time
means that some of the core issues in SMT encodings do not
have a counterpart in SAT encodings. The most central issues we will be addressing in this work are action exclusions
and delayed effects.
Extensions of the SAT problem were first applied to problems such as planning with numerical state variables more
than 15 years ago (Wolfman and Weld 1999). The modeling languages for temporal planning favored by the planning competition (IPC) community were shown by Shin
and Davis (2005) to be effectively representable in the
SMT framework (Wolfman and Weld 1999; Audemard et al.
∗
Also affiliated with Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia,
and the Helsinki Institute of Information Technology, Finland. This
work was funded by the Academy of Finland (Finnish Centre of
Excellence in Computational Inference Research COIN, 251170).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3349

