Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

DynaDiffuse: A Dynamic Diffusion Model for
Continuous Time Constrained Influence Maximization
Miao Xie1,2,3 , Qiusong Yang2,3 , Qing Wang2,3 , Gao Cong4 , Gerard de Melo5
1

2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, {xiemiao, qiusong, wq} @nfs.iscas.ac.cn
National Engineering Research Center of Fundamental Software, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
4
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, gaocong@ntu.edu.sg
5
Tsinghua University/Microsoft Research Asia, China, gdm@demelo.org
Abstract

In this paper, we thus drop the assumption of a static
network and investigate how to account for network evolution in influence maximization. We define the continuous time constrained influence maximization problem
and propose the continuous time dynamic diffusion model
(DYNA D IFFUSE) for dynamic diffusion networks. Having
captured specific dynamic characteristics of networks (such
as herd behavior and activeness), DYNA D IFFUSE enables
us to consider their effects while estimating the influence
spread of a set of nodes within a given time frame. This is
achieved using an innovative stochastic model checking approach. Although the new problem is NP-hard, the influence
spread function is monotonic and submodular. This enables
us to obtain fast approximations with a lower bound precision ratio of 1 − 1/e. In our experiments on real social network data, we show that network evolution indeed plays an
important role in influence maximization. DYNA D IFFUSE
leads to significantly more influential node sets than previous models, with negligible time overhead.

Studying the spread of phenomena in social networks is
critical but still not fully solved. Existing influence maximization models assume a static network, disregarding
its evolution over time. We introduce the continuous
time constrained influence maximization problem for
dynamic diffusion networks, based on a novel diffusion
model called DYNA D IFFUSE. Although the problem is
NP-hard, the influence spread functions are monotonic
and submodular, enabling fast approximations on top
of an innovative stochastic model checking approach.
Experiments on real social network data show that our
model finds higher quality solutions and our algorithm
outperforms state-of-art alternatives.

1

Introduction

Understanding how information, diseases, etc. spread in a
network is vital in many settings. Companies may wish to
target users such that they, by word-of-mouth, influence their
friends, friends-of-friends, and so on, to purchase a product. Finding a set of initial nodes that will eventually influence the largest number of nodes in a network is critical
for achieving a high success rate (Domingos and Richardson
2001). Solving such an influence maximization problem can
enable us to predict the success or failure of new innovations
in their early stages, or to shape the process accordingly.
While several influence diffusion models have been proposed, all of them assume the given network is static (Guille
et al. 2013). In reality, however, networks may evolve quite
notably during the diffusion process (Mislove et al. 2008;
Tang et al. 2010). Matsubara et al. (2012) found that the information diffusion process often goes on for days or even
months. During this time, the degree of influence between
two nodes can change quite substantially due to changing interests or social ties. Likewise, the network topology
may change, with new nodes appearing or disappearing, and
edges coming and going. Gomez-Rodriguez, Leskovec, and
Schölkopf (2013) show that information diffusion networks
inferred from cascade data often evolve dramatically as the
information cascades accumulate. Accounting for such dynamics and thus pursuing seed node sets of a higher quality
may lead to significant financial gains.

2

Related Work

Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos (2003) first formulated the
problem of influence maximization in a graph, in which influence propagation is captured using stochastic cascades,
as in their independent cascade (IC) model. Recently, temporal aspects have been gaining increasing attention. Chen,
Lu, and Zhang (2012) incorporated the time delay of influence diffusion into the IC model. Liu et al. (2012) defined
a discrete time constrained information maximization problem and improved the IC model by adding the time stamps
of every time period for each edge, but their algorithms do
not consider continuous time constraints. Gomez-Rodriguez
and Schölkopf (2012) proposed a continuous time constrained diffusion model, which can be inferred from a cascade database (Gomez-Rodriguez, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf
2011). However, unlike DYNA D IFFUSE, all aforementioned
models assume a static network with fixed propagation rates
or probabilities during the diffusion process.
Finding the best initial set of nodes requires combinatorial optimization, which is very costly. Many studies aimed
at speeding up Kempe’s greedy algorithm. Kimura and Saito
(2006) introduced a shortest-path based IC model and provided efficient algorithms for it. Leskovec et al. (2007)
proposed the Cost-Effective Lazy Forward (CELF) scheme

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

346

