Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Efficient Active Learning of Halfspaces via Query Synthesis
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin and Xin Gao and Xiangliang Zhang
Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences & Engineering Division
King Abdullah University of Science & Technology (KAUST)
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia 23955

Abstract

recognition and text classification, there is often an abundance of unlabeled examples that can be used to improve
classification accuracy. However, the labeling cost is not
negligible, and the goal is to nominate a small subset of such
unlabeled examples for manual human annotation. Similarly, active learning can be used in dataset compression, in
which the entire training set is reduced in size in order to
improve the training time.
More precisely, suppose throughout this paper that our instance space is Rd , and suppose we would like to estimate a
halfspace c? = {x ∈ Rd | hw? , xi ≥ 0} for some unknown
normal vector w? ∈ Rd . The goal of active learning is to be
able to estimate c? , or equivalently w? , using as few queries
as possible. Here, a query comprises of an instance xi ∈ Rd
and a membership response:

Active learning is a subfield of machine learning that
has been successfully used in many applications including text classification and bioinformatics. One of
the fundamental branches of active learning is query
synthesis, where the learning agent constructs artificial
queries from scratch in order to reveal sensitive information about the true decision boundary. Nevertheless,
the existing literature on membership query synthesis
has focused on finite concept classes with a limited
extension to real-world applications. In this paper, we
present an efficient spectral algorithm for membership
query synthesis for halfspaces, whose sample complexity is experimentally shown to be near-optimal. At each
iteration, the algorithm consists of two steps. First, a
convex optimization problem is solved that provides an
approximate characterization of the version space. Second, a principal component is extracted, which yields a
synthetic query that shrinks the version space exponentially fast. Unlike traditional methods in active learning, the proposed method can be readily extended into
the batch setting by solving for the top k eigenvectors
in the second step. Experimentally, it exhibits a significant improvement over traditional approaches such as
uncertainty sampling and representative sampling. For
example, to learn a halfspace in the Euclidean plane
with 25 dimensions and an estimation error of 1E-4, the
proposed algorithm uses less than 3% of the number of
queries required by uncertainty sampling.

yi = c? (xi ) = I{xi ∈ c? } = sign(hxi , w? i) ∈ {+1, −1}
We assume we operate in the realizable setting. That is,
we have for all queries {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . .}:
∃w ∈ Rd : ∀i, yi = sign(hxi , wi)

In addition, we assume that the true halfspace c? (a.k.a. the
target concept) is deterministic and noise-free. These assumptions are widely used in the literature (see for instance
(Settles 2010; Balcan and Long 2013; Tong and Koller 2002;
Brinker 2003; Balcan, Broder, and Zhang 2007; Dasgupta
2005b; Freund et al. 1997; Dasgupta, Kalai, and Monteleoni
2009)). They are satisfied for many important classification
problems such as text classification (Xu et al. 2003). In addition, the assumed setting is equivalent to the task of reverseenigneering linear classifiers.
The traditional Probably Approximately Correct (PAC)
model (Valiant 1984; Haussler and Warmuth 1993) can be
used to provide sample complexity bounds for learning halfspaces. Specifically, suppose that D is a probability distribution of instances x ∼ D and let ĉ be the concept estimated according to the training set {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . .},
whose instances xi are drawn i.i.d. according to D while
yi = c? (xi ) ∈ {+1, −1}. Define estimation error to be  =
Px∼D [ĉ(x) 6= c? (x)]. Then, a classical result using the PAC
model states that Õ( d ) training examples are needed in order to achieve an estimation error of  (Cohn, Atlas, and Ladner 1994; Dasgupta 2005a; Balcan, Broder, and Zhang 2007;
Balcan and Long 2013). The hope of active learning is to

Introduction
Active learning is a subfield of machine learning that has received a growing interest over the past 20 years. It has been
successfully used in many applications including character recognition, text classification, computational chemistry,
spam filtering, and bioinformatics (Liu 2004; Sculley 2007;
Settles 2010). In addition, many software companies are
increasingly reliant on active learning techniques, such as
Google, IBM, and CiteSeer (Settles 2010; 2011).
The central goal of active learning (also called “query
learning”) is to be able to learn well using only a few queries
or training examples. There are various scenarios in which
active learning arises quite naturally. For instance, in speech
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2483

