Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Scalable Agent Modeling for Large Multiagent Systems
Carrie Rebhuhn
Oregon State University
rebhuhnc@onid.orst.edu

Introduction

Few stereotype methods explicitly handle dynamic
agents, but some accommodate a robust stereotype definition. Denzinger and Hamdan handle potential stereotype
misidentification by periodically reevaluating an agent’s assigned stereotype (2004). Bard and Bowling implicitly modeling by learning responses to several player types offline.
This does not rely on an explicit model of an agent’s actions,
but does not accommodate dynamic agents (2007).
The novelty of this work is to develop an approach that
works with a larger number of adaptive agents than previous
approaches.

In a heterogeneous multiagent system it can be useful to
have knowledge about the different types of agents in the
system. Agent modeling develops agent models based on interactions between agents, then predicts agent actions. This
approach is effective in small domains but does not scale
well. We develop an approach where an agent can learn using an abstract model identification or stereotype rather than
an explicit and unique model for each agent. We associate
each agent with a stereotype and learn a policy incorporating this knowledge. The benefits of this approach are that it
is simple, scalable, and degrades gracefully with misidentification.

Proposed Research Plan
We want investigate and develop stereotype methods for
large multiagent systems. Toward this, we will show the efficacy of using stereotypes in a large domain. We will then
use domain characteristics to define stereotypes. Finally we
will adjust our stereotype approach to better accommodate
dynamic agents.

Research Questions
We have three main goals in this thesis. We first wish to
see if, by identifying types in the state space, agents can
use this information to increase performance during learning. We then wish to identify system characteristics which
recommend the level of agent modeling. Finally we wish to
use stereotype identifications with dynamic agents. We do
this by asking three research questions:

Stereotype Use in a Complex Domain
We first show that stereotypes can improve performance in
a complex cooperative system: the Conflict-Avoidance domain for Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS). This problem
requires planes to select conflict-avoidance maneuvers while
flying continuously between randomized points. The highlevel goal is to ensure plane separation while adding minimal extra distance to the plane’s path. Formally we define
the global utility as:
X
|A|L
G(ŝ, â) =
dextra (ai ) + P
(1)
i∈A dneighbor (si )

• RQ 1: Can we increase performance in a large multiagent
system using type identification and external learning?
• RQ 2: Can we identify some aspect of the domain that
will indicate the appropriate descriptiveness of the model?
• RQ 3: Can we assign types dynamically to account for
unconverged learning solutions?

Related Work
Stereotyping has varying definitions in literature. Broadly
defined, stereotyping groups several agents under a single
model definition. By identifying another agent’s policy type,
an agent can make a more informed decision. Burnett, Norman, and Sycara combined stereotyping with the concept of
trust using a tree model to represent a stereotype (2010). The
agent community was then able to share and update these
stereotypes. Stereotypical reputation allows agents without
prior knowledge of others to access group knowledge (Burnett, Norman, and Sycara 2013).

i∈A

where G(ŝ, â) is the global utility dependent on the states ŝ
and actions â, dextra (ai ) is the distance cost incurred by the
action of agent i from the set â, dneighbor(si ) is the euclidean
distance of the nearest neighbor of agent i, |A| is the number
of agents, and L is the edge length of the testing map.
We then assess stereotyping against other techniques that
focus on noise reduction by comparing to a difference utility. The difference utility reduces noise by comparing the
system reward with agent i to a system reward without agent
i. This must be accomplished through approximation or resimulation. The performance shown in Figure 1 indicates that

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4251

