Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Emerging Architectures for Global System Science
Michela Milano(1) , Pascal Van Hentenryck(2)
(1) DISI, University of Bologna - Italy
(2) NICTA and the Australian National University, Australia (pvh@nicta.com.au)

• Strategic and Tactical Planning: Deciding how to influence and optimize the medium- and long-term behaviour
of the system.

Our society is organized around a number of (interdependent) global systems. Logistic and supply chains, health
services, energy networks, financial markets, computer networks, and cities are just a few examples of such global,
complex systems. These global systems are socio-technical
and involve interactions between complex infrastructures,
man-made processes, natural phenomena, multiple stakeholders, and human behavior. For the first time in the history of manking, we have access to data sets of unprecedented scale and accuracy about these infrastructures, processes, natural phenomena, and human behaviors. In addition, progress in high-performancing computing, data mining, machine learning, and decision support opens the possibility of looking at these problems more holistically, capturing many of these aspects simultaneously.
Global System Science (GSS) (Jaeger et al. 2013) is the
evidence-based study of such complex systems. Its goal is to
identify fundamental concepts that help structure problems,
identify phenomena, and organize actions. GSS looks at systems holistically, studying their main components and how
they interact. In particular, GSS jointly studies
• The underlying complex infrastructure/organization,
including the physical laws and the process governing it.
• The environment influencing and being influenced by the
system.
• The human factor driving and perturbing the dynamics
of such systems.
• The conflicting interests of a number of self-interested
actors involved in the process.
• The different time/geographical scales at which the system components operate.
The goals of GSS research are already present in the study
of many isolated subsystems and they include:
• Descriptive analytics: Understanding the system behaviour, its components, and their relations.
• Predictive analytics: Predicting how the system will behave over time.
• Operational Control: Controlling and optimizing the dynamics of the system.

What is novel in GSS is the focus on holistic modeling. Indeed, these above tasks have been traditionally performed in
isolation. This is the case in many logistics and supply-chain
systems where the separation of strategic, tactical, and operational levels creates fundamental issues at the operational
level. The real GSS challenge is to tightly integrate the operations of the infrastructure/organization, human behaviour
and mechanisms to influence it, social and environmental
considerations, and strategic and tactical planning.
The rest of this paper presents a general architecture to
manage global systems, a number of case-studies to showcase GSS challenges and opportunities, and emerging architectures in GSS. It is important to point out that global systems have been investigated in the past. What is novel is the
availability of data sets of unprecedented accuracy and the
computational progress in optimization and machine learning, which opens tremendous opportunities for AI research.

The Emerging Architecture
Global systems must reason about complex infrastructures,
natural phenomena, and behavioral models for individuals
and communities; they aim at modeling both social and economic objectives; and they need to find mechanisms encouraging collaboration between selfish stakehoders. An emerging architecture capturing all these aspects is depicted in
Figure 1. The strategic, tactical, and operational layers contain both predictive and decision models. Interactions among
layers enable the tight integration advocated earlier. Despite
its generality, the architecture is instrumental in crystalizing
many critical aspects of global systems. For space reasons,
this paper does not discuss the monitoring components despite its critical importance in adaptating the system behavior to the dynamic environments it is operating under.
It is worth mentioning that fields such as logistics (Bilgen
and Ozkarahan 2004) or supply chain management (Steven
2006) are often presented through strategic, tactical, and operational layers. What is typically missing in these fields is
a feedback loop between the levels and tight vertical and
horizontal integrations between various components. These
integrations are precisely the topic of this paper.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4042

