Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Hybrid Approach of Classifier and Clustering
for Solving the Missing Node Problem
Sigal Sina

Avi Rosenfeld

Sarit Kraus

Navot Akiva

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
sinasi@macs.biu.ac.il

Jerusalem College of
Technology, Israel
rosenfa@jct.ac.il

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
sarit@cs.biu.ac.il

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
navot.akiva@gmail.com

Abstract

ety of fields (Bishop 2006; Jain 2010). Several researchers
have also suggested combining several methods of classification in order to yield better results (Kuncheva 2004). Examples of hybrid methods containing both clustering and
classification classification were presented by Nguyen and
Armitage, (Nguyen and Armitage 2008) and Shrot et al.
(Shrot et al. 2014). However, these works used the clustering
algorithm as a first step of unsupervised classification before
a second, refinement step of supervised classification. Other
work (Basu, Bilenko, and Mooney 2004) suggested a semisupervised clustering framework, where the performance of
unsupervised clustering algorithms can be improved with
limited amounts of supervision in the form of labels on the
data or constraints. They proposed a principled probabilistic
framework based on Hidden Markov Random Fields (HMRFs) for semi-supervised clustering that combined the existing constraint-based and distance-based approaches in a
unified model. However, their model assumed that part of
objects needs to be clustered is labeled, while in HACC the
classifier is learned in advance. Another difference is that the
HACC classifier is based on a different set of labeled objects
and clusters than the objects currently being processed.
To better understand HACC’s novelty, consider the authorship identification domain. Existing works on authorship
identification are unsupervised or supervised, where the author’s model is learned based on the same author’s previous publications (Stamatatos 2009). The generalization of
the learned model is for new publications of the same authors, as the tagging of both sets is the same. In contrast,
HACC learns models from one set of authors and generalizes
its model to identify another set of authors. Here, the generalization is from one set of authors and their publications
to identify a new set of authors and their new set of publications. As such, the tagging sets of the learned data and
the testing data are different – not only the data points. The
advantage of HACC’s type of learning is that it facilitates
a hybrid model that creates a classifier which is not used
for categorization, but instead as input for a second learning
model in HACC.
The main contribution of HACC is the way it utilizes a prelearned classifier as a preprocessing step. HACC creates one
combined affinity measure between each object pair, which
is the classifier’s confidence score, that measures the probability that two objects needing to be clustered will be in

An important area of social network research is identifying
missing information which is not explicitly represented in the
network or is not visible to all. In this paper, we propose a
novel Hybrid Approach of Classifier and Clustering, which
we refer to as HACC, to solve the missing node identification
problem in social networks. HACC utilizes a classifier as a
preprocessing step in order to integrate all known information into one similarity measure and then uses a clustering
algorithm to identify missing nodes. Specifically, we used the
information on the network structure, attributes about known
users (nodes) and pictorial information to evaluate HACC and
found that it performs significantly better than other missing
node algorithms. We also argue that HACC is a general approach and domain independent and can be easily applied to
other domains. We support this claim by evaluating HACC on
a second authorship identification domain as well.

Introduction
Data clustering has been used for more than 50 years in order to find a natural grouping of a set of patterns, points, or
objects based on similarity or dissimilarity measures (Jain
2010). The main challenge is to find the measures that
can improve clustering accuracy. To achieve this goal, in
this paper we propose HACC, a novel Hybrid Approach of
Classifier and Clustering, for solving the missing node identification problem in social networks. Additionally, we argue that our approach is general and domain independent
and can be easily applied to other domains. The novelty of
HACC is its use of a small collection of labeled objects to
tune and learn a classifier as a preprocessing step in order to
integrate all known information into one similarity measure.
The classifier learning is done only once and in advance, using labeled objects of different clusters than the clusters of
the unlabeled data. Later, HACC can use this classifier to facilitate and improve the clustering result of different, large
collections of unlabeled objects. To the best of our knowledge, HACC is the first algorithm to combine the use of supervised classifiers as a preprocessing step before activating
the unsupervised clustering algorithm of objects of different
clusters than the unlabeled ones.
Machine learning methods including clustering and classification are well-established and have been used in a variCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

282

