Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Bayesian Approach to Modeling and
Detecting Communities in Signed Network
Bo Yang, Xuehua Zhao, and Xueyan Liu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
ybo@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract

unbalanced due to the frustration in them, i.e., negative links
within clusters and positive links between clusters.
Although many methods have been proposed to address
community detection since Girvan and Newman’s work
(Girvan and Newman 2002), however, most of them are exclusively designed for unsigned networks, which focus on
link density rather than link sign to define and detect communities.Therefore, the primary techniques adopted by them
cannot be directly applied to signed networks, such as modularity optimization (Newman 2004), Markov random walk
(Zhou 2003), clique percolation model (Palla et al. 2005),
spectral analysis (Mitrović and Tadić 2009), evolutionary
optimization (Pizzuti 2008), among many others.
In view of this, new methods have been proposed for
signed community detection. On one hand, some of them are
studied from the perspective of social science. For instance,
based on the social balance theory, Doreiian and Mrvar proposed a frustration-optimization based method, referred to
as DM, which partitions a signed network by minimizing the
sum of negative link quantity within communities and positive link quantity between communities (Doreian and Mrvar 1996). Thereafter, Larusso et al improved the same idea
to partition weighted signed networks (Larusso, Bogdanov,
and Singh 2010). Very similarly, Bansal et al proposed a correlation clustering method to maximize the agreement (i.e.
the number of positive intra-cluster links and negative intercluster links) or to minimize the disagreement (i.e. the number of negative intra-cluster links and positive inter-cluster
links) among nodes (Bansal, Blum, and Chawla 2004).
On the other hand, some of them are proposed by means
of generalizing the current techniques of partitioning unsigned networks as mentioned above. For examples, based
on potts model Traag et al deduced an improved modularity function for signed networks and then proposed
a modularity-optimization based partition algorithm PSA
(Traag and Bruggeman 2009). Yang et al generalized the
Markov stochastic process on unsigned network to signed
network and then proposed an improved random-walk based
method FEC (Yang, Cheung, and Liu 2007). Huang et al
improved the clique percoltion model to detect overlapping
signed communities (Huang and Qiu 2010). Anchuri et al
proposed a generalized spectral method for signed network
partition (Anchuri and Magdon-Ismail 2012). Very recently,
multi-objective evolutionary methods have been applied to

There has been an increasing interest in exploring
signed networks with positive and negative links in that
they contain more information than unsigned networks.
As fundamental problems of signed network analysis,
community detection and sign (or attitude) prediction
are still primary challenges. To address them, we propose a generative Bayesian approach, in which 1) a
signed stochastic blockmodel is proposed to characterize the community structure in context of signed networks, by means of explicitly formulating the distributions of both density and frustration of signed links
from a stochastic perspective, and 2) a model learning
algorithm is proposed by theoretically deriving a variational Bayes EM for parameter estimation and a variation based approximate evidence for model selection.
Through the comparisons with state-of-the-art methods
on synthetic and real-world networks, the proposed approach shows its superiority in both community detection and sign prediction for exploratory networks.

Introduction
In recent years, the study of signed networks becomes a burgeoning research area. In contrast to the extensively studied
unsigned networks only encoding whether relationships exist or not, signed networks contain more information by extending the single relationship to positive and negative relationships, wherein positive ones represent to like, trust, support or collaborate and negative ones represent to dislike,
distrust, oppose or compete, among others. For signed networks, community detection is of considerable importance
for understanding the basic patterns of structure and dynamics. This task is trying to identify K antagonistic communities, so that most links within communities are positive while
most links between communities are negative. In this sense,
communities are consistent with the clusters defined in balance theory in social science (Cartwright and Harary 1956;
Davis 1967), where a strongly (or weakly) balanced network
can be divided into two (or K) clusters, so that all links
within clusters are positive and all links between clusters are
negative. Note that, real-world signed networks are usually
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1952

