Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Phrase Type Sensitive Tensor Indexing Model for Semantic Composition
1

Yu Zhao1 , Zhiyuan Liu1∗ , Maosong Sun1,2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Lab for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Competence, Jiangsu 221009, China
zhaoyu.thu@gmail.com, {liuzy, sms}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Compositional semantic aims at constructing the meaning of phrases or sentences according to the compositionality of word meanings. In this paper, we propose
to synchronously learn the representations of individual words and extracted high-frequency phrases. Representations of extracted phrases are considered as gold
standard for constructing more general operations to
compose the representation of unseen phrases. We propose a grammatical type speciﬁc model that improves
the composition ﬂexibility by adopting vector-tensorvector operations. Our model embodies the compositional characteristics of traditional additive and multiplicative model. Empirical result shows that our model
outperforms state-of-the-art composition methods in the
task of computing phrase similarities.

Figure 1: Comparison of different semantic composition
models, including (a) vector-vector composition, (b) tensorvector composition and (c) vector-tensor-vector composition.

Introduction
Compositional semantic aims at constructing the meaning
of phrases or sentences according to the compositionality
of word meanings. Most recently, continuous word representations are frequently used for representing the semantic meaning of words (Turney and Pantel 2010), which have
achieved great success in various NLP tasks such as semantic role labeling (Collobert and Weston 2008), paraphrase detection (Socher et al. 2011a), sentiment analysis (Maas et al. 2011) and syntactic parsing (Socher et al.
2013a). Beyond word representation, it is also essential to
ﬁnd appropriate representations for phrases or longer utterances. Hence, compositional distributional semantic models
(Marelli et al. 2014; Baroni and Zamparelli 2010; Grefenstette and Sadrzadeh 2011) have been proposed to construct
the representations of phrases or sentences based on the representations of the words they contain.
Most existing compositional distributional semantic models can be divided into the following two typical types:
Vector-Vector Composition. These models use elementwise composition operations to compose word vectors into
phrase vectors, as shown in Figure 1(A). For example,
Mitchell and Lapata (2010) propose to use additive model

(z = x + y) and multiplicative model (z = x  y). However, both of the operations are commutative, which may
be unreasonable for semantic composition since the order
of word sequences in a phrase may inﬂuence its meaning.
For instance, machine learning and learning machine have
different meanings, while the commutative functions will return the same representation for them.
Tensor-Vector Composition. To improve composition
capability, complicated schemes for word representation are
proposed to replace simple vector-space models, including matrices, tensors, or a combination of vectors and matrices (Erk and Padó 2008; Baroni and Zamparelli 2010;
Yessenalina and Cardie 2011; Coecke, Sadrzadeh, and Clark
2010; Grefenstette et al. 2013). In this way, semantic composition is conducted via operations like tensor-vector product, as demonstrated in Figure 1(B) 1 . Despite of powerful
capability, these methods have several disadvantages that reduce their scalability: (1) They have to learn matrices or
tensors for each word, which is time-consuming. Moreover,
In accordant with grammatical structure, words with k arguments are represented by rank k + 1 tensors. Hence, the word neural is represented by a 2-order tensor, i.e., a matrix. An example for
words represented by 3-order tensors is the verb loves in the clause
John loves Mary.
1

∗

Corresponding author: Zhiyuan Liu (liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn).
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2195

