Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

The Complexity of Recognizing Incomplete Single-Crossing Preferences
Edith Elkind

Piotr Faliszewski

University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom

AGH University of Science and Technology
Kraków, Poland

Martin Lackner

Svetlana Obraztsova

Vienna University of Technology
Vienna, Austria

Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel &
National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece
that all voters who prefer a to b precede all voters who prefer b to a or vice versa. A profile is single-crossing if the
votes can be permuted so as to achieve the single-crossing
property. Single-crossing preferences, originally introduced
by Mirrlees (1971) and Roberts (1977), arise in situations
where voters and candidates are spread over a spectrum
of opinions—say, from extreme left-wing ones to extreme
right-wing ones—and left-leaning voters prefer left-leaning
candidates to right-leaning ones, and the other way round for
the right-leaning voters. While this domain is perhaps not
as well-known as that of single-peaked preferences, it has
many of the same desirable properties: for instance, under
single-crossing preferences the majority relation is transitive
(Mirrlees 1971), and single-crossing preferences admit efficient algorithms for several voting problems that are hard for
the general domain (Cornaz, Galand, and Spanjaard 2013;
Skowron et al. 2013; Magiera and Faliszewski 2014).
However, in practice we rarely have access to voters’ full
preferences: voters are far more likely to only report some
part of their preference order, e.g., rank a few top alternatives or report a small number of pairwise comparisons. Indeed, in an overwhelming majority of data sets in PrefLib
(Mattei and Walsh 2013) preference profiles contain partial orders. This phenomenon is recognized by computational social choice researchers, who showed that many of
the positive results that are known to hold for complete preference profiles can be extended to partial preference profiles (Baumeister et al. 2012; Narodytska and Walsh 2014).
It also motivated research on the possible/necessary winner
problem (Konczak and Lang 2005; Betzler and Dorn 2010;
Xia and Conitzer 2011; Baumeister and Rothe 2012), where
we ask whether a given candidate wins in some/all extensions of a given profile of partial votes to a profile of
full votes, under a particular voting rule. In a similar vein,
we can ask if a profile of partial votes can be extended
so that it enjoys a particular structural property, such as
being single-peaked/single-crossing, and, if the answer is
positive, whether we can identify an ordering of candidates/voters witnessing this. Answering this question would
tell us whether voters’ preferences may be essentially onedimensional in nature; if this answer is positive, we may be
able to make a reasonably good decision quickly and without eliciting full preferences.
For incomplete single-peaked preferences, the complex-

Abstract
We study the complexity of deciding if a given profile
of incomplete votes (i.e., a profile of partial orders over
a given set of alternatives) can be extended to a singlecrossing profile of complete votes (total orders). This
problem models settings where we have partial knowledge regarding voters’ preferences and we would like
to understand whether the given preference profile may
be single-crossing. We show that this problem admits a
polynomial-time algorithm when the order of votes is
fixed and the input profile consists of top orders, but becomes NP-complete if we are allowed to permute the
votes and the input profile consists of weak orders or
independent-pairs orders. Also, we identify a number
of practical special cases of both problems that admit
polynomial-time algorithms.

1

Introduction

An important job for a designer of a multi-agent system is
identifying a good method of aggregating the agents’ preferences. It is well-known that this is not an easy task, at least
if agents’ preferences can be arbitrary total orders over the
available alternatives: every preference aggregation mechanism for this setting exhibits undesirable behavior on some
inputs (Arrow 1951). However, the designer’s task becomes
much easier when agents’ preferences possess additional
structure.
For instance, the well-known class of single-peaked preferences (Black 1958) admits a voting rule that always selects
a Condorcet winner (an alternative that is preferred to every
other alternative by a majority of voters) and is strategyproof
(Moulin 1991). Moreover, single-peaked preferences admit
efficient algorithms for problems that are more complex than
selecting a single winner and that are known to be hard for
general preferences, such as choosing a good ranking of the
alternatives (Brandt et al. 2010) or a representative committee (Betzler, Slinko, and Uhlmann 2013).
In this paper, we focus on another restricted preference
domain, namely, that of single-crossing preferences. A preference profile is single-crossing with respect to a fixed ordering of voters if for every pair of alternatives (a, b) it holds
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

865

