Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Automated Analysis of Commitment Protocols
Using Probabilistic Model Checking
Akın Günay and Song Songzheng and Yang Liu and Jie Zhang
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
akingunay@ntu.edu.sg, songsz@ntu.edu.sg, yangliu@ntu.edu.sg, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

environments and propose automated methods in which
agents create new protocols dynamically at run-time taking
their goals and changing conditions of the environment into
account (Artikis 2009; Günay, Winikoff, and Yolum 2013;
Meneguzzi, Telang, and Singh 2013).
While these new methods allow agents to operate successfully in dynamic environments, they also introduce a new
decision problem. That is whether an agent’s participation in
a protocol is rational. In the case of a design-time protocol,
this decision is made by the developer of the agent. On the
other hand, when a protocol is created at run-time, this decision should be made by the agent itself. Unfortunately, the
existing design-time analysis methods are not fully adequate
to make this decision, since they neither take the partial local knowledge, nor the private goals and preferences of an
agent into account. In this paper we propose a method that
can be used by an agent to make this decision at run-time.
Particularly, we address the following key challenges.
The first challenge is to identify the properties, which
should be necessarily verified by an agent to make a rational decision about participating in a protocol. Approaches to
analyze static protocols focus mainly on the general properties (e.g., safety) of protocols. These general properties of a
protocol should be taken into account while deciding on participation. However, they are not sufficient, since they do not
analyze the protocol from the agent’s perspective. Therefore,
in order to make a rational decision about the participation of
an agent in a protocol, it is necessary to define new properties, which are specifically designed according to the agent’s
goals and preferences. To solve this issue, we identify three
key properties. These are: conformance of the agent’s behavior with the protocol, achievement of the agent’s goals
by participating in the protocol, and benefit of participation.
The second challenge is to build a formal model that can
be used to formalize the identified properties and verify them
against a commitment protocol. As we discussed earlier, the
formal model should be able to represent an agent’s partial local knowledge about a protocol. Moreover, the formal
model should represent the agent’s beliefs to reflect its uncertainty about the behavior of other agents. Since existing
static protocol analysis methods assume availability of complete information about a protocol and the behavior of all the
agents, they do not model an agent’s local knowledge and
beliefs. Hence, they are not adequate to decide on partici-

Commitment protocols provide an effective formalism
for the regulation of agent interaction. Although existing work mainly focus on the design-time development
of static commitment protocols, recent studies propose
methods to create them dynamically at run-time with
respect to the goals of the agents. These methods require agents to verify new commitment protocols taking
their goals, and beliefs about the other agents’ behavior
into account. Accordingly, in this paper, we first propose a probabilistic model to formally capture commitment protocols according to agents’ beliefs. Secondly,
we identify a set of important properties for the verification of a new commitment protocol from an agent’s
perspective and formalize these properties in our model.
Thirdly, we develop probabilistic model checking algorithms with advanced reduction for efficient verification
of these properties. Finally, we implement these algorithms as a tool and evaluate the proposed properties
over different commitment protocols.

Introduction
Agent interaction is a fundamental aspect of any multiagent
system. To prevent undesirable outcomes, multiagent systems regulate interaction of agents employing control mechanisms, such as protocols. The concept of (social) commitment provides an effective formalism to define such protocols (Singh 1999; Yolum and Singh 2002). A commitment
protocol (for short, protocol) defines the responsibilities of
the agents in a declarative manner without specifying how
they should satisfy these responsibilities. As a result, a commitment protocol does not interfere with agents’ autonomy.
Verifying the correctness of commitment protocols is
a major challenge. Most of the existing work focus on
the development of static commitment protocols at designtime, which are created by developers and embedded into
agents’ implementation (Desai et al. 2005; Winikoff 2007;
Baldoni, Baroglio, and Marengo 2010). Successful designtime methods to analyze static commitment protocols have
been developed (Desai et al. 2007; Kafalı and Torroni 2012;
Yolum 2007; Sultan et al. 2014). However, recent studies
discuss the limitations of static protocols in dynamic agent
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2060

