Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Belief Revision with General Epistemic States
Hua Meng

Hui Kou

Sanjiang Li

School of Mathematics
Southwest Jiaotong University
MengHua@home.swjtu.edu.cn

School of Mathematics
Sichuan University
KouHui@scu.edu.cn

QCIS, Faculty of Engineering and IT
University of Technology Sydney
Sanjiang.Li@uts.edu.au

Abstract

rather than belief sets (Darwiche and Pearl 1997). Each epistemic state Ψ consists of a belief set and a set of conditional
beliefs, and a conditional belief (β|α) is in Ψ if and only
if β is entailed by the revision of Ψ with α. Furthermore,
they show that each epistemic state corresponds to a total
preorder on the set of worlds. But it remains unclear how to
characterise an epistemic state directly in terms of the beliefs
and conditional beliefs it contains. This is rather unlike the
notion of belief set, which is defined as a set of propositions
that is deductively closed.
One aim of this paper is to provide an axiomatic characterisation for epistemic states. We identify nine rules about
the beliefs and conditional beliefs contained in an epistemic
state, and then prove that these rules are necessary and sufficient for characterising epistemic states. The first seven rules
are quite natural. For example, one rule describes that if φ is
a belief in Ψ, then (φ | T ) is a conditional belief in Ψ, where
T is a fixed tautology; and another rule describes that each
epistemic state contains the conditional belief (φ | φ) for any
consistent proposition φ. Moreover, these rules are all closed
under intersection, i.e. if Ψ1 and Ψ2 both satisfy these rules,
then so does their intersection Ψ1 ∩ Ψ2 . However, the last
two rules ((E8) and (E9)) are neither obvious nor closed under intersection. Take (E8) as an example. Suppose α, β, γ
are pairwise inconsistent propositions and Ψ is an epistemic
state which contains the conditional belief (α∨β | α∨β∨γ).
Then (E8) specifies that Ψ should contain either (α | α ∨ γ)
or (β | β ∨ γ). This shows that an epistemic state is always
deterministic or certain when an agent has ‘disjunctive’ conditional beliefs.
In this paper, we propose to eliminate these two rules and
call a structure which satisfies the first seven rules a general
epistemic state (GEP). A GEP differs from an epistemic state
only in the two rules (E8) and (E9). Because the absence
of these two rules, we no longer can characterise the belief
information contained in a GEP by a total preorder on the set
of worlds. To provide a semantical characterisation of GEPs,
we introduce a binary relation  on the power set of worlds.
Suppose W is the set of worlds and Ψ is a GEP. For a
proposition φ, we write Mod(φ) for the set of worlds of φ.
If ψ is a belief in Ψ, then we impose Mod(ψ)  Mod(¬ψ);
if (β | α) is a conditional belief in Ψ, then we impose
Mod(α ∧ β)  Mod(α ∧ ¬β). Here, for two jointly inconsistent propositions α and β, Mod(α)  Mod(β) is in-

In order to properly regulate iterated belief revision,
Darwiche and Pearl (1997) model belief revision as revising epistemic states by propositions. An epistemic
state in their sense consists of a belief set and a set of
conditional beliefs. Although the denotation of an epistemic state can be indirectly captured by a total preorder
on the set of worlds, it is unclear how to directly capture
the structure in terms of the beliefs and conditional beliefs it contains. In this paper, we first provide an axiomatic characterisation for epistemic states by using
nine rules about beliefs and conditional beliefs, and then
argue that the last two rules are too strong and should be
eliminated for characterising the belief state of an agent.
We call a structure which satisfies the first seven rules a
general epistemic state (GEP). To provide a semantical
characterisation of GEPs, we introduce a mathematical
structure called belief algebra, which is in essence a certain binary relation defined on the power set of worlds.
We then establish a 1-1 correspondence between GEPs
and belief algebras, and show that total preorders on
worlds are special cases of belief algebras. Furthermore,
using the notion of belief algebras, we extend the classical iterated belief revision rules of Darwiche and Pearl
to our setting of general epistemic states.

Introduction
Belief revision mainly characterises how an agent changes
her belief with new evidence. It concerns how to represent
and update an agent’s belief. Logic based belief revision has
been extensively studied in AI (Alchourron, Gärdenfors, and
Makinson 1985; Katsuno and Mendelzon 1991; Darwiche
and Pearl 1997; Jin and Thielscher 2007; Benferhat, Lagrue,
and Papini 2005; Tamargo et al. 2011; Ma, Benferhat, and
Liu 2012; Delgrande 2012) in the past three decades.
The AGM framework of belief revision (Alchourron,
Gärdenfors, and Makinson 1985) represents an agent’s current belief as a set of propositions, called a belief set, and
represents the new evidence by a single proposition. The revision result is also represented as a belief set. Noticing that
the AGM framework is too permissive to enforce iterated belief revision, Darwiche and Pearl argue that belief revision
should be extended to permit operations on epistemic states,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1553

