Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Nonconvex Relaxation Approach for Rank Minimization Problems
Xiaowei Zhong, Linli Xu, Yitan Li, Zhiyuan Liu, Enhong Chen
School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
xwzhong@mail.ustc.edu.cn, linlixu@ustc.edu.cn, {etali,lzy11}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

(2010) has proved that the nuclear norm is the convex envelop of the rank function over the domain kXk2 ≤ 1. In
another word, the nuclear norm is a tight approximation of
the rank function under simple conditions. Candès and Recht
(2009) has shown that low rank solutions can be recovered
perfectly via nuclear norm under incoherence assumptions.
Due to the convex property of the nuclear norm, there are
many sophisticated algorithms off the shelf. These algorithms can achieve a global optimal solution efficiently with
theoretical guarantees, examples include SVT (Cai, Candès,
and Shen 2010), ALM (Lin, Chen, and Ma 2010), APGL
(Toh and Yun 2010), and FISTA (Beck and Teboulle 2009).
However, the nuclear norm suffers from the major limitation that all singular values are simultaneously minimized,
which implies that large singular values are penalized more
heavily than small ones. In real applications, the underlying
matrix may have no incoherence property, and the data may
be grossly corrupted. Under these circumstances, methods
based on nuclear norms usually fail to find a good solution.
Even worse, the resulting global optimal solution may deviate significantly from the ground truth.
The nature of nonconvex relaxations is to overcome the
imbalanced penalization of different singular values. Essentially, they will keep larger singular values large and shrink
smaller ones, since the large singular values are dominant in
determining the properties of a matrix, and should be penalized less to preserve the major information. A representative
of nonconvex relaxations is the truncated nuclear norm (Hu
et al. 2013) which is defined as the sum of the smallest r singular values. By minimizing only the smallest r singular values, one can avoid penalizing large singular values. In real
applications, nonconvex relaxation methods usually perform
better than convex relaxations and could be more robust to
noise. On the other hand, the algorithms solving nonconvex
relaxations may get trapped in bad local optimal solutions
or cost too much time due to the hardness of nonconvex optimization. The approach of truncated nuclear norm could
achieve more accurate solutions than nuclear norm methods
empirically, however it has a two-layer loop that implies substantial computational overhead, and the number of singular
values to be penalized is hard to determine.
In this paper, inspired by Candès, Wakin, and Boyd
(2008), which uses the weighted `1 norm to enhance sparsity, we will introduce an intuitive and flexible weighted nu-

Recently, solving rank minimization problems by leveraging nonconvex relaxations has received significant attention.
Some theoretical analyses demonstrate that it can provide a
better approximation of original problems than convex relaxations. However, designing an effective algorithm to solve
nonconvex optimization problems remains a big challenge. In
this paper, we propose an Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding
and Reweighted Algorithm (ISTRA) to solve rank minimization problems using the nonconvex weighted nuclear norm
as a low rank regularizer. We prove theoretically that under
certain assumptions our method achieves a high-quality local
optimal solution efficiently. Experimental results on synthetic
and real data show that the proposed ISTRA algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both accuracy and efficiency.

Introduction
Rank minimization is a widely investigated problem in
machine learning and computer vision where one intends
to exploit low-dimensional structure in high-dimensional
space. For example, in matrix completion (Candès and Recht
2009), it is common to assume that a partially observed matrix has low rank structure; in robust PCA (Candès et al.
2011), backgrounds of videos and faces under varying illumination are regarded as falling into a low rank subspace;
in multi-task learning (Chen, Zhou, and Ye 2011), different
tasks are supposed to share certain properties, which can be
expressed as a low rank task-feature matrix; in subspace segmentation (Liu, Lin, and Yu 2010), clustering is performed
on the low rank representation of the original data.
A general rank minimization problem can be formulated
as
min f (X) + λ · rank(X)
(1)
X

It has been proved that solving (1) is NP-hard due to the
noncontinuous and nonconvex nature of the rank function.
In order to tackle this NP-hard problem, general approaches
usually relax the rank function to various regularizers, which
can be categorized into convex and nonconvex relaxations.
The commonly used convex relaxation for the rank function is the nuclear norm kXk∗ . Recht, Fazel, and Parrilo
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1980

