Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

SAT-Based Strategy Extraction in Reachability Games∗
Niklas Een
UC Berkeley

Alexander Legg

Nina Narodytska

Abstract

Game-based synthesis involves solving two related problems: (1) determining the winner and (2) generating a winning strategy. The former identifies the player who can always win the game by choosing correct actions in every state
(any reachability game has a unique winner); the latter computes a strategy function which maps states of the game into
winning actions. The strategy can then be converted into a
hardware circuit or a software program.
The traditional approach to game solving iteratively constructs a sequence of state sets from which the controller
can win the game in 1, 2, . . . rounds, until a fixed point is
reached. Given this sequence, the strategy can be extracted
using one of several existing techniques (Lonsing and Biere
2010; Jiang, Lin, and Hung 2009; Ehlers, Könighofer, and
Hofferek 2012). Both parts of this two-step process are carried out symbolically using BDD, SAT or QBF-based methods. All three approaches suffer from similar performance
problems. In particular, the winner determination step becomes inefficient if there does not exist a compact BDD or
CNF representation of the winning sets or if such a representation is hard to compute. Furthermore, the strategy extraction step starts with an intermediate strategy representation
that defines a potentially very large number of winning transitions in every state. Determinising such a strategy proved
costly (Bloem et al. 2014a).
To address these limitations, a new type of SAT and
QBF-based game solvers was proposed recently (Janota et
al. 2012; Narodytska et al. 2014). Instead of computing
winning regions, they use counterexample-guided search to
compute winning sequences of actions represented as a compact abstract game tree. These solvers proved to be efficient
at solving the winner determination problem on several families of benchmarks where the traditional approach does not
scale (Narodytska et al. 2014).
In this work, we focus on the strategy generation problem,
which is crucial for practical application of game solvers.
Our contribution is two-fold:

Reachability games are a useful formalism for the synthesis
of reactive systems. Solving a reachability game involves (1)
determining the winning player and (2) computing a winning
strategy that determines the winning player’s action in each
state of the game. Recently, a new family of game solvers has
been proposed, which rely on counterexample-guided search
to compute winning sequences of actions represented as an
abstract game tree. While these solvers have demonstrated
promising performance in solving the winning determination
problem, they currently do not support strategy extraction.
We present the first strategy extraction algorithm for abstract
game tree-based game solvers. Our algorithm performs SAT
encoding of the game abstraction produced by the winner determination algorithm and uses interpolation to compute the
strategy. Our experimental results show that our approach
performs well on a number of software synthesis benchmarks.

1

Leonid Ryzhyk

NICTA† and UNSW Australia University of Toronto and NICTA Carnegie Mellon University

Introduction

Two-player games are a useful formalism for synthesis and
analysis of reactive systems (Bloem et al. 2007; Cassez et al.
2009; Ryzhyk et al. 2014). A two-player game involves two
parties, referred to as the controller and the environment,
which perform actions over a finite state space of the game.
The controller aims to satisfy a predefined game objective,
while the environment tries to prevent it from doing so.
We consider games with reachability objectives, where
the controller must force the system into a given goal region. Consider, for example, the problem of synthesising
the packet transmission function of a network controller
device driver. The problem can be formulated as a game
played over the state space of the device automaton, where
controller actions model software commands to the device
and environment actions model non-deterministic hardware
events, such as error conditions. The game objective is to
force the device into a state where it successfully completes
packet transfer (Ryzhyk et al. 2014).

1. We propose the first strategy generation method for game
solvers based on abstract game trees, thus enabling the use
of such solvers as part of a complete synthesis methodology.

∗

This research is supported by a grant from Intel Corporation.
†
NICTA is funded by the Australian Government through
the Department of Communications and the Australian Research
Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence Program.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2. We demonstrate that abstract game trees enable lowoverhead strategy generation, thus providing additional

3738

