Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Probabilistic Planning with Risk-Sensitive Criterion
Ping Hou
Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces, NM 88003, USA
phou@cs.nmsu.edu

Introduction

(RS-Dec-POMDPs). Algorithms can also be designed for
RS-POMDPs and RS-Dec-POMDPs with different assumptions.

Probabilistic planning models and, in particular, Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs), Partially Observable Markov
Decision Processes (POMDPs) and Decentralized Partially
Observable Markov Decision Processes (Dec-POMDPs)
have been extensively used by AI and Decision Theoretic
communities for planning under uncertainty. Typically, the
solvers for probabilistic planning models find policies that
minimize the expected cumulative cost (or, equivalently,
maximize the expected cumulative reward). While such a
policy is good in the expected case, there is a small chance
that it might result in an exorbitantly high cost. Therefore, it
is not suitable in high-stake planning problems, where exorbitantly high costs should be avoided.
With this motivation in mind, Yu, Lin, and Yan (1998)
introduced the Risk-Sensitive criterion (RS-criterion) for
MDPs, where the objective is to find a policy π that maximizes the probability P r(cT (π) (s0 ) ≤ θ0 ), where cT (π) (s0 )
is the cumulative cost of the policy and θ0 is the cost threshold. They combine MDPs with the RS-criterion to formalize
Risk-Sensitive MDPs (RS-MDPs) and introduced a Value Iteration (VI) like algorithm to solve a typical type of RSMDPs. Liu and Koenig (2006) generalized RS-MDPs by
mapping the MDP rewards to risk-sensitive utility functions and sought to find policies that maximize the expected utility—an RS-MDP is a specific case, where the utility function is a step function. They introduced Functional
Value Iteration (FVI), which finds optimal policies for general utility functions by approximating it as piecewise linear
(PWL) functions.
Unfortunately, algorithms like VI and FVI cannot scale to
large problems as they need to perform Bellman updates for
all states and all break points of their utility function in each
iteration. As such, more efficient algorithms can be developed to take advantage of structure in RS-MDPs.
In my work, I introduced various algorithms for RSMDPs with different assumptions (e.g., MDPs with dead
ends and MDPs with zero or negative cost cycles). In addition to RS-MDPs, POMDPs and Dec-POMDP can also
be combined with RS-criterion to formalize Risk-Sensitive
POMDPs (RS-POMDPs) and Risk-Sensitive Dec-POMDPs

Current Progress
In our recent paper (Hou, Yeoh, and Varakantham 2014),
we formally defined Risk-Sensitive MDPs (RS-MDPs) and
show that the optimal policy for RS-MDPs is not stationary
in the original state space. So an MDP policy π : S → A,
namely a mapping from states to actions, is not always optimal. Instead, the execution history can be compctly represented by a cost threshold value θ = θ0 − cT (π) (s0 , t),
namely the amount of unused cost, where θ0 is the initial
cost threshold and cT (π) (s0 , t) is the accumulated cost thus
far up to the current time step t. Therefore, instead of an
MDP policy, an RS-MDP policy π : S × Θ → A, which
is a mapping of augmented states (s, θ | s ∈ S, θ ∈ Θ) to
actions a ∈ A, can give an optimal solution to an RS-MDP.
Based on the augmented state (s, θ), we can build a augmented MDP, where the actions and transitions correspond
to their counterpart in the original MDP and the reward function is 1 for transitions that transition into a goal state and 0
otherwise, which is an important property of MAXPROB
MDPs (Kolobov et al. 2011). Since the cost threshold value
θ could be real number, the number of augmented states
(s, θ) could be infinite and the augmented MDP is actually
an MDP with Continuous State Spaces (Marecki, Koenig,
and Tambe 2007). From a decision-theoretic view, the solution for an RS-MDP can be represented with step utility
functions, which is the mapping from cost threshold value
to the reachable probability, for each state. Each augmented
state actually corresponds to a point in the utility function,
and the number of break points in the utility function is
countable. So, the reachable probability of all break points
together completely describes the entire utility function.
In (Hou, Yeoh, and Varakantham 2014), we show that the
number of the break points of utility function is finite as long
as the cost function does not form negative cycles in the original state space. By extracting those augmented states corresponding to break points, they together form the states of
an augmented MDP with a finite state space. Starting from
augmented states with an original goal state, a Dynamic Programming (DP) style algorithm, TVI-DP, is introduced to
traverse the augmented state space backwards without gen-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4241

