Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Time-Sensitive Opinion Mining for Prediction
Wenting Tu, David Cheung, and Nikos Mamoulis
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
E-mail: {wttu, dcheung, nikos}@cs.hku.hk
Complementary-material webpage: http://sites.google.com/site/wenting4aaai/

2

Abstract

Our work extends the basic opinion mining framework to
use reference time (RT) information in the formation of future predictions. For the extraction of RT, we design four
features that discriminate prediction opinions with different RT tags. Opinion text around each sentiment indicator is
translated into a four-dimensional vector. Then, using learning or rule-based methods, we can identify the RT value of
the opinioned text segment. Finally, we construct a prediction model that uses the RT information.

Users commonly use Web 2.0 platforms to post their opinions
and their predictions about future events (e.g., the movement
of a stock). Therefore, opinion mining can be used as a tool
for predicting future events. Previous work on opinion mining
extracts from the text only the polarity of opinions as sentiment indicators. We observe that a typical opinion post also
contains temporal references which can improve prediction.
This short paper presents our preliminary work on extracting
reference time tags and integrating them into an opinion mining model, in order to improve the accuracy of future event
prediction. We conduct an experimental evaluation using a
collection of microblogs posted by investors to demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Our methodology

Extraction of Reference Time
We design four features that can be used to characterize future and past RT semantics (Several real-world examples of
opinioned text items and their corresponding RT features
can be seen in Figure 1):
(i) Temporal Expression (TE). Expressions in the text may
refer to specific time. For an opinion, we find all terms it
contains and can be characterized as temporal expressions.
Then, we map each term into an absolute time (AT) and
compare it to the current time (CT). If AT is after CT, the
value of feature TE of the opinion is defined as 1; if AT is
before CT, TE is −1. If there is no temporal expression in
the opinion, TE is set to 0. Moreover, if we cannot decide
which one of AT and CT comes first (e.g., when AT is a
time interval containing CT), the corresponding term does
not contribute to TE.
(ii) Tense Indicator (TI). Certain words or verb endings are
tense indicators. Tense indicators have strong discriminative
power for separating future and past semantics. We keep a
dictionary where the value of each TI word indicating future
tense (e.g., “will”, “to be”, etc.) is +1 and the values of those
indicating past tense (e.g., “was”, past forms of verbs, etc.)
are −1. Then, for analyzing the reference time of a opinion,
we find all TI words contained in its context. Finally, we use
the sum of values of these TI words in the dictionary as the
value of TI feature. If no TI word appears in the opinion’s
text, the value of TI is set to 0.
(iii) Prediction/Summary Indicator (PSI). Certain keywords have prediction or summary semantics such as “expect”, “look back”, etc. Prediction semantics typically refer
to the future, while summary semantics refer to the past. We
follow the same approach as in the case of the TI feature,

Introduction

By analyzing the prediction opinions of users, we can aggregate personal wisdom and different viewpoints into an
objective prediction. This paper aims at extending the previous opinion mining framework (Dave et al. 2003) to derive
a more accurate prediction model. Our work is motivated
by the observation that within a post item by an individual,
prediction opinions may refer to different times. An opinion
may not necessarily refer to the future and therefore may not
constitute a prediction. For example, in the sentence “Although the market was bullish today, tomorrow it may be
changed to bearish”, the opinion “bullish” refers to “today”
(past) and the opinion “bearish” refers to “tomorrow” (future). Obviously, the author actually predicts a bearish trend
here. If we disregard temporal references in sentiment analysis of this sentence, there is a “bullish” and a “bearish” component in the content, and the result is amphibolous. On the
other hand, by considering the reference time of the opinions, we can correctly identify the author’s meant prediction.
In this work, we propose a model that extracts the reference
time (RT) of prediction opinions posted by users. When we
aggregate prediction opinions about a subject in order to derive a prediction, we use the RT information to weigh the
influence of the opinions, by favoring those that refer to the
future. This way, we achieve a better prediction accuracy, as
we demonstrate experimentally, using a real-world dataset.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4214

