Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

HVAC-Aware Occupancy Scheduling
(Extended Abstract)
Boon-Ping Lim
Optimisation Research Group, NICTA
Research School of Computer Science, ANU
boonping.lim@nicta.com.au

1

Introduction

sults in an integrated approach whose benefits exceed the
naı̈ve superposition of both of its parts, as the scheduling
fully exploits the capabilities of the underlying occupancybased HVAC control across available times and locations.
We focus on meeting scheduling, but our model is more
broadly applicable to scheduling occupant activities within
specified time windows, and ultimately, can be integrated
into a range of room booking and scheduling systems, including large-scale university timetabling applications.

Energy consumption in commercial and educational buildings is impacted by group activities such as meetings, workshops, classes and exams, and can be reduced by scheduling
these activities to take place at times and locations that are
favorable from an energy standpoint. Recent studies show
that heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) expenditure, which constitutes to 20% of the US total energy consumption, can be significantly reduced by adopting occupancy-based control strategies (PSU 2012). For instance, model predictive control strategies determine supply
air flow rate and temperature over longer time horizons so as
to optimise energy consumption, whilst remaining within air
flow and temperature bounds that reflect the predicted occupancy of various building zones (Goyal, Ingley, and Barooah 2013). Another recent research line investigates the
proactive control of occupancy in order to minimise HVAC
consumption (Kwak et al. 2013; Majumdar, Albonesi, and
Bose 2012; Pan et al. 2012). Unfortunately, existing occupancy scheduling approaches assume conventional HVAC
control strategies (Kwak et al. 2013). Moreover, since reasoning using explicit models of the HVAC and the building
is computationally expensive, they typically adopt suboptimal scheduling strategies guided by proxies for the optimisation criterion. One such proxy is the minimisation of the
number of rooms used and of the time gap between successive meetings; it is used to guide the search towards solutions
that take advantage of thermal inertia and schedule meetings
to take place back-to-back in as few rooms as possible (Pan
et al. 2012; Majumdar, Albonesi, and Bose 2012).
In my thesis, I am designing an integrated approach to
HVAC control and occupancy scheduling, which aims at
combining the strengths of the above research directions.
We improve on the effectiveness of energy-aware roombooking and occupancy scheduling approaches, by allowing
the scheduling decisions to rely on an explicit model of the
building’s occupancy-based HVAC control. A naı̈ve combination would be to schedule occupancy in a first phase using
existing methods, and then control HVAC based on this occupancy schedule. In contrast, we model and solve the joint
HVAC control and occupancy scheduling problem. This re-

2

Progress to Date

My progress to date relates to two aspects of the problem.
The first aspect is concerned with the formulation of a mixed
integer linear programming (MILP) model for integrated
HVAC control and occupancy scheduling. The second aspect tames the problem complexity and scales to large problems by combining MILP model with large neighbourhood
search (LNS)(Lim et al. 2015).
Integrating HVAC control and occupancy scheduling.
The core component of our approach is a MILP model
which optimally solves the joint occupancy scheduling and
occupancy-based HVAC control problem. In more detail, the
joint problem we consider is that of deciding the respective
times and locations (rooms) of a set of meetings or similar
activities, as well as the HVAC supply air temperature and
air flow rate for each zone and time, in such a way as to optimise the overall HVAC consumption over a long time horizon. The occupancy schedule complies with the HVAC and
building dynamics models, and with comfort and air-flow
rate bounds that depend on the scheduled zone occupancy.
It also satisfies typical meeting scheduling constraints, including constraints on meetings times, on meeting locations
(e.g. room capacity, equipment availability), and on participant attendance conflicts. To tame the challenges caused
by the presence of non-linear HVAC control constraints, we
relax them using McCormick relaxation to obtain a MILP
model guaranteed to provide a lower bound on the objective function. Results show that the HVAC-aware scheduling model leads to significant consumption reduction (50%
to 70% in our experiments) when compared to occupancybased HVAC control using arbitrary schedules or energyaware schedules generated by heuristic methods.
MILP-based LNS. MILP enables us to easily manage the
tightly constrained interactions between meeting scheduling

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4249

