Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Non-Classical Planning for Robotic Applications
Scott Kiesel
University of New Hampshire
skiesel@cs.unh.edu

Abstract

where the entire world state is not known a priori, but instead
is slowly discovered over time. As the agent moves around
the world and interacts with it through its sensor data it is
able to develop a more accurate picture of the world state.
In the 2013 ICAPS PlanRob paper (Kiesel et al. 2013),
we examined a few domains that exhibit open worlds, but
the most significant was the Search and Rescue domain. In
this domain, a robot is tasked with finding injured victims
inside of a building. To make this more difficult, the robot
does not know the layout of the building and it also does not
know the locations of any victims.
The robot must balance exploration of the building and
discovery of victims against an approaching temporal deadline to return to its home base. In this work we wanted to
show that while overly complicated techniques are the norm,
simpler techniques also can perform quite well.
We implemented a form of Hindsight Optimization for
our robot to use to search the building looking for victims.
In our implementation of Hindsight Optimization, we would
generate possible worlds that could exist given our current
knowledge of the world. For example, we would have some
concrete knowledge of the building layout given the history
of our sensor data and given a very rough idea of what any
building might look like we could generate random topological building layouts. Inside that topological building layout
we would randomly distribute victims, or if an expected distribution was known, we would bias toward that.
Given these possible worlds, we then used a very simple
domain specific solver to try to maximize reward in each
world. From that, we could then rank the next action the
robot could execute based on the expectation of reward that
would follow. The action would then be executed, new sensor data would arrive, new world samples would be generated, planning would happen again and finally a new next
action would be selected.
To show how versatile this approach is, in the 2014
ICAPS PlanRob paper (Kiesel and Ruml 2014), we shifted
the focus from Open Worlds to Temporal Uncertainty. In this
work we considered a simple robot assistant which could be
given a variety of pick and place tasks around the house.
The difficulty in this problem, was however, that there was
uncertainty in the objects’ locations, the duration of each
action executed, the success of an action execution and also
exogenous events that occurred at uncertain time points.

For my dissertation I am focusing on non-classical planning for robotic applications. Much classical planning
research relies on assumptions that do not hold in real
world robotics applications. In many cases the entire
world state is not known in advance and the events that
occur in the future can not be known with certainty.
Robots operating in the real world also need to be responsive and react to dynamic obstacles and events.

I am currently a sixth year PhD student at the University of
New Hampshire. I am focusing my research on non-classical
planning for robotics applications. A lot of my research has
been driven from the applications side of things and highlighted some of the shortcomings of traditional planning
techniques. Specifically there many assumption of classical
planning do not hold when performing planning for robotics.
Very rarely is the initial state fully specified or known with
much certainty. Events very often do happen outside of the
control of the planning agent. Actions can fail and do not always take the same amount of time for repeated execution.
Robots that take long periods to plan an entire solution
on the order of minutes are much less practical in an environment with dynamic obstacles. Traditionally planning algorithms find a full solution from the current state all the
way to the goal, but in many cases this can take too long.
Real-Time Search is a promising area that aims to limit the
amount of planning that is done before actions are executed.
By doing this, obstacles that are moving toward the agent
can be avoided.
Lastly, providing heuristics to guide task and motion planning is another area that I am doing research in to help speed
up solving times and improve the overall quality of solutions.
This summary is criminally scarce on citations and I apologize. I hope that it is okay to refer the reader to my cited
works for related work.

Open Worlds and Temporal Uncertainty
In this portion of my dissertation I have investigated two interesting classes of problems. The first revolves around the
idea of Open World Planning. This is a type of planning
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4245

