Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Two Weighting Local Search for Minimum Vertex Cover
Shaowei Cai1∗ and Jinkun Lin2 and Kaile Su3
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Institute for Integrated and Intelligent Systems, Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia
shaoweicai.cs@gmail.com; jkunlin@gmail.com

Abstract

(Dinur and Safra 2005); and state-of-the-art approximation
algorithms can only achieve an approximation ratio of 2 −
o(1) (Karakostas 2005). Besides, both MaxClq and MaxIS
are not approximable within |V |1− for any  > 0, unless
NP=P (Zuckerman 2006).
However, the hardness of these problems are based on
worst case complexity analysis. In practice, we can develop
algorithms to tackle these problems efficiently in most cases.
Practical algorithms for these three problems mainly fall into
two types: exact ones mainly including branch-and-bound
algorithms and heuristic ones mainly including local search
algorithms. Exact algorithms guarantee the optimality of the
solutions they find, but may fail to give a solution within
reasonable time for large instances. Local search algorithms
cannot guarantee the optimality of their solutions, but they
can find optimal or near-optimal solutions for large and hard
instances within reasonable time.
A huge amount of effort has been devoted to local search
algorithms for these three problems, e.g., (Battiti and Protasi
2001; Pullan 2006; Richter, Helmert, and Gretton 2007;
Andrade, Resende, and Werneck 2008; Cai, Su, and Sattar
2011; Benlic and Hao 2013; Cai et al. 2013), to name a
few. Most of the algorithms are designed to solve MinVC or
MaxClq. Recently, local search algorithms for MinVC have
been shown to be more efficient than those for MaxClq and
MaxIS, based on experiments with the standard benchmarks
namely DIMACS and BHOSLIB. Especially, the very recent
algorithm NuMVC (Cai et al. 2013) dominates other MinVC
local search algorithms on both DIMACS and BHOSLIB
benchmarks, and significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
MaxClq local search algorithms such as PLS1 (Pullan 2006),
with an exception on the brock family.
State-of-the-art MinVC local search algorithms, including
NuMVC, employ edge weighting techniques and prefer to
select vertices with higher weighted score. A disadvantage
of such edge-weighting greedy search algorithms is that,
they are not robust and have poor performance on certain
types of instances (such as those with structures which
defeat greedy heuristics).
In this paper, we propose a vertex weighting scheme

Minimum Vertex Cover (MinVC) is a well known
NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem, and local
search has been shown to be one of the most
effective approaches to this problem. State-of-the-art
MinVC local search algorithms employ edge weighting
techniques and prefer to select vertices with higher
weighted score. These algorithms are not robust and
especially have poor performance on instances with
structures which defeat greedy heuristics. In this paper,
we propose a vertex weighting scheme to address this
shortcoming, and combine it within the current best
MinVC local search algorithm NuMVC, leading to a
new algorithm called TwMVC. Our experiments show
that TwMVC outperforms NuMVC on the standard
benchmarks namely DIMACS and BHOSLIB. To the
best of our knowledge, TwMVC is the first MinVC
algorithm that attains the best known solution for all
instances in both benchmarks. Further, TwMVC shows
superiority on a benchmark of real-world networks.

Introduction
A vertex cover of a graph is a set of vertices such that
each edge of the graph is incident to at least one vertex
of the set. The Minimum Vertex Cover (MinVC) problem
is to find the minimum sized vertex cover in a graph.
MinVC is a prominent NP-hard combinatorial optimization
problem with many applications, such as network security,
VLSI design and industrial machine assignment. It is
also closely related to Maximum Clique (MaxClq) and
Maximum Independent Set (MaxIS) problems. Algorithms
for MinVC can be directly used to solve the MaxClq
problem, which has many applications from computer vision
to social networks. Due to their hardness and importance
to many real-world applications, even a small progress in
solving these three problems can have a significant impact
in practice.
MinVC as well as MaxClq and MaxIS are all NPhard and the associated decision problems are NP-complete
(Garey and Johnson 1979). Furthermore, it is NP-hard to
approximate MinVC within any factor smaller than 1.3606

1

∗

PLS is a milestone of MaxClq local search, and still competes
very well with the most recent MaxClq local search algorithms
(Benlic and Hao 2013).

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1107

