Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Stable Invitations
Hooyeon Lee

Yoav Shoahm

Computer Science Department
Stanford University
haden.lee@stanford.edu

Computer Science Department
Stanford University
shoham@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

call this problem the Anonymous Stable Invitation Problem
(ASIP). If we assume truthful agents, we have an algorithm
design problem, and we obtain positive results in this case.
If we assume strategic agents, we have a mechanism design
problem, and we obtain an impossibility result in general as
well as positive results for a special case of the problem.
We then remove the assumption of anonymous preferences and define the General Stable Invitation Problem
(GSIP) where each agent can specify her acceptance set of
agents and rejection set of agents (in addition to her preference over sizes). An agent is willing to attend only if everyone in her acceptance set attends, no one in her rejection set
attends, and the number of attendees is acceptable to her. We
generalize the definition of stable invitations, accordingly.
We then ask the same set of questions as in ASIP. In the
non-strategic case we show that computational complexity
depends on the size of the largest acceptance and rejection
sets. In the strategic case, an impossibility for ASIP directly
implies the same impossibility for GSIP. We provide another impossibility result for a different sub-class of GSIP.
In Section 2 we discuss related work in the literature.
In Section 3 we define the Anonymous Stable Invitation
Problem (ASIP), and investigate both the non-strategic and
strategic cases. In Section 4 we define the General Stable
Invitation Problem (GSIP), and investigate both the nonstrategic and strategic cases. In Section 5 we discuss our
contributions and directions for future work.

We consider the situation in which an organizer is trying to
convene an event, and needs to choose whom out of a given
set of agents to invite. Agents have preferences over how
many attendees should be at the event and possibly also who
the attendees should be. This induces a stability requirement:
All invited agents should prefer attending to not attending,
and all the other agents should not regret being not invited.
The organizer’s objective is to find an invitation of maximum
size, subject to the stability requirement. We investigate the
computational complexity of finding such an invitation when
agents are truthful, as well as the mechanism design problem
when agents act strategically.

1

Introduction

Imagine an event organizer trying to convene an event – for
example, a fundraiser. We assume that the time and venue
for the event are fixed, and that the only remaining decision for the organizer to make is whom to invite among a
set of agents. An invitation is simply defined to be a subset
of agents. The goal of the organizer is to maximize attendance (for example, in order to maximize donations), but
the potential invitees have their own preferences over how
many attendees there should be at the event and possibly also
who the potential attendees should be. For example, a given
donor may not want to attend if too few attendees show up,
but she may not want the event to be overly crowded. Another donor may want to attend the event only if her friends
attend and her business competitor does not.
We first consider agents with anonymous preferences over
invitations – agents only care about how many attendees are
at the event (but not the identities of attendees). An invitation
is stable if all invitees prefer attending to not attending and
if no person who is not invited wishes she had been invited.
Stability is desirable, but a stable invitation may not exist
in general. This naturally raises the question of how hard it
is to determine whether it exists for a given setting, and if
it does, what the maximum stable invitation is. These questions take an extra meaning in the strategic case, in which
agents may misreport their preferences. Can the organizer
incentivize the agents to disclose their true preferences? We

2

Related Work

Darmann et al. (2012) consider the Group Activity Selection
Problem (GASP), in which the objective is to assign agents
to activities where agents have anonymous preferences over
activities as well as the number of participants. The Anonymous Stable Invitation Problem (ASIP in Section 3) can be
viewed as a sub-class of GASP with a single activity. Yet
there are several differences between our work and the work
by Darmann et al. First, our main results are anchored in
the General Stable Invitation Problem (GSIP in Section 4)
where agents no longer have anonymous preferences; therefore their hardness results for GASP do not imply similar results for GSIP. Second, we consider strategic agents in both
ASIP and GSIP, but Darmann et al. only consider truthful agents. Finally, our impossibility results imply the same
negative results for GASP.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

965

