Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Sparse Representations from Datasets with
Uncertain Group Structures: Model, Algorithm and Applications
Longwen Gao and Shuigeng Zhou
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
{lwgao, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

other? The former characterizes the sparsity among groups,
which is measured by a sparse-inducing norm such as `1 norm, while the latter characterizes the sample “concentration” of groups, which is measured by an `γ -norm (γ > 1).
However, in our point of view, there is a third concern that
does not receive enough attention and thus needs further investigation: how do the samples relate to the groups? Existing work assumes that samples have certain membership
with one or more groups. Concretely, early group sparsity
models specify that each sample belongs to only one certain group. (Jacob, Obozinski, and Vert 2009) handles overlapping group structures that allow one sample to belong to
several groups, by dividing the corresponding coefficient of
a sample into several parts so that each of the overlapping
groups has one part of the coefficient. Though overlapping
groups extend the sample-group relationship from many-toone to many-to-many, the sample-group relationship is still
assumed to be certain. Recently, (Chen et al. 2013) deals
with the problem of learning dictionaries from ambiguously
labeled data, where training samples have multiple given labels, but only one is correct. Based on the dataset with noisy
yet certain sample-group relationships, the authors tried to
learn a dictionary with correct labeling by iterating between
updating a confidence matrix and learning a dictionary from
the clusters inferred by the confidence matrix. When this
process converges, sparse representation with certain group
structure can be performed on the learned dictionary. However, in reality, sample-group relationship can be uncertain.
For example, in text classification, each training text may be
probabilistically related to multiple classes; and in image understanding, a picture may be annotated to several categories
based on a probability scheme.
This paper addresses a more general problem that learns
group sparsity from datasets with uncertain group structures, where each sample is related to all groups in terms
of a probability distribution. We propose a novel structured
sparse representation called uncertain group sparse representation (UGSR) to deal with uncertain group structures.
UGSR is a generalization of standard GSR.
SR and GSR have been successfully applied to many classification tasks such as images (Majumdar and Ward 2009;
Wright et al. 2009), texts (Sainath et al. 2010) and biological data (Li and Ngom 2012; Yuan et al. 2012). While
dealing with classification tasks, GSR usually outperforms

Group sparsity has drawn much attention in machine
learning. However, existing work can handle only
datasets with certain group structures, where each sample has a certain membership with one or more groups.
This paper investigates the learning of sparse representations from datasets with uncertain group structures, where each sample has an uncertain membership with all groups in terms of a probability distribution. We call this problem uncertain group sparse
representation (UGSR in short), which is a generalization of the standard group sparse representation (GSR).
We formulate the UGSR model and propose an efficient algorithm to solve this problem. We apply UGSR
to text emotion classification and aging face recognition. Experiments show that UGSR outperforms standard sparse representation (SR) and standard GSR as
well as fuzzy kNN classification.

Introduction
In many regression problems and their applications to
machine leaning and signal processing, regularization by
sparsity-inducing norms has drawn a lot of research interest. For example, in the ANOVA problem, important
main effects and interactions are often selected for accurate prediction (Yuan and Lin 2006). Sparse representation (SR) (Olshausen and Field 1997) using `1 -norm selects
a few relevant support signals and has some theoretical advantages (Hoyer 2003) in signal processing. For applications
that require some definite sparsity patterns (Jenatton, Audibert, and Bach 2011), regularizers of structured sparsity were
introduced for a better adaption to various tasks. For example, group sparse representation (GSR) (Yuan and Lin 2006)
imposes the sparsity among groups of signals, composite absolute penalties (CAPs) (Zhao, Rocha, and Yu 2006) put a
hierarchical group structure among signals. More complicate structures such as overlapping groups and graph structures were also proposed (Jacob, Obozinski, and Vert 2009).
Essentially, the above work as in (Zhao, Rocha, and Yu
2006) addresses two major concerns: how do the groups relate to each other? and how do the samples (or signals in
signal processing context) within each group relate to each
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2603

