Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Mining User Intents in Twitter: A Semi-Supervised
Approach to Inferring Intent Categories for Tweets
Jinpeng Wang1 , Gao Cong2 , Wayne Xin Zhao3 , Xiaoming Li1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China,
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
School of Information, Renmin University of China, China
JooPoo@pku.edu.cn, gaocong@ntu.edu.sg, batmanfly@gmail.com, lxm@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

To the best of our knowledge, there exists no reported
study of inferring intent categories for tweets in the context of commerce marketing. Tweets often contain sentences
and user intent is often explicitly expressed in tweets. Moreover, tweets often contain more information than queries,
e.g., friendship and context. It is reported in (Morris, Teevan, and Panovich 2010) that users prefer social sites over
search engines when talking about opinions and recommendations. Note that although only a small portion of tweets
(7% in our corpus by randomly sampling tweets) are sent
with specific meanings or contain explicit intents, the number of intent tweets is still very huge since the number of
tweets is enormous1 . Nevertheless, the problem of inferring
the intent categories of tweets is still challenging. Tweets
are very noisy and often contain slang, misspellings, emotions and hashtags. In addition, it is very time-consuming to
generate labeled data if we adopt the supervised approach.
To address the challenge, we formulate the problem as
a classification problem and propose a graph-based semisupervised approach to inferring intent categories for tweets.
Our approach has two significant merits. (1) Noise resistant:
to reduce noise in tweets, we propose to use intent-keywords
instead of all the words as basic information units which
are derived from a unsupervised bootstrap based method. (2)
Weak supervision: we propose an optimization model which
is built on the intent graph with tweets and intent-keywords
as nodes. An edge in the intent graph can be established
to model the association between two tweets, two intentkeywords, or a tweet and an intent-keyword. With effective information propagation via graph regularization, only
a small set of tweets with category labels is needed as the
supervised information.
We conduct experiments on a tweet dataset generated by
a bootstrap based method. Our experimental results show
that the proposed method outperforms several competitive
baselines in inferring the categories of intent tweets.

In this paper, we propose to study the problem of identifying and classifying tweets into intent categories. For example, a tweet “I wanna buy a new car” indicates the user’s
intent for buying a car. Identifying such intent tweets will
have great commercial value among others. In particular, it
is important that we can distinguish different types of intent
tweets. We propose to classify intent tweets into six categories, namely Food & Drink, Travel, Career & Education,
Goods & Services, Event & Activities and Trifle. We propose
a semi-supervised learning approach to categorizing intent
tweets into the six categories. We construct a test collection
by using a bootstrap method. Our experimental results show
that our approach is effective in inferring intent categories for
tweets.

Introduction
Posting short messages (i.e., tweets) through microblogging services (e.g., Twitter) has become an indispensable part of the daily life for many users. Users heavily express their needs and desires on Twitter, and tweets have
been considered as an important source for mining user
intents (Hollerit, Kröll, and Strohmaier 2013; Zhao et al.
2014). For example, the intent tweet “I am planning to travel
to New York” explicitly indicates the user’s intent. Such intent tweets can be exploited by interested parties, e.g., companies, government, public organizations, etc. For the example intent tweet, it will be more interesting if we categorize
it to the travel category for marketing services.
In this paper, we study the task of identifying and inferring intent categories for tweets, which will benefit many
commercial applications. Based on our analysis on a tweet
corpora and the taxonomy of Groupon website, we propose
to divide the intent tweets into six categories namely Food
& Drink, Travel, Career & Education, Goods & Services,
Event & Activities and Trifle. An example intent tweet of
Goods & Services category is “I want to have a new car”
and an example intent tweet of Event & Activities category
is “I plan to go to swimming”. With the inferred intent categories, one can potentially employ Twitter as a market or
auction place, where we can find people with particular intents or desires through their tweets.

Related Work
Query intent classification The existing work on query intent classification can be roughly divided into two types
based on the classification taxonomy employed. The first
1
Statistics from Twitter show that approximately 500 million
tweets are sent every day: http://goo.gl/407UDX.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

339

