Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Heuristics and Symmetries in Classical Planning
Alexander Shleyfman

Michael Katz

Technion, Haifa, Israel
alesh@tx.technion.ac.il

IBM Haifa Research Lab, Israel
katzm@il.ibm.com

Malte Helmert and Silvan Sievers and Martin Wehrle
University of Basel, Switzerland
{malte.helmert,silvan.sievers,martin.wehrle}@unibas.ch
Abstract

In this paper, we systematically investigate the interaction
of symmetries and heuristics for classical planning. In our
main contribution, we analyze influential heuristics from the
planning literature to see if they are invariant under symmetry in the sense that, given two symmetric states, they are
guaranteed to compute the same estimate.
Invariance under symmetry gives us some reassurance
that a heuristic captures global structural aspects of the problem: (blind) search trees rooted at symmetric states are isomorphic, and hence an unbiased heuristic might be expected
to treat them identically. However, the state of the art in
the classical heuristic search literature contains many examples of estimators that are not invariant under symmetry,
and hence so-called symmetric lookups are often performed
to compute heuristic information not just for the currently
considered search state, but also for other representatives of
its equivalence class (e. g., Culberson and Schaeffer 1998;
Korf and Felner 2002; Felner et al. 2011). Such symmetric
lookups are of course only useful for heuristics which are
not invariant under symmetry.
As a second contribution, we introduce structural symmetries for classical planning tasks. Compared to other notions of symmetry suggested in the recent planning literature (e. g., Pochter, Zohar, and Rosenschein 2011), structural
symmetries are directly defined in terms of straight-forward
invariance properties on the original factored representation
of a planning task. They are hence easier to understand and
easier to reason about than previous notions of symmetry.

Heuristic search is a state-of-the-art approach to classical
planning. Several heuristic families were developed over
the years to automatically estimate goal distance information
from problem descriptions. Orthogonally to the development
of better heuristics, recent years have seen an increasing interest in symmetry-based state space pruning techniques that
aim at reducing the search effort. However, little work has
dealt with how the heuristics behave under symmetries. We
investigate the symmetry properties of existing heuristics and
reveal that many of them are invariant under symmetries.

Introduction
Many current algorithms for classical planning are based on
heuristic search in the problem state space (e. g., Hoffmann
and Nebel 2001; Gerevini and Serina 2002; Helmert 2006;
Richter and Westphal 2010). These planners use automatically derived heuristic functions to guide the search towards
goal states. Their heuristics are often classified into four
families: abstractions (e. g., Culberson and Schaeffer 1998;
Edelkamp 2001; Helmert et al. 2014; Katz and Domshlak
2010), delete relaxations (e. g., Bonet and Geffner 2001;
Hoffmann and Nebel 2001; Keyder and Geffner 2008; Katz,
Hoffmann, and Domshlak 2013), critical paths (Haslum and
Geffner 2000), and landmarks (e. g., Richter, Helmert, and
Westphal 2008; Karpas and Domshlak 2009; Helmert and
Domshlak 2009; Keyder, Richter, and Helmert 2010).
Besides heuristics, several state pruning methods have
been proposed to alleviate the state explosion problem. One
such method is symmetry-based state pruning, which has recently seen increasing interest in domain-independent planning (Pochter, Zohar, and Rosenschein 2011; Domshlak,
Katz, and Shleyfman 2012; 2013). Symmetry pruning computes equivalence classes of symmetric states, and only explores one representative state per equivalence class.
Previous work on symmetry pruning in classical planning has, for the most part, not considered the question how
these symmetries interact with heuristics. An exception is
the work of Domshlak et al. (2013), which shows how information about symmetries can be used to enrich knowledge about landmarks that need to be achieved from a given
search node.

Background
We consider planning tasks Π = hP, O, I, G, Ci in the
(propositional) STRIPS formalism extended with operator
costs. In such a task, P is a set of Boolean propositions.
Each subset s ⊆ P is called a state, and S = 2P is the state
space of Π. The state I is the initial state of Π. The goal
G ⊆ P is a set of propositions, where a state s is a goal state
if G ⊆ s. The set O is a finite set of operators. Each operator o ∈ O has an associated set of preconditions pre(o) ⊆ P ,
add effects add(o) ⊆ P and delete effects del(o) ⊆ P , and
C : O → R0+ is a non-negative operator cost function.
The semantics of STRIPS planning is as follows. An operator o is applicable in the state s if pre(o) ⊆ s. Applying
o in s results in the state sJoK := (s \ del(o)) ∪ add(o).
The transition graph TΠ = hS, Ei of Π is the edge-labeled

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3371

