Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Energy Disaggregation via Learning ‘Powerlets’ and Sparse Coding
Ehsan Elhamifar and Shankar Sastry
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences Department
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract

Froehlich et al. 2011) for a comprehensive review. The literature on energy disaggregation can be divided into two categories. The first group of algorithms focuses on classifying
electrical events rather than the disaggregation task. Earlier
work in this category model each device as a finite state machine and look for sharp edges in real and reactive power
signals (Hart 1992). Subsequently, they cluster devices according to consumption changes. However, the drawback of
these approaches is that for many devices with low power
consumption, clusters corresponding to different devices
are indistinguishable. To better distinguish devices, later
work incorporate transient and harmonic information using
very high-frequency sampling (Laughman and Leeb 2003;
Gupta, Reynolds, and Patel 2010; Berges et al. 2010). However, sampling at high-frequency requires expensive hardware and installation of monitoring devices in a building.

In this paper, we consider the problem of energy disaggregation, i.e., decomposing a whole home electricity
signal into its component appliances. We propose a new
supervised algorithm, which in the learning stage, automatically extracts signature consumption patterns of
each device by modeling the device as a mixture of
dynamical systems. In order to extract signature consumption patterns of a device corresponding to its different modes of operation, we define appropriate dissimilarities between energy snippets of the device and
use them in a subset selection scheme, which we generalize to deal with time-series data. We then form a
dictionary that consists of extracted power signatures
across all devices. We cast the disaggregation problem
as an optimization over a representation in the learned
dictionary and incorporate several novel priors such as
device-sparsity, knowledge about devices that do or do
not work together as well as temporal consistency of the
disaggregated solution. Real experiments on a publicly
available energy dataset demonstrate that our proposed
algorithm achieves promising results for energy disaggregation.

The second group of algorithms directly addresses the disaggregation problem by decomposing the aggregate electricity signal into its component appliances over time (Kim et al.
2011; Kolter, Batra, and Ng 2010; Kolter and Jaakkola 2012;
Wytock and Kolter 2014). Different approaches in this category can be divided into supervised and unsupervised disaggregation algorithms. The supervised sparse coding-based
method in (Kolter, Batra, and Ng 2010) uses a training
dataset of electricity signals from different devices across
several homes. It models the entire signal of each device
over a long period of time, such as a week, as a sparse linear
combination of the atoms of an unknown dictionary. Both
the sparse coefficients and the dictionary for each device are
learned using a discriminative approach. However, the drawback of the algorithm is that it requires to have access to a
large training dataset to capture all possible times that the
same device may operate. The work of (Kim et al. 2011)
uses a Factorial Hidden Markov Model (FHMM) (Ghahramani and Jordan 1997) with block Gibbs sampling to decompose the whole electricity signal into signals of individual devices. Building upon the FHMM framework, (Kolter
and Jaakkola 2012) uses an approximate algorithm based on
convex programming, which also takes into account unmodeled devices. FHMM can work in the supervised or unsupervised setting, depending on whether a training dataset
for individual devices is used. However, the learning often
involves EM (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin 1977), which depends on initialization and can get stuck in local optima.

Introduction
Energy disaggregation, also referred to as non-intrusive
load monitoring (Hart 1992), is the task of separating the
whole energy signal of a residential, commercial, or industrial building into the energy signals of individual appliances. Disaggregated electricity consumptions not only
provide feedback to consumers in order to improve their
consumption behavior, but also help to detect malfunctioning of electrical devices, design energy incentives, forecast demands and more (Froehlich et al. 2011). In particular, studies have shown that presenting such an energy
breakdown to consumers can lead to energy-saving behavior that improves user efficiency by about 15% (Darby 2006;
Neenan and Robinson 2009).
Prior Work: Studies on energy disaggregation date back
to about thirty years ago. However, recent energy and sustainability challenges facing the society have created renewed interest in this problem, see (Ziefman and Roth 2011;
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

629

