Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Towards User-Adaptive Information Visualization
Cristina Conati, Giuseppe Carenini, Dereck Toker, Sébastien Lallé
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
{conati, carenini, dtoker, lalles}@cs.ubc.ca

x Objective 1: investigate whether a variety of user and
task characteristics impact user performance and
satisfaction in different visualization contexts.
Essentially, we wanted to identify which characteristics
have enough impact on user visualization experience to
justify adapting to these characteristics (what to adapt
to).
x Objective 2: Provide eye-tracking data to be analyzed to
understand if/how users and tasks characteristics affect
user attention patterns to specific elements of a
visualization to identify possible targets for adaptation
(how to adapt).
x Objective 3: Investigate if eye-tracking data can inform
user models to predict, in real-time, characteristics
relevant for adaptation (how and when to adapt).

Abstract
This paper summarizes an ongoing multi-year project
aiming to uncover knowledge and techniques for devising
intelligent environments for user-adaptive visualizations.
We ran three studies designed to investigate the impact of
user and task characteristics on user performance and
satisfaction in different visualization contexts. Eye-tracking
data collected in each study was analyzed to uncover
possible interactions between user/task characteristics and
gaze behavior during visualization processing. Finally, we
investigated user models that can assess user characteristics
relevant for adaptation from eye tracking data.

Introduction
Research in Information Visualization (InfoVis) has
traditionally followed a one-size-fits-all approach that does
not account for user differences. In recent years, however,
researchers have started showing that user-adaptive
interaction, i.e., interaction adapted by an intelligent
interface to suit each user’s specific needs and abilities, has
the potential to improve users’ experience during
visualization processing (e.g., Gotz and Wen 2009, Ahn
and Brusilowsky 2013). Still, despite these initial results,
the effects of both user differences and different forms of
adaptation remain largely unexplored. This paper
summarizes the results of ATUAV (Advanced Tools for
User-Adaptive Visualizations), an ongoing multi-year
project aiming to uncover further knowledge and
techniques for devising user-adaptive visualizations.
Three main questions should be addressed in any
research involving intelligent interfaces that deliver useradaptive interaction: What user differences should be
considered for adaptation? How to adequately adapt to
these differences? When to adapt, in order to maximize
adaptation effectiveness and reduce intrusiveness? To
address these questions, we conducted three studies
designed to achieve the following objectives:

Related Work
Our work on user-adaptive visualizations draws from
research in three related areas: analyzing influences of user
traits on visualization effectiveness, user modeling, and the
use of eye-tracking to build user and task models.
The influence of user traits on the effectiveness of
information visualizations has been studied for both
cognitive abilities and personality-based traits. The
cognitive abilities of perceptual speed, visual working
memory, and verbal working memory were found to
influence both performance with and preferences for
visualizations (Conati and Maclaren 2008, Velez et al.
2005, Toker et al. 2012), while capacity of attention was
found to modulate the effectiveness of visualizations
(Haroz and Whitney 2012). The locus of control
personality trait was found to influence performance on
visualization tasks (Ziemkiewicz et al. 2011, Green and
Fisher 2010).
Studies linking user traits to visualization effectiveness
motivate the need to estimate those traits during
visualization use. Several researchers have approached this
task by tracking user interface actions. For instance,
Grawemeyer (2006) and Mouine and Lapalme (2012)
recorded user selections among alternative visualizations to

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4100

