Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Solving and Explaining Analogy Questions
Using Semantic Networks
Adrian Boteanu, Sonia Chernova
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
100 Institute Road Worcester, MA 01609
aboteanu@wpi.edu, soniac@wpi.edu

Abstract
Analogies are a fundamental human reasoning pattern
that relies on relational similarity. Understanding how
analogies are formed facilitates the transfer of knowledge between contexts. The approach presented in this
work focuses on obtaining precise interpretations of
analogies. We leverage noisy semantic networks to answer and explain a wide spectrum of analogy questions.
The core of our contribution, the Semantic Similarity
Engine, consists of methods for extracting and comparing graph-contexts that reveal the relational parallelism that analogies are based on, while mitigating uncertainty in the semantic network. We demonstrate these
methods in two tasks: answering multiple choice analogy questions and generating human readable analogy
explanations. We evaluate our approach on two datasets totaling 600 analogy questions. Our results show
reliable performance and low false-positive rate in question answering; human evaluators agreed with 96% of
our analogy explanations.

Figure 1: Overview of the Semantic Similarity Engine and
its application to answering analogy questions and explaining the analogy relationship.

Introduction
Analogy is a powerful cognitive mechanism that enables
people to transfer knowledge from one situation or context
to another. By identifying similarities between situations,
reasoning by analogy facilitates understanding, inference
making, learning new abstractions and creating conceptual
change (Schiff, Bauminger, and Toledo 2009). At the core
of analogical reasoning lies the concept of similarity, which
can be modeled as featural or alignment-based (Goldstone
and Son 2005). The former relies on comparing observable
attributes, while the latter emphasizes structural correspondences. Analogical reasoning is founded on the alignmentbased model of similarity – the process of understanding an
analogy requires reasoning from a relational perspective.
For AI, analogy solving presents an interesting and important problem because it offers the potential for deep problem understanding and automated generalization of learned
tasks. In human learning, analogies have long been applied
as a measure of verbal intelligence. Of particular interest to
this work are verbal analogy questions commonly used on

human standardized tests designed to evaluate understanding of relationships between a broad vocabulary of words.
A verbal analogy has the form A:B::C:D, meaning “A is
to B, as C is to D”. A question is formed by the first pair
of words (A:B), followed by a number of possible answer
pairs (C:D, E:F, etc.); the task is to select the answer pair for
which the relation between the pair of words is the same as
for the question pair. For example, given the initial pair ostrich:bird, and the options (a) cat:feline, (b) primate:monkey
and (c) chair:lounge, the correct answer is (a), because the
same is a relation connects the first word to the second word
on both sides of the analogy.
Prior work in this area of AI includes several techniques
for solving analogy questions designed for humans. Automated methods rely on latent analysis (Turney 2006).
Crowdsourcing answers has been attempted, with no performance gains over statistical methods (Lofi 2013). None of
these approaches produce interpretable justifications, focusing only on providing correct answer choices.
In this paper, we argue that complete analogical reason-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1460

