Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Ontology-Based Information Extraction with a Cognitive Agent
Peter Lindes, Deryle W. Lonsdale, David W. Embley
Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah 84602

Abstract
Machine reading is a relatively new field that features
computer programs designed to read flowing text and
extract fact assertions expressed by the narrative content. This task involves two core technologies: natural
language processing (NLP) and information extraction
(IE). In this paper we describe a machine reading system that we have developed within a cognitive architecture. We show how we have integrated into the framework several levels of knowledge for a particular domain, ideas from cognitive semantics and construction
grammar, plus tools from prior NLP and IE research.
The result is a system that is capable of reading and interpreting complex and fairly idiosyncratic texts in the
family history domain. We describe the architecture and
performance of the system. After presenting the results
from several evaluations that we have carried out, we
summarize possible future directions.

Figure 1: Sample of domain text (Vanderpoel 1902).
course the OCR process introduces a sizable number of errors. Once a book has been digitized, manual annotation and
indexation can be performed to identify interesting facts using existing tools. However, the task is enormous, challenging, and complicated.
Another solution is to automatically extract information
from the textual content. This requires integrating several
types and levels of knowledge: lexical, syntactic, semantic,
and pragmatic. In this paper we describe a system called OntoSoar that is designed to apply all these levels of knowledge
to the problem of extracting information from genealogy
books in an automatic fashion. Built within a cognitive architecture framework and targeting information specified by
a user-supplied ontology, its advanced text processing and
information extraction functions integrate seamlessly. We
discuss performance of the system and evaluate it against
a gold-standard corpus of human annotations.

Introduction
Much Web traffic involves people searching for genealogical data that might inform them about their family history. A
great online supply of historical documents containing such
data exists, but most were generated long before modern digital technology was available. In this paper we discuss one
way of extracting information from historical documents in
a digital form so it can be searchable.
Various approaches are possible depending upon the type
of document involved. Census records are highly structured
but are largely handwritten. Involving vast pools of human
annotators to hand-index entries has proven useful in this
case, as was shown recently for the 1940 U.S. census.
A large corpus of family history books written before the
digital age is now also becoming available online. Figure 1
shows a short example of text from p. 419 of one such book
(Vanderpoel 1902). Many parts of this book have information in a fairly structured form, as can be seen in the list
of children. However, much of the rest of the text follows
a greatly abbreviated and highly formulaic style of English
lexis and grammar. Typically these books were digitized by
scanning them into PDF files and using optical character
recognition (OCR) algorithms to extract the raw text. Of

Related work
Our work derives from several principal threads of ongoing research: natural language processing (NLP), information extraction, cognitive grammar, and deep reading.
The task is largely linguistic since we are processing running text. However, as mentioned above, the text departs
from normal expectations of “grammatical” English; this
complicates the syntactic processing—or parsing—stage.
We (Lonsdale et al. 2007) and others (Akbik and Bross
2009) have successfully used the link grammar (LG) parser
to parse text that, like ours, is linguistically idiosyncratic and

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

558

