Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Social Hierarchical Learning
Bradley Hayes
Department of Computer Science
Yale University
bradley.h.hayes@yale.edu

Summary
My dissertation research focuses on the application of hierarchical learning and heuristics based on social signals to
solve challenges inherent to enabling human-robot collaboration. I approach this problem through advancing the state
of the art in building hierarchical task representations, multiagent task-level planning, and learning assistive behaviors
from demonstration.
Figure 1: Collaborative execution of a furniture construction task with a mixed human-robot team. In this situation,
the team is interacting in a “leader-assistant” paradigm, with
the robot performing supportive actions to increase the efficiency of the human worker.

Introduction
The cages and physical barriers that once isolated robots
from contact with humans are being replaced with sensing
technology and algorithms. As such, collaborative robotics
is a fast-growing field of research spanning many important real-world robotics and artificial intelligence challenges.
These include learning motor skills from demonstration,
learning hierarchical task models, multi-agent planning under uncertainty, and intention recognition. My dissertation
research focuses on how to develop and apply hierarchical learning methods that leverage social signals as heuristics to make collaboration between humans and robots safe,
productive, and efficient. In particular, my work focuses on
methods applicable to sequential motor tasks.
Other researchers that work within this domain have focused on effective multi-robot team planning (Dogar et al.
2014), efficiently solving single-agent sequential motor task
planning problems (Tomas Lozano-Perez 2014), and investigating theoretical properties of multi-agent problem representations (Dibangoye et al. 2014). Prior related work
concentrating on human-robot interactions has focused on
building shared mental models amongst collaborators in
mixed human-robot teams (Nikolaidis and Shah 2013) and
increasing task knowledge from social interactions (Kollar
et al. 2013).
My research can be split into three inter-related components: learning task structure, performing socially aware
multi-agent task planning, and learning supportive behaviors
for human-robot collaboration.

Learning Task Structure
Achieving collaboration between humans and robots is contingent upon providing adequate solutions to many challenging problems (Hayes and Scassellati 2013), including state
estimation, goal inference, and action planning. Scalable,
efficient tools that offer solutions to many of these problems are available, but rely on the prior availability of a
rich, hierarchical task model. While some techniques exist
for building these models, they place heavy requirements on
the available information encoded in the task representation.
In many cases, especially those where the predominant
mode of task specification is user demonstration, the extraction and formalization of this information is exceptionally
difficult and can easily be intractible given the available sensor data. Accordingly, one area of my research concerns developing robots that engage in active learning, participating
in the learning process by guiding their instructors to provide
more informative examples to extend structural task knowledge (Hayes and Scassellati 2014a).
In work under review, I present an algorithm for constructing flexible hierarchical task networks, derived from
sub-goal ordering constraints within task networks (e.g.,
Semi-Markov Decision Processes), that are compatible with
demonstration-based skill acquisition techniques. This compatibility emerges from the minimal symbolic requirements
and insights levied upon the chosen goal and/or motor primitive representation. The resulting hierarchical task structure
has many practical applications within human-robot collab-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4237

