Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Word Representations from Relational Graphs
Danushka Bollegala Takanori Maehara Yuichi Yoshida Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
The University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, United Kingdom.
National Institute of Informatics, 2-1-2, Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 101-8430, Japan.
JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project.
Preferred Infrastructure, Inc., Hongo 2-40-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Abstract

are modelled by predicates with a single argument whereas
relations are modelled by predicates with two or more arguments.
Learning representations of words is an important task
with numerous applications (Bengio et al. 2013). Better representations of words can improve the performance in numerous natural language processing tasks that require word
representations such as language modelling (Collobert et al.
2011; Bengio et al. 2003), part-of-speech tagging (Zheng et
al. 2013), sentiment classification (Socher et al. 2011b), and
dependency parsing (Socher et al. 2013a; 2011a). For example, to classify a novel word into a set of existing categories
one can measure the cosine similarity between the words in
each category and the novel word to be classified. Next, the
novel word can be assigned to the category of words that
is most similar to (Huang et al. 2012). However, existing
methods for learning word representations only consider the
co-occurrences of two words within a short window of context, and ignore any semantic relations that exist between the
two words.
Considering the close connection between attributes and
relations, an obvious question is, can we learn better word
representations by considering the semantic relations that
exist among words? More importantly whether word representations learnt by considering the semantic relations
among words could outperform methods that focus only on
the co-occurrences of two words, ignoring the semantic relations. We study these problems in this paper and arrive at
the conclusion that it is indeed possible to learn better word
representations by considering the semantic relations between words. Specifically, given as input a relational graph,
a directed labelled weighted graph where vertices represent words and edges represent numerous semantic relations
that exist between the corresponding words, we consider the
problem of learning a vector representation for each vertex
(word) in the graph and a matrix representation for each label type (pattern). The learnt word representations are evaluated for their accuracy by using them to solve semantic word
analogy questions on a benchmark dataset.
Our task of learning word attributes using relations between words is challenging because of several reasons. First,
there can be multiple semantic relations between two words.
For example, consider the two words ostrich and bird. An
ostrich is-a-large bird as well as is-a-flightless bird. In this

Attributes of words and relations between two words
are central to numerous tasks in Artificial Intelligence
such as knowledge representation, similarity measurement, and analogy detection. Often when two words
share one or more attributes in common, they are connected by some semantic relations. On the other hand,
if there are numerous semantic relations between two
words, we can expect some of the attributes of one
of the words to be inherited by the other. Motivated
by this close connection between attributes and relations, given a relational graph in which words are interconnected via numerous semantic relations, we propose
a method to learn a latent representation for the individual words. The proposed method considers not only the
co-occurrences of words as done by existing approaches
for word representation learning, but also the semantic
relations in which two words co-occur. To evaluate the
accuracy of the word representations learnt using the
proposed method, we use the learnt word representations to solve semantic word analogy problems. Our experimental results show that it is possible to learn better
word representations by using semantic semantics between words.

Introduction
The notions of attributes and relations are central
to Artificial Intelligence. In Knowledge Representation
(KR) (Brachman and Levesque 2004), a concept is described
using its attributes and the relations it has with other concepts in a domain. If we already know a particular concept
such as pets, we can describe a new concept such as dogs
by stating the semantic relations that the new concept shares
with the existing concepts such as dogs belongs-to pets. Alternatively, we could describe a novel concept by listing all
the attributes it shares with existing concepts. In our example, we can describe the concept dog by listing attributes
such as mammal, carnivorous, and domestic animal that it
shares with another concept such as the cat. Therefore, both
attributes and relations can be considered as alternative descriptors of the same knowledge. This close connection between attributes and relations can be seen in knowledge representation schemes such as predicate logic, where attributes
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2146

