Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Variational Inference for Nonparametric Bayesian Quantile Regression
Sachinthaka Abeywardana

Fabio Ramos

School of Information Technologies
University of Sydney
NSW 2006, Australia
sachinra@it.usyd.edu.au

School of Information Technologies
University of Sydney
NSW 2006, Australia
fabio.ramos@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

The second approach uses a loss function that penalises
predictive quantiles at wrong locations. Koenker and Bassett Jr introduced the tilt (pinball) loss function over the errors ξi for a specified quantile α ∈ (0, 1) (equation 1). The
errors mentioned in this context are the errors between the
observation yi and the inferred quantile fi ;

αξi
if ξi ≥ 0,
L(ξi , α) =
(1)
(α − 1)ξi if ξi < 0.

Quantile regression deals with the problem of computing robust estimators when the conditional mean and
standard deviation of the predicted function are inadequate to capture its variability. The technique has an
extensive list of applications, including health sciences,
ecology and finance. In this work we present a nonparametric method of inferring quantiles and derive a
novel Variational Bayesian (VB) approximation to the
marginal likelihood, leading to an elegant Expectation
Maximisation algorithm for learning the model. Our
method is nonparametric, has strong convergence guarantees, and can deal with nonsymmetric quantiles seamlessly. We compare the method to other parametric and
non-parametric Bayesian techniques, and alternative approximations based on expectation propagation demonstrating the benefits of our framework in toy problems
and real datasets.

1

However, as with many other regression techniques, regularisation is necessary to prevent overfitting. Thus, the problem can be transformed to minimising over f (the quantile
function) for L(α, y, f ) + λ||f || for some specified norm
PN
||·|| where, L(α, y, f ) =
i=1 L(yi − fi , α). This could
be solved as an optimisation problem using quadratic programming as shown in (Takeuchi et al. 2006). However, it
requires finding an appropriate regularisation term λ.
In this work, we adopt the second approach where a loss
is minimised but within a Bayesian framework. In addition
to naturally encoding the Occam’s razor principle (simpler
models are preferable) therefore avoiding the manual specification of the regularisation term, the Bayesian formulation
also provides posterior estimates for the predictions and the
associated uncertainty.
Inspired by the ability of the l1 norm to consistently enforce sparsity, Koenker and Bassett Jr modified this loss
function to create the pinball loss function (equation 1)
where, ξi = yi − fi . The l1 norm can be thought of as a
proxy to cardinality, which is exploited in Lasso regression,
(Tibshirani 1996). As stated in (Takeuchi et al. 2006) the
minimiser f of this loss has the property of having at most
αN and (1 − α)N observations for ξ < 0 and ξ > 0 respectively. Finally, for large number of observations, the proportion |ξ < 0|/|ξ > 0| converges to α. In a probabilistic setting, instead of minimising this loss the goal is to maximise
the exponential of the negative loss.
In this work we derive a nonparametric approach to modelling the quantile function. Similarly, (Quadrianto et al.
2009), (Takeuchi et al. 2006) and (Boukouvalas, Barillec,
and Cornford 2012) use kernels as a nonparametric method
of inferring quantile functions. (Quadrianto et al. 2009) minimises the expected loss function under a Gaussian Process
(GP) (Rasmussen 2006) prior which is placed over the data.
(Boukouvalas, Barillec, and Cornford 2012) takes a more

Introduction

Most regression techniques revolve around predicting an average value for a query point given a training set and, in certain cases, the predicted variance around this mean. Quantile regression was introduced as a method of modelling the
variation in functions, where the mean along with standard
deviation are not adequate. In this sense quantile regression
provides a better statistical view of the predicted function.
Quantiles are important tools in medical data, for instance
in measuring a normal weight range for a particular age
group or, in modelling train arrival times where (for arguments sake) 90% of trains would arrive before the allocated
time and 10% late. Other areas of application are in financial
data where it is important to measure what the daily worst
case scenarios would be so that analysts could hedge their
risks.
There are two main approaches used in inferring quantiles. The first is building a Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) over the set of observations. Taddy and Kottas; Chen and Müller employ this approach to model the
quantiles. However, the drawback of this approach is that it
requires MCMC methods for inference which can be computationally intensive and prohibitive for large datasets.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1686

