Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Linear-Time Gibbs Sampling in Piecewise Graphical Models
Hadi Mohasel Afshar

Scott Sanner

Ehsan Abbasnejad

ANU & NICTA
Canberra, Australia
hadi.afshar@anu.edu.au

NICTA & ANU
Canberra, Australia
ssanner@nicta.com.au

ANU & NICTA
Canberra, Australia
ehsan.abbasnejad@anu.edu.au

Abstract

queries. As commonly done in multi-attribute utility theory
(Keeney and Raiffa 1993), the overall item utility u(a| θ) is
decomposed additively over the attribute choices of a:

Many real-world Bayesian inference problems such as preference learning or trader valuation modeling in financial markets naturally use piecewise likelihoods. Unfortunately, exact closed-form inference in the underlying Bayesian graphical models is intractable in the general case and existing approximation techniques provide few guarantees on both approximation quality and efficiency. While (Markov Chain)
Monte Carlo methods provide an attractive asymptotically
unbiased approximation approach, rejection sampling and
Metropolis-Hastings both prove inefficient in practice, and
analytical derivation of Gibbs samplers require exponential
space and time in the amount of data. In this work, we
show how to transform problematic piecewise likelihoods
into equivalent mixture models and then provide a blocked
Gibbs sampling approach for this transformed model that
achieves an exponential-to-linear reduction in space and time
compared to a conventional Gibbs sampler. This enables
fast, asymptotically unbiased Bayesian inference in a new
expressive class of piecewise graphical models and empirically requires orders of magnitude less time than rejection,
Metropolis-Hastings, and conventional Gibbs sampling methods to achieve the same level of accuracy.

u(a| θ) =

D
X

θi · αi

i=1

User responses are in the form of n queries (i.e. observed
data points) d1 to dn where for each 1 ≤ j ≤ n, dj is a pairwise comparison of some items aj and bj with the following
possible responses:
• aj  bj : In the j-th query, the user prefers item aj over bj .
• aj  bj : In the j-th query, the user does not prefer item aj
over bj .
It is assumed that with an elicitation noise 0 ≤ η < 0.5, the
item with a greater utility is preferred:

u(aj |θ) < u(bj |θ) : η
(1)
pr(aj  bj | θ) = u(aj |θ) = u(bj |θ) : 0.5

u(aj |θ) > u(bj |θ) : 1 − η

pr(aj  bj | θ) = 1 − pr(aj  bj | θ)

(2)

As the graphical model in Figure 1 illustrates, our posterior belief over the user’s attribute weights is provided by the standard Bayesian
Qn inference expression:
pr(θ| d1 , . . . , dn ) ∝ pr(θ) · j=1 pr(dj | θ). As also evidenced in Figure 1, since the prior and likelihoods are piecewise distribitions, the posterior distribution is also piecewise
with the number of pieces growing exponentially in n. ♦

Introduction
Many Bayesian inference problems such as preference
learning (Guo and Sanner 2010) or trader valuation modeling in financial markets (Shogren, List, and Hayes 2000)
naturally use piecewise likelihoods, e.g., preferences may
induce constraints on possible utility functions while trader
transactions constrain possible instrument valuations. To be
concrete, consider the following Bayesian approach to preference learning where our objective is to learn a user’s
weighting of attributes for classes of items (e.g., cars, apartment rentals, movies) given their responses to pairwise comparison queries over those items:

Unfortunately, Bayesian inference in models with piecewise likelihoods like BPPL in Example 1 (and illustrated in
Figure 1) often lead to posterior distributions with a number
of piecewise partitions exponential in the number of data
points, thus rendering exact analytical inference impossible.
While (Markov Chain) Monte Carlo methods (Gilks 2005)
provide an attractive asymptotically unbiased approximation approach, rejection sampling and Metropolis-Hastings
(Hastings 1970) both prove inefficient in practice, and analytical derivation of Gibbs samplers (Casella and George
1992) require exponential space and time in the number of
data points.
In this work, we show how to transform problematic
piecewise likelihoods into equivalent mixture models and

Example 1 (Bayesian pairwise preference learning (BPPL)). Suppose each item a is modeled by
an D-dimensional real-valued attribute choice vector
(α1 , . . . , αD ). The goal is to learn an attribute weight
vector θ = (θ1 , . . . , θD ) ∈ RD that describes the utility
of each attribute choice from user responses to preference
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3461

