Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Unsupervised Feature Learning
Through Divergent Discriminative Feature Accumulation
Paul A. Szerlip and Gregory Morse and Justin K. Pugh and Kenneth O. Stanley
Department of EECS (Computer Science Division)
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816
{pszerlip,jpugh,kstanley}@eecs.ucf.edu, gregorymorse07@gmail.com
Abstract

in a classification problem in effect encourage the exclusive
discovery of features that help to discriminate among the
target classifications. In contrast, unsupervised approaches,
which include both generative representations such as restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) (Hinton, Osindero,
and Teh 2006) and autoencoders that are trained to reproduce their inputs (Bengio et al. 2007), yield a more general feature set that captures dimensions of variation that
may or may not be essential to the classification objective. The hope of course is that such a set would nevertheless be useful for classification in any case, and the pros
and cons of e.g. generative versus discriminative features
have proven both subtle and complex (Ng and Jordan 2002;
Jaakkola, Haussler, and others 1999). Nevertheless, one benefit of unsupervised training is that it does not require labeled data to gain traction.
An important insight in this paper is that there is an unrecognized option outside this usual unsupervised versus supervised (or generative versus discriminative) dichotomy.
In particular, there is an alternative kind of discriminative
learning that is unsupervised rather than supervised. In this
proposed alternative approach, called divergent discriminative feature accumulation (DDFA), instead of searching for
features constrained by the objective of solving the discriminative classification problem, a learning algorithm can instead attempt to collect as many features that discriminate
strongly among training examples as possible, without regard to any particular classification problem.
The approach in such unsupervised discriminative learning is thus to search continually for novel features that discriminate among training examples in new ways. Interestingly, unlike conventional algorithms in deep learning, such
a search is explicitly divergent (i.e. intentionally spreading
out in the space rather than aiming for a specific point or
area1 ) by design and therefore continues to accumulate new
features without converging. In effect, a high-scoring feature is therefore relevant to discriminating among the examples, even though the ultimate discrimination problem
is not known. A comprehensive set of such features that
discriminate among the training set in fundamental ways
is thereby suitable in principle for later supervised training

Unlike unsupervised approaches such as autoencoders that
learn to reconstruct their inputs, this paper introduces an alternative approach to unsupervised feature learning called divergent discriminative feature accumulation (DDFA) that instead continually accumulates features that make novel discriminations among the training set. Thus DDFA features are
inherently discriminative from the start even though they are
trained without knowledge of the ultimate classification problem. Interestingly, DDFA also continues to add new features
indefinitely (so it does not depend on a hidden layer size), is
not based on minimizing error, and is inherently divergent instead of convergent, thereby providing a unique direction of
research for unsupervised feature learning. In this paper the
quality of its learned features is demonstrated on the MNIST
dataset, where its performance confirms that indeed DDFA is
a viable technique for learning useful features.

Introduction
The increasing realization in recent years that artificial
neural networks (ANNs) can learn many layers of features (Bengio et al. 2007; Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006;
Marc’Aurelio, Boureau, and LeCun 2007; Cireşan et al.
2010) has reinvigorated the study of representation learning in ANNs (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). While
the beginning of this renaissance focused on the sequential
unsupervised training of individual layers one upon another
(Bengio et al. 2007; Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006), the
number of approaches and variations that have proven effective at training in such deep learning has since exploded
(Schmidhuber et al. 2011; Bengio, Courville, and Vincent
2013). This explosion has in turn raised the question of
what makes a good representation, and how it is best learned
(Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). The main contribution of this paper is to advance our understanding of good
representation learning by suggesting a new principle for
obtaining useful representations that is accompanied by a
practical algorithm embodying the principle.
The feature representation obtained through learning algorithms is often impacted by the nature of the training. For
example, supervised approaches such as stochastic gradient
descent (Cireşan et al. 2010) that aim to minimize the error

1
This sense of divergence should not be confused with e.g. contrastive divergence (Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006).

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2979

