Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Closed Form Solution to Multi-View Low-Rank Regression
Shuai Zheng, Xiao Cai, Chris Ding, Feiping Nie, Heng Huang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington, TX, USA
zhengs123@gmail.com, xiao.cai@mavs.uta.edu, chqding@uta.edu,
feipingnie@gmail.com, heng@uta.edu

X = [x1 , x2 , ..., xn ] ∈ <p×n is the single view feature
data matrix and Y ∈ <n×c is the target class indicator matrix. Ridge regression can achieve better results by adding
a Frobenius norm based regularization on linear regression
loss objective (Hoerl and Kennard 1970) (Marquaridt 1970).
Ridge regression solves the problem minB ||Y − X T B||2F +
λ||B||2F , where λ is the regularization weight parameter. Cai
(Cai et al. 2013) showed that when B is low-rank, regression
is equivalent to linear discriminant analysis based regressions. However, all these work only works for single-view
problems.

Abstract
Real life data often includes information from different channels. For example, in computer vision, we can
describe an image using different image features, such
as pixel intensity, color, HOG, GIST feature, SIFT features, etc.. These different aspects of the same objects
are often called multi-view (or multi-modal) data. Lowrank regression model has been proved to be an effective
learning mechanism by exploring the low-rank structure of real life data. But previous low-rank regression
model only works on single view data. In this paper,
we propose a multi-view low-rank regression model by
imposing low-rank constraints on multi-view regression
model. Most importantly, we provide a closed-form solution to the multi-view low-rank regression model. Extensive experiments on 4 multi-view datasets show that
the multi-view low-rank regression model outperforms
single-view regression model and reveals that multiview low-rank structure is very helpful.

In this paper, we propose a multi-view low-rank regression model by imposing low-rank constraints on regression
model. This model can be solved using closed-form solution directly. In linear regression, low rank parameter matrix B ν is dependent on view ν. Through theoretical analysis, we show that multi-view low-rank regression model is
equivalent to do regression in the subspace of each view. In
other words, let B ν = Aν B, and it is equivalent to find the
shared regression parameter matrix B under the subspace
transformation Aν with respect to view ν. Extensive experiments performed on 4 multi-view datasets show that the proposed model outperforms single-view regression model and
reveals that low-rank structure can improve the classification
result of a full-rank model.

Introduction
In many tasks, a single object can be described using information from different channels (or views). For example, a
3-D object can be described using pictures from different
angles; a website can be described using the words it contains, and the hyperlinks it contains; an image can be described using different features, such as SIFT feature, and
HOG feature; in daily life, a person can be characterized using age, height, weight and so on. These data all comes from
different aspects and channels. Multi-view problems aim to
improve existing single view model by learning a model utilizing data collected from multiple channels (Rüping and
Scheffer 2005) (de Sa 2005) (Zhou and Burges 2007).
Low-rank regression model has been proved to be an effective learning mechanism by exploring the low-rank structure of real life data (Xiang et al. 2012) (Evgeniou and Pontil 2007) (Cai et al. 2013). Existing regression models only
work on single view data. To be specific, linear regression
finds a linear model with respect to the single view feature
data to fit target class data (Seber and Lee 2012). Let matrix
B ∈ <p×c be the parameter of the linear model. Linear regression solves a problem of minB ||Y − X T B||2F , where

Assume that there are v views and c classes, pν is the dimension of view ν, nj is the sample size of the j-th class,
and n is the total sample size. Let Xν = [xν1 , ..., xνn ] ∈
<pν ×n be the data matrix of view ν, ν = 1, 2, ..., v, and
Y = [y1 , ..., yc ] ∈ <n×c is the normalized class indicator
√
matrix, i.e. Yij = 1/ nj if the i-th data point belongs to the
j-th class and Yij = 0 otherwise.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

We try to minimize the residual of low rank regression
model in each class and in each view. Loss function of multi-

Notations. In this paper, matrices are written in uppercase
letters, such as X, Y . Vectors are written in bold lower case
letters, such as x, y. Tr(X) means the trace operation for
matrix X.

Multi-view Low Rank Regression

1973

