Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Going Beyond Literal Command-Based Instructions:
Extending Robotic Natural Language Interaction Capabilities
Tom Williams, Gordon Briggs, Bradley Oosterveld, and Matthias Scheutz
Human-Robot Interaction Laboratory
Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
{thomas_e.williams, gordon.briggs, bradley.oosterveld, matthias.scheutz}@tufts.edu

Abstract

representations over single-valued probabilities because the
probability-based Bayesian inference problem to calculate
P (I|U, C) in terms of P (U |I, C) is not practically feasible,
for at least two reasons: (1) we do not have access to distributions over an agent’s intentions (as we cannot look inside
its head), and (2) we would need a table containing priors
on all combinations of intentions and contexts. Instead, we
employ rules of the form u ∧ c →[α,β] i that capture intentions behind utterances in particular contexts, where [α, β] is
a confidence interval contained in [0,1] which can be specified for each rule independently (e.g., based on social conventions, or corpora statics when available). These rules are
very versatile in that they can be defined for individual utterances and contexts or whole classes of utterances and contexts. Most importantly, we can employ DS-based modus
ponens to make uncertain deductive and abductive inferences which cannot be made in a mere Bayesian framework.
For more details justifying this approach, see (Williams et
al. 2014).
We start with background information on instructionbased robotic architectures and basic Dempster-Shafer theoretic concepts, and then introduce the proposed algorithms
for pragmatic inference and for generating requests to disambiguate intended meanings. Then we demonstrate the
operation of the algorithms in a detailed example showing
how uncertainty is propagated at each stage of processing
and can lead to different responses by the robot. We finish
with a brief discussion of the proposed approach and possible directions for future work.

The ultimate goal of human natural language interaction is to
communicate intentions. However, these intentions are often
not directly derivable from the semantics of an utterance (e.g.,
when linguistic modulations are employed to convey politeness, respect, and social standing). Robotic architectures with
simple command-based natural language capabilities are thus
not equipped to handle more liberal, yet natural uses of linguistic communicative exchanges.
In this paper, we propose novel mechanisms for inferring intentions from utterances and generating clarification requests
that will allow robots to cope with a much wider range of
task-based natural language interactions. We demonstrate the
potential of these inference algorithms for natural humanrobot interactions by running them as part of an integrated
cognitive robotic architecture on a mobile robot in a dialoguebased instruction task.

Introduction
When humans interact in natural language (NL) as part of
joint activities, their ultimate goal is to understand each others’ intentions, regardless of how such intentions are expressed. While it is sometimes possible to determine intentions directly from the semantics of an utterance, often
the utterance alone does not convey the speaker’s intention.
Rather, it is only in conjunction with goal-based, task-based,
and other context-based information that listeners are able to
infer the intended meaning, such as in indirect speech acts
where requests or instructions are not apparent from the syntactic form or literal semantics of the utterance. Given that
an important goal of human-robot interaction is to allow for
natural interactions (Scheutz et al. 2007), robotic architectures will ultimately have to face the challenge of coping
with more liberal and thus natural human speech.
Enabling a broader coverage of human speech acts (beyond imperatives expressing commands), however, is quite
involved and requires various additional mechanisms in the
robotic architecture. In this paper, we introduce novel algorithms based on Dempster-Shafer (DS) theory (Shafer 1976)
for inferring intentions I from utterances U in contexts C,
and, conversely, for generating utterances U from intentions I in contexts C. We select more general DS-based

Previous Work
Over the last several years, various integrated robotic architectures with natural language capabilities have been proposed for instruction-based natural language interactions
(Lemaignan et al. 2014; Kruijff et al. 2010; Chai et al. 2014;
Deits et al. 2013; Scheutz et al. 2013; Jing et al. 2012). Some
of these approaches (e.g. (Jing et al. 2012)) are focused on
compiling low-level controls from high-level, natural language commands and constraints and do not address efficient real-time interaction. Other architectures, while concerned with real-time interactions, do not generally perform
pragmatic analyses to infer non-literal meanings from received utterances (and thus are not able to systematically
handle utterances whose literal semantics do not directly re-

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1387

