Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Thesis Summary:
Optimal Multi-Agent Pathfinding Algorithms
Guni Sharon

is the optimal individual path cost for agent ai , i.e. the shortest path length from si to gi while ignoring other agents. A
child in the ICT is generated by increasing the cost limit for
one of the agents by one (or some unit cost). An ICT node
[C1 , .., Ck ] is a goal if there is a complete non-conflicting
solution such that the cost of the individual path for ai is
exactly Ci .
Low level: The low level acts as a goal test for the high
level. For each ICT node [C1 , .., Ck ] visited by the high
level, the low level is invoked. The task of the low level is
to find a non-conflicting complete solution such that the cost
of the individual path of agent ai is exactly Ci . For each
agent ai , ICTS stores all single-agent paths of cost Ci in
a special compact data-structure called a multi-value decision diagram (MDD) (Srinivasan et al. 1990). The low level
searches the cross product of the MDDs in order to find a set
of k non-conflicting paths for the different agents. If such
a non-conflicting set of paths exists, the low level returns
true and the search halts. Otherwise, false is returned and
the high level continues to the next high-level node (of a different cost combination).

Abstract
The multi-agent path finding (MAPF) problem is a generalization of the single-agent path finding problem for k > 1
agents. It consists of a graph and a number of agents. For
each agent, a unique start state and a unique goal state are
given, and the task is to find paths for all agents from their
start states to their goal states, under the constraint that agents
cannot collide during their movements. In many cases there is
an additional goal of minimizing a cumulative cost function
such as the sum of the time steps required for every agent
to reach its goal. The goal of my research is providing new
methods to solve MAPF optimally and provide theoretical
understandings that will help choose the best solver given a
problem instance.

Introduction and Research Question
In the multi-agent path finding (MAPF) problem, we are
given a graph, G(V, E), and a set of k > 1 agents labeled
a1 . . . ak . Each agent ai has a start position si ∈ V and
goal position gi ∈ V . At each time step an agent can either move to a neighboring location or can wait in its current
location. The task is to return the least-cost set of actions for
all agents that will move each of the agents to its goal without conflicting with other agents (i.e., without being in the
same location at the same time or crossing the same edge
simultaneously in opposite directions). In the online variant of this problem agents may appear at any time step and
disappear once they reach their goal. MAPF has practical
applications in video games, traffic control (Silver 2005;
Dresner and Stone 2008), robotics (Bennewitz et al. 2002)
and aviation (Pallottino et al. 2007). Up until now I presented two algorithms for solving MAPF optimally: the Increasing Cost Tree Search (Sharon et al. 2013b) (ICTS) and
the Conflict Based Search (Sharon et al. 2012a) (CBS).
ICTS is based on the understanding that a complete solution for the entire problem is built from individual paths
(one for each agent). ICTS divides the MAPF problem into
two levels. High level: At its high level, ICTS searches the
increasing cost tree (ICT). Every node in the ICT consists
of a k-ary vector [C1 , . . . Ck ] which represents all possible
solutions in which the individual path cost of agent ai is exactly Ci . The root of the ICT is [opt1 , ..., optk ], where opti

1. A set of constraints (N.constraints). Each constraint
prohibits a given agent from being at a given coordinate (location, time step). The root of the CT contains an
empty set of constraints. The child of a node in the CT
inherits the constraints of the parent and adds one new
constraint for one agent.
2. A solution (N.solution). A set of k paths, one path for
each agent. The path for agent ai must be consistent with
the constraints of ai . Such paths are found by the lowlevel search algorithm.
3. The total cost (N.cost). The cost of the current solution
(summation over all the single-agent path costs).
Node N in the CT is a goal node when N.solution is
valid, i.e., the set of paths for all agents have no conflicts.
The high-level phase performs a best-first search on the CT
where nodes are ordered by their costs. Given the list of constraints for a node N of the CT, the low-level search is invoked. This search returns one shortest path for each agent,
ai , that is consistent with all the constraints associated with
ai in node N . If the chosen paths for two agents, a1 and
a2 , are found to conflict at coordinate x, two new CT nodes

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4255

