Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi-Task Learning and Algorithmic Stability
Yu Zhang
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
The Institute of Research and Continuing Education, Hong Kong Baptist University (Shenzhen)

Abstract

Taskar, and Jordan 2006) by using the group sparse regularization, learning shared feature covariance (Argyriou,
Evgeniou, and Pontil 2006), learning from the given task
relations (Evgeniou, Micchelli, and Pontil 2005; Kato et
al. 2007), learning the task relation from data in different
ways (Jacob, Bach, and Vert 2008; Zhang and Yeung 2010a;
Solnon, Arlot, and Bach 2012; Zhang and Yeung 2013;
2014), decomposition methods (Chen, Liu, and Ye 2010;
Jalali et al. 2010; Lozano and Swirszcz 2012; Zweig and
Weinshall 2013) which decomposes the model parameters
into two or more parts with each part modeling one type of
sparsity, and constructing multi-task local learners (Zhang
2013). As well as the aforementioned multi-task models,
some Bayesian models have been extended to multi-task setting by using Gaussian process (Bonilla, Chai, and Williams
2007), Dirichlet process (Xue et al. 2007), t process (Zhang
and Yeung 2010b) and so on.

In this paper, we study multi-task algorithms from the
perspective of the algorithmic stability. We give a definition of the multi-task uniform stability, a generalization
of the conventional uniform stability, which measures
the maximum difference between the loss of a multi-task
algorithm trained on a data set and that of the multitask algorithm trained on the same data set but with a
data point removed in each task. In order to analyze
multi-task algorithms based on multi-task uniform stability, we prove a generalized McDiarmid’s inequality
which assumes the difference bound condition holds by
changing multiple input arguments instead of only one in
the conventional McDiarmid’s inequality. By using the
generalized McDiarmid’s inequality as a tool, we can
analyze the generalization performance of general multitask algorithms in terms of the multi-task uniform stability. Moreover, as applications, we prove generalization
bounds of several representative regularized multi-task
algorithms.

Besides the algorithmic development, several theoretical
analysis has been conducted for multi-task learning. For
example, Baxter (2000) analyzes the multi-task generalization bound via the VC dimension. Also based on the
VC dimension, Ben-David and Borbely (2008) study the
generalization bound for multi-task algorithms where the
data distributions of any pair of tasks are assumed to be
transformable. Ando and Zhang (2005) provide a generalization bound for a multi-task method, which learns the
shared subspace among tasks, by using the covering number. Maurer (2006) uses the Rademacher complexity to analyze linear multi-task methods. Kolar et al. (2011) investigate to recover sparse patterns. Kakade et al. (2012) investigate the regularization techniques for learning with matrices and apply the analysis to multi-task learning. The
generalization bound for the multi-task sparse coding is
analyzed in (Maurer, Pontil, and Romera-Paredes 2013;
Maurer, Pontil, and Romera-Paredes 2014). Pontil and Maurer (2013) study the generalization bound of multi-task algorithms which upper-bound the trace norm as a constraint to
learn low-rank parameter matrix. Besides the generalization
bound, the oracle inequality is studied in (Lounici et al. 2009;
Solnon, Arlot, and Bach 2012; Solnon 2013). Even though
there is so much analysis for multi-task learning, most of
them analyze multi-task algorithms whose objective functions are formulated as constrained optimization problems
with the constraints achieving regularization on the model pa-

Introduction
Multi-task learning (Caruana 1997) aims to learn multiple
related tasks simultaneously to improve the generalization
performance of each task by leveraging the useful information among all tasks. Multi-task learning has many real-world
applications in various areas, such as data mining, computer
vision, bioinformatics, healthcare, and so on.
In the past decades, many multi-task learning models have
been proposed. Among all the existing models, the multilayer feedforward neural network (Caruana 1997), where
the hidden layers provide the common feature representations for all tasks, is among the earliest learning models
for multi-task learning. Then some regularized methods are
developed for multi-task learning by adapting the singletask learners. One example is the multi-task support vector
machine in (Evgeniou and Pontil 2004) which proposes a
regularizor to enforce the model parameters of all tasks to
approach the average. Some other representative regularized
multi-task models include learning shared subspace (Ando
and Zhang 2005), multi-task feature selection (Obozinski,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3181

