Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Measuring Plan Diversity: Pathologies in Existing
Approaches and a New Plan Distance Metric
Robert P. Goldman and Ugur Kuter
SIFT, LLC
Minneapolis, MN USA
{rpgoldman,ukuter}@sift.net

Abstract

works (Thayer et al. 2013). These applications would benefit from a domain-independent, theoretically-justified, and
informative definition of plan-plan diversity.
There are a number of approaches to generating diverse sets of plans for a problem (Myers and Lee 1999;
Coman and Muñoz-Avila 2011; Bryce 2014; Nguyen et al.
2012a; Roberts, Howe, and Ray 2014). Unfortunately, the
only commonly-used way of measuring plan diversity, action distance (Srivastava et al. 2007; Nguyen et al. 2012a),
lacks a strong theoretical basis and can give poor results
in many cases. Other proposed domain-independent measures have similar problems, and while Coman & MunõzAvila (2011) suggest using domain-specific measures, there
is no commonly accepted technique for identifying appropriate domain-specific measures.
Our objective is to provide a theoretically grounded,
domain-independent, and quantitative way to assess planplan distances and identify interesting diversity. Our contributions are as follows:
• We analyze previous diversity measures, and based on this
analysis, we present an intuitive account of plan diversity
in terms of conditional surprise (conditional information),
and coding length.
• The challenge of conditional information as a measure of
plan diversity, is that obvious approaches require domain
dependent information. We meet this challenge by employing Kolmogorov (Algorithmic) complexity (Li and
Vitányi 2008). Unfortunately, algorithmic complexity
is not computable, so we adopt compression distance (Li
et al. 2004) as an approximation.
• In our experiments, compression distance was successful in providing diversity measures in planning domains
with correlated fluents, unordered subplans, lifted information, and could quickly identify conditional information in plans.
• We used NCD to select training sets for a Hierarchical
Task Network (HTN) learning algorithm. In these experiments, plans sets found diverse by compression distance
enabled more effective learning than AD.
• We also present experimental results showing potential
weaknesses of compression distance as a plan-plan distance metric. In particular, our results show that compression distance can over-focus on adjacent relations in the

In this paper we present a plan-plan distance metric based
on Kolmogorov (Algorithmic) complexity. Generating diverse sets of plans is useful for tasks such as probing user
preferences and reasoning about vulnerability to cyber attacks. Generating diverse plans, and comparing different diverse planning approaches requires a domain-independent,
theoretically motivated definition of the diversity distance
between plans. Previously proposed diversity measures are
not theoretically motivated, and can provide inconsistent results on the same plans.
We define the diversity of plans in terms of how surprising one plan is given another or, its inverse, the conditional
information in one plan given another. Kolmogorov complexity provides a domain independent theory of conditional
information. While Kolmogorov complexity is not computable, a related metric, Normalized Compression Distance
(NCD), provides a well-behaved approximation. In this paper we introduce NCD as an alternative diversity metric,
and analyze its performance empirically, in comparison with
previous diversity measures, showing strengths and weaknesses of each. We also examine the use of different compressors in NCD. We show how NCD can be used to select
a training set for HTN learning, giving an example of the
utility of diversity metrics. We conclude with suggestions
for future work on improving, extending, and applying it to
serve new applications.

Introduction
In many applications the ability to generate multiple plans
that are interestingly different would be useful. Boddy et
al. (2005) propose to use diverse plan generation to give
defenders insight into attackers’ plans in cyber-security domains. Nguyen, et al. (2012a) and Myers & Lee (1999) propose to use diverse plans to probe users’ preferences. Goldman et al. (2012) have used AI planners to identify ways
in which a user’s plan is vulnerable to uncontrolled actions
and events. Identifying diverse ways that a plan can go
wrong would help users make their plans robust to disturbances. Other applications include program analysis (Kuter
et al. 2014), and attack surface generation in computer netCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3275

