Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Answering Conjunctive Queries over EL Knowledge Bases
with Transitive and Reflexive Roles
Giorgio Stefanoni and Boris Motik
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
Wolfson Building, Parks Road,
Oxford, OX1 3QD, UK

Abstract

Zakharyaschev 2013; Eiter et al. 2012; Venetis, Stoilos, and
Stamou 2014). One can reduce the complexity by restricting
the query shape; for example, answering acyclic CQs (Yannakakis 1981) is tractable in relational databases. Bienvenu
et al. (2013) have shown that answering acyclic CQs in DLLitecore and ELH is tractable, whereas Gottlob et al. (2014)
have shown it to be NP-hard in DL-LiteR .
In this paper, we consider answering CQs over KBs in
the EL family of languages. No existing practical approach
for EL supports complex role inclusions—a prominent feature of OWL 2 EL that can express complex properties of
roles, including role transitivity. The known upper bound
for answering CQs over EL KBs with complex role inclusions (Krötzsch, Rudolph, and Hitzler 2007) runs in
PSPACE and uses automata techniques that are not practicable due to extensive don’t-know nondeterminism. Moreover, this algorithm does not handle transitive roles specifically, but considers complex role inclusions. Hence, it is not
clear whether the PSPACE upper bound is optimal in the
presence of transitive roles only; this is interesting because
role transitivity suffices to express simple graph properties
such as reachability, and it is a known source of complexity
of CQ answering (Eiter et al. 2009). Thus, to complete the
landscape, we study the combined complexity of answering
CQs over various extensions of EL and different classes of
CQs. Our contributions can be summarised as follows.
In Section 3 we present a novel algorithm running in
NP for answering CQs over ELHOs KBs—a logic containing all of OWL 2 EL, but with complex role inclusions restricted to role transitivity—and thus settle the open question
of the complexity for transitive and (locally) reflexive roles.
Our procedure generalises the combined approach with filtering (Lutz et al. 2013) for ELHO by Stefanoni, Motik,
and Horrocks (2013). We capture certain consequences of an
ELHOs KB by a datalog program; then, to answer a CQ, we
evaluate the query over the datalog program to obtain candidate answers, and then we filter out unsound candidate answers. Transitive and reflexive roles, however, increase the
complexity of the filtering step: unlike the filtering procedure for ELHO, our filtering procedure runs in nondeterministic polynomial time, and we prove that this is worstcase optimal—that is, checking whether a candidate answer
is sound is an NP-hard problem. To obtain a goal-directed
filtering procedure, we developed optimisations that reduce

Answering conjunctive queries (CQs) over EL knowledge
bases (KBs) with complex role inclusions is PSPACE-hard
and in PSPACE in certain cases; however, if complex role
inclusions are restricted to role transitivity, a tight upper complexity bound has so far been unknown. Furthermore, the existing algorithms cannot handle reflexive roles, and they are
not practicable. Finally, the problem is tractable for acyclic
CQs and ELH, and NP-complete for unrestricted CQs and
ELHO KBs. In this paper we complete the complexity landscape of CQ answering for several important cases. In particular, we present a practicable NP algorithm for answering
CQs over ELHOs KBs—a logic containing all of OWL 2
EL, but with complex role inclusions restricted to role transitivity. Our preliminary evaluation suggests that the algorithm
can be suitable for practical use. Moreover, we show that,
even for a restricted class of so-called arborescent acyclic
queries, CQ answering over EL KBs becomes NP-hard in
the presence of either transitive or reflexive roles. Finally, we
show that answering arborescent CQs over ELHO KBs is
tractable, whereas answering acyclic CQs is NP-hard.

1

Introduction

Description logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2007) are a family of
knowledge representation languages that logically underpin
the Web Ontology Language (OWL 2) (Cuenca Grau et al.
2008). DL knowledge bases (KBs) provide modern information systems with a flexible graph-like data model, and answering conjunctive queries (CQs) over such KBs is a core
reasoning service in various applications (Calvanese et al.
2011). Thus, the investigation of the computational properties of CQ answering, as well as the development of practicable algorithms, have received a lot of attention lately.
For expressive DLs, CQ answering is at least exponential
in combined complexity (Glimm et al. 2008; Ortiz, Rudolph,
and Simkus 2011)—that is, measured in the combined size
of the query and the KB. The problem is easier for the DLLite (Calvanese et al. 2007) and the EL (Baader, Brandt,
and Lutz 2005) families of DLs, which logically underpin
the QL and the EL profiles of OWL 2, respectively, and
worst-case optimal, yet practicable algorithms are known
(Kontchakov et al. 2011; Rodriguez-Muro, Kontchakov, and
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1611

