Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Approximate Linear Programming for
Constrained Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
Pascal Poupart† , Aarti Malhotra† , Pei Pei† , Kee-Eung Kim§ , Bongseok Goh§ and Michael Bowling‡
†

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada
Department of Computer Science, Korean Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Korea
‡
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Canada
†
{ppoupart, pei.pei, aarti.malhotra}@uwaterloo.ca, § {kekim,bsgoh}@cs.kaist.ac.kr, ‡ bowling@cs.ualberta.ca
§

Abstract

be found exactly by linear programming. Since the space of
reachable beliefs is often infinite (or too large to enumerate),
we consider an approximate linear program that works with
a subset of beliefs. Although the linear program is approximate, we show that its solution is an upper bound on total
rewards. Since the resulting policy is a finite state controller,
we also show how to compute the exact value of each objective by solving a system of linear equations. We also devise
an iterative approach to increase the subset of beliefs and
ensure that in the limit of an infinitely large belief set, the
exact optimal policy is found. The approach is evaluated on
a set of benchmark problems. The quality of the policies and
the running time outperform the state of the art, which consists of a constrained version of point-based value iteration
and a minimax quadratically constrained program (Kim et
al. 2011).

In many situations, it is desirable to optimize a sequence
of decisions by maximizing a primary objective while respecting some constraints with respect to secondary objectives. Such problems can be naturally modeled as constrained
partially observable Markov decision processes (CPOMDPs)
when the environment is partially observable. In this work,
we describe a technique based on approximate linear programming to optimize policies in CPOMDPs. The optimization is performed offline and produces a finite state controller
with desirable performance guarantees. The approach outperforms a constrained version of point-based value iteration on
a suite of benchmark problems.

1

Introduction

Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
provide a natural framework for sequential decision making
under uncertainty. The goal is to find a policy that maximizes the expected total return specified by a reward function. However, in many applications, there are several objectives and it may be desirable to ensure that some bounds
are respected for some secondary objectives. For instance,
in spoken dialog systems (Williams and Young 2007) the
main objective may be to minimize the number of turns
while ensuring that the probability of completing a booking
task is above some threshold. In mobile assistive technologies (Hoey et al. 2012; Grześ, Poupart, and Hoey 2013a),
the goal may be to maximize the probability of completing a task while bounding energy consumption. In wireless communications, the goal of opportunistic spectrum access (Zhao et al. 2007) is to maximize the utilization of wireless spectrum by allowing multiple devices to use the same
wireless channel while satisfying regulatory requirements
on the maximum collision rate between devices. To that effect, POMDPs have been extended to constrained POMDPs
(CPOMDPs) by allowing secondary objectives to be specified with corresponding bounds on the expectation of those
objectives (Isom, Meyn, and Braatz 2008).
We propose a novel approach based on approximate linear programming to optimize policies in CPOMDPs. When
the reachable space of beliefs is finite, an optimal policy can

2

Background

We consider a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) defined formally by a tuple
hS, A, O, T, Z, R, γ, b0 i where S is the set of states s,
A is the set of actions a, O is the set of observations o,
T (s0 , s, a) = Pr(s0 |s, a) is the transition distribution,
Z(o, s0 , a) = Pr(o|s0 , a) is the observation distribution,
R(s, a) ∈ R is the reward function, γ ∈ (0, 1) is the
discount factor and b0 (s0 ) = Pr(s0 ) is the initial belief
at time step 0. Since the underlying state of the system is
not directly observable, the decision maker can maintain a
belief b(st ) = Pr(st ) about the current state st at each time
step t. The belief can be updated as time progresses based
on Bayes’ theorem. For instance, the belief bao obtained
after executing a in b and observing o is
X
bao (s0 ) ∝
b(s) Pr(s0 |s, a) Pr(o|s0 , a) ∀s0
(1)
s

A policy π : B → A is a mapping from beliefs to actions. In
a POMDP, there is a single objective consisting of the reward
function. The goal is to find a policy π ∗ that maximizes the
expected discounted sum of rewards.
"
#
X
∗
t
π = argmaxπ E
γ R(st , at )|π
(2)
t

A constrained POMDP (Isom, Meyn, and Braatz 2008)
allows multiple objectives to be considered. One of the ob-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3342

