Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Noise-Robust Semi-Supervised Learning by Large-Scale Sparse Coding
Zhiwu Lu1 and Xin Gao2 and Liwei Wang3 and Ji-Rong Wen1 and Songfang Huang4
1

School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division,
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Jeddah 23955, Saudi Arabia
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
4
IBM China Research Lab, Beijing, China
{zhiwu.lu, xin4gao, wangliwei.pku, jirong.wen}@gmail.com, huangsf@cn.ibm.com
2

Abstract

2004). Since the graph is at the heart of graph-based semisupervised learning, graph construction has been studied
extensively (Wang and Zhang 2008; Yan and Wang 2009;
Cheng et al. 2010; Zhuang et al. 2012; Sun, Hussain,
and Shawe-Taylor 2014). However, these graph construction methods are not developed directly for noise reduction,
and the corresponding semi-supervised learning still suffers
from significant performance degradation due to the inaccurate labeling of data points commonly encountered in different image analysis tasks. Moreover, the labeling of images
may be contributed by the community (e.g. Flickr) and we
can only obtain noisy labels for all the images.
In this paper, we focus on developing a novel noiserobust semi-supervised learning algorithm to deal with the
challenging problem of semi-supervised learning with noisy
initial labels. As summarized in (Wang and Zhang 2008),
graph-based semi-supervised learning can be formulated as
a quadratic optimization problem based on Laplacian regularization (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003; Zhou et
al. 2004; Lu and Peng 2013a). Considering the success of
L1 -norm optimization for noise reduction (Elad and Aharon
2006; Mairal, Elad, and Sapiro 2008; Wright et al. 2009), if
we give a new L1 -norm formulation of Laplacian regularization, we can propose noise-robust L1 -norm semi-supervised
learning. Fortunately, derived from the eigenvalue decomposition of the normalized Laplacian matrix L, we can represent L in a symmetrical decomposition form and then define
L1 -norm Laplacian regularization. Since all the eigenvectors
of L are explored in this symmetrical decomposition, our
L1 -norm Laplacian regularization is actually defined based
upon the manifold structure of the data. By limiting the solution of semi-supervised learning to the space spanned by the
eigenvectors of L, our noise-robust semi-supervised learning is formulated as a generalized sparse coding problem.
To keep the scalability for very large data, we utilize
both nonlinear approximation and dimension reduction techniques to solve this generalized sparse coding problem.
More specifically, we first construct a large graph over the
data only based upon a limited number of clustering centers (obtained by k-means clustering). Due to the special
definition of this graph, we can find the eigenvectors of
L (to be used in this generalized sparse coding problem)
in linear time complexity. For the sake of more efficiency,
we choose to only work with a small subset of eigenvec-

This paper presents a large-scale sparse coding algorithm to deal with the challenging problem of noiserobust semi-supervised learning over very large data
with only few noisy initial labels. By giving an L1 -norm
formulation of Laplacian regularization directly based
upon the manifold structure of the data, we transform
noise-robust semi-supervised learning into a generalized sparse coding problem so that noise reduction can
be imposed upon the noisy initial labels. Furthermore,
to keep the scalability of noise-robust semi-supervised
learning over very large data, we make use of both
nonlinear approximation and dimension reduction techniques to solve this generalized sparse coding problem
in linear time and space complexity. Finally, we evaluate the proposed algorithm in the challenging task of
large-scale semi-supervised image classification with
only few noisy initial labels. The experimental results
on several benchmark image datasets show the promising performance of the proposed algorithm.

Introduction
Semi-supervised learning has been widely applied to many
challenging image analysis tasks (Lu, Zhao, and Cai 2006;
Xu and Yan 2009; Lu and Ip 2010; Fergus, Weiss, and Torralba 2010; Tang et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2009) such as image
representation, image classification, and image annotation.
In these image analysis tasks, the manual labeling of training
data is often tedious, subjective as well as expensive, while
the access to unlabeled data is much easier. In the literature,
through exploiting the large number of unlabeled data with
reasonable assumptions, semi-supervised learning (Blum
and Mitchell 1998; Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003;
Zhou et al. 2004) has been shown to reduce the need for
expensive labeled data and achieve promising results in different challenging image analysis tasks.
Among various semi-supervised learning methods, one
influential work is graph-based semi-supervised learning
(Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003; Zhou et al. 2004)
which models the entire dataset as a graph. The basic idea
behind this semi-supervised learning is label propagation
over the graph with the cluster consistency (Zhou et al.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2828

