Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Low-Rank Similarity Metric Learning in High Dimensions
Wei Liu†
†

Cun Mu‡

Rongrong Ji\

Shiqian Ma§

‡

\

John R. Smith†

Shih-Fu Chang‡

§

IBM T. J. Watson Research Center Columbia University Xiamen University The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{weiliu,jsmith}@us.ibm.com cm3052@columbia.edu
sfchang@ee.columbia.edu
rrji@xmu.edu.cn sqma@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

clude supervised metric learning which is the main focus
in the literature, semi-supervised metric learning (Wu et al.
2009; Hoi, Liu, and Chang 2010; Liu et al. 2010a; 2010b;
Niu et al. 2012), etc. The suite of supervised metric learning
can further be divided into three categories in terms of forms
of supervision: the methods supervised by instance-level labels (Goldberger, Roweis, and Salakhutdinov 2004; Globerson and Roweis 2005; Weinberger and Saul 2009), the
methods supervised by pair-level labels (Xing et al. 2002;
Bar-Hillel et al. 2005; Davis et al. 2007; Ying and Li 2012),
and the methods supervised by triplet-level ranks (Ying,
Huang, and Campbell 2009; McFee and Lanckriet 2010;
Shen et al. 2012; Lim, McFee, and Lanckriet 2013). More
methods can also be found in two surveys (Kulis 2012) and
(Bellet, Habrard, and Sebban 2013).
Despite the large amount of literature, relatively little
work has dealt with the problem where the dimensionality of input data can be extremely high. This is relevant
to a wide variety of practical data collections, e.g., images,
videos, documents, time-series, genomes, and so on, which
frequently involve from tens to hundreds of thousands of
dimensions. Unfortunately, learning full-rank metrics in a
high-dimensional input space Rd quickly becomes computationally prohibitive due to high computational complexities
ranging from O(d2 ) to O(d6.5 ). Additionally, limited memory makes storing a huge metric matrix M ∈ Rd×d a heavy
burden.
This paper concentrates on a more reasonable learning
paradigm, Low-Rank Metric Learning, also known as structural metric learning. (Davis and Dhillon 2008) demonstrated that in the small sample setting n  d (n is the number of training samples) learning a low-rank metric in a highdimensional input space is tractable, achieving linear space
and time complexities with respect to the dimensionality d.
We follow this learning setting n  d throughout the paper. Given a rank r  d, a distance metric can be expressed
into a low-rank form M = LL> which is parameterized by
a rectangular matrix L ∈ Rd×r . L constitutes a low-rank
basis in Rd , and also acts as a dimensionality-reducing linear transformation since any distance between two inputs x
and x0 under such a low-rank metric M can be equivalently
viewed as a Euclidean distance between the transformed inputs L> x and L> x0 . Therefore, the use of low-rank metrics allows reduced storage of metric matrices (only saving

Metric learning has become a widespreadly used tool
in machine learning. To reduce expensive costs brought
in by increasing dimensionality, low-rank metric learning arises as it can be more economical in storage and
computation. However, existing low-rank metric learning algorithms usually adopt nonconvex objectives, and
are hence sensitive to the choice of a heuristic low-rank
basis. In this paper, we propose a novel low-rank metric learning algorithm to yield bilinear similarity functions. This algorithm scales linearly with input dimensionality in both space and time, therefore applicable
to high-dimensional data domains. A convex objective
free of heuristics is formulated by leveraging trace norm
regularization to promote low-rankness. Crucially, we
prove that all globally optimal metric solutions must
retain a certain low-rank structure, which enables our
algorithm to decompose the high-dimensional learning
task into two steps: an SVD-based projection and a metric learning problem with reduced dimensionality. The
latter step can be tackled efficiently through employing
a linearized Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers. The efficacy of the proposed algorithm is demonstrated through experiments performed on four benchmark datasets with tens of thousands of dimensions.

Introduction
During the past decade, distance metric learning, typically
referring to learning a Mahalanobis distance metric, has become ubiquitous in a variety of applications stemming from
machine learning, data mining, information retrieval, and
computer vision. Many fundamental machine learning algorithms such as K-means clustering and k-nearest neighbor classification all need an appropriate distance function
to measure pairwise affinity (or closeness) between data
examples. Beyond the naive Euclidean distance, the distance metric learning problem intends to seek a better metric through learning with a training dataset subject to particular constraints arising from fully supervised or semisupervised information, such that the learned metric can reflect domain-specific characteristics of data affinities or relationships. A vast number of distance metric learning approaches have been proposed, and the representatives inCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2792

