Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Grounded Fixpoints
Bart Bogaerts

Joost Vennekens

Marc Denecker

Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven
3001 Heverlee, Belgium
bart.bogaerts@cs.kuleuven.be

Department of Computer Science
Campus De Nayer, KU Leuven
2860 Sint-Katelijne-Waver, Belgium
joost.vennekens@cs.kuleuven.be

Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven
3001 Heverlee, Belgium
marc.denecker@cs.kuleuven.be

Abstract

and some new semantics in these fields (Denecker, Marek,
and Truszczyński 2003). By showing that Konolige’s mapping from DL to AEL preserves the approximating operator,
they resolved an old research question regarding the nature
of these two logics: AEL and DL are “just” two different
dialects of autoepistemic reasoning (Denecker, Marek, and
Truszczyński 2011).
The study of these approximating operators is called approximation fixpoint theory (AFT). It is now commonly
used to define semantics of extensions of logic programs,
such as logic programs with aggregates (Pelov, Denecker,
and Bruynooghe 2007) and HEX logic programs (Antic,
Eiter, and Fink 2013). Vennekens, Gilis, and Denecker
(2006) used AFT in an algebraic modularity study for logic
programming, AEL and DL. Recently, Strass (2013) showed
that many semantics from Dung’s argumentation frameworks (AFs) and abstract dialectical frameworks (ADFs)
can be obtained by direct applications of AFT and Bogaerts
et al. (2014) defined the causal logic FO(C) as an instantiation of AFT. This work suggests that fixpoint theory, despite
its high level of abstraction, captures certain fundamental
intuitions and cognitive principles in a range of logics and
sorts of human knowledge. It is this observation that provides the basic motivation for the present study.
In Section 3, we extend AFT with a new type of fixpoint:
a point x in a lattice L is a grounded fixpoint of operator
O : L → L if O(x) = x and for all v ∈ L such that
O(x ∧ v) ≤ v, it holds that x ≤ v. In Section 4, we discuss the relation between grounded fixpoints and the other
fixpoints defined by AFT. In particular, we show that all (ultimate) stable fixpoints are grounded and that all grounded
fixpoints are minimal fixpoints approximated by the (ultimate) well-founded fixpoint in the bilattice. In general there
are minimal fixpoints that are not grounded, and grounded
fixpoints that are not stable. If the well-founded fixpoint is
“exact”, the well-founded fixpoint is the unique grounded
and stable fixpoint of O.
Grounded fixpoints have several appealing properties.
First of all, a grounded fixpoint is a purely algebraical concept. As such, it can be used in all fields where AFT is
applied. Secondly, a first step in the application of AFT for
a lattice operator O is to choose a bilattice operator that approximates O. In contrast, grounded fixpoints are defined
directly in terms of the original operator O. Thirdly, their

Algebraical fixpoint theory is an invaluable instrument
for studying semantics of logics. For example, all major
semantics of logic programming, autoepistemic logic,
default logic and more recently, abstract argumentation have been shown to be induced by the different
types of fixpoints defined in approximation fixpoint theory (AFT). In this paper, we add a new type of fixpoint to AFT: a grounded fixpoint of lattice operator
O : L → L is defined as a lattice element x ∈ L
such that O(x) = x and for all v ∈ L such that
O(v ∧ x) ≤ v, it holds that x ≤ v. On the algebraical
level, we show that all grounded fixpoints are minimal fixpoints approximated by the well-founded fixpoint and that all stable fixpoints are grounded. On the
logical level, grounded fixpoints provide a new mathematically simple and compact type of semantics for any
logic with a (possibly non-monotone) semantic operator. We explain the intuition underlying this semantics
in the context of logic programming by pointing out
that grounded fixpoints of the immediate consequence
operator are interpretations that have no non-trivial unfounded sets. We also analyse the complexity of the
induced semantics.
Summarised, grounded fixpoint semantics is a new,
probably the simplest and most compact, element in
the family of semantics that capture basic intuitions and
principles of various non-monotonic logics.

1

Introduction

Motivated by structural analogies in the semantics of several
non-monotonic logics, Denecker, Marek, and Truszczyński
(2000) developed an algebraic theory that defines different
types of fixpoints for a so-called approximating bilattice operator, called supported, Kripke-Kleene, stable and wellfounded fixpoints. In the context of logic programming, they
found that Fitting’s immediate consequence operator is an
approximating operator of the two-valued immediate consequence operator and that its four different types of fixpoints
correspond exactly with the four major, equally named semantics of logic programs. They also identified approximating operators for default logic (DL) and autoepistemic logic
(AEL) and showed that the fixpoint theory induces all main
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1453

