Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Existential Rule Languages with Finite Chase:
Complexity and Expressiveness
Heng Zhang1 and Yan Zhang1 and Jia-Huai You2
1

School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematics, University of Western Sydney, Penrith, NSW 2751, Australia
2
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E8, Canada

Abstract

fragments of existential rule languages such that the underlying chase procedure, though non-terminating in general,
still enjoys some kind of finite representability property, so
that the problem of query answering is decidable under this
setting. This paradigm includes, e.g., guarded rules (Calı̀,
Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012), greedy bounded treewidth
sets (Baget et al. 2011b), sticky sets (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Pieris
2012), and Shy programs (Leone et al. 2012). The other
approach is to identify a certain acyclicity condition under
which each existential rule can only be finitely applied so
that the chase procedure always terminates. There have been
many recent studies on this paradigm. Our work presented
in this paper is along this line. Below, let us provide a brief
summary of recent works under this approach.
In their milestone paper, Fagin et al. (2005) formulated
a concept called weak acyclicity (WA) as a sufficient condition to ensure the chase termination for existential rules.
This concept was then extended to a number of notions, such
as stratification (Deutsch, Nash, and Remmel 2008), superweak acyclicity (Marnette 2009), local stratification (Greco,
Spezzano, and Trubitsyna 2011), joint acyclicity (Krötzsch
and Rudolph 2011), model-faithful acyclicity (MFA) and
model-summarising acyclicity (MSA) (Grau et al. 2013),
and some dependency relations by (Baget et al. 2014).
Among these, MFA is known to define the largest rule class.
In addition, many ontologies in various domains turn out to
be in the MFA class, as evidenced in (Grau et al. 2013).
It has been observed that almost all of the existential
rule languages defined based on the notion of acyclicity or
its variations have PT IME-complete data complexity and 2E XP T IME-complete combined complexity. The uniformity
on data complexity is in fact due to an interesting result
proved in (Marnette 2009), which states that every rule language with finite Skolem chase is in PT IME for data complexity. A natural question then arises: Does this uniformity
hold for combined complexity? Moreover, what is the expressiveness of existing rule languages with finite chase?
Please note that the uniformity on data complexity does not
imply the uniformity on expressiveness as data complexity only captures the hardest case of a language. Recently,
there have been two interesting related works that studied
the expressiveness of existential rules (Arenas, Gottlob, and
Pieris 2014; Gottlob, Rudolph, and Simkus 2014). But both
of them only focus on guarded language or its variations.

Finite chase, or alternatively chase termination, is an
important condition to ensure the decidability of existential rule languages. In the past few years, a number
of rule languages with finite chase have been studied.
In this work, we propose a novel approach for classifying the rule languages with finite chase. Using this
approach, a family of decidable rule languages, which
extend the existing languages with the finite chase property, are naturally defined. We then study the complexity
of these languages. Although all of them are tractable
for data complexity, we show that their combined complexity can be arbitrarily high. Furthermore, we prove
that all the rule languages with finite chase that extend
the weakly acyclic language are of the same expressiveness as the weakly acyclic one, while rule languages
with higher combined complexity are in general more
succinct than those with lower combined complexity.

Introduction
It has been shown that existential rule languages, also called
Datalog± , have prominent applications in ontological reasoning, knowledge representation, and databases, in which
query answering is a primary yet challenging problem; see
e.g., (Calı̀ et al. 2010; Baget et al. 2011a). Under an existential rule language, queries are answered against a logical
theory consisting of an input database and a finite set of existential rules, while a chase procedure is usually used. Specifically, given an input database D, a finite set Σ of existential
rules, and a query q, we want to decide whether D ∪ Σ |= q.
Applying the chase procedure, the problem is equivalent to
deciding whether chase(D, Σ) |= q. Through a chase procedure, fresh nulls have to be introduced for each application of the existential rules, and hence, potential cyclic applications of these rules may lead the chase procedure not to
terminate, i.e., chase(D, Σ) is infinite. Therefore, the problem of query answering under existential rule languages is
in general undecidable (Beeri and Vardi 1981).
There have been a considerable number of works on
identifying decidable classes with respect to query answering. Basically, two major approaches have provided a landscape on this study: One is to focus on some restricted
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1678

