Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Tensor-Based Learning for Predicting Stock Movements
Qing Li and LiLing Jiang and Ping Li
Computer Science Department
Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
555 Liutai Ave., Chengdu, 611130, China

Hsinchun Chen
Management Information Systems
Department, University of Arizona
1130 E. Helen St. Tucson, Arizona, 85721-0108, USA
affects stock markets, they believe that information shapes
stock movements.
Financial information can be roughly categorized into
quantiﬁed data and qualitative descriptions of ﬁrms. Stock
analysts, whether the technician or the fundamentalist, rely
heavily on the quantiﬁed information. In traditional ﬁnance,
a number of literature examines the effect of quantiﬁed market data like ﬁrm size, cash ﬂow, book-to-market equity, past
return, on stock movements. For example, Dechow (1994)
shows that accounting earnings and cash ﬂows help measure
the ﬁrm performance, as reﬂected in stock returns. Jegadeesh
and Titman (1993) ﬁnd that stocks with higher returns in the
previous twelve months tend to have higher future returns.
Chen and Ng (1992) document that there is a stable relations
between stock price dynamics and ﬁrm size (ME, stock price
times number of shares) but the strengths of the relationships
change over time. Fama and French (1993) identify three
risk factors in the returns on stocks, i.e., overall market, ﬁrm
size, book-to-market equity (BE/ME, the ratio of the book
value of common equity to its market value).
However, the quantiﬁed data cannot entirely convey the
limitless variety of ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial standings. Qualitative
information, hidden in the textual descriptions of conventional news and social media, is complementary to quantiﬁed data to enrich investors’ information environment,
especially in social media era. Social media including
blogs, tweets/micro-blogs, and discussion boards is updated
rapidly and spreads virally at an unprecedented speed, providing ﬁrst-hand information to investors ahead of formal
statistical reports (Luo, Zhang, and Duan 2013). Meanwhile,
the adaption of user engagement in social media, such as
comments, ratings, votes, and so forth, enables vibrant information creation, sharing, and collaboration among investors. With such rapid information inﬂux and user interactions, decisions of investors tend to be inﬂuenced by
the emotion of peers and the public. It may well lead to
a herd behavior in investment. This is evidenced by the
recent behavior ﬁnance studies. For instance, Frank and
Antweiler (2004) extract the bullish and bearish sentiments
of Yahoo! Finance postings, concluding that the effect of
ﬁnancial discussion boards on stocks is statistically signiﬁcant. Gilbert and Karahalios (2010) report that an increase of anxiety, worry, and fear emotions produces down-

Abstract
Stock movements are essentially driven by new information. Market data, ﬁnancial news, and social sentiment are believed to have impacts on stock markets.
To study the correlation between information and stock
movements, previous works typically concatenate the
features of different information sources into one super feature vector. However, such concatenated vector approaches treat each information source separately
and ignore their interactions. In this article, we model
the multi-faceted investors’ information and their intrinsic links with tensors. To identify the nonlinear patterns between stock movements and new information,
we propose a supervised tensor regression learning approach to investigate the joint impact of different information sources on stock markets. Experiments on CSI
100 stocks in the year 2011 show that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art trading strategies.

Introduction
Essentially, stock movements are information-driven activities in which new information affects the beliefs of investors
and causes ﬂuctuations of stock prices. Traditional ﬁnance
believes that stock prices are affected by new information
randomly. In particular, a stock price is always driven by
“unemotional” investors to equal the ﬁrm’s rational present
value of expected future cash ﬂows (Fama 1965). Stock investors are constantly updating their beliefs on the future
business value, although they will disagree on the the direction of the company’s business value with new information. This will lead to a discrepancy between the actual price
and the intrinsic price which causes the stock to wander
randomly around its intrinsic value. However, in real ﬁnancial markets, stock investors are emotional. Empirical studies have shown that stock prices do not completely follow
random walks (Lo and MacKinlay 1988). Modern behavioral ﬁnance studies attribute non-randomness stock movements to investors’ cognitive and emotional biases (DeLong
et al. 1990; Nofsinger 2005; Shleifer and Vishny 1997). In
spite of the fact that traditional ﬁnance and modern behavioral ﬁnance are conﬂicted in the way of how information
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1784

