Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Modeling with Node Degree Preservation Can Accurately Find Communities
Di Jin1, Zheng Chen2, Dongxiao He1, Weixiong Zhang2,3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China, 2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA, 3Institute for Systems Biology, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056, China
{jindi, hedongxiao}@tju.edu.cn, {zheng.chen, weixiong.zhang}@wustl.edu

much attention lately (Newman 2012). Several modelbased methods have been proposed (Wang et al. 2011; Psorakis et al. 2011; Zhang and Yeung 2012; Ren et al. 2009;
Shen, Cheng and Guo 2011; Karrer and Newman 2011;
Ball, Karrer and Newman 2011), most of which are based
on the popular stochastic blockmodel (Nowicki and Snijders 2001). In a simple form of the stochastic blockmodel,
each of n nodes of a network is assigned to one of c communities, and two nodes are connected with a probability
depending on the community memberships of the nodes.
To be concrete, the stochastic blockmodel of a network of
n nodes can be represented by a c×c probability matrix ω =
(ωgigj), where gi is the community that node i belongs to
and ωgigj is the probability that an edge is introduced between nodes i and j.
Although simple, this blockmodel ignores variation of
node degrees and thus does not preserve node degrees of a
network to be modeled, rendering the model unsuitable for
real networks (Karrer and Newman 2011). Node degrees of
a real-world network are typically distinct from that of a
random graph; node degrees of a real-world network often
exhibit a power-law distribution (Barabasi and Albert
1999). Neglect or improper formulation of node degrees
can result in inaccurate network structures and thereby
affecting the quality of a community discovery algorithm.
The idea of preserving node degrees was proposed by
(Karrer and Newman 2011). However, their model itself
does not preserve node degrees; this is achieved by additional inference, which limits its generality. This critical
issue has not been addressed adequately in the existing
methods that adopt or extend the blockmodel, as discussed
in Sec. 5. Here, we attempted to address this issue. In our
study, we did not use the blockmodel. Rather, we introduced a new stochastic model atop a popular random-graph
null model, i.e., null model of modularity (Newman and
Girvan 2004). Using probabilistic community membership,
our new model can not only describe those community
structures that the original null model failed to capture, but
also hold the property of retaining the expected node degrees in the model to be the same as in the original network.
The community structure was learned by fitting the model
to the given network. Our model preserves node degrees by
itself without inference, and hence it doesn’t have to rely

Abstract
An important problem in analyzing complex networks is
discovery of modular or community structures embedded in
the networks. Although being promising for identifying
network communities, the popular stochastic models often
do not preserve node degrees, thus reducing their representation power and applicability to real-world networks. Here
we address this critical problem. Instead of using a blockmodel, we adopted a random-graph null model to faithfully
capture community structures by preserving in the model
the expected node degrees. The new model, learned using
nonnegative matrix factorization, is more accurate and robust in representing community structures than the existing
methods. Our results from extensive experiments on synthetic benchmarks and real-world networks show the superior performance of the new method over the existing methods in detecting both disjoint and overlapping communities.

1. Introduction
Most networks, such as social and biological networks, are
better organized and represented in communities or modules, where nodes within a community are relatively densely connected and nodes across communities are sparsely
linked (Girvan and Newman 2002). Due to its utility in
unraveling complex structures in networks from diverse
fields, ranging from social sciences, engineering to biology
and medicine, identification of communities in complex
networks has attracted much attention in recent years (Fortunato 2010). Much effort has been devoted to developing
methods for community detection. These methods can be
grouped into that for finding disjoint communities (Girvan
and Newman 2002; Blondel et al. 2008; Rosvall and
Bergstrom 2008) and those for finding overlapping communities (Palla et al. 2005; Lancichinetti, Fortunato and
Kertesz 2009; Ahn, Bagrow and Lehmann 2010).
Among the existing methods for community discovery
are stochastic models of communities, which offer an effective technique for network analysis and has attracted
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

160

