Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Verification of Relational Multiagent Systems with Data Types
Diego Calvanese

Giorgio Delzanno

Marco Montali

University of Genova
Via Dodecaneso 35, 16146 Genova, Italy
giorgio.delzanno@unige.it

Free University of Bozen-Bolzano
Piazza Domenicani 3, 39100 Bolzano, Italy
{calvanese,montali}@inf.unibz.it

Abstract

Savkovic and Calvanese 2012).
The focus of this work is on design-time verification of
RMASs against rich first-order temporal properties, allowing for quantification across states. By considering only a
countably infinite domain with equality, it has been shown
in (Belardinelli, Lomuscio, and Patrizi 2012; Bagheri Hariri
et al. 2013; Montali, Calvanese, and De Giacomo 2014)
that decidability of verification holds for variants of firstorder temporal logics under the assumption that the system is state-bounded, i.e., unboundedly many data objects
can be encountered over time, provided that in each single
state only a bounded number of them is stored in the agent
databases (Bagheri Hariri et al. 2014). We recast this condition by considering different options for the data types.
Specifically, by exploiting an encoding of two-counter machines, we show that decidability of verification even of
propositional reachability properties is lost when one of the
data types is equipped with the successor relation. Our main
technical result is showing decidability for a variant of firstorder µ-calculus in presence of dense, linear orders, and
facets defined on top of them. In this case, we provide an
explicit technique to construct a finite-state, faithful abstraction of the original system, in which dense linear orders are
reformulated as non-rigid relations working on the active domain of the system only. This allows us to model and verify state-bounded RMASs that include coordination mechanisms such as ticket-based mutual exclusion protocols.
Major details about the framework and its execution semantics, as well as full proofs and examples, can be found
in an extended version of this work (Calvanese, Delzanno,
and Montali 2014).

We study the extension of relational multiagent systems
(RMASs), where agents manipulate full-fledged relational
databases, with data types and facets equipped with domainspecific, rigid relations (such as total orders). Specifically, we
focus on design-time verification of RMASs against rich firstorder temporal properties expressed in a variant of first-order
µ-calculus with quantification across states. We build on previous decidability results under the state-bounded assumption, i.e., in each single state only a bounded number of data
objects is stored in the agent databases, while unboundedly
many can be encountered over time. We recast this condition,
showing decidability in presence of dense, linear orders, and
facets defined on top of them. Our approach is based on the
construction of a finite-state, sound and complete abstraction
of the original system, in which dense linear orders are reformulated as non-rigid relations working on the active domain
of the system only. We also show undecidability when including a data type equipped with the successor relation.

1

Introduction

We study relational multiagent systems (RMASs), taking
inspiration from the recently defined framework of dataaware commitment-based multiagent systems (DACMASs)
(Chopra and Singh 2013; Montali, Calvanese, and De Giacomo 2014). Broadly speaking, an RMAS is constituted by
agents that maintain data in an internal fully fledged relational database, apply proactive and reactive rules to update
their own data, and exchange messages with other agents.
Messages have an associated payload, which is used to move
data from one agent to another. When updating their internal
database, agents may also inject fresh data into the system,
by invoking external services. This abstraction serves as a
metaphor for any kind of interaction with the external world,
such as interaction with web services, or humans.
From the data perspective, previous research has mainly
focused on a single, countably infinite data domain, whose
elements can only be compared for equality and inequality.
This assumption is highly restrictive, since data types used
in applications are typically equipped with domain-specific,
rigid relations (such as total orders), and might be specialized through the use of facets (ISO/IEC 11404:2007 2007;

2

Relational Multiagent Systems

RMASs are data-aware multiagent systems constituted by
agents that exchange and update data. Beside generic agents,
an RMAS is equipped with a so-called institutional agent,
which exists from the initial system state, and can be contacted by the other agents as a sort of “white-page” agent,
i.e., to: (i) get information about the system as a whole;
(ii) obtain names of other agents so as to establish an interaction with them; and (iii) create and remove agents.
At a surface level, RMASs and DACMASs share many aspects. There are however two key differences in the way they
model data. On the one hand, while DACMASs consider

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2031

