Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Dictionary Learning with Mutually Reinforcing Group-Graph Structures
Hongteng Xu1∗ , Licheng Yu2∗ , Dixin Luo3 , Hongyuan Zha4,5 , Yi Xu3
1

2

School of ECE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA
3
SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4
Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
5
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA

Abstract

sub-dictionaries for representing different classes, the group
sparse model has a huge advantage for large-scale classification problem — theoretically, the number of classes it can
handle increases exponentially with the size of dictionary.
Laplacian graph. Laplacian graph captures the geometrical structure of the whole sample space by measuring the
similarity among samples regardless of their labels. This
method has been widely used in unsupervised learning, e.g.,
nonlinear dimension reduction, and semi-supervised learning, e.g., graph regularized sparse model (Gao et al. 2010;
Zheng et al. 2011). Especially in the semi-supervised case,
using graph-based label propagation algorithms (Goldberg
et al. 2011), we can add new labels to samples.
These two structure regularization methods are complementary in nature: On one hand, training group sparse representation model relies on sufficient labeled samples, which
can be obtained by graph-based label propagation. On the
other hand, the group structure can introduce label information into graph, which prevents samples from being aggregated incorrectly. To our knowledge, there are few prior
works leveraging both in a clean unified fashion.
Our main contribution is a method for dictionary learning over semi-supervised data that uses dynamic group
and graph structures. We refer to these together as groupgraph structures. The learning algorithm is partitioned into
three phases: sparse coding, structure updating and dictionary updating. First, we take the group and graph regularization into account jointly for sparse coding. Second,
we allow the group and graph structures to reinforce each
other. An entropy-based label propagation strategy is proposed to incorporate several unlabeled samples into groups.
These newly introduced samples are used to update their local graphs. Third, the dictionary is learned via the revised
group-graph structures. We prove the convergence of the
proposed method, and study the configurations of critical parameters. The image classification experiments on a variety
of datasets show the superior performances of the proposed
method compared to the state-of-art methods, especially in
the case of a few labeled samples and limited dictionary size.

In this paper, we propose a novel dictionary learning
method in the semi-supervised setting by dynamically
coupling graph and group structures. To this end, samples are represented by sparse codes inheriting their
graph structure while the labeled samples within the
same class are represented with group sparsity, sharing
the same atoms of the dictionary. Instead of statically
combining graph and group structures, we take advantage of them in a mutually reinforcing way — in the
dictionary learning phase, we introduce the unlabeled
samples into groups by an entropy-based method and
then update the corresponding local graph, resulting in
a more structured and discriminative dictionary. We analyze the relationship between the two structures and
prove the convergence of our proposed method. Focusing on image classification task, we evaluate our approach on several datasets and obtain superior performance compared with the state-of-the-art methods, especially in the case of only a few labeled samples and
limited dictionary size.

Introduction
Dictionary learning is the core of sparse representation models and helps to effectively reveal underlying structure in
the data. Take image classification as an example. Learning a dictionary to allow sparse representation of images
can capture high-level semantics of images. Generally, the
discriminative power of sparse coding is highly correlated
with the structure of dictionary, so several approaches have
been pursued for dictionary learning. Among them, group
sparsity (Bengio et al. 2009; Wang et al. 2011; Deng, Yin,
and Zhang 2013) and Laplacian graph (Gao et al. 2010;
Zheng et al. 2011; Long et al. 2013) are two popular regularization methods for learning the structure of the dictionary.
Group sparsity. Models exploiting group sparsity aim to
encode samples with the same label using the same set of
atoms of the dictionary. Each subset of dictionary atoms
constructs a basis for the corresponding group. Compared
with previous works in (Mairal et al. 2008; Wright et al.
2009; Jiang, Lin, and Davis 2011), which learn disjoint

Proposed Model
The basic sparse representation model is shown as follows,

∗

These two authors contribute equally.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

min kX − DAk2F + λkAk1 ,
D,A

3101

(1)

