Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Unconstrained Quasi-Submodular Function Optimization
Jincheng Mei, Kang Zhao and Bao-Liang Lu*
Center for Brain-Like Computing and Machine Intelligence
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction and Cognitive Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
800 Dong Chuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China
{jcmei,sjtuzk,bllu}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

and Bilmes 2012) formulate multiple sensor placement and
multimodal feature selection as bisubmodular function maximization, where the objectives have multiple set arguments.
Golovin and Krause (Golovin and Krause 2011) introduce
the concept of adaptive submodularity to make a sequence
of adaptive decisions with uncertain responses. Feige (Feige
2009) proposes maximizing subadditive functions on welfare problems to capture the complement free property of
the utility functions. However, all the mentioned generalizations of submodularity enjoy benefits in special application
scenarios (multiset selection, adaptive decision, and complement free allocation).
In this paper, we study a universal generalization. Submodularity is often viewed as the discrete analogue of convexity (Lovász 1983). One of the most important generalizations of convexity is quasi-convexity (Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004). Quasi-convex functions satisfy some weaker
properties, but still benefit much from the optimization perspective. More specifically, quasi-convex constraints can
be easily transformed to convex constraints via sublevel
sets, and quasi-convex optimization problems can be solved
through a series of convex feasibility problems using bisection methods (Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004). Considering
the celebrated analogue between submodularity and convexity, a natural question is whether submodularity has similar
generalizations which satisfy weaker properties but still enjoy favorable performance in optimization? In this paper, we
positively answer this question and refer to this generalization as quasi-submodularity.
As aforementioned, quasi-submodularity is a weaker
property than submodularity. Similar to the diminishing return property of submodular functions, we first define a corresponding property called single sub-crossing. Then we
propose two algorithms for unconstrained quasi-submodular
minimization and maximization, respectively. Our theoretical analyses show that the proposed algorithms strictly increase or decrease the objective function values after each iteration. The output reduced lattices can be obtained in O(n)
iterations, which contain all the local and global optima of
the optimization problems. The theoretical and experimental results indicate that although quasi-submodularity is a
weaker property than submodularity, it enjoys favorable performance in optimization.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first

With the extensive application of submodularity, its
generalizations are constantly being proposed. However, most of them are tailored for special problems. In
this paper, we focus on quasi-submodularity, a universal
generalization, which satisfies weaker properties than
submodularity but still enjoys favorable performance in
optimization. Similar to the diminishing return property
of submodularity, we first define a corresponding property called the single sub-crossing, then we propose two
algorithms for unconstrained quasi-submodular function minimization and maximization, respectively. The
proposed algorithms return the reduced lattices in O(n)
iterations, and guarantee the objective function values
are strictly monotonically increased or decreased after
each iteration. Moreover, any local and global optima
are definitely contained in the reduced lattices. Experimental results verify the effectiveness and efficiency of
the proposed algorithms on lattice reduction.

Introduction
Given a ground set N = {1, 2, · · · , n}, a set function
F : 2N 7→ R is said to be submodular (Fujishige 2005)
if ∀X, Y ⊆ N ,
F (X) + F (Y ) ≥ F (X ∩ Y ) + F (X ∪ Y ).
An equivalent definition is given as following, i.e., ∀A ⊆
B ⊆ N , i ∈ N \ B,
F (i|A) ≥ F (i|B),
where F (i|A) , F (A + i) − F (A) is called the marginal
gain of i with respect to A. It implies that submodular functions capture the diminishing return property. To facilitate
our presentation, we use F (A + i) to refer to F (A ∪ {i}),
and F (A − i) to refer to F (A \ {i}).
Submodularity is widely applied in economics, combinatorics, and machine learning, such as welfare allocation (Vondrák 2008), sensor placement (Krause, Singh, and
Guestrin 2008), feature selection (Das and Kempe 2011),
and computer vision (Liu et al. 2011), to name but a few.
With the wide application of submodularity, it has many
generalizations. For example, Singh et al. (Singh, Guillory,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1191

