Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Value of Information Based on Decision Robustness
Suming Chen, Arthur Choi, and Adnan Darwiche
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
{suming,aychoi,darwiche}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

Here, the reward function is entropy and the goal is to select features that reduce the expected entropy of the decision
variable D. Another criterion is the one based on classification loss (Gao and Koller 2011), which is used in the context
of threshold-based classification. Some additional criteria
are proposed in (Krause and Guestrin 2009), which are also
formulated in terms of expected reward.
In this paper, we propose a new criterion for VOI in the
context of threshold-based decisions. The proposed criterion
is based on a new principle, decision robustness, which values features that, when observed, would lead to a decision
that is maximally robust against further observations.
Our proposed VOI criterion can also be formulated in
terms of expected reward, where the reward function is
a recently proposed probabilistic query, called the SameDecision Probability (SDP) (Darwiche and Choi 2010). The
SDP quantifies the stability of a threshold-based decision
and is defined as the probability that a current decision
would stay the same, had we observed further information.
Our second contribution is an algorithm, MaxDR, that optimally selects features using the new criterion, given a budget. We restrict our attention to Naive Bayes networks,
as computing the SDP is PPPP -complete for Bayesian
networks (Choi, Xue, and Darwiche 2012) but only NPhard for Naive Bayes networks (Chen, Choi, and Darwiche
2013).1 The proposed algorithm, MaxDR, is based on a combination of techniques used to solve the knapsack problem
as well as a branch-and-bound search algorithm.
Our third contribution is in exploring the application of
MaxDR to classification and decision making tasks. For the
former, we show that MaxDR can be used to tradeoff the ex-

There are many criteria for measuring the value of information (VOI), each based on a different principle that is usually
suitable for specific applications. We propose a new criterion
for measuring the value of information, which values information that leads to robust decisions (i.e., ones that are unlikely to change due to new information). We also introduce
an algorithm for Naive Bayes networks that selects features
with maximal VOI under the new criterion. We discuss the
application of the new criterion to classification tasks, showing how it can be used to tradeoff the budget, allotted for acquiring information, with the classification accuracy. In particular, we show empirically that the new criterion can reduce
the expended budget significantly while reducing the classification accuracy only slightly. We also show empirically that
the new criterion leads to decisions that are much more robust
than those based on traditional VOI criteria, such as information gain and classification loss. This make the new criterion
particularly suitable for certain decision making applications.

Introduction
Consider a probabilistic graphical model with some features
F1 , . . . , Fn that can be observed at a cost. Consider also a
decision variable D in the model, whose posterior distribution will be used to make a decision. Given a budget on
observations, a classical problem is that of finding a set of
features G from F1 , . . . , Fn , where the cost of observing G
is within budget, and the value obtained from observing G is
maximal. This problem appears in a variety of applications,
including active sensing (Greiner, Grove, and Roth 2002;
Gao and Koller 2011), medical diagnosis (Yu et al. 2009),
fault identification (Bellala et al. 2013), knowledge assessment (Munie and Shoham 2008; Millán et al. 2013), and
computer vision (Ahmad and Yu 2013).
There are different criteria for measuring the VOI, each
based on a different principle that is suitable for specific applications. Most of these criteria can be formulated in terms
of the expected reward of observing features G (Krause and
Guestrin 2009). This includes, for example, the popular criterion based on information gain; see (Lu and Przytula 2006;
Zhang and Ji 2010; Yu et al. 2009; Gao and Koller 2011).

1
First, observe the following relationship between complexity
classes:
NP ⊆ PP ⊆ NPPP ⊆ PPPP

Note that MPE is the prototypical NP-complete problem for probabilistic inference (Shimony 1994). MAP (Park and Darwiche 2004)
is the prototypical NPPP -complete problem. SDP was shown to
be PPPP -complete, where PPPP can be thought of as a counting
variant of the class NPPP , hence highly intractable. Naive Bayes
networks are typically tractable for basic queries, yet remain NPhard for MAP (De Campos 2011), and PP-complete for computing the value of information (Krause and Guestrin 2009). SDP has
also been shown to be an NP-hard problem in Naive Bayes (Chen,
Choi, and Darwiche 2013).

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3503

