Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

The Utility of Text: The Case of Amicus Briefs and the Supreme Court
Yanchuan Sim

Bryan R. Routledge

Noah A. Smith

Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
ysim@cs.cmu.edu

Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
routledge@cmu.edu

Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
nasmith@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

we then posit amici as rational agents seeking to maximize
their expected utility by framing their arguments to influence
justices toward a favorable outcome (§3). We derive appropriate inference and parameter estimation procedures (§4).
Our experiments (§5) show that the new approach offers
substantial gains in vote prediction accuracy. More importantly, we show how the model can be used to answer questions such as: How effective were amici on each side of
a case? What would have happened if some or all amicus
briefs were not filed? How might an amicus have changed
her brief to obtain a better outcome? Since our approach
characterizes the amicus brief as a (probabilistic) function
of the case parameters, our approach could also be used to
ask how the amici would have altered their briefs given different merits facts or a different panel of justices. Although
we focus on SCOTUS, our model is applicable to any setting where textual evidence for competing goals is available
alongside behavioral response.

We explore the idea that authoring a piece of text is an
act of maximizing one’s expected utility. To make this
idea concrete, we consider the societally important decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States. Extensive past work in quantitative political science provides
a framework for empirically modeling the decisions of
justices and how they relate to text. We incorporate into
such a model texts authored by amici curiae (“friends of
the court” separate from the litigants) who seek to weigh
in on the decision, then explicitly model their goals in
a random utility model. We demonstrate the benefits of
this approach in improved vote prediction and the ability to perform counterfactual analysis.

1

Introduction

Some pieces of text are written with clear goals in mind.
Economists and game theorists use the word utility for the
concept of satisfying a need or desire, and a huge array of
theories and models are available for analyzing how utilityseeking agents behave. This paper takes the first steps in incorporating text into these models.
The Supreme Court of the United States (SCOTUS) is the
highest court in the American judicial system; its decisions
have far-reaching effects. While the ideological tendencies
of SCOTUS’ nine justices are widely discussed by press and
public, there is a formal mechanism by which organized interest groups can lobby the court on a given case. These
groups are known as amici curiae (Latin for “friends of the
court,” hereafter “amici,” singular “amicus”), and the textual
artifacts they author—known as amicus briefs—reveal explicit attempts to sway justices one way or the other. Taken
alongside voting records and other textual artifacts that characterize a case, amicus briefs provide a fascinating setting
for empirical study of influence through language.
We build on well-established methodology from political
science known as ideal points for analyzing votes. Specifically, Lauderdale and Clark (2014) combined descriptive
text and ideal points in a probabilistic topic model. Although
the influence of amici has been studied extensively by legal
scholars (Collins 2008), we are the first to incorporate them
into ideal points analysis (§2). Drawing on decision theory,

SCOTUS Terminology. SCOTUS reviews the decisions
of lower courts and (less commonly) resolves disputes between states.1 In a typical case, the petitioner writes a
brief putting forward her legal argument; the respondent
(the other party) then files a brief. These, together with a
round of responses to each other’s initial briefs, are collectively known as merits briefs. Amicus briefs—further arguments and recommendations on either side—may be filed
by groups with an interest (but not a direct stake) in the
outcome, with the Court’s permission. After oral arguments
(not necessarily allotted for every case) conclude, the justices vote and author one or more opinions. In this paper, we
relate the votes of justices to merits and amicus briefs.

2

Ideal Point Models

Ideal point (IP) models are a mainstay in quantitative political science, often applied to voting records to place voters
(lawmakers, justices, etc.) in a continuous space. A justice’s
“ideal point” is a latent variable positioning her in this space.
Unidimensional Ideal Points The simplest model for judicial votes is a unidimensional IP model (Martin and Quinn
1
Details about the procedures and rules of the SCOTUS can be
found at http://www.uscourts.gov.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2311

