Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Absent Multiple Kernel Learning
Xinwang Liu

Lei Wang

Jianping Yin, Yong Dou

Jian Zhang

School of Computer
National University
of Defense Technology
Changsha, China, 410073

School of Computer Science
and Software Engineering
University of Wollongong
NSW, Australia, 2522

School of Computer
National University
of Defense Technology
Changsha, China, 410073

Faculty of Engineering
and Information Technology
University of Technology Sydney
NSW, Australia, 2007

Abstract

when some channels of samples become missing, which
is common in neuroimaging (Yuan et al. 2012), computational biology (Chechik et al. 2008), medical analysis (Marlin 2008), etc. This issue is known as missing value (Smola,
Vishwanathan, and Hofmann 2005; Marlin 2008) or absent
data learning (Chechik et al. 2008), and it has been studied
in the literature (Smola, Vishwanathan, and Hofmann 2005;
Chechik et al. 2008; Ghahramani and Jordan 1993; Yuan
et al. 2012). Nevertheless, the research on designing novel
MKL algorithms to effectively handle absent channels has
not been explored in existing MKL literature.
The violation to this assumption makes existing MKL algorithms unable to handle the above issue. A straightforward
remedy may firstly impute the absent channels with zero
(known as zero-filling in the literature) or mean value (meanfilling) or by more sophisticated expectation-maximization
(EM-filling) (Ghahramani and Jordan 1993) approach. A
standard MKL algorithm is then deployed on the imputed
data. Such imputation methods usually work well when
missing ratio is small. However, they may produce inaccurate imputation with the increase of missing ratio, and this
could deteriorate the performance of the subsequent MKL.
Different from the imputation approach, this paper proposes to directly classify samples with absent channels without imputation. It is inspired by the concept of sample-based
margin developed in (Chechik et al. 2008). In this paper,
we first immigrate the concept of sample-based margin into
multiple kernel-induced feature spaces, and maximize the
minimum of all sample-based margins. On one hand, this
approach is able to effectively handle the issue of absent
channels. On the other hand, it yields a difficult optimization problem due to the minimization over all training samples. In this paper, we reformulate it as a convex optimization problem and make it readily solvable via off-the-shelf
optimization packages. We highlight the main contributions
of this paper as follows:

Multiple kernel learning (MKL) optimally combines the multiple channels of each sample to improve classification performance. However, existing MKL algorithms cannot effectively
handle the situation where some channels are missing, which
is common in practical applications. This paper proposes an
absent MKL (AMKL) algorithm to address this issue. Different from existing approaches where missing channels are
firstly imputed and then a standard MKL algorithm is deployed on the imputed data, our algorithm directly classifies
each sample with its observed channels. In specific, we define a margin for each sample in its own relevant space, which
corresponds to the observed channels of that sample. The proposed AMKL algorithm then maximizes the minimum of all
sample-based margins, and this leads to a difficult optimization problem. We show that this problem can be reformulated
as a convex one by applying the representer theorem. This
makes it readily be solved via existing convex optimization
packages. Extensive experiments are conducted on five MKL
benchmark data sets to compare the proposed algorithm with
existing imputation-based methods. As observed, our algorithm achieves superior performance and the improvement is
more significant with the increasing missing ratio.

Introduction
Multiple kernel learning (MKL) has been an active topic in
machine learning community during the last decade (Lanckriet et al. 2004; Rakotomamonjy et al. 2008; Cortes, Mohri,
and Rostamizadeh 2012; Liu et al. 2012; Xu et al. 2010;
Gönen 2012; Liu et al. 2014). Current research on MKL
mainly focuses on improving the efficiency of MKL algorithms (Rakotomamonjy et al. 2008; Xu et al. 2010; Orabona
and Luo 2011; Gönen and Alpaydın 2011), designing nonsparse and nonlinear MKL algorithms (Xu et al. 2010;
Yan et al. 2012; Kloft et al. 2011), developing two-stage
MKL algorithms (Cortes, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2012;
Kumar et al. 2012) and integrating radius information into
traditional margin-based MKL algorithms (Do et al. 2009;
Gai, Chen, and Zhang 2010; Liu et al. 2013). These research works on MKL usually take the following assumption: all channels (or base kernels) of each sample are observed. However, this assumption may not hold anymore

• Our work extends existing MKL algorithms by enabling
them to handle samples with absent channels, which
broadens the application scope of MKL.
• By applying the representer theorem (Schölkopf, Herbrich, and Smola 2001), we reformulate the optimization
problem as a convex one in its primal space. It can be
readily solved by existing convex optimization packages

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2807

