Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Incentivizing Users for Balancing Bike Sharing Systems
Adish Singla

Marco Santoni

Gábor Bartók

ETH Zurich
adish.singla@inf.ethz.ch

ElectricFeel Mobility Systems
marco@electricfeel.com

ETH Zurich
bartok@inf.ethz.ch

Pratik Mukerji

Moritz Meenen

Andreas Krause

ElectricFeel Mobility Systems
mukerji@electricfeel.com

ElectricFeel Mobility Systems
meenen@electricfeel.com

ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

station and let her decide the duration of the trip without any
prior planning or reservation. Indeed, this ﬂexibility is the
key factor for the success of BSSs.

Abstract
Bike sharing systems have been recently adopted by a
growing number of cities as a new means of transportation offering citizens a ﬂexible, fast and green alternative
for mobility. Users can pick up or drop off the bicycles at
a station of their choice without prior notice or time planning. This increased ﬂexibility comes with the challenge
of unpredictable and ﬂuctuating demand as well as irregular ﬂow patterns of the bikes. As a result, these systems
can incur imbalance problems such as the unavailability
of bikes or parking docks at stations. In this light, operators deploy ﬂeets of vehicles which re-distribute the
bikes in order to guarantee a desirable service level. Can
we engage the users themselves to solve the imbalance
problem in bike sharing systems?
In this paper, we address this question and present a
crowdsourcing mechanism that incentivizes the users in
the bike repositioning process by providing them with
alternate choices to pick or return bikes in exchange for
monetary incentives. We design the complete architecture of the incentives system which employs optimal
pricing policies using the approach of regret minimization in online learning. We investigate the incentive compatibility of our mechanism and extensively evaluate it
through simulations based on data collected via a survey
study. Finally, we deployed the proposed system through
a smartphone app among users of a large scale bike sharing system operated by a public transport company, and
we provide results from this experimental deployment.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst dynamic incentives
system for bikes re-distribution ever deployed in a realworld bike sharing system.

Balancing problem. This ﬂexibility also poses a number
of new challenges for the BSS operators. The demand is often unpredictable, asymmetric and ﬂuctuating throughout the
day. Other factors such as altitude differences, weather conditions or events in the city can cause irregular or asymmetric
rental demands and ﬂow of bikes. As the number of available
bikes and parking spots at any bike station in the system is
limited, satisfying the forthcoming demand with such limited
resources is a major challenge and recurrent problem for BSS
operators. A BSS user would experience an unsatisfactory
quality of service when attempting to rent or drop off a bike at
an empty or full station respectively. Meeting the demand for
bikes and free docks requires an extensive logistic work and
poses major operational costs to the operators. Thus, ﬂeets of
vehicles (or trucks) are deployed to re-distribute bikes among
stations to balance the system out (Büttner, Mlasowsky, and
Birkholz 2011).
Incentivizing users. Apart from the large operational
costs, deploying trucks for the re-distribution goes against the
green concept of BSS. Can we engage the users of such systems and provide them incentives to contribute re-balancing
the system? Termed as crowdphysics by Sadilek, Krumm, and
Horvitz (2013), this class of crowdsourcing systems requires
users to sequence or synchronize physical actions in time and
space, and can lead to building self-sustainable systems. The
goal of building such a system presents several challenges
including: i) the system’s large scale in terms of user base as
well as number of stations, ii) the ﬂuctuating demand over
time that needs to be taken into account while determining
problematic stations, iii) the unknown personal costs of the
users and their strategic behavior potentially aiming at maximizing their proﬁt, iv) the budget constraints of how much
can be spent on incentives and v) a user-friendly interface to
make such a system appealing (e.g., through a smartphone
app). Building such a self-sustainable and crowd-powered
bike sharing system is the key idea we explore in this paper.
While we focus on BSSs, similar problems arise in other
domains (e.g., car sharing or rerouting users on over-booked
ﬂights) and our methodology is applicable to these systems
as well.

Introduction
A Bike Sharing System (henceforth BSS) is a new concept
of public transportation offering citizens a ﬂexible and green
alternative as well as complementing the slow and crowded
transportation in urban areas. This mobility trend had an exponential growth over the last years, and, as of June 2014, over
700 cities actively operate automated bike sharing systems
deploying an estimate of 800,000 bikes worldwide (Meddin
and DeMaio 2014). BSSs increase the user’s commuting ﬂexibility by allowing her to pick up or drop off a bike at any
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

723

