Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Relational Sum-Product Networks
Aniruddh Nath and Pedro Domingos
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195-2350, U.S.A.
{nath, pedrod}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract

Besides intractability, one other key shortcoming of most
widely used graphical models is their reliance on the i.i.d.
assumption. In many real-world applications, instances are
not truly independent, and can be better modeled if their interactions are taken into account. This is one of the key insights of the Statistical Relational Learning (SRL) community. SRL techniques have been applied to a wide variety of
tasks, including collective classification, link prediction, natural language processing, etc. However, most SRL methods
build on graphical models (e.g. Markov logic; Richardson
and Domingos 2006), and suffer from the same computational difficulties; these are compounded by the additional
problem of modeling interactions between instances.
In this paper, our goal is to combine these two lines of
research: tractable probabilistic models and relational learning. One line of related work uses Naı̈ve Bayes models in
structured domains (Flach and Lachiche 2004; Landwehr
et al. 2005; Davis et al. 2007). Although tractable, Naı̈ve
Bayes models are quite limited in expressiveness. PRISM
is a probabilistic logic that supports efficient inference, but
only under a very restrictive set of assumptions (Sato and
Kameya 2008). PSL (Bröcheler et al. 2010) supports efficient inference, but uses fuzzy logic-based semantics instead
of standard probabilistic semantics. TML (Domingos and
Webb 2012) is a subset of Markov logic on which efficient
inference can be guaranteed. TML is surprisingly expressive, subsuming most previous tractable models. However, a
TML knowledge base determines the set of possible objects
in the domain, and the relational structure among them. This
limits the applicability of TML to learning; a TML knowledge base cannot be learned on one set of objects and applied
to another mega-example with different size or structure.
To address this, we propose Relational Sum-Product Networks (RSPNs), a new tractable relational probabilistic architecture. RSPNs generalize SPNs by modeling a set of instances jointly, allowing them to influence each other’s probability distributions, as well as modeling the probabilities of
relations between objects. An RSPN can be trained on a set
of mega-examples, and applied to a previously unseen megaexample with different structure (given a part decomposition as input). We also introduce LearnRSPN, the first algorithm for learning tractable statistical relational models. Intractable inference has historically been a major obstacle to
the wider adoption of statistical relational methods; the de-

Sum-product networks (SPNs) are a recently-proposed deep
architecture that guarantees tractable inference, even on certain high-treewidth models. SPNs are a propositional architecture, treating the instances as independent and identically distributed. In this paper, we introduce Relational SumProduct Networks (RSPNs), a new tractable first-order probabilistic architecture. RSPNs generalize SPNs by modeling
a set of instances jointly, allowing them to influence each
other’s probability distributions, as well as modeling probabilities of relations between objects. We also present LearnRSPN, the first algorithm for learning high-treewidth tractable
statistical relational models. LearnRSPN is a recursive topdown structure learning algorithm for RSPNs, based on Gens
and Domingos’ LearnSPN algorithm for propositional SPN
learning. We evaluate the algorithm on three datasets; the
RSPN learning algorithm outperforms Markov Logic Networks in both running time and predictive accuracy.

Introduction
Graphical probabilistic models compactly represent a joint
probability distribution among a set of variables. Unfortunately, inference in graphical models is intractable. In practice, using graphical models for most real-world applications
requires either using approximate algorithms, or restricting
oneself to a subset of graphical models on which inference
is tractable. A common restriction that ensures tractability is to use models with low treewidth (Bach and Jordan
2001). However, not all tractable models have low treewidth.
Poon and Domingos (2011) recently proposed Sum-Product
Networks (SPNs), a tractable probabilistic architecture that
guarantees efficient exact inference. SPNs subsume most
known tractable probabilistic models, and can compactly
represent some high-treewidth distributions. SPNs can be
seen as a deep architecture with alternating layers of sum
nodes and product nodes. Since their introduction, several
SPN learning algorithms have been proposed, and SPNs
have been applied to a variety of problems (Delalleau and
Bengio 2011; Dennis and Ventura 2012; Amer and Todorovic 2012; Peharz et al. 2013; Gens and Domingos 2013,
etc.).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2878

