Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi-Document Summarization
Based on Two-Level Sparse Representation Model
He Liu, Hongliang Yu, Zhi-Hong Deng∗
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education),
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
lhdgriver@gmail.com, yuhongliang324@gmail.com, zhdeng@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Yang et al. 2013; Yu et al. 2014), a good summary should
recover the whole documents, or in other words, reconstruct
the whole documents. Based on the assumption, we think a
good summary should meet three key requirements: Coverage, Sparsity and Diversity. Coverage means the extracted
summary can conclude every aspect of all documents. Similar to (He et al. 2012), we use non-negative linear combination to represent the relations between sentences in the document set and the summary sentences. The relation can help
to reconstruct the original document set by summary sentences. Sparsity means one certain sentence in the document
set should be precisely represented by only a small number of summary sentences. Intuitively, multi-document set
always have one central topic and some sub-topics, indicating that the summary sentences should also be categorized
into groups. Each sentence in the document set should only
be represented by summary sentences in the same group.
On the contrary, not all summary sentences can be used to
reconstruct one certain sentence although all of them are important. Otherwise we will bring in noise since some summary sentences are irrelevant. To enforce the sparsity property, we introduce sparse coding, a powerful tool, for denoising (Elad and Aharon 2006). Diversity means to eliminate
redundancy. As stated above, document set can often be divided into some sub-topics, and thus we capture the overall
view of the document set if we introduce diversity into our
model. In this paper, we use the correlation of the least different summary sentence pairs to measure diversity.
Based on these three requisites, we design a two-level
sparse representation model to tackle the multi-document
summarization problem:

Multi-document summarization is of great value to
many real world applications since it can help people
get the main ideas within a short time. In this paper,
we tackle the problem of extracting summary sentences
from multi-document sets by applying sparse coding
techniques and present a novel framework to this challenging problem. Based on the data reconstruction and
sentence denoising assumption, we present a two-level
sparse representation model to depict the process of
multi-document summarization. Three requisite properties is proposed to form an ideal reconstructable summary: Coverage, Sparsity and Diversity. We then formalize the task of multi-document summarization as an
optimization problem according to the above properties,
and use simulated annealing algorithm to solve it. Extensive experiments on summarization benchmark data
sets DUC2006 and DUC2007 show that our proposed
model is effective and outperforms the state-of-the-art
algorithms.

Introduction
Multi-document summarization is the process of generating
a short version of given materials to indicate its main ideas.
As the number of documents on the web exponentially increases, text summarization has attracted a growth of attention since it can help people get the topic within a short time.
Most existing studies are extraction-based methods. The
extraction approaches usually use a rank model to select sentences from original text set. However, these methods suffer
from severe problem that top-ranked sentences tend to convey much redundant information. Although some methods
tried to reduce the redundancy (Li et al. 2009), finding balance between wide coverage and minimum redundancy is a
non-trivial task.
In this paper, an ideal summary is assumed to represent
the whole document set, namely, by reading the summarization instead of the whole set one can understand the general
idea of the original documents. Rank models merely provide
important sentences by score, and hence are not able to cover
all aspects of the original corpus. Inspired by data compression and reconstruction(Simon, Snavely, and Seitz 2007a;

• Level-1: The summary set is a sparse representation of the
original document set.
• Level-2: Each sentence in the candidate set is sparsely reconstructed by the summary set.
The model is illustrated in Figure 1. We denote the set of all
the sentences in the original document set as candidate set,
and the set of all the summary sentences as summary set.
The summary set is selected from the candidate set. Similar to (Yang et al. 2013), the two-level sparse representation
model we introduced is NP-hard, we use simulated annealing algorithm to get the summarization.
To our knowledge, this is the first paper that utilizes cover-

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

196

