Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Using Matched Samples to Estimate the Effects of
Exercise on Mental Health from Twitter
Virgile Landeiro Dos Reis and Aron Culotta
Department of Computer Science
Illinois Institute of Technology
Chicago, IL 60616
vlandeir@hawk.iit.edu, aculotta@iit.edu

Abstract

studies using survey data or health screenings to estimate
causal effects when more rigorous controlled studies are infeasible or unethical — e.g., measuring the health effects of
living in proximity to waste landfill sites.
Because subjects are not randomly assigned to experimental and control groups, observational studies do not have
the same internal validity of randomized controlled trials,
making them susceptible to the correlation/causation fallacy.
That is, the observed difference in groups may be due to
variables other than that proposed by the scientific hypothesis. As a result, many statistical techniques have been developed to estimate causal effects from observational data
— for example, stratification and matching (Winship and
Morgan 1999). These approaches all assume the presence
of some observable covariates (e.g., demographics) that are
predictive of group assignment.
In this paper, we take initial steps to explore the potential
of Web-scale observational studies in the context of a specific health hypothesis: Does exercise improve mood? This
question has been studied using traditional small study designs in psychology and psychiatry, where the evidence suggests that vigorous physical activity can alleviate symptoms
of mild depression, improve self-image and social skills, and
reduce anxiety (Taylor, Sallis, and Needle 1985). Traditional
studies are typically limited by cost to small sample sizes
and brief time windows. Social media provides a potential
new data source to conduct such observational studies.
We develop an experimental framework to test this hypothesis using Twitter data, focusing on three research questions:

Recent work has demonstrated the value of social media monitoring for health surveillance (e.g., tracking
influenza or depression rates). It is an open question
whether such data can be used to make causal inferences
(e.g., determining which activities lead to increased depression rates). Even in traditional, restricted domains,
estimating causal effects from observational data is
highly susceptible to confounding bias. In this work,
we estimate the effect of exercise on mental health from
Twitter, relying on statistical matching methods to reduce confounding bias. We train a text classifier to estimate the volume of a user’s tweets expressing anxiety,
depression, or anger, then compare two groups: those
who exercise regularly (identified by their use of physical activity trackers like Nike+), and a matched control
group. We find that those who exercise regularly have
significantly fewer tweets expressing depression or anxiety; there is no significant difference in rates of tweets
expressing anger. We additionally perform a sensitivity analysis to investigate how the many experimental
design choices in such a study impact the final conclusions, including the quality of the classifier and the construction of the control group.

1

Introduction

Social media are increasingly used for tracking health concerns such as influenza (Lampos and Cristianini 2010;
Culotta 2010; Paul and Dredze 2011; Signorini, Segre,
and Polgreen 2011; Sadilek, Kautz, and Silenzio 2012),
E. coli (Stewart and Diaz 2012), Adderall use (Hanson
et al. 2013), dental pain (Heaivilin et al. 2011), insomnia (Jamison-Powell et al. 2012) and depression (De Choudhury et al. 2013). See Dredze (2012) for an overview. This
approach provides an attractive complement to traditional
survey approaches; it is cheaper, faster, and typically provides larger sample sizes, making it particularly appealing
for monitoring diseases with rapid transmission rates.
While health tracking has been well studied, little efforts
have been made to use social media data for a potentially
more powerful health application: Web scale observational
studies. Epidemiologists commonly conduct observational

RQ1. Can we accurately annotate users according to
mood and physical activity? We train a text classifier that identifies three different mood states (Hostility, Dejection, Anxiety) with 87% accuracy. Additionally, we use the increased popularity of activity
tracking applications (e.g., Nike+) to identify physically active users.
RQ2. How can we identify a suitable control set of
users? We provide an exact matching approach that
identifies users with similar characteristics as the
physically active set of users (based on gender, location, and online activity).

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

RQ3. How sensitive are the results to choice of control

182

