Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi-Agent Dynamic Coupling for Cooperative Vehicles Modeling
Maxime Guériau , Romain Billot , Nour-Eddin El Faouzi
Université de Lyon, F-69000, Lyon, France
IFSTTAR, LICIT, F-69500, Bron
ENTPE, LICIT, F-69518, Vaulx en Velin

Salima Hassas , Frédéric Armetta
Université de Lyon, F-69000, Lyon, France
LIRIS Laboratory, F-69000, Lyon
Abstract
Cooperative Intelligent Transportation Systems (C-ITS)
are complex systems well-suited to a multi-agent modeling. We propose a multi-agent based modeling of a
C-ITS, that couples 3 dynamics (physical, informational
and control dynamics) in order to ensure a smooth cooperation between non cooperative and cooperative vehicles, that communicate with each other (V2V communication) and the infrastructure (I2V and V2I communication). We present our multi-agent model, tested through
simulations using real traffic data and integrated into our
extension of the Multi-model Open-source Vehiculartraffic SIMulator (MovSim).

Introduction
Traffic management relies on complex systems (i.e. Intelligent Transportation Systems) well suited to agent-based
paradigms, as illustrated by several approaches (see (Chen
and Cheng 2010) for a review). A way to improve traffic flow
is to introduce cooperation between vehicles through their
embedded communication and perception capabilities. Such
cooperative vehicles can communicate with each other (Vehicle to Vehicle-V2V communication) and exchange information with the infrastructure part of Cooperative Systems
(Infrastructure to Vehicle-I2V-and Vehicle to InfrastructureV2I). Infrastructure is composed of Road Side Units (RSU)
spaced along the road network, able to collect information
on their dedicated section and ensuring a decentralized control of cooperative vehicles.
In this paper, we present our three-layer multi-agent
framework, which has been implemented for cooperative
traffic modeling as an extension of an existing traffic simulator.

Figure 1: Interacting layers

• the physical layer concerns the vehicle dynamics rules and
estimates on its dynamics,
• the communication layer governs the information exchanges through proximity and reliability rules,
• the trust layer models information reliability and enables
an agent to evaluate trust in others.
Communication and trust layers influence the physical layer
and hence vehicles behavior.

Extending a microscopic traffic simulator
The Multi-model Open-source Vehicular traffic SIMulator
(MovSim) from (Treiber and Kesting 2013) has been selected to be extended for cooperative traffic modeling, because of its generic design pattern and the several already
implemented models. Multi-agent concepts, the three-layer
framework and cooperative vehicles interactions have been
implemented in our extension of MovSim, illustrated in figure 2. We extend the simulator by adding new physical
models (cooperative behavior) and new entities as the RSU.
Both vehicles and infrastructure inherit from a generic agent
framework which provides sensors, effectors, and a selfdecision process to make them autonomous.

A three-layer framework
Overview
With respect to the governance of the system, the purpose is
to make use of reliable information to influence the movements of vehicles while limiting traffic disturbances, and
hence homogenize traffic flow.
Figure 1 presents the interaction between three layers:
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4276

