Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Incremental Weight Elicitation for Multiobjective State Space Search
Nawal Benabbou and Patrice Perny
Sorbonne Universites, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7606, LIP6
CNRS, UMR 7606, LIP6, F-75005, Paris, France
4 Place Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France
nawal.benabbou@lip6.fr, patrice.perny@lip6.fr

Abstract

tiattribute spaces (Gonzales and Perny 2004; Braziunas and
Boutilier 2007; Koriche and Zanuttini 2010). In the context
of multiobjective state space search, our aim here is to propose a new approach integrating preference elicitation and
search. We consider a state space graph endowed with q
evaluation criteria, i.e. q cost functions to be minimized (e.g.
time, distance, energy, risk). Each path is therefore valued by
a cost vector and preference over paths are inherited from
the preference over their cost vectors. Preference over cost
vectors are defined using a parameterized aggregation function fω : Rq+ → R+ defining the overall cost (or disutility)
fω (x) attached to any cost vector x ∈ Rq+ , where ω is a vector
of preference parameters (weights) representing the relative
importance of criteria. We want to find a path from an initial
node to a goal node that minimizes the overall cost function fω that represents the DM’s preferences. However, for
the elicitation purpose, we assume that ω is not known precisely, and we intend to elicit the weights during the search
so as to determine the best possible solution path.
The elicitation of criteria weights defining ω can be performed in different ways. The first way, quite standard, consists in scanning the space of weights and repeatedly selecting a vector ω to generate an fω -optimal solution until one
meets the satisfaction of the DM; see e.g. (Zionts and Wallenius 1976; Vanderpooten and Vincke 1997). In multiobjective state space search, when fω is linear (i.e. fω (x) = ω · x)
the generation of an fω -optimal solution at every step of
the exploration can simply be performed by a standard A∗
search (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968) after a preliminary scalarization of costs using fω . When fω is not linear, other algorithms have been proposed, more complex, to
solve the optimization problem for various classes of aggregation functions, e.g. multiattribute utility functions (Dasgupta, Chakrabarti, and DeSarkar 1995), weighted Tchebycheff norms (Galand and Perny 2006), and Choquet integrals
(Galand and Perny 2007). They can be used to generate the
current solution in an interactive exploration method.
A second way of performing preference elicitation in multiobjective combinatorial problems, less explored, consists
in integrating an incremental elicitation method into the
search procedure. In our case, starting with an initial set of
possible weights, it consists in generating preference queries
during the search so as to progressively reduce the set of admissible parameters until an optimal path can be determined

This paper proposes incremental preference elicitation
methods for multiobjective state space search. Our approach consists in integrating weight elicitation and
search to determine, in a vector-valued state-space
graph, a solution path that best fits the Decision Maker’s
preferences. We first assume that the objective weights
are imprecisely known and propose a state space search
procedure to determine the set of possibly optimal solutions. Then, we introduce incremental elicitation strategies during the search that use queries to progressively
reduce the set of admissible weights until a nearlyoptimal path can be identified. The validity of our algorithms is established and numerical tests are provided to
test their efficiency both in terms of number of queries
and solution times.

Introduction
Preference-based search is an active topic in Artificial Intelligence with various applications to constraint satisfaction, planning, search, resource allocation and electronic
commerce (see e.g. (Boutilier et al. 2004; Brafman and
Domshlak 2009; Domshlak et al. 2011)). Although many
algorithmic contributions focus on the elaboration of efficient algorithms to determine a best solution given a preference model, some others concern preference elicitation
strategies so as to best fit the decision model to Decision
Maker’s (DM) preferences. In this paper, we address both
aspects simultaneously. We study the potential of incremental elicitation methods (White III , Sage, and Dozono 1984;
Wang and Boutilier 2003; Braziunas and Boutilier 2007) in
the framework of multiobjective state space search (Stewart
and White III 1991; Mandow and De la Cruz 2005). This is
a decision context where solutions are very numerous and
defined implicitly. Hence usual elicitation methods based on
systematic pairwise comparisons are often ineffective.
Elicitation on combinatorial domains is a challenging issue that recently motivated several contributions in various
contexts, e.g. in constraint satisfaction problems (Boutilier
et al. 2006), in Markov Decision Processes (Regan and
Boutilier 2011; Weng and Zanuttini 2013), in stable matching problems (Drummond and Boutilier 2014) and in mulCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1093

