Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Sharing Rides with Friends: A Coalition Formation Algorithm for Ridesharing
Filippo Bistaffa and Alessandro Farinelli

Sarvapali D. Ramchurn

Department of Computer Science
University of Verona
Verona, Italy
{filippo.bistaffa,alessandro.farinelli}@univr.it

Electronics and Computer Science
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
sdr@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Abstract

In particular, we provide a model for the SR problem casting this as a Graph Constraint Coalition Formation (GCCF)
problem, where commuters (i.e., riders and drivers) form
coalitions (i.e., join in a car) meeting the constraints imposed by the social network (i.e., users prefer to join a car
with their friends). Specifically, following relevant literature
on GCCF (Myerson 1977; Voice, Ramchurn, and Jennings
2012), we consider a coalition to be feasible, only if the commuters involved in such coalition form a connected subgraph
of the social network.
Recently, (Kamar and Horvitz 2009) addressed the computational aspects related to ridesharing, proposing an interesting model to evaluate ridesharing plans, on which we
base our model for SR. However, such work is mostly
focused on incentive design aspects for ridesharing while
here we focus on the optimisation problem posed by SR.
Moreover, they do not consider the role of the social network in their work. Now, the optimisation problem related
to coalition formation (i.e., Coalition Structure Generation)
has been addressed by several researchers throughout the
years (Sandholm et al. 1999; Service and Adams 2011;
Rahwan, Michalak, and Jennings 2012; Shehory and Kraus
1998). Consequently the relevant literature offers a wealth
of optimal solution techniques as well as approximate algorithms that can provide quality guarantees. However, as
pointed out in (Voice, Ramchurn, and Jennings 2012), all
such algorithms do not consider graph constraints that limit
feasible coalitions, hence they can not be applied to the
GCCF problem as their behaviour for such specific problem
is not well defined.
Recently, several approaches have been explicitly designed to deal with the GCCF problem (Voice, Ramchurn,
and Jennings 2012; Voice, Polukarov, and Jennings 2012;
Bistaffa et al. 2014). Among these approaches, here we consider as a solution technique the CFSS algorithm proposed in
(Bistaffa et al. 2014) which, unlike previous approaches, can
provide approximate solutions with quality guarantees for
large-scale systems (including thousands of agents). Hence,
this approach is particularly suitable for SR, in which good
solutions for a large number of agents are needed in near
real-time. On the other hand, one key element for the efficiency of such approach is the possibility of finding an effective and efficient bounding function to prune significant part
of the search space. Now, such a bounding function is easy to

We consider the Social Ridesharing (SR) problem, where a
set of commuters, connected through a social network, arrange one-time rides at short notice. In particular, we focus
on the associated optimisation problem of forming cars to
minimise the travel cost of the overall system modelling such
problem as a graph constrained coalition formation (GCCF)
problem, where the set of feasible coalitions is restricted by
a graph (i.e., the social network). Moreover, we significantly
extend the state of the art algorithm for GCCF, i.e., the CFSS
algorithm, to solve our GCCF model of the SR problem. Our
empirical evaluation uses a real dataset for both spatial (GeoLife) and social data (Twitter), to validate the applicability of
our approach in a realistic application scenario. Empirical results show that our approach computes optimal solutions for
systems of medium scale (up to 100 agents) providing significant cost reductions (up to −36.22%). Moreover, we can
provide approximate solutions for very large systems (i.e., up
to 2000 agents) and good quality guarantees (i.e., with an approximation ratio of 1.41 in the worst case) within minutes
(i.e., 100 seconds).

1

Introduction

The concept of real-time ridesharing, where people arrange
one-time rides at short notice with their private cars, is
rapidly shifting the way people commute for their daily
activities. Companies such as Uber or Lyft allow users to
quickly share their positions and arrange rides with other
people they know/trust within minutes, hence providing a
credible alternative to standard transportation systems (such
as taxis or public transport). A clear trend for such companies is to build a community of users, where commuters can
rate drivers/passengers, and then use such information to automatically form groups of commuters that know/trust each
other.
Following this trend, here we focus on providing an approach that, given the desired starting points and destinations of a community of commuters, can share cars to lower
associated transportation costs (i.e., travel time and fuel),
while considering the constraints imposed by the social network that connects such commuters. We call this problem
the Social Ridesharing (SR) problem.
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

608

