Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Towards Tractable and Practical ABox Abduction
over Inconsistent Description Logic Ontologies
Jianfeng Du

Kewen Wang

Yi-Dong Shen

Guangdong University of
Foreign Studies,
Guangzhou 510006, China
jfdu@gdufs.edu.cn

Griffith University,
Brisbane, QLD 4111, Australia
k.wang@griffith.edu.au

State Key Laboratory of
Computer Science,
Institute of Software,
Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100190, China
ydshen@ios.ac.cn

Abstract

ABox abduction does not work under inconsistency since
anything can be entailed from an inconsistent DL ontology.
As pointed out in the literature e.g. (Du, Qi, and Shen 2013),
inconsistency may often occur in some important ontologybased applications such as data integration and ontology
population. In these applications it is also needed to explain
why an observation cannot be a meaningful entailment of an
inconsistent DL ontology under some inconsistency-tolerant
semantics. Thus it is useful to extend ABox abduction to
handle inconsistency. However, to the best of our knowledge
this extension has not been explored in the literature.
To make ABox abduction works with inconsistency, we
consider how to define explanations for observations in an
inconsistent DL ontology. We focus on a general problem
for ABox abduction, the query abduction problem (QAP)
(Calvanese et al. 2013), where observations are BCQs and
explanations may contain fresh individuals neither in the ontology nor in the observation. Since QAP often requires to
compute all minimal explanations, we consider two requirements for the notion of minimal explanations under inconsistency. First, minimal explanations in an inconsistent DL
ontology degenerate into traditional minimal explanations
when the given ontology is consistent. Second, computing
all minimal explanations is tractable at least in terms of data
complexity which is measured by the size of the ABox only.
It has been shown (Du, Wang, and Shen 2014) that computing all traditional minimal explanations in a consistent
first-order rewritable ontology is tractable in data complexity. We expect that this tractable result still holds when the
ontology is inconsistent. Thus, we adapt an inconsistencytolerant semantics, namely the Intersection ABox Repair
(IAR) semantics, to defining meaningful explanations in inconsistent DL ontologies. The IAR semantics, first proposed
in (Lembo et al. 2010), has been shown to be computable in
polynomial time in data complexity for first-order rewritable
ontologies (Lukasiewicz, Martinez, and Simari 2013).
Based on the IAR semantics, we require that an explanation E for a BCQ in a possibly inconsistent ontology is a
set of assertions such that appending it to the given ontology O (with TBox T and ABox A) makes the union of T
and the intersection of all ABox repairs of O ∪ E entail the
BCQ, where an ABox repair of O ∪ E is a maximal subset

ABox abduction plays an important role in reasoning over
description logic (DL) ontologies. However, it does not work
with inconsistent DL ontologies. To tackle this problem while
achieving tractability, we generalize ABox abduction from
the classical semantics to an inconsistency-tolerant semantics, namely the Intersection ABox Repair (IAR) semantics,
and propose the notion of IAR-explanations in inconsistent
DL ontologies. We show that computing all minimal IARexplanations is tractable in data complexity for first-order
rewritable ontologies. However, the computational method
may still not be practical due to a possibly large number of
minimal IAR-explanations. Hence we propose to use preference information to reduce the number of explanations to
be computed. In particular, based on the specificity of explanations, we introduce the notion of ⊆cps -cminimal IARexplanations, which can be computed in a highly efficient
way. Accordingly, we propose a tractable level-wise method
for computing all ⊆cps -cminimal IAR-explanations in a firstorder rewritable ontology. Experimental results on benchmarks of inconsistent ontologies show that the proposed
method scales to tens of millions of assertions and can be
of practical use.

1

Introduction

ABox abduction (Klarman, Endriss, and Schlobach 2011;
Du et al. 2011a; Du, Wang, and Shen 2014), an adaptation
of abductive reasoning (Eiter and Gottlob 1995) to description logics (DLs), has gained much attention recently since
many ontology-based applications raise a requirement for
explaining why an observation cannot be entailed by a DL
ontology. Given a consistent DL ontology and an observation, such as a Boolean conjunctive query (BCQ), ABox abduction computes sets of assertions (namely explanations)
whose appending to the ontology enforces the entailment of
the observation while keeping the ontology consistent. The
usefulness of ABox abduction has been identified in medical
diagnosis (Elsenbroich, Kutz, and Sattler 2006), ontology
quality control (Bada, Mungall, and Hunter 2008), conjunctive query answering (Borgida, Calvanese, and RodriguezMuro 2008), semantic matchmaking (Du et al. 2011b), etc.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1489

