Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Incorporating Implicit Link Preference
Into Overlapping Community Detection
Hongyi Zhang1,2 , Irwin King1,2 , Michael R. Lyu1,2
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Rich Media Big Data Analytics and Applications,
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
{hyzhang, king, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

etc. The research issue of finding such groups is known as
the community detection problem.
Classic methods in community detection assume that one
node belongs to exactly one community. However, many
complex networks we encounter in daily life allow multiple memberships. For example, two colleagues in the same
department are also in the same company (nested), one can
join in several discussion groups in an online forum (overlapping), etc. Thus, the topic of overlapping community detection has attracted major attention recently (Xie, Kelley,
and Szymanski 2013).
Existing overlapping community detection approaches
can be categorized into two classes: one is based on dense
subgraph extraction (Ahn, Bagrow, and Lehmann 2010;
Palla et al. 2005; Kumpula et al. 2008), which uses certain
criteria to find overlapping dense subgraphs or clusters in the
network to be communities; the other is based on community
affiliation model (Psorakis et al. 2011; Wang et al. 2011;
Yang and Leskovec 2013; Zhang and Yeung 2012), which
determines the number of communities in advance and assigns each node to multiple communities according to some
optimization function. However, both classes of approaches
only focus on links themselves but ignore the implicit preference information in links. In fact, a link can reflect the
preferences of both sides to some extent. For example, in a
social network, if user A wants to make friend with user B, a
typical way for A is to send a friend invitation to B and wait
for him to accept it. They cannot be friends if either step
goes wrong. Thus, when we see the fact that A and B are
friends, it is reasonable to argue that A prefers B than other
strangers to be his friend. Assuming B also receives other
people’s invitations and only accepts a few of them (this is
very likely to happen in real world), we can also argue that
B prefers A than others who are still strangers to him. Following the intuition that a node are more likely to build links
with other nodes in the same community than those outside
its community, the implicit preference information can be
helpful for community detection.
For the second class of approaches, i.e., community affiliation based approaches, nonnegative matrix factorization
(NMF) has been applied as a standard technique. The basic
idea of NMF technique is to find a node-community membership matrix F (Fu,c represents the weight of node u in
community c) and approximate the adjacency matrix G via

Community detection is an important technique to understand structures and patterns in complex networks.
Recently, overlapping community detection becomes a
trend due to the ubiquity of overlapping and nested
communities in real world. However, existing approaches have ignored the use of implicit link preference information, i.e., links can reflect a node’s preference on the targets of connections it wants to build.
This information has strong impact on community detection since a node prefers to build links with nodes inside its community than those outside its community. In
this paper, we propose a preference-based nonnegative
matrix factorization (PNMF) model to incorporate implicit link preference information. Unlike conventional
matrix factorization approaches, which simply approximate the original adjacency matrix in value, our model
maximizes the likelihood of the preference order for
each node by following the intuition that a node prefers
its neighbors than other nodes. Our model overcomes
the indiscriminate penalty problem in which non-linked
pairs inside one community are equally penalized in
objective functions as those across two communities.
We propose a learning algorithm which can learn a
node-community membership matrix via stochastic gradient descent with bootstrap sampling. We evaluate
our PNMF model on several real-world networks. Experimental results show that our model outperforms
state-of-the-art approaches and can be applied to large
datasets.

1

Introduction

Discovering the community structure in complex networks
has been extensively investigated in the past decade (Fortunato 2010). A community is intuitively regarded as a group
of nodes with more links inside the group than between
its member and outside the group (Girvan and Newman
2002). In real world, communities can be social circles manually categorized by users in ego networks (McAuley and
Leskovec 2012), authors from the same institution in collaboration networks (Newman 2001), proteins with the same
functionality in biochemical networks (Gavin et al. 2002),
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

396

