Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Knowledge Forgetting in Circumscription: A Preliminary Report
Yisong Wang

Kewen Wang and Zhe Wang and Zhiqiang Zhuang

Department of Computer Science,
Guizhou University, 550025, China

School of Information and Communication Technology,
Griffith University, QLD 4111, Australia

Abstract

Kontchakov, Wolter, and Zakharyaschev 2008; Wang et al.
2010). Another stream is about forgetting for nonmonotonic logics, especially, logic programs under answer set
semantics (Zhang and Foo 2006; Eiter and Wang 2008;
Wang, Wang, and Zhang 2013; Wang et al. 2014b). Due
to the pivotal role of commonsense reasoning in artificial
intelligence, it is worthwhile to study forgetting in dominating nonmonotonic formalisms, such as circumscription (McCarthy 1980), default logic (Reiter 1980) and autoepistemic
logic (Moore 1985).
For instance, a commonsense knowledge about birds is
that they can fly unless there exists abnormality. Let us consider the following simple propositional case:


bird(tweety) ∧ ¬ab(tweety) → f ly(tweety),
.
Σ=
bird(tweety)

The theory of (variable) forgetting has received significant attention in nonmonotonic reasoning, especially,
in answer set programming. However, the problem of
establishing a theory of forgetting for some expressive
nonmonotonic logics such as McCarthy’s circumscription is rarely explored. In this paper a theory of forgetting for propositional circumscription is proposed,
which is not a straightforward adaption of existing approaches. In particular, some properties that are essential for existing proposals do not hold any longer or have
to be reformulated. Several useful properties of the new
forgetting are proved, which demonstrate suitability of
the forgetting for circumscription. A sound and complete algorithm for the forgetting is developed and an
analysis of computational complexity is given.

In terms of circumscription1 (Lifschitz 1994), one can use
CIRC [Σ; ab; f ly] to represent such a commonsense knowledge. It has a unique model {bird(tweety), f ly(tweety)}.
If bird(tweety) is discarded from Σ in the circumscription, a natural question is: what would be the resulting
theory of circumscription? In propositional logic, the result of forgetting bird(tweety) is ψ ≡ ¬ab(tweety) →
f ly(tweety) ≡ ab(tweety) ∨ f ly(tweety) for which the
atom ab(tweety) is not circumscribed. Ideally, the result of
forgetting bird(tweety) in Σ should be CIRC[ψ; ab, f ly],see
Example 1.
As suggested by Delgrande (2015), the central ideal about
forgetting is to retain exact “knowledge content” that is irrelevant from being forgotten signatures. From the perspective
of knowledge content, the circumscription CIRC[Σ; ab; f ly]
specifies a knowledge base Σ as well. Thus, if Σ0 is a result
of discarding bird(tweety) from Σ in the circumscription
then Σ0 and Σ should be semantically as close as possible
under circumscription.
Forgetting is known as an operator of quantifier elimination and thus in this way, it is closely related to circumscription. Some variants and (slight) generalizations of classical
forgetting have been used to define and compute circumscription, e.g. literal forgetting (Lang, Liberatore, and Marquis 2003), literal forgetting with varying atoms (Moinard

Introduction
The ability of discarding irrelevant information from knowledge bases is a significant feature for logic-based agent
systems (Lin and Reiter 1994; Lang, Liberatore, and Marquis 2003; Zhang and Zhou 2009). It can be naturally
formalised as a form of knowledge forgetting in artificial
intelligence (AI). Forgetting closely correlates with various notions in logics and AI, including irrelevance (Lakemeyer 1997), the weakest sufficient and strongest necessary conditions (Lin 2001; Doherty, Lukaszewicz, and Szalas 2001), uniform interpolation (Goranko and Otto 2007).
Knowledge forgetting has been extensively applied in artificial intelligence (Lang, Liberatore, and Marquis 2003),
such as cognitive robotics (Liu and Wen 2011; Rajaratnam et al. 2014), resolving conflict (Zhang and Foo 2006;
Eiter and Wang 2008) and handling inconsistence (Lang and
Marquis 2010), belief update (Delgrande, Jin, and Pelletier
2008), and ontology engineering (Lutz and Wolter 2011;
Wang et al. 2014a).
Recent approaches to knowledge forgetting fall into two
major streams. One stream covers works about forgetting for monotonic logical formalisms including propositional logic, predicate logic and its subclasses (typically,
description logics), and (epistemic) modal logics, such as
(Lang, Liberatore, and Marquis 2003; Lin and Reiter 1994;

1

A propositional circumscription is a quantified Boolean formula, which is equivalent to a propositional formula. See the next
section for a formal definition of circumscription.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1649

