Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Compile!
Pierre Marquis
CRIL-CNRS, Université d’Artois, France
marquis@cril.univ-artois.fr

Abstract

the product catalog is so large that it cannot be represented
extensionally. Here, F may represent intensionally the feasible products and each Vi represents some user choices; F
is independent of the Vi ; among the tasks of interest, a basic
one consists in determining whether the current choices Vi
of the user are compatible with F , i.e., whether there exists
a product which satisfies those choices (if the answer is negative, then the user must be aware of it and has to question
some of her choices).
In KC, ”knowledge” must be taken in a rather broad
sense: F may represent any piece of information. In AI, F
typically corresponds to beliefs or to preferences, but pieces
of information of other types could be considered as well.
Obviously, beliefs and preferences can be modeled in many
different ways; most of the existing work focus on propositional statements (in classical logic) and utility functions,
respectively. Unsurprisingly, due to the very nature of the
input, the tasks to be achieved typically amount to combinations of elementary inference or optimization processes.
For instance, in a configuration problem, one needs to be
able to provide the user with the direct consequences of the
choices she makes and to maintain the minimal and maximal
costs of the products compatible with the current choices. In
such applications where guaranteed response times are expected, knowledge compilation appears as very challenging.
Indeed, offering some guarantee on the response time is a
first-class requirement for many programs which must make
on-line decisions under strong time constraints. Especially,
this is the case for a number of Web-based applications (the
user is typically not ready to wait a long time for getting the
information she is looking for).
A standard scenario for which some KC approaches have
been developed is the one where F is a database (or a knowledge base), each Vi is a query, and f (F, Vi ) is the answer
to Vi given F . More specifically, one is often interested
in the case when F is a (classical) propositional formula,
Vi is a propositional clause (or a propositional CNF formula), and f corresponds to the clausal entailment problem CE, i.e., f is the characteristic function of the language
{(F, Vi ) | F |= Vi }. This problem occurs in many AI applications. Indeed, since F |= Vi holds iff F ∧ ¬Vi is consistent, determining whether the user choices (¬Vi ) are consistent with F reduces to the clausal entailment problem.
In particular, such a task is of the utmost value for product

This paper is concerned with knowledge compilation (KC), a
family of approaches developed in AI for more than twenty
years. Knowledge compilation consists in pre-processing
some pieces of the available information in order to improve
the computational efficiency (especially, the time complexity) of some tasks. In this paper, the focus is laid on three
KC topics which gave rise to many works: the development
of knowledge compilation techniques for the clausal entailment problem in propositional logic, the concept of compilability and the notion of knowledge compilation map. The
three topics, as well as an overview of the main results from
the literature, are presented. Some recent research lines are
also discussed.

Introduction
Pioneered more than two decades ago, knowledge compilation (KC) (see (Cadoli and Donini 1998) for a survey)
appears nowadays as a very active field in AI. In KC one
is basically concerned with the computation of a recursive
function f , which represents the task to be solved. f takes
two arguments: a ”fixed” part F and a ”varying part” V . The
objective is to improve the time needed to compute f (F, V ),
the image of F, V by f , when V varies. To reach this goal,
the fixed part F is pre-processed during an off-line phase:
F is turned into a compiled form C(F ) using a compilation function C. In some situations, such a pre-processing
is computationally useful: for some p the (cumulated) time
needed to compute C(F ), f (C(F ), V1 ), . . ., f (C(F ), Vp )
can be lower (sometimes by orders of magnitude) than the
(cumulated, on-line) time needed to compute f (F, V1 ), . . .,
f (F, Vp ). It must be noted that the assumption that some
pieces of information are not very often subject to change (a
”fixed” part exists) is valid in many scenarios. For instance,
in a computer-aided product configuration problem (which
will be considered as a ”running example”), the objective is
to help the customer to find out a product (e.g., a car) by
making some elementary choices (e.g., the number of seats,
the engine, the color of the car). What makes this task not
obvious is that, on the one hand, not all the combinations of
elementary choices correspond to a feasible product (due to
production or marketing constraints) and on the other hand,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4112

