Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

When Suboptimal Rules
Avshalom Elmalech

David Sarne

Avi Rosenfeld

Eden Shalom Erez

Bar-Ilan University,
Israel
elmalea@cs.biu.ac.il

Bar-Ilan University,
Israel
sarned@cs.biu.ac.il

Jerusalem College of Technology,
Israel
rosenfa@jct.ac.il

Independent Researcher,
Israel
edenerez@gmail.com

Abstract

types of tasks, an advising agent should intentionally provide suboptimal advice instead. Thus, the agent should reason about the tradeoff between the probability its advice will
be accepted and the value the person’s acceptance of this advice will bring the system. In cases where the expected utility
of suboptimal advice is higher than that of the optimal one,
it should be presented instead.
Focusing in giving suboptimal advice contrasts with previous works that attempted to overcome people’s inability
to recognize what is optimal in a given decision setting. For
example, some work attempted to convince people of the
correctness of the optimal solution, e.g., through providing
them a series of manipulations, though with not much success (Grosskopf, Bereby-Meyer, and Bazerman 2007; Elmalech, Sarne, and Grosz 2014). Others attempted to teach
people how to optimally solve the decision problem (Lesser
1999; Elmalech, Sarne, and Agmon 2014). Our approach,
on the other hand, does not require any overhead from the
advisee’s side. A third approach considered self interested
advice agent which intentionally withheld advice(Buntain
et al. 2012; Azaria et al. 2014; Rosenfeld and Kraus 2015;
Azaria et al. 2013; 2012), or customized it for the people (Hazon, Lin, and Kraus 2013), to maximize the advice agent’s reward. However, we consider a collaborative environment with a shared goal. This work investigates
the efficiency of the solution presented on real people, in
contrast to other work that measured their solution using
agents to simulate (to some extent) people’s behavior (Mash,
Lin, and Sarne 2014; Chalamish, Sarne, and Lin 2012;
Elmalech and Sarne 2014).
To support our claims, we provide extensive empirical
results from two canonical domains: a “Company Valuation Game”, (aka. the “Takeover Game”) originally presented by Samuelson and Bazerman (1985), and a “Birthday Game”, (also known as the “Birthday Paradox”) previously developed by Ball (1914). Both domains have optimal
non-intuitive solutions and previous studies have shown that
participants consistently do not make the optimal decisions
in them (Selten, Abbink, and Cox 2005; Voracek, Tran, and
Formann 2008). The analysis of the results validates that indeed people’s strategies in these two domains are far from
optimal and demonstrates that people overall reject the optimal advice. Furthermore, we show that agents giving our
proposed suboptimal advice facilitated significantly better

This paper represents a paradigm shift in what advice agents
should provide people. Contrary to what was previously
thought, we empirically show that agents that dispense optimal advice will not necessary facilitate the best improvement
in people’s strategies. Instead, we claim that agents should
at times suboptimally advise. We provide results demonstrating the effectiveness of a suboptimal advising approach in
extensive experiments in two canonical mixed agent-human
advice-giving domains. Our proposed guideline for suboptimal advising is to rely on the level of intuitiveness of the optimal advice as a measure for how much the suboptimal advice
presented to the user should drift from the optimal value.

Introduction
Previous research on advice provisioning focused on providing the optimal advice as the assumption was this advice would definitely be accepted, thus yielding the best performance (Power and Sharda 2009; Bharati and Chaudhury
2004). However, while designing agents to dispense fully rational advice is inherently logical, previous work has shown
that people often do not adhere to rigid models of rationality. Research in psychology behavioral economics, and artificial intelligence has established that people are boundedly
rational (Kahneman 2000; Rosenfeld and Kraus 2009; Hajaj
et al. 2013) and showed that their decision-making may be
influenced by other factors and that people are at times biased towards certain conclusions (Blackhart and Kline 2005;
Drake 1993; Hajaj, Hazon, and Sarne 2014). Similarly, as
our work shows, optimal advice given by agents is not always accepted by the people they supposedly are supporting. Please note that the use of the term “optimal” is for
describing the “best” advice the system can come up with.
However, the person may not recognize this advice as such
(e.g. she believes the agent is untruthful) and we thus must
consider when agents should deviate from dispensing fully
rational advice, and if so, by how much, such that the advise
will be more likely to be accepted.
This work presents a new approach for advice provisioning. We posit that in cases where the solution is not intuitive,
people will often not accept the optimal advice. In these
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1313

