Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On the Scalable Learning of Stochastic Blockmodel
Bo Yang and Xuehua Zhao
School of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
ybo@jlu.edu.cn

time of learning is at least O(K 2 n2 ). Otherwise, it quickly
goes up to O(n5 ) in that the process of determining “true”
block numbers is very time-consuming. In another word, if
we use a conventional PC to run current algorithms, the networks we can efficiently handle contain at most hundreds of
nodes, far from the scales faced in practice.
The learning of SBM consists of two main sub-tasks: to
determine block number K and to estimate parameter Π and
Ω, corresponding to model selection and parameter estimation, respectively. Model selection aims at selecting a model
having a good tradeoff between data fitting and model complexity, in obtaining a better generalization ability. Since
the tradeoff can be measured by the quantity of its parameters, to select a “good” model for SBM means to determine a reasonable value of K in the sense that the parameter number of SBM is actually a function of K. For example, the parameter number of a standard SBM is equal to
K 2 + K + 1. Formally, for a given network N , the objective
of SBM learning can be stated as: arg minK,h C(N, K, h),
where h denotes model parameters (i.e. Π and Ω), C denotes
the cost function evaluating the tradeoff of parameterized
model (K, h). A widely used cost function is: C(N, K, h) =
− log L(N |K, h)+p(K, h), where log L(N |K, h) indicates
the data fitting in terms of the maximum log-likelihood of N
given a model and its parameters, and p(K, h) is a regularization item that penalizes models with high complexity.
In the literature, MCMC (Snijders and Nowicki 1997;
Yang et al. 2011; McDaid et al. 2013), EM (Newman and
Leicht 2007), variational EM (Latouche, Birmele, and Ambroise 2012), and variational Bayes EM (Airoldi et al. 2009;
Latouche, Birmele, and Ambroise 2012; Gopalan et al.
2012) have been adopted to estimate the parameters of SBM.
Currently, the model selection methods used by SBM learning are either cross validation (Airoldi et al. 2009), or MDL
(Yang, Liu, and Liu 2012), or different approximations of
Bayesian model evidence, mainly including BIC (Airoldi et
al. 2009), ICL(Daudin, Picard, and Robin 2008), and Variation based approximate evidence (Hofman and Wiggins
2008; Latouche, Birmele, and Ambroise 2012).
Current SBM learning algorithms adopt a model-wise
learning mechanism to integrate the aforementioned methods of parameter estimation and model selection. That is,
they parameterize and then evaluate all candidates in a
model space one by one. Finally, the parameterized model

Abstract
Stochastic blockmodel (SBM) enables us to decompose
and analyze an exploratory network without a priori
knowledge about its intrinsic structure. However, the
task of effectively and efficiently learning a SBM from
a large-scale network is still challenging due to the high
computational cost of its model selection and parameter estimation. To address this issue, we present a novel
SBM learning algorithm referred to as BLOS (BLOckwise Sbm learning). Distinct from the literature, the
model selection and parameter estimation of SBM are
concurrently, rather than alternately, executed in BLOS
by embedding the minimum message length criterion
into a block-wise EM algorithm, which greatly reduces
the time complexity of SBM learning without losing
learning accuracy and modeling flexibility. Its effectiveness and efficiency have been tested through rigorous
comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods on both
synthetic and real-world networks.

Introduction
Formally, a standard SBM is defined as a triple (K, Π, Ω).
K is the number of blocks. Π is a K × K matrix, in which
πql denotes the probability that a link from one node in block
q connects to another node in block l. Ω is a K-dimension
vector, in which ωk denotes the probability that a randomly
chosen node falls in block k.
SBM is often used as a generative model to decompose
real-world networks or synthesize artificial networks, which
contain either assortative communities, disassortative multipartites, or arbitrary mixtures of them. Moreover, SBM can
be used as a prediction model for link prediction. Being a
powerful tool of network analysis, SBM has attracted more
and more attentions (Newman and Leicht 2007; Airoldi et al.
2009; Latouche et al. 2011; Karrer and Newman 2011; Yang
et al. 2011; Yang, Liu, and Liu 2012) since it was originally
proposed (Holland and Leinhardt 1981).
Although SBM has superiority in structure analysis, however, SBM learning is computationally intractable, which
limits it to a narrow range of applications just involving very
small networks. For the current algorithms, given the number of blocks K, i.e. we do not consider model selection, the
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

360

