Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Realistic Assumptions for Attacks on Elections
Zack Fitzsimmons
College of Computing and Information Sciences
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623, USA
zmf6921@rit.edu

Abstract

likely in practice than one isolated attack with all other voters and election organizers acting honestly. This was the
topic of the paper that I presented at IJCAI-13 (Fitzsimmons, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2013). This paper
explored elections where there is both an election chair controlling the election and a subset of voters manipulating the
election. The chair and the manipulators may act either collaboratively or competitively and this has interesting effects
on the corresponding worst-case complexity.
In another paper we explored the complexity of manipulating two-stage elections when the same election system is
used at each stage (Fitzsimmons, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2014). The main motivation was that when there
are multiple winners in an election it is reasonable to assume that a runoff election would be held among the winners. Like the aforementioned combination of manipulation
and control, the aim of this research is to present a model
that is likely to occur in real-world situations.
Election attacks are not only affected by the structure of
the attack, but also the behavior of the voters. One common
assumption is that a given electorate satisfies a domain restriction such as single peakedness.
The notion of single-peaked preferences introduced by
Black (1948) is the most commonly studied domain restriction on voters’ preferences in an election. Single-peaked
preferences model the preferences of voters with respect to
a polarizing issue where the candidates can be arranged with
respect to a one-dimensional axis where the leftmost and
rightmost positions of the axis represent the extremes of the
issue. When an election has voters with single-peaked preferences the worst-case complexity of the manipulation and
control problems often decreases (Faliszewski et al. 2011).
In real-world elections voters often have some degree of
partial preference and this should be properly considered
when determining if a collection of voters satisfies a certain
domain restriction. Recently single-peaked preferences were
examined for preference profiles of partial votes in an existential model (Lackner 2014). I expanded on this work in a
recent technical report (Fitzsimmons 2014) and showed that
single-peaked consistency for weak orders in this existential model is in P, solving the main open problem in Lackner (2014). Additionally, I showed that the two other definitions for single-peaked consistency for weak orders are each
also in P (Fitzsimmons 2014) and returned to more estab-

We must properly model attacks and the preferences of the
electorate for the computational study of attacks on elections to give us insight into the hardness of attacks in practice. Theoretical and empirical analysis are equally important
methods to understand election attacks. I discuss my recent
work on domain restrictions on partial preferences and on
new election attacks. I propose further study into modeling
realistic election attacks and the advancement of the current
state of empirical analysis of their hardness by using more
advanced statistical techniques.

Models for Election Attacks
In computational social choice we apply techniques from
computer science to understand social choice problems such
as elections, which are a way to reach a fair decision when
presented with the preferences of several agents. However,
elections can be vulnerable to voters misrepresenting their
preferences (manipulation) or even attacks on the structure
of the election itself (control).
It is obvious to suggest that we should use election
systems where these attacks are not possible. Unfortunately, a crucial negative result, the Gibbard-Sattertwaithe
theorem (Gibbard 1973; Satterthwaite 1975), states that every reasonable election system is manipulable. While it is
not possible to design an election system that is impossible
to manipulate it may be computationally infeasible to determine if a manipulation exists. Bartholdi et al. (1989) introduced the concept of measuring the resistance of elections
to manipulation using computational complexity. Since then
there has been a focus on determining the worst-case complexity of manipulation and other attacks on different election systems (see, e.g., Faliszewski et al. (2010)) and more
recently how hard they are in practice through experimental
means (see, e.g., Walsh (2011)).
The problems of manipulation and control have been
well-studied individually. However, to better model realworld scenarios, other attacks can and have been developed
that have aspects of manipulation and control or are logical extensions of them. One extension is to explore multiple attacks happening in the same election, which is more
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4235

