Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On the Convergence of Iterative Voting:
How Restrictive Should Restricted Dynamics Be?
Svetlana Obraztsova

Evangelos Markakis

National Technical University of Athens, Greece
Tel-Aviv University, Israel
svetlana.obraztsova@gmail.com

Athens University of Economics & Business
Greece
markakis@gmail.com

Maria Polukarov

Zinovi Rabinovich

Nicholas R. Jennings

University of Southampton
United Kingdom
mp3@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Mobileye Vision Technologies Ltd.
Israel
zr@zinovi.net

University of Southampton
United Kingdom
nrj@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Abstract

their vote. Iterative voting has recently received significant
attention in the literature due to, in part, its potential to provide good predictions for the final outcome of a vote. For instance, an iterative process eliminates low quality Nash equilibria that may arise otherwise, in a one-shot voting game.
Also, iterative voting can model the electorate response to
poll data, see e.g., (Reijngoud and Endriss 2012).

We study convergence properties of iterative voting procedures. Such procedures are defined by a voting rule
and a (restricted) iterative process, where at each step
one agent can modify his vote towards a better outcome
for himself. It is already known that if the iteration dynamics (the manner in which voters are allowed to modify their votes) are unrestricted, then the voting process
may not converge. For most common voting rules this
may be observed even under the best response dynamics limitation. It is therefore important to investigate
whether and which natural restrictions on the dynamics of iterative voting procedures can guarantee convergence. To this end, we provide two general conditions on the dynamics based on iterative myopic improvements, each of which is sufficient for convergence.
We then identify several classes of voting rules (including Positional Scoring Rules, Maximin, Copeland and
Bucklin), along with their corresponding iterative processes, for which at least one of these conditions hold.

Several results have been obtained regarding the convergence of best/better response dynamics for various voting
rules (see Related Work). One of the main findings is that
if agents are allowed to make arbitrary moves (or just play
only best responses), then convergence of such processes is
not guaranteed, see e.g., (Lev and Rosenschein 2012). Nevertheless, it is often the case that voters will not choose a
best response when they update their voting decision. Natural restrictions may apply if the voters are computationally
bounded or if they tend to make greedy local moves. Voters
may also desire a consensus, reached by the smallest possible changes to their ballot, rather than a plain manipulation.
Some restrictions on the dynamics of voting processes, as an
attempt to model such considerations, were studied recently
by (Reijngoud and Endriss 2012) and (Grandi et al. 2013).
However, the family of restricted moves that enforces convergence has not been yet characterised, and this is one of
the major open directions in the field of iterative voting.

Introduction
Voting mechanisms constitute a popular tool for preference aggregation and collective decision making in multiagent systems that involve entities with possibly diverse
preferences. The major concern, however, with voting as a
decision-making process, is that voters may misreport their
real preferences in order to favour certain candidates. Indeed, strategic behaviour is inherent in most voting rules, as
the famous Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem (Gibbard 1973;
Satterthwaite 1975) asserts. It is then natural to resort to
game-theoretic concepts and tools in order to model voting
behaviour and assess the outcome of a voting process.
Motivated by web services such as Doodle or Survey
Monkey, we investigate strategic behaviour in iterative voting processes. Specifically, following (Meir et al. 2010), we
consider iterative procedures, where agents start from some
initial (most commonly, the truthful) voting configuration,
and subsequently make myopic improvements by changing

Against this background, in this work we consider iterative voting procedures, specified by a voting rule along with
a dynamic process, i.e., a specification of improvement steps
that can be made by the voters. We focus on single-winner
elections, with lexicographic tie-breaking. Our contribution
is twofold. On the conceptual level, we provide two general
conditions on these processes, each of which is sufficient for
convergence. The first one is based on potential function arguments, whereas the second concerns the monotonicity of a
set sequence defined along an improvement path. These conditions provide a unifying framework to study the behaviour
of such dynamics. We then utilise this framework to identify
dynamic processes that converge for several classes of voting rules (including Positional Scoring Rules, Maximin, and
Bucklin). Especially for Bucklin, this is essentially the first

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

993

