Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Online Dictionary Learning on Symmetric Positive
Deﬁnite Manifolds with Vision Applications
Shengping Zhang1,3 , Shiva Kasiviswanathan2 , Pong C Yuen3 and Mehrtash Harandi4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology at Weihai, China
2
General Electric Global Research, United States
3
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
4
NICTA and Australian National University, Australia
s.zhang@hit.edu.cn, kasivisw@gmail.com, pcyuen@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, mehrtash.harandi@nicta.com.au
in D? (ii) Dictionary Learning: Given a set of SPD matrices X = {X i }ti=1 arriving in a steaming fashion, how can
a set D be learned in an online fashion to “represent” X accurately? We provide efﬁcient approaches for tackling these
problems that take into account the geometric structure of
the SPD manifolds.
One of the difﬁculties in dealing with SPD matrices is that
they do not naturally lie in a linear space. To overcome this,
we follow the approach of (Harandi et al. 2012) and use a
special type of the matrix Bregman divergence, namely the
Stein divergence (Sra 2012) to recast our problems on the
SPD manifolds as problems in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Spaces (RKHS). As explained later, this mapping preserves
most properties of the original manifold geometry.
For coding, we propose an efﬁcient (sparse) coding algorithm in RKHS based on the method of accelerated proximal gradient (Nesterov 1983; Beck and Teboulle 2009). This
leads to a (provably) faster algorithm for coding in RKHS
than previous known approaches which were based on techniques such as OMP (Nguyen et al. 2012) and Feature-Sign
Search (Gao, Tsang, and Chia 2010).
The problem of dictionary learning is to estimate a collection of basis vectors over which a given data collection
can be accurately reconstructed, often with sparse encodings. This is a well-investigated problem over Euclidean
spaces (Olshausen and Field 1997; Aharon, Elad, and
Bruckstein 2006; Mairal et al. 2010). However, a limitation
with traditional dictionary learning algorithms, e.g., (Olshausen and Field 1997; Aharon, Elad, and Bruckstein 2006)
is the requirement to have the whole dataset available beforehand to minimize the learning cost. Hence, these methods cannot efﬁciently deal with very large data sets or data
that dynamically vary over time, such as video sequences.
In the last few years, online dictionary learning has been extensively studied in the Euclidean spaces (Mairal et al. 2010;
Kasiviswanathan et al. 2012). However, to our best knowledge, there is no prior work on online dictionary learning
on the SPD manifolds. Our dictionary learning algorithm
is unique in the sense that it uses a geometric gradient descent approach and at any given timepoint it only consumes
the incoming data together with seen observations over a
short time window. In contrast to existing studies for dictionary learning in RKHS such as (Harandi et al. 2012;
Nguyen et al. 2012), which rely on access to the whole

Abstract
Symmetric Positive Deﬁnite (SPD) matrices in the form of
region covariances are considered rich descriptors for images
and videos. Recent studies suggest that exploiting the Riemannian geometry of the SPD manifolds could lead to improved performances for vision applications. For tasks involving processing large-scale and dynamic data in computer
vision, the underlying model is required to progressively and
efﬁciently adapt itself to the new and unseen observations.
Motivated by these requirements, this paper studies the problem of online dictionary learning on the SPD manifolds. We
make use of the Stein divergence to recast the problem of online dictionary learning on the manifolds to a problem in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces, for which, we develop efﬁcient algorithms by taking into account the geometric structure of the SPD manifolds. To our best knowledge, our work
is the ﬁrst study that provides a solution for online dictionary learning on the SPD manifolds. Empirical results on
both large-scale image classiﬁcation task and dynamic video
processing tasks validate the superior performance of our approach as compared to several state-of-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
In computer vision, our main focus area here, the need for
adaptive online methods arises in countless applications that
process large-scale and dynamic data (Ross et al. 2008;
Mairal et al. 2010; Lu, Shi, and Jia 2013; Wang, Wang, and
Yeung 2013; Zhang et al. 2013b; Xu et al. 2013). Structured
descriptors in the form of SPD matrices (e.g., covariance descriptors) are becoming pervasive to describe images and
videos (Porikli, Tuzel, and Meer 2006; Zhang et al. 2008;
Harandi et al. 2012; Hu et al. 2012; Guo, Ishwar, and Konrad 2013; Harandi, Salzmann, and Porikli 2014). Despite
their wide applications and appealing properties, SPD matrices which lie on a special type of Riemannian manifold
(henceforth, referred to as SPD manifold) are difﬁcult to analyze (Harandi et al. 2012; Cherian and Sra 2014).
This paper addresses the problem of online dictionary
learning on the SPD manifolds. We consider the following
two problems: (i) Coding: Given a matrix X and a set of matrices D = {D i }ki=1 , where X and D i are all SPD matrices,
how can X be approximated by a combination of matrices
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3165

