Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Knowledge Representation and Reasoning: What’s Hot
Chitta Baral

Giuseppe De Giacomo

Arizona State University
Arizona, USA
chitta@asu.edu

Sapienza University of Rome
Rome, Italy
degiacomo@dis.uniroma1.it

Knowledge representation and reasoning (KR) stems
from a deep tradition in logic. In particular, it aims at building systems that know about their world and are able to act in
an informed way in it, as humans do. A crucial part of these
systems is that knowledge is represented symbolically, and
that reasoning procedures are able to extract consequences
of such knowledge as new symbolic representations. Such
an ability is used to deliberate, in an informed fashion, about
the course of actions to take.
This very idea is radically new in human history
(Levesque 2014). It comes about after a long gestation,
stemming from Aristotle, who developed the initial notion
of logic though unrelated to the notion of computation; continued by Leibniz, who brought forward a notion of “thinking as computation,” though not yet symbolic; and later by
Frege, who developed the notion of symbolic logic, though
unrelated to computation; and finally by the breakthrough in
human thinking of the early part of last century with Church,
Godel, and Turing, who set the bases for symbolic logic
bound together with computation and ultimately for Computer Science, though even they did not think about logic as
a way of representing knowledge.
It was McCarthy (McCarthy 1959) who first had the very
radical idea of building intelligent systems by focusing not
on programming or on the details of the system architecture,
but on the knowledge necessary to behave in an intelligent
way. If a system were able to represent what it needed to
know and draw conclusions from it in an automatic way,
it would be able to deduce for itself how to behave intelligently.
Knowledge representation and reasoning is a wellestablished field of AI deriving directly from McCarthy’s
idea. Research in KR is currently present in the major AI
generalist conferences like the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), and European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI).
The series of International Conferences on Principles of
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR) is one of
the most scientifically respected conferences in AI. The KR
conference series is a leading forum for timely in-depth presentation of progress in the theory and principles underly-

ing the representation and computational management of
knowledge. The first KR conference was held 25 years ago
in 1989. The last KR edition KR 2014 was the 14th and was
held 25th year of the first KR conference. Since the first KR
conference there has been significant progress in KR and
now we have many well developed KR formalisms with supporting theories, building-block results, reasoning systems,
and applications. There are many books that present these
developments. We have reached a stage where various disciplines in AI and Computer Science are now using KR.
Among them is the use of KR in agents, semantic web applications, video understanding, natural language understanding, and many others.
The 2014 edition of KR was very special as it was held
as part of the Vienna Summer of Logic, the largest scientific
event in the history of logic. The Vienna Summer of Logic
(VSL, www.vsl2014.at) consisted of 12 large conferences
and 82 workshops.
The papers presented at KR 2014 can be broadly divided into the following areas: Description Logics, Reasoning about Actions and Processes; Belief Revision and
Nonmonotonicity; General Knowledge Representation and
Reasoning; Planning, Strategies, and Diagnosis; Answer Set
Programming and Logic Programming; Argumentation; Automated Reasoning and Computation; Causality; and Rationality and Uncertainty. In addition application oriented papers where presented as Reports from the Field. Prior to
the KR 2014 conference, in early 2013 the National Science Foundation of the USA sponsored and co-organized an
workshop1 titled “Research Challenges and Opportunities in
KR” where international researchers in KR discussed various aspects of KR as a field. It was a consensus that KR had
matured with a solid body of work, was being used in many
applications and there was a big interest in enhancing its use.
With that in mind the KR 2014 conference program had several invited talks and tutorials on emerging application areas as well as on traditional KR topics. This list of talks are
good pointers to what is hot in KR. They were in the topics
of: (a) role of KR in video understanding (Cohn. 2014); (b)
role of KR in natural language understanding (NLU), and
various available knowledge bases that can be and are being used in developing NLU systems (Ovchinnikova 2014);

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4316

http://krnsfworkshop.cs.illinois.edu/

