Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Influence-Driven Model for Time Series Prediction from Partial Observations
Saima Aman

Charalampos Chelmis and Viktor K. Prasanna

Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
Email: saman@usc.edu

Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
Email: {chelmis, prasanna}@usc.edu

Abstract

loop detectors installed under pavements for recording traffic (Pan, Demiryurek, and Shahabi 2012); and meters on
wind turbines that record wind speed and turbines’ power
output (Bullis 2014).
Due to several factors, data from all sensors is not available at central nodes in real-time or at a frequency that is required for fast and real-time modeling and decision-making.
For example, wind turbines record data every few seconds,
but transmit data every five minutes to far-off research centers for use in forecasting algorithms (Bullis 2014). Physical limitations of existing transmission networks, such as
latency, bandwidth and high energy consumption (Ciancio
and Ortega 2005) are key factors that limit the frequency of
data transmission from sensors to central nodes (Bouhafs,
Mackay, and Merabti 2012). Sometimes, consumers may
also limit frequent transmission of information from sensors
located at their premises for security and privacy concerns
(McDaniel and McLaughlin 2009).
All these situations reflect the partial data problem,
where only partial data from sensors is available in realtime, and complete high resolution data become available
only periodically, generally one or more times a day. Without addressing this problem, traditional solutions risk degradation in performance and inaccurate interpretation of generated insights. For instance, time series prediction methods
are adversely affected by the prediction horizon length, and
in the case of partial data, the effective prediction horizon
for those sensors for which data is unavailable in real-time
becomes larger, which in turn leads to detrimental increase
in prediction error. Thus, the time series approach cannot be
used for accurate predictions, for example, for up to 8 hours
ahead. A possible approach - as we propose in this paper
- is to develop creative solutions using data from a small
subset of sensors selected on the basis of some heuristics
or learning methods, while minimizing information loss resulting from leaving out data from remaining sensors. The
intuition behind this approach is the fact that sensors located
spatially close to each other or sensing activities driven by
similar schedules - such as those on an academic campus or
traffic on high density roads - are likely to be correlated. If
this information can be leveraged, it will obviate the need for
real-time transmission from all sensors to the central nodes,
and thereby reduce the load on the transmission network.
Also, it would make it simpler to add new sensors without

Applications in sustainability domains such as in energy, transportation, and natural resource and environment monitoring, increasingly use sensors for collecting data and sending it back to centrally located processing nodes. While data can usually be collected by
the sensors at a very high speed, in many cases, it can
not be sent back to central nodes at a frequency that is
required for fast and real-time modeling and decisionmaking. This may be due to physical limitations of the
transmission networks, or due to consumers limiting
frequent transmission of data from sensors located at
their premises for security and privacy concerns. We
propose a novel solution to the problem of making short
term predictions in absence of real-time data from sensors. A key implication of our work is that by using
real-time data from only a small subset of influential
sensors, we are able to make predictions for all sensors. We evaluated our approach with a large real-world
electricity consumption data collected from smart meters in Los Angeles and the results show that between
prediction horizons of 2 to 8 hours, despite lack of real
time data, our influence model outperforms the baseline
model that uses real-time data. Also, when using partial
real-time data from only ≈ 7% influential smart meters,
we witness prediction error increase by only ≈ 0.5%
over the baseline, thus demonstrating the usefulness of
our method for practical scenarios.

Introduction
Low cost wireless sensors are increasingly being deployed
in large numbers for performing monitoring and control in
many sustainability domains such as in smart electric grids,
transport networks, and natural resource and environment
monitoring. These sensors are located at geographically dispersed locations and periodically send back acquired data
to centrally located processing nodes (Ciancio and Ortega
2005) via wireless links and the Internet (Chong and Kumar 2003). They include sensors for monitoring natural resource and environment such as biodiversity and atmosphere
(Lozano et al. 2009); smart meters for measuring energy
consumption (Simmhan et al. 2013), (Marascu et al. 2013);
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

601

