Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Causal Inference via Sparse Additive Models
with Application to Online Advertising
Wei Sun1 , Pengyuan Wang2 , Dawei Yin2 , Jian Yang2 , and Yi Chang2
1

2

Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,USA, sun244@purdue.edu
Yahoo Labs, Sunnyvale, CA, USA, {pengyuan, daweiy, jianyang,yichang}@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract

Hence it is critical and necessary to provide statistical approaches to estimate the ad effectiveness directly from observational data rather than experimental data. Previous
studies based on observational data try to establish direct
relationship between the ad treatment and a success action
(Abraham 2008). However, in observational data, typically
the user characteristics may affect both the exposed ad treatment and the success tendency. Ignoring such confounding
effects of user characteristics may lead to a biased estimation
of the treatment effect (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1984).
Causal inference aims to infer unbiased causality effect
of the ad treatment from observational data, by eliminating the impact of the confounding factors such as user
characteristics. The causal inference framework for a binary treatment was original proposed by Rosenbaum and
Rubin (1983). They introduced the concept of propensity
score and proposed to estimate it via a logistic regression.
To expand the scope of causal inference from a binary
treatment to a continuous/categorical treatment, a propensity function-based framework was proposed (Imai and van
Dyk 2004), where Gaussian linear regression was applied
to estimate the propensity function. Based on the estimated propensity score (or propensity function), an additional sub-classification procedure was usually performed to
produce the final treatment effect estimation. Recently, machine learning algorithms, e.g. gradient boosted machine,
bagged CART, and random forest, were employed to estimate the propensity score (Lee, Lessler, and Stuart 2010;
Su et al. 2012). While these algorithms showed desirable
performance, they mainly focused on the scenario with a
univariate treatment and low dimensional user features. In
online advertising, causal inference methods have been developed to estimate the causal effect (Chan et al. 2010;
Dalessandro et al. 2012; Wang, Traskin, and Small 2013;
Wang et al. 2014). Nevertheless, these works also mainly
focused on the univariate and binary treatment and not well
suited for measuring the effects of complex treatment (e.g.,
a two-dimensional treatment consists of ad exposure frequency and ad size), which are more realistic and in great
demand.
Measuring complex ad treatment effectiveness is still facing four major challenges. First, the general ad treatment can
be much more complex than binary treatment. It could be a
discrete or continuous, uni- or multi-dimensional treatment.

Advertising effectiveness measurement is a fundamental problem in online advertising. Various causal inference methods have been employed to measure the
causal effects of ad treatments. However, existing methods mainly focus on linear logistic regression for univariate and binary treatments and are not well suited for
complex ad treatments of multi-dimensions, where each
dimension could be discrete or continuous. In this paper
we propose a novel two-stage causal inference framework for assessing the impact of complex ad treatments.
In the first stage, we estimate the propensity parameter via a sparse additive model; in the second stage,
a propensity-adjusted regression model is applied for
measuring the treatment effect. Our approach is shown
to provide an unbiased estimation of the ad effectiveness under regularity conditions. To demonstrate the efficacy of our approach, we apply it to a real online advertising campaign to evaluate the impact of three ad
treatments: ad frequency, ad channel, and ad size. We
show that the ad frequency usually has a treatment effect cap when ads are showing on mobile device. In addition, the strategies for choosing best ad size are completely different for mobile ads and online ads.

Introduction
In the current online advertising ecosystem, user are exposed to ads with diverse formats and channels, and user’s
behaviors are caused by complex ad treatments combining
of various factors (Rosenkrans 2009). The complexity of
ad treatments calls for an accurate and causal measurement
of ad effectiveness, i.e., how the ad treatment causes the
changes in outcomes. An outcome is the user’s response in
the ad campaigns, such as whether or not the user clicks a
link, or searches for a brand. The gold standard of accurate
ad effectiveness measurement is the experiment-based approach, such as A/B test, where different ad treatments are
randomly assigned to users. However, the cost of fully randomized experiments is usually very high (Chan et al. 2010;
Kohav and Longbotham 2010; Stitelman et al. 2011) and in
some rich ad treatment circumstances, such fully randomized experiments are even infeasible (Bottou et al. 2013).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

297

