Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Propagating Ranking Functions on a Graph: Algorithms and Applications
Buyue Qian

Xiang Wang

Ian Davidson

IBM T. J. Watson Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
bqian@us.ibm.com

IBM T. J. Watson Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
wangxi@us.ibm.com

University of California
Davis, Davis, CA 95616
davidson@cs.ucdavis.edu

Abstract

methods to estimate the unknown or improve the weak ranking functions by those strong ones. The purpose of this work
is to propagate linear ranking functions over the nodes on a
graph, where each node corresponds to a retrieval task/user.
Problem Setting. There are three key concepts in this
work, (i) linear ranking function, (ii) ordinal distribution features, and (iii) ranking function propagation. We shall now
explain each briefly. A linear ranking function is a realvalued vector, whose inner product with a data point is usually called a ranking score. In a retrieval task using a linear
ranking function, we first calculate ranking scores, the inner product between the ranking function vector and all data
points, and then sort the data points based on the ranking
scores. Data points with higher ranking scores are more relevant to the retrieval topic. Ordinal distribution features are a
powerful way of representing complex objects by the counts
of features that are ordinal, that is the features represent an
ordered set of values such as small, medium, large.
Consider our experiments on creating a ranking function for
each type of bird based on their song. The songs are represented using spectrograms which contains the counts of each
audio frequency and analogous to histograms. The spectrograms capture not only the counts of each frequency but also
that adjacent (in the spectrogram) frequencies are similar.
Propagation of ranking functions implies that in our study a
graph can be comprised of strong, weak, and unknown ranking functions, and we allow the strong ranking functions being propagated to the weak or unknown functions. In particular we can calculate the ranking functions after an infinite
number of propagation steps on the network.
Proposal. To explore the graph propagation of linear
ranking functions on distribution data, there are three main
challenges that we address. (i) Since our ranking function
is of ordinal (order sensitive features) regular label propagation methods will fare poorly with these ordinal distribution features. We adopt the Hellinger distance metric to
calculate the similarity between two linear ranking functions (distributions). (ii) Propagating distributed based ranking functions requires a specialized objective function. We
generalize the objective functions of several classic diffusion methods whose objectives have shown to be useful in
solving real problems. (iii) The construction of a similarity
graph to propagate the ranking functions will vary between
applications. For example, in a personalized movie ranking

Learning to rank is an emerging learning task that opens
up a diverse set of applications. However, most existing work focuses on learning a single ranking function whilst in many real world applications, there can
be many ranking functions to fulfill various retrieval
tasks on the same data set. How to train many ranking functions is challenging due to the limited availability of training data which is further compounded
when plentiful training data is available for a small subset of the ranking functions. This is particularly true in
settings, such as personalized ranking/retrieval, where
each person requires a unique ranking function according to their preference, but only the functions of the persons who provide sufficient ratings (of objects, such as
movies and music) can be well trained. To address this,
we propose to construct a graph where each node corresponds to a retrieval task, and then propagate ranking functions on the graph. We illustrate the usefulness
of the idea of propagating ranking functions and our
method by exploring two real world applications.

Introduction
Any system that presents ordered results to users is performing ranking (Burges et al. 2005). This has led to extensive interest in applying machine learning techniques to learn ranking functions. Such techniques are called learning to rank,
whose goal is to automatically build a retrieval function from
training data, and has been successfully applied to various
information retrieval problems. In many real world applications, we often require many ranking functions to fulfill
various retrieval tasks on a single dataset. It is often the case
that the training data is limited and imbalanced hence, only
a few ranking functions can be trained adequately (deemed
as strong), while the majority ranking functions are completely unknown or learnt with little training data (deemed
as weak). Consider a personalized movie ranking problem,
each person has different taste of movies and thus requires
a unique ranking function. However, for a particular user, a
strong ranking function can be learned only if that user provides sufficient movie ratings, which is often not the case
in practice. In this study we consider using graph diffusion
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1833

