Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Entorhinal-Hippocampal Model for Simultaneous Cognitive Map Building
Miaolong Yuan1 , Bo Tian1 , Vui Ann Shim1 , Huajin Tang1,2,∗ , Haizhou Li1
1

Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 138632
2
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China 610065

Abstract

entation. However, the discrete representations of individual place cell and head direction cell activity could not be
sufficient to support navigation from one place to another.
When rats move away from a start position, they can keep
track of their relative changing positions by path-integrating
linear and angular self-motion and return to their original location effortlessly (Moser, Kropff, and Moser 2008;
Domnisoru, Kinkhabwala, and Tank 2013; McNaughton et
al. 2006). The historical discovery of grid cells in the dorsocaudal medial entorhinal cortex (dMEC) strongly suggests
that path integrator exists in the brain, as grid fields persist
after removal or replacement of major landmarks points and
self-motion information is regarded as the primary source
for maintaining and updating grid representations (Hafting
et al. 2005). Grid cells display strikingly regular firing responses to the animal’s locations in 2-D space and provide
metric information for mapping space. A widely held view
is that grid cells path-integrate self-motion signals of speed
and direction to update the place cell’s firing fields, whereas
external cues specifying location allow error correction associated with the path integration (Hafting et al. 2005;
Milford, Wiles, and Wyeth 2010). It is unclear, however,
how grid cells interact with place cells in the entorhinalhippocampal system (Bonnevie et al. 2013). Existing studies suggested that place cell responses may be generated
from a subset of grid cell inputs (McNaughton et al. 2006;
Solstad, Moser, and Einevoll 2006; Monaco and Abbott
2011). Two main models have been proposed to account
for the formation of place cell responses by (1) a linear
summation of a subset of afferent grid cells with a range
of spatial frequencies (Solstad, Moser, and Einevoll 2006;
Fuhs and Touretzky 2006); and (2) competitive learning
among grid cell inputs with various spacings and orientations (Rolls, Stringer, and Elliot 2006; Monaco and Abbott
2011).

Hippocampal place cells and entorhinal grid cells have
been hypothesized to be able to form map-like spatial representation of the environment, namely cognitive map. In most prior approaches, either neural network methods or only hippocampal models are used for
building cognitive maps, lacking biological fidelity to
the entorhinal-hippocampal system. This paper presents
a novel computational model to build cognitive maps of
real environments using both place cells and grid cells.
The proposed model includes two major components:
(1) A competitive Hebbian learning algorithm is used
to select velocity-coupled grid cell population activities, which path-integrate self-motion signals to determine computation of place cell population activities; (2)
Visual cues of environments are used to correct the accumulative errors intrinsically associated with the path
integration process. Experiments performed on a mobile
robot show that cognitive maps of the real environment
can be efficiently built. The proposed model would provide an alternative neuro-inspired approach for robotic
mapping, navigation and localization.

Introduction
Spatial cognition is the basic ability of mammals to perform cognitive tasks including exploration, map building,
localization, and navigation in an environment. For decades,
researchers have been investigating how animals perceive
space and navigate freely in an environment. Tolman suggested that navigation is guided by an internal map-like representation, i.e., cognitive map, which represents the spatial relationship among salient landmarks of an environment
(Tolman 1948).
Earlier studies of spatial cognition discovered that place
cells and head direction cells in the rat hippocampus are involved in the development of abstract-level cognitive maps
of spatial relations (O’Keefe and Dostrovsky 1971; O’keefe
and Nadel 1978; Taube 2007). Place cells fire only when
a rat occupies a specific location in a given environment
and provide the rat with a dynamic, continuously updated
representation of allocentric space, while head direction
cells fire when the rat’s head is at a specific global ori-

It has also been found that rats have mechanisms to
correct the accumulative errors of path integration when
they meet salient landmarks (McNaughton et al. 2006).
While many models (Solstad, Moser, and Einevoll 2006;
Si and Treves 2009; Savelli and Knierim 2010) focus on
how place cell responses are generated from grid cell inputs without considering coupling velocity information into
grid cells, (Burak and Fiete 2009) proposed a grid cell model
using continuous attractor network (CAN), which can per-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

586

