Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Constructing Models of User and Task Characteristics from Eye Gaze
Data for User-Adaptive Information Highlighting
Matthew Gingerich and Cristina Conati
University of British Columbia
{majugi, conati}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract

1976), and because gaze data can be obtained for noninteractive visualizations. Earlier work showed that three
different cognitive abilities (perceptual speed, visual
working memory and verbal working memory), task performance, and task type can be estimated (albeit with varying degrees of accuracy) from gaze patterns during visualization tasks with bar graph and radar graph visualizations
(Steichen et al., 2014a). Our work complements these previous findings as follows.
First, we verify whether we can obtain similar results for
predicting the same user and task properties while users
interact with bar graphs visualizing more complex datasets.
The inclusion of task performance as a target for prediction
is intended to address the question of when adaptive interventions should be displayed: users with low predicted
performance stand to benefit more from additional support.
The prediction of user cognitive abilities and task type can
inform the decision of which interventions should be displayed, since prior work has correlated these characteristics
with effects on specific aspects of visualization processing
(Carenini et al., 2014).
Second, we add the prediction of a user’s locus of control, a personality trait that has been shown to impact visualization performance (e.g. Ziemkiewicz et al., 2011).
Third, we compare classifiers built with interfaceindependent and interface-dependent features, in order to
assess the extent to which these predictive models require
having detailed information on the presented visualization.
Finally, we investigate how model accuracy is affected
if models are trained with data from tasks that had different
types of highlighting interventions added to the visualization. These interventions were designed to highlight graph
bars that were relevant to perform the given task. Interventions could eventually be used to provide adaptive support
by dynamically redirecting the user's attention to different
subsets of the visualized data as needed (e.g. when the visualization is used together with a verbal description that
discusses different aspects of a dataset, Carenini et al.,
2014).

A user-adaptive information visualization system capable of
learning models of users and the visualization tasks they
perform could provide interventions optimized for helping
specific users in specific task contexts. In this paper, we investigate the accuracy of predicting visualization tasks, user
performance on tasks, and user traits from gaze data. We
show that predictions made with a logistic regression model
are significantly better than a baseline classifier, with particularly strong results for predicting task type and user performance. Furthermore, we compare classifiers built with
interface-independent and interface-dependent features, and
show that the interface-independent features are comparable
or superior to interface-dependent ones. Finally, we discuss
how the accuracy of predictive models is affected if they are
trained with data from trials that had highlighting interventions added to the visualization.

Introduction
Research in information visualization has always had a
strong focus on understanding how cognitive and perceptual processes interact with visualizations. In recent years,
there has been increased attention in investigating the impact of users’ individual differences on interactions with
visualizations. Researchers have found that several cognitive abilities and personality traits can impact the effectiveness of visualizations (e.g. Ziemkiewicz et al., 2011,
Toker et al., 2013). These findings suggest that personalized visualizations may offer benefits to users by adapting
to their individual traits.
The goal of our current work is to explore what value
gaze data can have for an adaptive visualization that actively learns the traits of its users and presents customized
highlighting of information to meet their individual needs.
Gaze patterns are of interest both because they are tightly
linked to information processing (Just and Carpenter,
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1728

