Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Convex Batch Mode Active Sampling via
α-relative Pearson Divergence
Hanmo Wang1,2 , Liang Du1 , Peng Zhou1,2 , Lei Shi1,2 and Yi-Dong Shen1∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
{wanghm,duliang,zhoup,shilei,ydshen}@ios.ac.cn

Abstract

batch mode active learning process, the learner is given a
labeled set and an unlabeled set, and iteratively chooses a
batch of instances from the unlabeled set to query for the
labels. The main difficulty of batch active learning is under
what criterion the batch is selected.
One of the most recent work in batch mode active learning
uses representative information based on distribution matching (Chattopadhyay et al. 2013). It adopts maximum mean
discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al. 2006) to select the batch
that minimizes the empirical MMD score between labeled
and unlabeled data. It turns out that the use of MMD to
capture representative information cannot effectively distinguish between the optimal batch and the other candidates
(Settles 2010; Wang and Ye 2013). When more data are
labeled, the induced candidate batches become more similar, which makes the problem of MMD seems more serious.
Therefore, to handle this issue, we propose to use an alternative measure called α-relative Pearson divergence (RPE)
(Yamada et al. 2011) which is more appropriate to compare distributions because of the following distinct properties. First, divergence, such as K-L divergence (Kullback and
Leibler 1951), is well-known to be suitable for distribution
comparison. Second, the superiority of RPE against MMD
has been shown in two-sample distribution matching. Therefore, the effectiveness of RPE in distribution-oriented batch
active learning could also be expected. In addition, it is also
shown that RPE often gives larger dissimilarity score when
two distributions are similar but non-identical (Yamada et
al. 2011). It is with the two nice properties that RPE is usually able to distinguish between the optimal batch and the
other candidates. Such advantages are further enlarged when
the distributions represented by different candidates become
more similar.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.

Active learning is a machine learning technique that
trains a classifier after selecting a subset from an unlabeled dataset for labeling and using the selected data for
training. Recently, batch mode active learning, which
selects a batch of samples to label in parallel, has attracted a lot of attention. Its challenge lies in the choice
of criteria used for guiding the search of the optimal
batch. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to
selecting the optimal batch of queries by minimizing
the α-relative Pearson divergence (RPE) between the
labeled and the original datasets. This particular divergence is chosen since it can distinguish the optimal
batch more easily than other measures especially when
available candidates are similar. The proposed objective
is a min-max optimization problem, and it is difficult to
solve due to the involvement of both minimization and
maximization. We find that the objective has an equivalent convex form, and thus a global optimal solution can
be obtained. Then the subgradient method can be applied to solve the simplified convex problem. Our empirical studies on UCI datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach compared with the
state-of-the-art batch mode active learning methods.

Introduction
Active learning is proposed to alleviate the effort of the labeling process by selecting informative data samples. It is
useful when unlabeled data are abundant but manual labeling is expensive. The challenge of active learning is that,
given a large pool of unlabeled data and a relatively small labeling budget, the classifier trained on selected labeled data
must have good generalization performance on unseen data.
In other words, an active learning algorithm selects only a
few data instances for labeling while maintaining certain
classification performance.
Traditional active learning approaches that select the single most informative data example usually retrain the classifier when a new instance is labeled. Under circumstances
where multiple annotators are working concurrently, batch
mode active learning which iteratively selects a batch of
queries to label is more efficient and appropriate. In the

1. We propose a novel batch mode active learning algorithm
based on α-relative Pearson divergence (RPE) whose
properties are suitable for this task.
2. When using RPE in batch active learning, some auxiliary
variable will be introduced. As a result, the overall objective function becomes a min-max optimization problem, and generally it is hard to solve because the objective function is simultaneously maximized and minimized
with respect to the first and second variable. To address

∗

corresponding author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3045

