Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi-Agent Pathfinding as a Combinatorial Auction
Ofra Amir

Guni Sharon and Roni Stern

School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
oamir@seas.harvard.edu

Department of Information Systems Engineering
Ben Gurion University of the Negev
{gunisharon, roni.stern}@gmail.com

Abstract

corresponds to minimizing the sum of path costs. The flexibility of existing CA mechanisms enables using the proposed mapping to solve a range of MAPF variants, including
MAPF problems with heterogeneous agents and those with
prioritization over agents. Of particular interest, CA mechanisms can be used in non-cooperative settings with selfinterested agents that aim to minimize their own path costs
rather than the sum of path costs for all agents. Using appropriate CA mechanisms and the proposed MAPF to CA mapping, we provide the first mechanism for non-cooperative
MAPF that is optimal and provably robust to certain types
of manipulations.
While using CA mechanisms to solve MAPF problems
offers benefits, implementing auctions in the MAPF domain
poses computational challenges. Specifically, agents have a
possibly infinite number of paths to consider when bidding
(all possible paths to their goal), and the paths (bundles) can
be long (i.e., include many items). These characteristics require significant computation from the agents, in their bidding, and from the auctioneer, in its search of the optimal
path allocation. To address these computational problems,
we propose to use an iterative CA mechanism (Parkes 2006)
in conjunction with efficient representations and methods
from the MAPF literature. Iterative CA mechanisms reduce
the computational burden of the agents by gradually eliciting their preferences as the auction progresses. Drawing
on techniques used in ICTS, a state-of-the-art MAPF algorithm (Sharon et al. 2012c), we store the revealed preferences over bundles using a compact representation and utilize pruning rules when searching for possible path allocations. The resulting MAPF solver is shown empirically to be
competitive with recent MAPF solvers.
Market-based approaches, and auctions in particular, have
been previously used in multi-agent planning domain for
various purposes, including task allocation (Gerkey and
Mataric 2002; Hunsberger and Grosz 2000), computation
of coordinated MDP policies (Bererton, Gordon, and Thrun
2003), robot exploration (Tovey et al. 2005), and resource allocation (Dolgov and Durfee 2005). In most of these works,
agents bid on the tasks to perform whereas in our setting
the tasks (goals) are fixed and the problem is finding nonconflicting paths to the pre-specified agents’ goals.
The contributions of the paper are threefold. First, we
provide a mapping between MAPF and CA. Second, we

This paper proposes a mapping between multi-agent
pathfinding (MAPF) and combinatorial auctions (CAs). In
MAPF, agents need to reach their goal destinations without colliding. Algorithms for solving MAPF aim at assigning agents non-conflicting paths that minimize agents’ travel
costs. In CA problems, agents bid over bundles of items they
desire. Auction mechanisms aim at finding an allocation of
bundles that maximizes social welfare. In the proposed mapping of MAPF to CAs, agents bid on paths to their goals and
the auction allocates non-colliding paths to the agents. Using
this formulation, auction mechanisms can be naturally used to
solve a range of MAPF problem variants. In particular, auction mechanisms can be applied to non-cooperative settings
with self-interested agents while providing optimality guarantees and robustness to manipulations by agents. The paper
further shows how to efficiently implement an auction mechanism for MAPF, utilizing methods and representations from
both the MAPF and CA literatures.

Introduction
The multi-agent path finding (MAPF) problem is a generalization of the single-agent path finding problem to multiple
agents. A common objective in MAPF is to minimize the
sum of path costs of all agents. MAPF has many applications, including video games, traffic control (Silver 2005;
Dresner and Stone 2008), robotics (Bennewitz, Burgard,
and Thrun 2002; Pallottino et al. 2007; Wagner and Choset
2011), and vehicle routing (Kiesel et al. 2012).
In Combinatorial Auctions (CA), agents bid on bundles
of items allowing them to express complex preferences
over bundles. Auction mechanisms aim to find efficient allocations that maximize social welfare, that is, maximizing the sum of utilities of the agents. They have been applied in various domains, including airport time slot allocation (Rassenti, Smith, and Bulfin 1982), distributed query
optimization (Stonebraker et al. 1994) and transportation
service procurement (Song and Regan 2003).
This paper proposes a mapping between MAPF and CA,
where the bundles agents bid on are paths. This mapping
is carefully designed such that maximizing social welfare
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2003

