Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Large-Margin Multi-Label Causal Feature Learning
Chang Xu†

Dacheng Tao‡

Chao Xu†

†

‡

Key Lab. of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education), Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology, Sydney 2007, Australia
xuchang@pku.edu.cn dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

works have already used this strategy. For example, (Cai and
Hofmann 2004; Cesa-Bianchi, Gentile, and Zaniboni 2006;
Rousu et al. 2005; Hariharan et al. 2010; Bi and Kwok
2011) utilize external knowledge to derive the label relationships, such as knowledge of label hierarchies and label correlation matrices. Since these external knowledge resources are often unavailable for real-world applications,
other studies (Sun, Ji, and Ye 2008; Tsoumakas et al. 2009;
Petterson and Caetano 2011) have attempted to exploit label
relationships by counting the co-occurrence of labels in the
training data.
In practice, the label relationship is asymmetric rather
than symmetric, as assumed by most of the existing multilabel learning algorithms. For example, an image labeled
‘lake’ implies a label ‘water’, but the inverse is not true.
Only a small number of works have tried to exploit this
asymmetric label relationship. For example, in (Zhang and
Zhang 2010), a Bayesian network was used to characterize the dependence structure between multiple labels, and
a binary classifier was learned for each label by treating its
parental labels in the dependence structure as additional input features. (Huang, Yu, and Zhou 2012) assumed that if
two labels are related, the hypothesis generated for one label
can be helpful for the other label, and implemented this idea
as a boosting approach with a hypothesis reuse mechanism.
The feature of each example in multi-label learning determines the appearance of its labels, thus the feature itself
can be seen as a disorderly mixture of the properties originating from diverse labels. To comprehensively understand
the asymmetric label relationship, we define the relationship
as causality, and propose to reveal the causality from the
perspective of feature. Moreover, there is a demand for the
theoretical results to guarantee that exploiting causality is
actually beneficial for multi-label learning.
In this paper, we intend to transform the original features of examples shared by different labels into causal features corresponding to each individual label. Following the
large-margin principle, we propose a new algorithm termed
Large-margin Multi-label Causal Feature learning (LMCF)
to achieve this aim. The discovered causal features will reveal causality between labels from the perspective of feature.
Geometrically, the causality is encoded by the ‘margins’ corresponding to different labels on the hyperplane of causal
features. By encouraging the margins to be large while sat-

In multi-label learning, an example is represented by a descriptive feature associated with several labels. Simply considering labels as independent or correlated is crude; it would
be beneficial to define and exploit the causality between multiple labels. For example, an image label ‘lake’ implies the label ‘water’, but not vice versa. Since the original features are a
disorderly mixture of the properties originating from different
labels, it is intuitive to factorize these raw features to clearly
represent each individual label and its causality relationship.
Following the large-margin principle, we propose an effective
approach to discover the causal features of multiple labels,
thus revealing the causality between labels from the perspective of feature. We show theoretically that the proposed approach is a tight approximation of the empirical multi-label
classification error, and the causality revealed strengthens the
consistency of the algorithm. Extensive experimentations using synthetic and real-world data demonstrate that the proposed algorithm effectively discovers label causality, generates causal features, and improves multi-label learning.

Introduction
In the conventional single-label learning scenario, an example is associated with a single label that characterizes its
property. In many real-world applications, however, an example will naturally have several class labels. For example,
an image of a natural scene can simultaneously be annotated
with ‘sky’, ‘mountains’, ‘trees’, ‘lakes’, and ‘water’. Multilabel learning (Luo et al. 2013b; 2013a; Xu, Yu-Feng, and
Zhi-Hua 2013; Bi and Kwok 2014; Doppa et al. 2014) has
emerged as a new and increasingly important research topic
which has the capacity to handle such tasks.
The most straightforward solution to multi-label learning
is to decompose the problem into a series of binary classification problems, one for each label (Boutell et al. 2004).
However, this solution is limited because it neglects to take
the relationships between labels into account. Learning multiple labels simultaneously has been empirically shown to
significantly improve performance relative to independent
label learning, especially when there are insufficient training
examples for some labels. It is therefore advantageous to exploit the relationships between labels for learning, and some
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1924

