Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Relational Kalman Filtering
Jaesik Choi

Eyal Amir

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
Ulsan, Korea

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, USA

Tianfang Xu and Albert J. Valocchi
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, USA
leverage the ability of relational languages to specify models with size of representation independent of the size of
populations involved (Friedman et al. 1999; Poole 2003;
Richardson and Domingos 2006; Kersting 2012).
Lifted inference algorithms for relational continuous
models (Wang and Domingos 2008; Choi, Hill, and Amir
2010; Ahmadi, Kersting, and Sanner 2011; Choi and Amir
2012) degenerate (or split) relational structures upon individual observations. Lifted RKF (Choi, Guzman-Rivera, and
Amir 2011) maintains relational structure when the same
number of observations are made. Otherwise, it also degenerates (possibly rapidly) the relational structure, thus lifted
RKF may not be useful with sparse observations.
The main contributions of this paper are (1) to learn parameters for RKFs and (2) to regroup the degenerated state
variables from noisy real-world observations with tight error
bounds. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper on learning
parameters in relational continuous probabilistic models.
We propose a new learning algorithm for RKFs. We show
that relational learning expedites ﬁltering, and achieves accurate prediction in theory and practice. The key intuition
is that the Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE) of RKF
parameters is the empirical mean and variance over state
variables of a group. For partial observations, the parameters can be calculated similarly. We show that variances
of degenerated state variables on partial observations converge exponentially under reasonable conditions. Thus, our
approximate regrouping algorithm has bounded errors compared to the exact KF. We show that the RKF with regrouping is more robust against degeneracy than the Lifted RKF
in practice with partial observations.

Abstract
The Kalman Filter (KF) is pervasively used to control
a vast array of consumer, health and defense products.
By grouping sets of symmetric state variables, the Relational Kalman Filter (RKF) enables us to scale the exact
KF for large-scale dynamic systems. In this paper, we
provide a parameter learning algorithm for RKF, and a
regrouping algorithm that prevents the degeneration of
the relational structure for efﬁcient ﬁltering. The proposed algorithms signiﬁcantly expand the applicability
of the RKFs by solving the following questions: (1) how
to learn parameters for RKF from partial observations;
and (2) how to regroup the degenerated state variables
by noisy real-world observations. To our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst paper on learning parameters in relational
continuous probabilistic models. We show that our new
algorithms signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy and the
efﬁciency of ﬁltering large-scale dynamic systems.

1

Introduction

Many real-world systems can be modeled by continuous
variables and relationships (or dependencies) among them.
The Kalman Filter (KF) (Kalman 1960) accurately estimates
the state of variables in a linear dynamic system with Gaussian noise given a sequence of control-inputs and observations. The KF has been applied in a broad range of domains
such as robotics, ﬁnance (Bahmani-Oskooee and Brown
2004), and environmental science (P. and Bierkens 2001;
Clark et al. 2008). Given a sequence of observations and linear dependencies with Gaussian noise between variables, the
KF calculates the conditional probability density of the state
variables at each time step.
Unfortunately, the KF computations are cubic in the number of state variables, which limits the use of existing exact methods for domains with a large number of state variables. This has led to the combination of approximation and
sampling in the Ensemble Kalman Filter (Evensen 1994),
and recently to the Relational Kalman Filters (RKFs) over
grouped state variables (Choi, Guzman-Rivera, and Amir
2011; Ahmadi, Kersting, and Sanner 2011). The RKFs

2

Relational Linear Dynamic Systems

In this section, we deﬁne relational linear dynamic systems.
Dependencies among variables are represented using relational atoms, or just atoms.1 The relational atoms are useful when the joint probability of variables involves common
types of functions. When representing the joint probability
distribution, there are products of the parameterized functions (or potentials).

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For comprehensive deﬁnitions,
de Salvo Braz, Amir, and Roth 2005).

2539

see

(Poole

2003;

