Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Planning-Based Assistance System for Setting Up a Home Theater
Pascal Bercher and Felix Richter and Thilo Hörnle and Thomas Geier and
Daniel Höller and Gregor Behnke and Florian Nothdurft and Frank Honold and
Wolfgang Minker and Michael Weber and Susanne Biundo
Faculty of Engineering and Computer Science
Ulm University, Germany
email: forename.surname@uni-ulm.de

Abstract

audio/video receiver receives the audio signals of these devices. For connecting the devices, there are several different
cables and adapters available.
We are not aware of any tool that is capable of assisting a
user with such an assembly task. In practice, one would have
to consider the operating manuals of the various devices and
to come up with a solution by oneself.
It is straightforward to model the task in terms of a planning problem, where actions correspond to plugging cables
into devices. We described an excerpt of the domain model1
in our earlier work (Bercher et al. 2014). We solve the planning problem that encodes the assembly task using a hybrid planning approach. It fuses hierarchical planning with
Partial-Order Causal Link (POCL) planning. That approach
is well-suited for our intent of providing user assistance, as
the causal links allow for the explanation of plans (Seegebarth et al. 2012), thereby justifying the system’s behavior.
Further, they allow for the smooth integration of plan execution and repair. The hierarchy, if introduced, can be used for
limiting the search space and improving plan explanations.
While the generation of plans allows to give detailed instructions to the user in the first place, plan repair allows to
assist in cases, where execution failures occur. Plan explanation allows to question the necessity of certain instructions.

Modern technical devices are often too complex for many
users to be able to use them to their full extent. Based on
planning technology, we are able to provide advanced user assistance for operating technical devices. We present a system
that assists a human user in setting up a complex home theater consisting of several HiFi devices. For a human user, the
task is rather challenging due to a large number of different
ports of the devices and the variety of available cables. The
system supports the user by giving detailed instructions how
to assemble the theater. Its performance is based on advanced
user-centered planning capabilities including the generation,
repair, and explanation of plans.

Introduction
Technical devices become more and more complex and often cause mental overload to human users operating them.
Companion Technology (Biundo and Wendemuth 2010;
Wendemuth and Biundo 2012) enables the development of
companion systems – cognitive technical systems that assist
the user in operating a technical device. In our paper “Plan,
Repair, Execute, Explain - How Planning Helps to Assemble your Home Theater” (Bercher et al. 2014), we showed
how planning and HCI capabilities were integrated to allow
for advanced user assistance – illustrated in an example scenario, where a human user wants to connect various devices
of his home theater. Here, we describe a mobile version of
the prototypical Companion System presented there.

System Description
Our system implements a generic architecture for Companion Systems introduced in earlier work (Bercher et al. 2014,
Fig. 1). Its domain-independent components enable the realization of assistance systems in many application areas.
In our example application, user assistance is based upon
a sequence of instructions that, if executed by the user,
solves the assembly task. That instruction sequence is based
upon a plan, which is a solution to the given planning problem. Since in hybrid planning such plans are only partially ordered, a most-suitable total order must be chosen.
While every total order respecting the partial order of the
plan solves the given planning problem, some of them might
be more plausible to human users than others. We devel-

Application Scenario
– Assembling a Home Theater
We want to assist a human user in assembling her or his HiFi
components, s.t. every component receives the required audio/video signals. We consider an example scenario, where
the user wants to set up a theater consisting of a television,
a blu-ray player, a satellite receiver, and an audio/video receiver. More technically, the task is to connect these devices
in such a way that the television receives the video signals
of the blu-ray player and the satellite receiver and that the

1
The domain model can be downloaded from the SiGAPS website http://users.cecs.anu.edu.au/∼patrik/sigaps/

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4264

