Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Cupid: Commitments in Relational Algebra
Amit K. Chopra

Munindar P. Singh

Lancaster University
Lancaster LA1 4WA, United Kingdom
a.chopra1@lancaster.ac.uk

North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695-8206, USA
singh@ncsu.edu

Abstract

identifier. A correct approach would rely upon identifiers
defined on the underlying information structures. However, there is currently no support for basing commitments
on information, and naı̈ve approaches prove inadequate.
Expressiveness. Effective secure collaboration presumes
features such as deadlines, complex expressions, standing commitments, and nested commitments. Current approaches do not provide these in a unified framework.
Tracking. To interact effectively, an agent should be able
to track the states of the commitments in which it is involved. Doing so is essential for accountability. For
example, a resource owner would track which resources
it offered to share with whom and until when. A patient would track which records a hospital should share,
archive, or destroy. Current approaches provide inadequate support for tracking commitment instances.
Modeling guidance. First-order commitments may fail to
capture what their modelers intended. For instance, variables may be inappropriately quantified, which could
mean that commitment instances are impossible to discharge. Or, specification of deadlines may be such that
commitment instances are never violated or they never expire, both of which would be undesirable in many settings.
Current approaches provide little support to modelers in
detecting and avoiding such anomalous specifications.

We propose Cupid, a language for specifying commitments
that supports their information-centric aspects, and offers crucial benefits. One, Cupid is first-order, enabling a systematic
treatment of commitment instances. Two, Cupid supports
features needed for real-world scenarios such as deadlines,
nested commitments, and complex event expressions for capturing the lifecycle of commitment instances. Three, Cupid
maps to relational database queries and thus provides a setbased semantics for retrieving commitment instances in states
such as being violated, discharged, and so on. We prove that
Cupid queries are safe. Four, to aid commitment modelers,
we propose the notion of well-identified commitments, and
finitely violable and finitely expirable commitments. We give
syntactic restrictions for obtaining such commitments.

1

Introduction

(Social) commitments provide a natural basis for modeling
and enacting interactions in multiagent systems (Yolum and
Singh 2002a). An important application is in realizing secure collaboration among autonomous parties by providing
a formal high-level model of what each party may expect
from another and to what it may hold the other accountable
(Young and Antón 2010). Despite advances in representing
and reasoning about commitments, current approaches suffer from technical shortcomings that limit their applicability
in real-world settings.

Cupid provides a generic application-independent solution
that avoids these shortcomings. Specifically, we contribute

Information-based commitments. First, we distinguish
between a schema (what occurs in a specification) and
its instances (what transpires and is represented in a
database). Below, we reserve the word commitment to
mean a schema and refer to an instance explicitly.
Current approaches are not information-based. Most current approaches represent commitments based on propositions, thereby losing the schema-instance distinction. Existing first-order approaches deal inadequately with commitment instances: they rely upon commitment identifiers, which interferes with reasoning about commitments
(Chopra and Singh 2011). For example, two commitments would appear unrelated from their conjunction because each of the three commitments would have a unique

• Cupid, an expressive language for specifying commitments that supports identifying commitment instances.
• A semantics for Cupid using relational algebra, which
enables straightforward implementation over information
systems.
• Formulating safety and proving all Cupid queries are safe.
• Identifying syntactic restrictions such that Cupid commitments are well-identified. We show that commitments
that are not well-identified are vacuous.
• Formulating finite violability and expiration and identifying syntactic restrictions ensuring these properties.
Organization of this paper. Section 2 presents some challenges in commitments with the help of examples. Section 3
presents the Cupid syntax and semantics, which Section 4
uses to address the challenges of Section 2. Section 5 formalizes properties of interest and how they may be guaran-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2052

