Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Cooperative Game Solution Concepts
that Maximize Stability under Noise
Yuqian Li and Vincent Conitzer
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
{yuqian, conitzer}@cs.duke.edu

Abstract

most stable solution(s). We do not claim to thereby establish
definitively that these concepts are the only ones that can
reasonably be said to maximize stability in noisy environments. One may find aspects of the noise model unappealing
and modify the noise model accordingly, which may lead either to an altogether new concept, or to a better justification
of an existing concept. The first question to answer, though,
is whether existing solution concepts can be justified in this
manner at all, and what types of noise model are needed for
this. This is the aim of our paper.1

In cooperative game theory, it is typically assumed that the
value of each coalition is known. We depart from this, assuming that v(S) is only a noisy estimate of the true value
V (S), which is not yet known. In this context, we investigate
which solution concepts maximize the probability of ex-post
stability (after the true values are revealed). We show how
various conditions on the noise characterize the least core and
the nucleolus as optimal. Modifying some aspects of these
conditions to (arguably) make them more realistic, we obtain
characterizations of new solution concepts as being optimal,
including the partial nucleolus, the multiplicative least core,
and the multiplicative nucleolus.

Definitions
In this section, we first review cooperative games without
uncertainty, and then extend to games with uncertainty (as
has been done in prior work). Finally, we discuss our framework for taking a cooperative game without uncertainty and
considering “noisy” versions of it.

Introduction
Computational cooperative game theory (see the overview
by Chalkiadakis, Elkind, and Wooldridge (2011)) is emerging as an important toolbox in the coordination of coalitions
in multiagent systems. Much of cooperative game theory focuses on stability: no subset of agents should have an incentive to break off and work on its own. Solutions satisfying
this criterion, straightforwardly interpreted, constitute the
core, which is the standard stability-oriented solution concept. While it is a useful analytical tool, the core is likely
to fall short in real multiagent settings, as it does not distinguish between solutions that are just barely stable and ones
that are stable by a comfortable margin. This is particularly
troublesome when the numbers used to compute the solution are just noisy estimates of the true values of coalitions.
Existing solution concepts such as the least core and the nucleolus appear to provide some relief, as they in some sense
give the solutions that are the “most” stable. But what is the
right sense of “most” stable, particularly when we are worried about the fact that our input numbers are no more than
noisy estimates? And does the right sense lead us to the least
core, the nucleolus, or something else? These are the questions we set out to answer in this paper.
Our contribution is to lay out a framework to address
these issues and obtain some first results. Specifically, we
show that noise models can be designed that justify the least
core, the nucleolus, and their multiplicative versions as the

Cooperative Games
A cooperative game (or a characteristic function game) is
specified by a pair (N, v) where N is a set of n agents and
v : 2N → R is the characteristic function that assigns a
value v(S) to every subset S ⊆ N , representing the value
that agents in S can obtain and distribute among themselves
if they work (only) with each other.
A solution of such a cooperative game usually consists of
a payment vector x : N → R, where
Px(i) is the payment
agent i ∈ N receives. Let x(S) =
i∈S x(i) denote the
total payment to a subset S ⊆ N . Generally it is required
that x(N ) = v(N ). Such a payment vector x is stable or in
the core if x(S) ≥ v(S) for all S ⊆ N (Gillies 1953). That
is, the total payment x(S) to a subset S should be no less
than the value S can generate by itself. Otherwise, S would
have an incentive to deviate and work on its own.
It is well known that the core can be empty; even when
it is nonempty, we might like to select its “most” stable elements. The least core is an attempt to address all this.
Definition 1 (Least Core (Maschler, Peleg, and Shapley
1979)). Let the ε-core be {x | x(N ) = v(N ) and x(S) ≥
v(S)−ε for all ∅ ( S ( N }. The least core is the nonempty
1

The approach is analogous to that used to justify voting rules
as maximum likelihood estimators of the “correct” outcome, which
we will discuss in the related research section.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

979

