Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

What Is Hot in CHI

Wei Li
Autodesk Research, Toronto, Canada
wei.li@autodesk.com

this data to produce estimates and knowledge. Personal
activity tracking is enmeshed with everyday life. That
tracking information is often used and interpreted with
reference to daily or short term goals and decision making
for not only health and wellbeing but also for workload and
performance.
By leveraging existing technology, such as Google
Glass, many applications already overlay digital information over the physical, real-world environment. On the
other hand, tangible user interfaces are still very desirable
in collaboration, learning and design application contexts.
By giving physical forms digital information, a tangible
user interface can take advantage of human abilities of
grasping and manipulating physical objects and materials.

Introduction
As the premier international forum on human-computer
interaction, "ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems" (CHI), has continued to grow and broaden
its range of topics and contributing disciplines. CHI 2014
received over 2000 submissions. Those papers and notes
were from diversified research domains—including psychology, computer science, sociology, engineering, communication sciences, design and arts, among others. Here, I
would like to introduce progress in HCI research which
will bring new opportunities and challenges to AI community.

Disappearing Boundary between the Digital
and Physical World

Future of Making
New manufacturing technologies and design processes for
personal fabrication attracted great interest in the CHI
community. HCI has employed radical envisionment of
future technologies as part of its research program. Many
DIY makers are turning visions of tangible and ubiquitous
computing into products. Because traditional manufacturing technology is often a major challenge for DIY makers,
there is a rapidly growing body of work that explores applications of this emerging fabrication technology, including the possibility of creating novel 3D printed interfaces,
of developing interactive tools for integrating the design
and fabrication, and of rapid fabrication of interactive systems.
3D printing technology has been expanded from being a
tool for rapid prototyping of shapes to printing functional
objects. With multi-material 3D printers, it is becoming
possible to fabricate not only passive mechanical components, but interactive functional electromechanical devices,
such as speakers.
Since 3D printers and laser cutters are becoming increasingly ubiquitous, researchers are also exploring new design
process and tools to lower the barrier for users to engage in
personal fabrication. For example, instead of 3D modeling,

How people interact with machines and physical environments dramatically changed in the past decade. Recent
advances in sensing, displays and processing have motivated and enabled increasingly ubiquitous interactive computing technology. For example, the emergence of smart
wearable devices, such as smart watches and smart eyewear introduces interactions beyond the usage of a single
device.
The ways in which people consume information and
make decisions are also changing rapidly. For example,
multi-touch devices have become very affordable and
powerful. This provides an opportunity for novel data visualization and interactive clustering techniques. Smart motion sensing controllers, such as Nest, utilize machine
learning, and impact users’ pattern of HVAC control at
home. Based on the predictive control interface, a study
found users had less interaction with the Nest over time.
In CHI 2014, there were several sessions focused on
utilizing personal data from various sources and exploiting
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4324

