Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Fully Proportional Representation with Approval Ballots: Approximating
the MaxCover Problem with Bounded Frequencies in FPT Time
Piotr Faliszewski

Piotr Skowron

AGH University, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

University of Warsaw, Poland
p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl

from W to which this voter has assigned the highest utility
(if there are several such candidates, the voter is represented
by any one of them). Chamberlin–Courant rule picks a set
of K candidates that maximizes the sum of the utilities that
the voters derive from their representatives.1
Computing winners under Chamberlin–Courant rule is
NP-hard (see the work of Procaccia et al. (2008) and of Lu
and Boutilier (2011)). However, there is a general greedy
approximation algorithm that runs in polynomial time and
achieves approximation ratio 1 − 1e (irrespective of the nature of voters’ utility values; see the analysis of Lu and
Boutilier (2011)). For the case of utilities derived using
Borda scoring fuction, even stronger approximation algorithms exist: Skowron et al. (2013b) have shown a practically useful polynomial-time approximation scheme.
We consider the case of approval utilities, i.e., the case
where agents’ utilities come from the set {0, 1}; the agent
gives utility 1 to the approved candidates and the utility 0
to the disapproved ones. This case is particularly interesting because providing approval information puts much less
burden on the agents than providing preference rankings.
Unfortunately, this case is also computationally harder then
the variant of the rule with preference rankings and Borda
utilities (no polynomial-time approximation algorithm better than the general one is possible unless P = NP).

Abstract
We consider the problem of winner determination under
Chamberlin–Courant’s multiwinner voting rule with approval utilities. This problem is equivalent to the wellknown NP-complete MaxCover problem (i.e., a version
of the SetCover problem where we aim to cover as many
elements as possible) and, so, the best polynomial-time
approximation algorithm for it has approximation ratio
1 − 1e . We show exponential-time/FPT approximation
algorithms that, on one hand, achieve arbitrarily good
approximation ratios and, on the other hand, have running times much better than known exact algorithms.
We focus on the cases where the voters have to approve
of at most/at least a given number of candidates.

Introduction
We study the complexity of winner determination under
Chamberlin–Courant multiwinner voting rule with approval
utilities. Chamberlin and Courant (1983) proposed their rule
as a mean of electing committees of representatives (e.g.,
parliaments, university senates, and so on), but this rule has
also found many other applications, for example, in building recommendation systems (Lu and Boutilier 2011), as
a model of resource allocation (Skowron, Faliszewski, and
Slinko 2013b), or as a variant of the facility location problem (see, for example, discussions provided by Procaccia et
al. (2008) and Betzler et al. (2013)).
Intuitively, Chamberlin–Courant rule proceeds as follows.
Consider a setting where we have some set C of candidates,
a collection V of voters, and the goal is to pick a committee of K candidates that, in some sense, best represent
the voters. Each voter provides numerical utilities regarding
the available candidates. These utilities express how satisfied each voter would be from being represented by each of
the candidates (by assumption, a voter can be represented
by a single candidate only). Typically, though not always,
the voters do not express the utilities directly but rather rank
the candidates and the election rule uses a scoring function
to compute the utilities from the rankings (e.g., Borda scoring function assigns utility m − i to a candidate that a voter
ranks as i’th best among m candidates). Given some set W
of K candidates, each voter’s representative is the candidate

Our Contribution. Chamberlin–Courant rule with approval utilties is equivalent to the MaxCover problem. In the
MaxCover problem we are given a set N of n elements, a
family S = {S1 , . . . , Sm } of m subsets of N , and an integer K. The goal is to find a size-at-most-K subcollection of
S that contains (covers) as many elements from N as possible. Now, each voter corresponds to an element in the set
N and each candidate corresponds to a set in the family
S. If a voter i approves of candidate Sj , we have i ∈ Sj :
Picking the set Sj to be included in the MaxCover solution means that the voter i is “covered” (i.e., has a candidate
in the committee that he or she approves of). That is, there
is a one-to-one mapping between winner-determination under approval-based Chamberlin–Courant rule and the Max1
Chamberlin–Courant rule has some disadvantages as a rule
for electing parliaments, but it is still quite an attractive one. For
more detailed comparison of multiwinner voting rules we point the
reader to the work of Elkind et al. (2014).

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2124

