Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Random Gradient Descent Tree:
A Combinatorial Approach for SVM with Outliers∗
Hu Ding and Jinhui Xu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo
{huding, jinhui}@buffalo.edu

Abstract

Crisp and Burges 1999), Core-SVM (Tsang, Kwok, and
Cheung 2005), and many other techniques (Har-Peled, Roth,
and Zimak 2007; Krause and Singer 2004).

Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a fundamental technique in machine learning. A long time challenge facing SVM is how to deal with outliers (caused by mislabeling), as they could make the classes in SVM nonseparable. Existing techniques, such as soft margin
SVM, ν-SVM, and Core-SVM, can alleviate the problem to certain extent, but cannot completely resolve the
issue. Recently, there are also techniques available for
explicit outlier removal. But they suffer from high time
complexity and cannot guarantee quality of solution. In
this paper, we present a new combinatorial approach,
called Random Gradient Descent Tree (or RGD-tree),
to explicitly deal with outliers; this results in a new algorithm called RGD-SVM. Our technique yields provably good solution and can be efficiently implemented
for practical purpose. The time and space complexities
of our approach only linearly depend on the input size
and the dimensionality of the space, which are significantly better than existing ones. Experiments on benchmark datasets suggest that our technique considerably
outperforms several popular techniques in most of the
cases.

1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: SVM with (b) and without (a) outliers; the green margin
in (b) is the output from soft margin SVM; the black margin is the
output after removing outliers, which is the same as in (a).

Each of the above techniques alleviates the problem from
a different perspective, and achieves good performance for
certain types of data. However, since such techniques do not
explicitly remove the outliers, their performance could be
considerably deteriorated by outliers, especially when there
exists a significant fraction of outliers in the dataset (see
Fig. 1). In recent years, there are also techniques (Xu, Crammer, and Schuurmans 2006; Suzumura et al. 2014) available
for explicit outliers removal. But most of them are numerical approaches (e.g., by adding penalties to the objective
function), and cannot guarantee the quality of solutions (i.e.,
often trapped by local optimum).

Introduction

Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a fundamental tool for
classification (Chang and Lin 2011). For a given set of points
in Euclidean space labeled with +1 or −1 each, SVM is
to find a separating hyperplane so that points with different
labels are located on different sides of the hyperplane and
the margin of separation is maximized. In an ideal scenario
where all labeled points are separable, SVM can be modeled as a convex quadratic program, and solved optimally
by using Lagrange multiplier. However, in real world applications, data often contain noises or outliers and may not always be separable (by either linear or non-linear classifier
(Aizerman, Braverman, and Rozonoer 1964)). To resolve
this challenging issue, a great deal of efforts have been devoted to this problem and a number of techniques have been
developed in the past, such as soft margin SVM (Cortes and
Vapnik 1995; Platt 1999), ν-SVM (Scholkopf et al. 2000;

1.1

Our Results

In this paper, we present a novel combinatorial technique
called Random Gradient Descent (RGD) Tree to identify
and remove outliers in SVM; this results in a new algorithm called RGD-SVM. Comparing to the existing numerical approaches, our technique yields provably good solutions (with respect to the optimal solution) and can be efficiently implemented for practical purpose. Experimental results on several benchmark data sets (from (Chang and Lin
2011)) suggest that our technique outperforms existing popular approaches.
Furthermore, our technique has significantly better time
and space complexities than existing approaches. It runs in

∗
The research of this work was supported in part by NSF under
grants IIS-1115220, IIS-1422591, and CCF-1422324.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2561

