Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Price Evolution in a Continuous Double Auction
Prediction Market with a Scoring-Rule Based Market Maker∗
Mithun Chakraborty, Sanmay Das, Justin Peabody
{mithunchakraborty,sanmay}@seas.wustl.edu, peabody@wustl.edu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis

Abstract

Brahma et al. 2012; Othman et al. 2013; Abernethy et al.
2014) etc.).
Most research on algorithmic market making in both financial and prediction markets has either focused on market
making as a trading strategy (Chakraborty and Kearns 2011;
Schmitz 2010) or has modeled the market as a pure dealer
market, where the market maker takes one side of every
trade (Hanson 2003b; Das 2008; Othman et al. 2013). The
market can therefore be modeled in terms of the market
maker’s quoted bid (buy) and ask (sell) prices, and traders’
decisions on whether or not to transact at these prices. However, most modern markets, ranging from big financial markets like the NYSE and NASDAQ to smaller prediction markets like the Iowa Electronic Markets, use the continuous
double auction (CDA) mechanism (Forsythe et al. 1992).
In CDAs, participants can place limit orders that specify a
transaction price and are guaranteed to only execute at that
price or better (although execution is, of course, no longer
guaranteed). The key element of CDAs is the limit order
book, which contains all active buy and sell limit orders; the
highest buy and the lowest sell constitute the market bid and
ask prices at any point in time.
While most practical market making algorithms (for example, those used by market makers on the NYSE and NASDAQ) are deployed in markets with limit order books, the
academic literature on algorithmic market making has thus
far produced almost no analysis of the impact of market
making in CDA markets (with the exception of (Wah and
Wellman 2014)). Here we begin to tackle this problem in
the context of market making in prediction markets. The
logarithmic market scoring rule proposed by Robin Hanson (2003b) is probably the most commonly deployed automated market maker in prediction markets. Hanson (2003a)
also provides a scheme for integrating order books with his
market making algorithm which, to the best of our knowledge, has not yet been evaluated in the literature. This
scheme, as proposed, involves the market maker having special access to orders before they hit the order book, and a
“parallel” implementation that looks at the incoming order,
the order book, and executes portions of the trade with the
market maker and portions with the existing orders on the
order book. In addition to the special system privileges this
requires, it is not entirely transparent to traders, since the order books themselves never reflect the market maker’s pres-

The logarithmic market scoring rule (LMSR), the most
common automated market making rule for prediction
markets, is typically studied in the framework of dealer
markets, where the market maker takes one side of every transaction. The continuous double auction (CDA)
is a much more widely used microstructure for general
financial markets in practice. In this paper, we study
the properties of CDA prediction markets with zerointelligence traders in which an LMSR-style market
maker participates actively. We extend an existing idea
of Robin Hanson for integrating LMSR with limit order books in order to provide a new, self-contained market making algorithm that does not need “special” access to the order book and can participate as another
trader. We find that, as expected, the presence of the
market maker leads to generally lower bid-ask spreads
and higher trader surplus (or price improvement), but,
surprisingly, does not necessarily improve price discovery and market efficiency; this latter effect is more pronounced when there is higher variability in trader beliefs.

Introduction
Financial markets, such as those for stocks, bonds, and
options, provide participants with opportunities for hedging, investment, and speculation. Prediction markets (which
can be thought of as a type of binary option) are often
used to forecast future events like elections or sports outcomes, with participants using either real or play money
(Berg and Rietz 2006; Cowgill and Zitzewitz 2014). In order to deal with the chicken-and-egg problem of liquidity, many markets employ market makers, specially designated agents that are responsible for providing liquidity
by always being ready to transact with traders. In the last
decade, research on algorithmic market making has become
one of the interesting contact points between artificial intelligence and finance, both in the general context (Das 2005;
2008; Wah and Wellman 2014), and specifically in the design of prediction markets ((Hanson 2003b; Chen 2007;
∗
This research was partially supported by an NSF CAREER
award (1414452).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

835

