Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Explaining Watson: Polymath Style
Wlodek Zadrozny

Valeria de Paiva

Lawrence S. Moss

UNC Charlotte
wzadrozn@uncc.edu

Nuance
valeria.depaiva@nuance.com

Indiana University
lmoss@indiana.edu

Abstract

answer. In addition Watson has a view of the background
knowledge as organized around collection of concepts, as
title-oriented resources, (Chu-Carroll et al. 2012), and not as
a big flat knowledge base (which still seem to be the canonical view, e.g. (Russell and Norvig 2009) p.235).
We argue that AI needs a project to explain what Watson does in some form of abstract semantics. We believe
a formal account should accelerate progress in natural language understanding, question answering and possibly other
domains. Without it, the community can’t achieve deeper
understanding of what are Watson’s advantages and limitations.

Our paper is actually two contributions in one. First,
we argue that IBM’s Jeopardy! playing machine needs
a formal semantics. We present several arguments as
we discuss the system. We also situate the work in the
broader context of contemporary AI. Our second point
is that the work in this area might well be done as a
broad collaborative project. Hence our “Blue Sky” contribution is a proposal to organize a polymath-style effort aimed at developing formal tools for the study of
state of the art question-answer systems, and other large
scale NLP efforts whose architectures and algorithms
lack a theoretical foundation.

This paper is organized as follows: After this Introduction we discuss the need for an abstract theory of Watson.
We focus on problems derived directly from the computational architecture of Watson. The follow-on section explores the opportunities of connecting Watson to prior work
in semantics and knowledge representation. The final section explores organization of such research in a polymath
fashion.

Introduction
IBM Watson, the Jeopardy! playing machine, significantly
advanced the state of the art in natural language processing
and question answering (Ferrucci and others 2012). However, despite a comprehensive description of its algorithms
and architecture in a dozen papers in a 2012 issue of IBM
J. of Research and Development, a few dozen patent applications, and several newer papers by IBM researchers, there
seem to be no abstract, scientific explanation of Watson’s
success. Furthermore, four years later, we are aware of no
replication of Watson’s results, i.e. a question answering system with the accuracy of a Jeopardy! champion.
Watson’s ways of achieving (partial) language understanding are significantly different from the ones used in
earlier projects. When trying to understand the meaning of
a sentence, Watson doesn’t adhere to the standard syntaxsemantics division of labor. In fact, by using information
retrieval techniques to generate candidate answers and find
supporting evidence, one can argue that Watson almost completely abandons the standard view of semantics, at least
when it comes to question answering.
On the other hand, Watson uses almost all the techniques
developed by computational linguists (parsing, building of
logical form, reference resolution, etc.). These techniques
are used to create a collection of scores that account for certain aspects of syntax and semantics, but only in the context of the question and supporting evidence for a candidate

Technical details on Watson are included in the overview papers (Ferrucci and others 2010), patents (e.g. (Brown et al.
2012; Fan et al. 2012)), and patent applications (available at
http://patft.uspto.gov/netahtml/PTO/index.html ) as well as
newer work arising from the project e.g. (Lally et al. 2014).
As a result of these disclosures, we know how Watson works
and some of its possible applications (e.g. (Gopinath 2013;
Lally et al. 2014)). However, we do not know why Watson works. That is, given that Watson’s architecture and approach differs from prior work, to what extent are these differences fundamental? What are the underlying mathematical and computational mechanisms?
We believe there should be a computational theory underlying Watson. A few examples to seed a discussion appear
below, looking at what the Watson team considers their main
innovations.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Heterogeneity of Natural language understanding:
Watson evaluates multiple aspects of available information.

An abstract computational theory underlying
Watson?

4078

