Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Online Detection of Abnormal Events Using Incremental Coding Length
Jayanta K. Dutta and Bonny Banerjee
Institute for Intelligent Systems, and Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
The University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152, USA
{jkdutta, bbnerjee}@memphis.edu

Abstract

(anomalous vs. not) is not an option. Second, the data size is
enormous, so storing all the data is not feasible. Finally, the
underlying data distribution is non-stationary and involves
concept drifts; consequently normality may vary over time.
Our goal is to build a fast and accurate abnormal event detection algorithm for practical real-world applications. It is
desirable that a method quickly builds a model of normality
and detects anomalies while incrementally updating itself in
an unsupervised manner as new patterns are observed. The
contributions of this paper are twofold.
A new definition of anomaly. Given a dictionary of features learned from local spatiotemporal cuboids using the
sparse coding objective (Olshausen and Field 1996; Mairal
et al. 2010), we define a data point as anomalous if it consists
of one or more features with significant strength that rarely
occur in the other observed data points. Formally, given a set
of data points X = {~xi }N
xc is
i=1 , an anomalous data point ~
defined as:

We present an unsupervised approach for abnormal event detection in videos. We propose, given a dictionary of features
learned from local spatiotemporal cuboids using the sparse
coding objective, the abnormality of an event depends jointly
on two factors: the frequency of each feature in reconstructing
all events (or, rarity of a feature) and the strength by which it
is used in reconstructing the current event (or, the absolute
coefficient). The Incremental Coding Length (ICL) of a feature is a measure of its entropy gain. Given a dictionary, the
ICL computation does not involve any parameter, is computationally efficient and has been used for saliency detection
in images with impressive results. In this paper, the rarity of
a dictionary feature is learned online as its average energy,
a function of its ICL. The proposed approach is applicable
to real world streaming videos. Experiments on three benchmark datasets and evaluations in comparison with a number
of mainstream algorithms show that the approach is comparable to the state-of-the-art.

~xc ∈ X, ζ(~xc |X) ≥ ω

Introduction

m

(1)

where ~xi ∈ R , m is the dimension of each data point, ζ :
X → R+ is a scoring function, R+ is the set of non-negative
real numbers and ω is a threshold. ζ assigns an outlier score
to each data in X based on its frequency of occurrence in
comparison to that of the other observed data. Rarer data
points are assigned higher scores. A data could be a pixel,
region, object or event, depending on the nature of the data
and the goal. For example, if the data is a video sequence, X
is a set of events ~xi defined at each point (xi , yi , ti ) in the
video where (xi , yi ) refers to the spatial location in a frame
and ti is the index of the frame. The crux of the problem is
to discover the function ζ such that unusual or rare data in a
dataset can be detected.
Evaluating ICL for scoring spatiotemporal data points for
anomaly detection. The Incremental Coding Length (ICL) of
a feature is a measure of its entropy gain. Given a dictionary
of features, the ICL computation does not involve any parameter, is computationally efficient and has been used for
saliency detection in images with impressive results (Hou
and Zhang 2008). In this paper, the rarity of a spatiotemporal feature in the dictionary is learned online as its average
energy, a function of its ICL. No prior assumption is made
regarding the data or nature of anomaly. Due to its unsupervised and online operation, the proposed approach is appli-

Video cameras that monitor round-the-clock are ubiquitous
and expanding their reach exponentially. Due to the sheer
amount of data these sensors can generate, the resources required to store, protect personal information, and analyze
them are enormous. Since anomalous events rarely occur, it
is imperative for smart sensors to detect such events which
may then be stored and decisions can be taken.
An anomalous event may be defined as one that stands
out due to some property that occurs infrequently among the
events in its neighboring spatiotemporal locations. Anomaly
detection can be posed as an outlier detection problem where
normal events are modeled and anomaly is detected as significant deviation from the norm (Hou and Zhang 2008;
Cong, Yuan, and Liu 2013; Roshtkhari and Levine 2013;
Zhao, Fei-Fei, and Xing 2011; Borji and Itti 2012). In case of
spatiotemporal data, such as videos, it is necessary to detect
the abnormal frames (i.e. temporal anomaly) and to localize the abnormal events within the detected frames (i.e. spatial anomaly). The problem of anomalous event detection in
videos is difficult due to three primary reasons. First, the data
is unlabeled, so supervised training for binary classification
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3755

