Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Online Learning and Profit Maximization from Revealed Preferences
Kareem Amin, Rachel Cummings∗ , Lili Dworkin, Michael Kearns, Aaron Roth†
Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
{akareem,ldworkin,mkearns,aaroth}@cis.upenn.edu; achelc@caltech.edu

Abstract

(Price-Setting) First, we consider a monopolist merchant
who has the power to set prices as he wishes (without fear
of losing the consumer to competition). In this setting, we
adopt the natural goal of merchant profit maximization. The
merchant has a fixed unit cost associated with each good,
and his profit, when the consumer buys a bundle x, is his revenue minus the cost of the bundle purchased. The merchant
wishes to adaptively set prices so as to minimize his costs,
which in turn maximizes his profits. Every round, the consumer purchases her utility maximizing bundle subject to the
merchant’s prices and her budget constraint. If the merchant
knew the consumer’s utility function, he could optimally set
prices, but he does not — instead, the merchant faces a
learning problem. For the case when the consumer has a linear utility function, we give an efficient algorithm for setting
prices to quickly learn the consumer’s utility function and
then exploit this knowledge to set profit-maximizing prices.
(Exogenous Prices) Second, we consider a merchant who
cannot unilaterally set prices, but instead must react to a
stream of exogenously chosen prices. This setting is relevant
to a seller of commodity goods, or the owner of a franchise
that must set prices given by the parent company. Despite his
lack of control over prices, this merchant would nevertheless
like to be able to predict which bundle the consumer is going to buy in the next period (e.g. to optimize inventory or
streamline the supply chain). The problem remains that the
consumer’s utility function is unknown, and now the price
sequence is also unknown and arbitrary (i.e. it could in the
worst case be chosen adaptively, by an adversary). In this
setting, when the consumer has a linear utility function, we
give an efficient algorithm with a small mistake bound — in
other words, even against an adaptively chosen set of price
vectors, in the worst case over consumer utility functions,
our algorithm makes only a bounded number of mistaken
predictions of bundles purchased.
We note that there are a variety of scenarios that fall under
the two frameworks above. These include sponsored search
or contextual advertising on the web (where advertisers typically must obey periodic budget constraints, and prices are
set exogenously by the bids of competitors or endogenously
by an ad exchange or publisher); consumers who regularly
receive gift certificates which can only be used for purchases
from a single merchant such as Amazon, who in turn has
price-setting powers; and crowdsourcing or labor manage-

We consider the problem of learning from revealed preferences in an online setting. In our framework, each period a consumer buys an optimal bundle of goods from
a merchant according to her (linear) utility function and
current prices, subject to a budget constraint. The merchant observes only the purchased goods, and seeks to
adapt prices to optimize his profits. We give an efficient
algorithm for the merchant’s problem that consists of a
learning phase in which the consumer’s utility function
is (perhaps partially) inferred, followed by a price optimization step. We also give an alternative online learning algorithm for the setting where prices are set exogenously, but the merchant would still like to predict
the bundle that will be bought by the consumer, for purposes of inventory or supply chain management. In contrast with most prior work on the revealed preferences
problem, we demonstrate that by making stronger assumptions on the form of utility functions, efficient algorithms for both learning and profit maximization are
possible, even in adaptive, online settings.

1

Introduction

We consider algorithmic and learning-theoretic aspects of
the classic revealed preferences problem. In this setting, a
consumer has a fixed but unknown utility function u over
n goods, and is price sensitive. At each period t, she observes a price vector pt and purchases a bundle of (possibly
fractional) goods xt to maximize her utility given her budget (i.e. xt ∈ arg maxx·pt ≤B u(x)). Given a sequence of
T observations (p1 , x1 ), . . . , (pT , xT ), the revealed preferences problem (introduced by Samuelson (1938); see Varian
(2006) for a survey) is to determine whether the observations
are consistent with a consumer optimizing any utility function u, subject to some mild constraints (e.g. monotonicity
of u). In this paper, however, we have different and stronger
objectives, motivated by what power the merchant has to set
prices. We consider two scenarios:
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Research performed while the author was visiting the University of Pennsylvania. Author’s current affiliation: Computing and
Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology.
†
Research supported in part by NSF grants CCF-1101389,
CNS-1065060, CNS-1253345, and a Google research grant.

770

