Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Language Independent Feature Extractor
Young-Seob Jeong and Ho-Jin Choi
Department of Computer Science, KAIST
291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, South Korea
{pinode,hojinc}@kaist.ac.kr

Introduction
We propose a new customizable tool, Language Independent
Feature Extractor (LIFE), which models the inherent patterns of any language and extracts relevant features of the
language. There are two contributions of this work: (1) no
labeled data is necessary to train LIFE (It works when a sufficient number of unlabeled documents are given), and (2)
LIFE is designed to be applicable to any language.
Although there are some studies that aim to design language independent feature extractors, we argue that most
of them are not truly language independent. First, many
works depend on some other resources or tools (e.g., WordNet) which themselves are inherently language-specific. In
(Steinberger, Pouliquen, and Ignat 2006), many resources
and features were employed, and a huge effort will be required to apply it to other languages. (Curran and Clark
2003) defined word-level features, alphabet-level features,
and some features obtained from a gazetteer which again is
language-specific. Many of these approaches are available
only when these resources are constructed using the target
languages.
Second, most of these studies are applicable to alphabetbased languages (e.g., English), but not to non-alphabetbased languages (e.g., Korean, Chinese) because the characteristic difference between the two types of language is
not considered. For example, Part-Of-Speech (POS) tags are
usually allocated to each morpheme in Korean, while the
POS tags in English are allocated to each word(token). There
can be no blank space between morphemes or words in Korean and Chinese, while in English, a blank space separates
two words. In order to design a truly language independent
feature extractor, analysis of documents should not depend
on such language-specific assumptions.
There are several approaches (Chen et al. 2010; Jing et
al. 2003) that do not depend on such language-specific assumption of word definition. Instead, they employ letterlevel features. (Jing et al. 2003) compares letter-level, wordlevel, and class-level features by their performances in NER
task on Chinese language. The class-level features are defined to be the class tags of words such as numbers, Chinese names, foreign names, etc. In this work, the letter-level

Figure 1: Result of LIFE on a sample sentence written in
English.
features provide the best performance. Employing the letterlevel features may serve as a good starting point in developing language independent methods. However, trivial letterlevel features are often just occurrence-based features, so
they cannot convey as much information as POS tags or
dependency trees. LIFE generates extended letter-level features which convey such sufficient information.
Fig. 1 shows the result of LIFE applied to a sample sentence written in English. The third row represents the letters of the given sentence which are used as input to LIFE.
The first and second rows represent the corresponding class
and topic values. These values are the features generated by
LIFE. The boxes represent letter sequences, where a letter
sequence contains at least one letter. The LIFE outputs a pair
of class and topic value for each letter sequence. For an instance, for the letter sequence ‘arriv’, its class value is 5 and
its topic value is 0. The class and topic values are obtained by
utilizing a modified version of the probabilistic model used
in (Griffiths et al. 2004). In the model, a particular class is
assigned to model the topic distributions. In this example,
class 5 is assigned to the topic distributions, i.e., the topic
value exists only when the class value is 5.
Fig. 2 shows the result of LIFE applied to a sample sentence written in Korean. The meaning of the sentence is
‘(We) arrived at noon.’. Similar to the Fig. 1, class 5 is assigned to model the topic distributions. The class 5 is allocated to two letter sequences ‘되어서’(doe-eo-seo) and ‘도
착했’(do-chak-haet), where the two letter sequences have
verbal morphemes. Notice that in Fig. 1, the letter sequence
‘arriv’ is also marked by class 5. We can see that the same
class value is allocated to both letter sequences that exhibit
similar functionality, i.e. verbal morphemes, despite the fact
that the two sentences are written in different languages.
The class values represent syntactic features while the topic
values represent semantic features. The main difference between a class value and a POS tag is that the class value is
allocated to a letter sequence while the POS tag is assigned

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4170

