Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Logic Programming in Assumption-Based Argumentation Revisited
— Semantics and Graphical Representation
Claudia Schulz and Francesca Toni
{claudia.schulz, ft}@imperial.ac.uk
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
London SW7 2AZ, UK
Abstract

though the representation of knowledge in ABA resembles
logic programs, the semantics of an ABA framework are determined in a completely different way, namely as sets of
assumptions called extensions, which are able to “defend”
themselves against all contrary evidence. Recently, a new
method for determining the complete semantics of an ABA
framework has been introduced, where all assumptions are
assigned one of the labels IN, OUT, or UNDEC according to
labelling rules, thus splitting the assumptions into acceptable (IN), non-acceptable (OUT), and neutral (UNDEC) ones
(Schulz and Toni 2014a). This method was proven equivalent to the notion of complete extension semantics, where
the assumptions labelled IN coincide with the extensions.
In early work on ABA (Bondarenko et al. 1997), the authors demonstrate how to encode a logic program in an ABA
framework in such a way that, for example, the stable models of the logic program correspond to the stable extensions
of the encoding ABA framework. This correspondence has
recently proven useful to explain stable models in argumentative terms (Schulz and Toni 2013; 2014b). Inspired by the
usefulness of these correspondence results, we show that
the 3-valued stable models of a logic program correspond
to the complete labellings and extensions of the encoding
ABA framework. Furthermore, we investigate the relation
of the 3-valued L-stable semantics of a logic program with
ABA semantics. By defining a labelling version of the semistable extension semantics in ABA (Caminada et al. 2013),
we prove that the 3-valued L-stable models of a logic program correspond to the semi-stable labellings and extensions
of the encoding ABA framework. These results do not only
improve the understanding of the relationship between LP
and ABA, but can also be useful in applications such as explanations of LP semantics (Schulz and Toni 2014b).
Based on our correspondence results, we also demonstrate how the semantics of a logic program can be easily displayed in a graphical representation of the ABA labelling semantics. Consequently, our correspondence results do not only provide novices and experts in LP with
a different way of thinking about the 3-valued (L-) stable model semantics (namely in argumentative terms), but
also with a graphical representation thereof. In addition,
we show how such an ABA graph can be used to apply Abstract Argumentation (AA) semantics (Dung 1995;
Caminada and Gabbay 2009) to a logic program, which is

Logic Programming and Argumentation Theory have been
existing side by side as two separate, yet related, techniques
in the field of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning for
many years. When Assumption-Based Argumentation (ABA)
was first introduced in the nineties, the authors showed how
a logic program can be encoded in an ABA framework and
proved that the stable semantics of a logic program corresponds to the stable extension semantics of the ABA framework encoding this logic program. We revisit this initial work
by proving that the 3-valued stable semantics of a logic program coincides with the complete semantics of the encoding ABA framework, and that the L-stable semantics of this
logic program coincides with the semi-stable semantics of
the encoding ABA framework. Furthermore, we show how
to graphically represent the structure of a logic program encoded in an ABA framework and that not only logic programming and ABA semantics but also Abstract Argumentation
semantics can be easily applied to a logic program using these
graphical representations.

1

Introduction

Logic Programming (LP) is a frequently used technique for
the representation of reasoning problems in terms of a logic
program consisting of rules which are made of atoms and
default elements called negation-as-failure (NAF) literals,
which are assumed to be true as long as their complementary atom cannot be proven to hold. A variety of semantics have been defined for logic programs yielding different solutions to a given problem, e.g. the stable (Gelfond
and Lifschitz 1988), 3-valued stable (Przymusinski 1989),
3-valued L-stable (Eiter, Leone, and Saccà 1997), and wellfounded (Van Gelder, Ross, and Schlipf 1991) model semantics. Most of them are defined as sets of atoms forming a fixpoint of a function which alters the original logic
program (see (Baral and Gelfond 1994) for an overview).
Assumption-Based Argumentation (ABA) (Bondarenko et
al. 1997; Dung, Kowalski, and Toni 2009; Toni 2014) is
another technique for representing reasoning problems, but
in terms of an ABA framework consisting of rules which
are made of atoms and default elements called assumptions,
where for each assumption a contrary literal is defined. Even
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1569

