Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Languages for Learning and Mining
Luc De Raedt
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science
Celestijnenlaan 200A, POBox 2402
3001 Heverlee, Belgium

Abstract

From the user point of view, there is no such thing as
real discovery, just a matter of the expressive power of
the available query language.
Coming more from a machine learning perspective, Tom
Mitchell (2006) in his essay on The Discipline of Machine
Learning asks a similar question but using programming
languages rather than query languages and focussing on
learning instead of mining:
Can we design programming languages containing
machine learning primitives? Can a new generation
of computer programming languages directly support
writing programs that learn? ... Why not design a new
computer programming language that supports writing
programs in which some subroutines are hand-coded
while others are specified as to be learned? Such a programming language could allow the programmer to declare the inputs and outputs of each to be learned subroutine, then select a learning algorithm from the primitives provided by the programming language.
Finally, inspired by the field of constraint programming,
(Guns et al. 2013) aim at developing declarative modeling
languages for specifying a wide range of mining problems.
Such languages should support
the high-level and natural modeling of pattern mining
tasks; that is, the models should closely correspond to
the definitions of data mining problems found in the
literature; should support user-defined constraints and
criteria such that existing problem formulations can be
extended and modified and novel mining tasks can be
specified.
Although query, modelling and programming languages
are quite different types of language, the motivation for incorporating machine learning and data mining primitives in
these languages is essentially the same: it is to bring added
power and expressiveness to the programmer who is developing machine learning and data mining software or applications. Furthermore, also the means with which they want
to realize this goal are essentially the same: it is to provide
the programmer with a formalism for declaratively specifying the patterns or models of interest. This should facilitate
the task of the developer as providing a specification of the
problem is much easier than implementing a full algorithm
in some programming language.

Applying machine learning and data mining to novel applications is cumbersome. This observation is the prime
motivation for the interest in languages for learning
and mining. This note provides a gentle introduction
to three types of languages that support machine learning and data mining: inductive query languages, which
extend database query languages with primitives for
mining and learning, modelling languages, which allow
to declaratively specify and solve mining and learning
problems, and programming languages, that support the
learning of functions and subroutines. It uses an example of each type of language to introduce the underlying
ideas and puts them into a common perspective. This
then forms the basis for a short analysis of the state-ofthe-art.

Introduction
Machine learning and data mining are popular subfields of
artificial intelligence. However, it is well-known that applying machine learning and data mining to novel data sets is
challenging because each application imposes its own requirements and constraints that often require the development of new algorithms and systems. While there are software packages and tools such as Scikit for machine learning
and Weka, Orange or Knime for data mining, adapting them
to novel tasks is not easy, which explains why one often resorts to implementing new algorithms and variations from
scratch.
This observation is not new and it forms also the key motivation for different proposals for languages for learning
and mining. For instance, (Imielinski and Mannila 1996) argue for the development of inductive query languages for
data mining with “a focus on increasing programmer productivity for KDD applications.” The ultimate goal of inductive databases and querying is to put data mining on the
same methodological grounds as databases and to derive the
equivalent of Codd’s relational database model for data mining, that is, to find the primitives underlying data mining.
(Imielinski and Mannila 1996) argue that patterns should be
first class citizens that can be queried and manipulated just
like data, and they used the slogan
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4107

