Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Cross-Modal Similarity Learning via
Pairs, Preferences, and Active Supervision
Yi Zhen

Piyush Rai

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
yzhen@cc.gatech.edu

Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
piyush.rai@duke.edu

Hongyuan Zha

Lawrence Carin

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
zha@cc.gatech.edu

Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
lcarin@duke.edu

Abstract

straints between objects across different modalities. These
constraints may be generated using a small amount of supervised side-information about some of the cross-modal
pairs of objects (e.g., using their class labels, or some userdefinied subjective notion of similarity). These constraints
are subsequently used by the algorithm to learn a mapping of
data to a new feature space, such that the mapping respects
the cross-domain pairwise constraints (Bronstein et al. 2010;
Zhen and Yeung 2012a; 2012b). In many cases, however, explicit pairwise constraints may be difficult and/or expensive
to obtain. It is therefore desirable to (i) exploit weaker but
easier-to-obtain constraints, and/or (ii) select the constraints
based on some active sampling scheme that returns the most
useful/informative constraints.
Driven by this motivation, in this paper we present
a cross-modal similarity learning framework which fulfils both the aforementioned desiderarta. Our framework is
based on learning compact binary codes for objects in each
modality, which can be used to compute cross-modal similarities. The key aspects of our framework are: (i) both crossmodal pairwise and cross-modal triplet constraints (relative
preferences defined w.r.t. two cross-modal object pairs) can
be incorporated in a coherent way. In particular, to the best
of our knowledge, none of the existing methods for learning cross-modal binary codes incorporate implicit constraint
such as triplets, and (ii) An efficient active learning strategy
for querying the most useful pairwise and triplet constraints.
Moreover, the binary code size for each modality is learned
adaptively from the data, taking a nonparametric Bayesian
approach (Griffiths and Ghahramani 2011). This is particularly useful for dynamically extending existing hash codes
when new objects (from any modality) or new constraints
become available (Quadrianto et al. 2013).

We present a probabilistic framework for learning pairwise similarities between objects belonging to different modalities, such as drugs and proteins, or text and
images. Our framework is based on learning a binary
code based representation for objects in each modality, and has the following key properties: (i) it can
leverage both pairwise as well as easy-to-obtain relative
preference based cross-modal constraints, (ii) the probabilistic framework naturally allows querying for the
most useful/informative constraints, facilitating an active learning setting (existing methods for cross-modal
similarity learning do not have such a mechanism), and
(iii) the binary code length is learned from the data. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach
on two problems that require computing pairwise similarities between cross-modal object pairs: cross-modal
link prediction in bipartite graphs, and hashing based
cross-modal similarity search.

Introduction
Many real-world datasets are inherently multimodal and
heterogeneous in nature. For example, a web corpora may
consist of data from multiple modalities, such as text, images, video and audio; multi-lingual text corpora may consist of documents from different languages; and medical
imaging data may consist of images from multiple imaging modalities such as fMRI, CT, and PET. Often, we
are interested in computing the similarities between objects that belong to different modalities. This has applications in a variety of problems such as similarity search,
object-alignment, and link prediction (Bronstein et al. 2010;
Whang, Rai, and Dhillon 2013), involving cross-modal data.
This task requires feature representations that are (i) compact and interpretable, and (ii) comparable across the different modalities.
Algorithms for learning cross-modal similarities usually
rely on some form of supervision, such as pairwise con-

Learning Cross-Modal Similarities via Pairs
and Preferences
For simplicity of exposition, we focus on the bi-modal case,
for examples texts and images (our framework can be extended for more than two modalities in a straightforward

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3203

