Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

How Many Diagnoses Do We Need?
Roni Stern and Meir Kalech and Shelly Rogov

Alexander Feldman

Ben Gurion University of the Negev
Be’er Sheva, Israel

Palo Alto Research Center
Palo Alto, CA, USA

Abstract

C1

A known limitation of many diagnosis algorithms is that
the number of diagnoses they return can be very large.
This raises the question of how to use such a large set
of diagnoses. For example, presenting hundreds of diagnoses to a human operator (charged with repairing the
system) is meaningless. In various settings, including
decision support for a human operator and automated
troubleshooting processes, it is sufficient to be able to
answer a basic diagnostic question: is a given component faulty? We propose a way to aggregate an arbitrarily large set of diagnoses to return an estimate of the
likelihood of a given component to be faulty. The resulting mapping of components to their likelihood of
being faulty is called the system’s health state. We propose two metrics for evaluating the accuracy of a health
state and show that an accurate health state can be found
without finding all diagnoses. An empirical study explores the question of how many diagnoses are needed
to obtain an accurate enough health state, and a simple
online stopping criterion is proposed.

C2

In

p({C1,C2})=0.2
Out

C3

C4

p({C3,C4})=0.16

C5

p({C3,C5})=0.16

C6

p({C3,C6})=0.16

C7

p({C3,C7})=0.16

C8

p({C3,C8})=0.16

Figure 1: An example where viewing the most probable diagnosis can be more misleading than viewing the system’s
health state.
model of the diagnosed system, and computational limitations. In addition, some system models are not fully diagnosable, in the sense that some diagnoses are not separable
by any observation (Provan 2001). In this work we explore
the question of what can be done in such cases, where multiple diagnoses are found.
In some cases, additional diagnostic actions can be performed, e.g., probing internal components and performing additional system testing (Feldman, Provan, and van
Gemund 2010b; de Kleer and Williams 1987; Shakeri et al.
2000). Such actions incur costs and they may still result in
a large set of diagnoses. Consider a setting where the DA’s
output should be displayed to a human operator that will decide on subsequent actions. Clearly, a human operator cannot intelligently consider a list of hundreds of possible diagnoses.
Some DAs assign a score to every returned diagnosis,
which estimates the likelihood of each diagnosis to be correct. Given the likelihood of each diagnosis to be correct,
one may consider displaying only the most probable diagnoses. Figure 1, which is explained in greater detail later
in this paper, shows an example where returning the most
likely diagnosis is very misleading. The most likely diagnosis is that C1 and C2 are faulty, but it is actually most likely

Introduction
A diagnosis problem arises when a system does not behave
as expected. A solution to a diagnosis problem is a diagnosis, which is a set of components that are assumed to
have caused the system’s abnormal behavior. Automated diagnosis has been studied in the artificial intelligence community for several decades, with several successful applications (Struss and Price 2003; Williams and Nayak 1996).
One of the fundamental approaches to diagnosis is ModelBased Diagnosis (MBD). In MBD, a formal model of the diagnosed system is assumed specifying the expected behavior
of the system. This model in conjunction with the observed
behavior is used to deduce diagnoses.
If a diagnosis algorithm (DA) returns a single diagnosis,
then the components that are faulty according to this diagnosis can be replaced. Unfortunately, in systems of non-trivial
size it is often the case that many diagnoses can be deduced
from the system model and observations. This may be due to
having an insufficient number of observations, an inaccurate
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1618

