Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Bayesian Affect Control Theory of Self
Jesse Hoey

Tobias Schröder

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave. West,
Waterloo, Ontario, N2L3G1, Canada
jhoey@cs.uwaterloo.ca

Potsdam University of Applied Sciences,
Kiepenheuerallee 5,
14469 Potsdam, Germany
post@tobiasschroeder.de

tural representations, interactants’ identities1 , and affective
experience (Heise 2007). ACT posits that humans will strive
to achieve consistency in shared affective cultural sentiments
about events, and will seek to increase alignment with other
agents (including artificial ones).
While ACT models interactions of agents specific to given
situations, the affect control theory of self (ACT-S) was
developed to include more dispositional, cross-situational
knowledge about agents (MacKinnon and Heise 2010).
ACT-S describes the self as the totality of a person’s sense
of themselves, and may include many identities that a person can enact in different social situations. ACT-S describes
how a person will select an identity to enact in a given situation as the one that will best lead to an interaction (according
to ACT) that confirms their true sense of themselves (their
self). This interaction makes the person feel authentic, but
others may lead to feelings of inauthenticity, and to further
pressure to seek self-confirming interactions.
Recently, a probabilistic and decision theoretic generalisation of ACT, called BayesAct, has been shown to be a
suitable framework for developing socially and emotionally intelligent agents (Hoey, Schröder, and Alhothali 2013b;
Lin et al. 2014). BayesAct is a partially-observable Markov
decision process (POMDP) model, and thus generalises
ACT by modeling affective states as probability distributions, and allowing decision-theoretic reasoning about affect
and other application-specific “cognitive” aspects. In this paper, we present a similar generalisation for the affect control
theory of self, called BayesAct-S. The introduction of probability distributions to ACT-S resolves some key problems
with the sociological theory that we expose in this paper.

Abstract
Notions of identity and of the self have long been studied in social psychology and sociology as key guiding
elements of social interaction and coordination. In the
AI of the future, these notions will also play a role in
producing natural, socially appropriate artificially intelligent agents that encompass subtle and complex human
social and affective skills. We propose here a Bayesian
generalization of the sociological affect control theory
of self as a theoretical foundation for socio-affectively
skilled artificial agents. This theory posits that each human maintains an internal model of his or her deep
sense of “self” that captures their emotional, psychological, and socio-cultural sense of being in the world.
The “self” is then externalised as an identity within any
given interpersonal and institutional situation, and this
situational identity is the person’s local (in space and
time) representation of the self. Situational identities
govern the actions of humans according to affect control
theory. Humans will seek situations that allow them to
enact identities consistent with their sense of self. This
consistency is cumulative over time: if some parts of a
person’s self are not actualized regularly, the person will
have a growing feeling of inauthenticity that they will
seek to resolve. In our present generalisation, the self is
represented as a probability distribution, allowing it to
be multi-modal (a person can maintain multiple different identities), uncertain (a person can be unsure about
who they really are), and learnable (agents can learn the
identities and selves of other agents). We show how the
Bayesian affect control theory of self can underpin artificial agents that are socially intelligent.

Introduction

Background

Designers of intelligent agents are increasingly looking towards the social sciences for ideas on how to create more
natural and aligned social interactions. This endeavour requires mathematical models of cognition, but also of emotion or affect, in ways that capture the subtle cultural
rules underlying human coordination and cooperation. Affect control theory (ACT) (Heise 2007) is a mathematically
formalized sociological theory of the interplays between cul-

Affect Control Theory
Affect Control Theory (ACT) arises from work on the psychology of human social interaction (Heise 2007). ACT proposes that social perceptions, behaviours, and emotions are
guided by a psychological need to minimize the differences
between culturally shared fundamental affective sentiments
1

The meaning of the term identity differs considerably across
scientific disciplines. Here, we adhere to the tradition in sociology
where it essentially denotes a kind of person in a social situation.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

529

