Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Finding Meaningful Gaps to Guide Data Acquisition
for a Radiation Adjudication System
Nick Gisolfi

Madalina Fiterau

Artur Dubrawski

ngisolfi@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

mfiterau@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

awd@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract

Approach

We consider the problem of identifying discrepancies
between training and test data which are responsible for
the reduced performance of a classification system. Intended for use when data acquisition is an iterative process controlled by domain experts, our method exposes
insufficiencies of training data and presents them in a
user-friendly manner. The system is capable of working
with any classification system which admits diagnostics
on test data. We illustrate the usefulness of our approach
in recovering compact representations of the revealed
gaps in training data and show that predictive accuracy
of the resulting models is improved once the gaps are
filled through collection of additional training samples.

We present an engineering framework that facilitates data
quality audits by automatically detecting gaps in training
data coverage. These gaps denote differences in distributions
of select variables between training and testing samples or
point to areas of the feature space where the observed performance of the threat adjudication system appears suboptimal.
The findings are presented in the form of human-readable,
low-dimensional projections of data, in order to ensure interpretability of results and to simplify planning of corrective actions. The resulting iterative data improvement procedure boosts threat adjudication accuracy while reducing the
workload of data engineers and application domain experts,
when compared to using uninformed data gathering process.
The proposed process involves: (1) Building a threat classifier (any plausible type of a classification model can be
used, we employ the random forest method primarily due to
its scalability to highly-dimensional feature spaces, but also
because of the computable on-the-fly metrics that diagnose
reliability of predictions being made, which it provides), (2)
Gap Retrieval Module (GRM), and (3) Human-driven procedure of addressing the identified gaps. Of particular relevance are two metrics that attempt to characterize reliability of predictions made by our random forest classifier:
Dot-Product-Sum (DPS) and In-Bounds Score (IBS). DPS
measures consistency of predictions made independently by
the individual trees in the forest. IBS is perfect if for each
node of a classification tree, the query fits within the range of
the bounding box of the training data. Otherwise, it returns
the value proportional to the fraction of nodes where the
query was in-bounds. The GRM identifies where the original threat classification model performs well and where it
performs poorly. It does this in one of two ways: (a) By finding low-dimensional projections where the testing and training data distributions differ significantly, and (b) By finding low-dimensional regions of data space where the original classifier experiences considerably low accuracy. The
GRM leverages a previously published algorithm called Regression for Informative Projection Retrieval (RIPR) (Fiterau and Dubrawski 2013). This algorithm discovers a small
set of low-dimensional projections of possibly highly multivariate data which reveal specific low-dimensional structures in data, if such structures exist. RIPR’s primary application is to improve understandability of classification, re-

Problem formulation
Consider an incident classification task in a radiation threat
detection and adjudication system. As vehicles travel across
international borders, they may be scanned for sources of
harmful radiation, such as improperly contained medical or
industrial isotopes, or nuclear devices. A substantial number of potential threats flagged by radiation measurement
devices that may be used in such applications are actually
non-threatening artifacts due to naturally occurring radioactive materials (e.g. ceramics, marble or cat litter). We have
been using machine learning methodology to dismiss alerts
that are confidently explainable by non-threatening natural causes, without increasing the risk of neglecting actual
threat (Dubrawski et al. 2012).
A robust alert adjudication system must be trained and
validated on data that includes the actual threats. However,
such data is (luckily) hard to come by. Therefore, it is practical and common to place the bulk of the available empirically gathered positive incident examples into a testing
data set, and create training data using benign measurements
mixed with a carefully chosen selection of simulated threat.
Nonetheless, the volumes and complexities of the feature
space in data typically encountered in radiation measurement applications makes synthesizing a robust, sufficiently
large, and (most importantly) comprehensive set of training
data difficult and prone to omissions.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4164

