Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Generalization of Sleep Sets Based on Operator Sequence Redundancy
Robert C. Holte

Yusra Alkhazraji

Martin Wehrle

University of Alberta, Canada
robert.holte@ualberta.ca

University of Freiburg, Germany
alkhazry@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

University of Basel, Switzerland
martin.wehrle@unibas.ch

Abstract

tribution is that we provide several generalizations of sleep
sets based on the richer notion of operator sequence redundancy used by move pruning. These generalizations strictly
dominate the original concept of sleep sets in terms of pruning power, while preserving completeness and optimality
of tree search algorithms like IDA∗ . We show that in domains where the more general kinds of redundancy exist,
search time is substantially reduced by using the more general methods. Our experiments also show that, in contrast
to generalized sleep sets and move pruning, only the basic
sleep set method is faster than IDA∗ in terms of total time
(i. e., search time + preprocessing time) due to its relatively
low computational overhead.

Pruning techniques have recently been shown to speed up
search algorithms by reducing the branching factor of large
search spaces. One such technique is sleep sets, which were
originally introduced as a pruning technique for model checking, and which have recently been investigated on a theoretical level for planning. In this paper, we propose a generalization of sleep sets and prove its correctness. While the
original sleep sets were based on the commutativity of operators, generalized sleep sets are based on a more general
notion of operator sequence redundancy. As a result, our approach dominates the original sleep sets variant in terms of
pruning power. On a practical level, our experimental evaluation shows the potential of sleep sets and their generalizations
on a large and common set of planning benchmarks.

Formal Preliminaries
+

As in SAS (Bäckström and Nebel 1995) and PSVN (Holte,
Arneson, and Burch 2014), we define a search problem using finite domain variables. States are represented as a mapping of each variable to a value of its domain. Operators
are state transformers, consisting of a precondition and an
effect. In this paper, we consider SAS+ operators, where
preconditions and effects both consist of variable/value pairs
(indicating the required variable values in the preconditions,
and the new variable values after applying the operator, respectively). The empty operator sequence is denoted ε. If A
is a finite operator sequence then |A| denotes the length of A
(the number of operators in A, |ε| = 0), cost(A) is the sum
of the costs of the operators in A (cost(ε) = 0), pre(A) is
the set of states to which A can be applied, and A(s) is the
state resulting from applying A to state s ∈ pre(A). We
assume the cost of each operator is non-negative. A path
from state s to state t is an operator sequence A such that
s ∈ pre(A) and A(s) = t. A prefix of A is a nonempty initial segment of A (A1 ...Ak for 1 ≤ k ≤ |A|) and a suffix is
a nonempty final segment of A (Ak ...A|A| for 1 ≤ k ≤ |A|).
A left-pointing arrow over an operator sequence denotes the
prefix consisting of all operators in the sequence except the
←
−
−
last. If |A| ≥ 1, A = A1 . . . A|A|−1 ; ←
ε is defined to be ε.
If O is a total order on operator sequences, B >O A indicates that B is greater than A according to O. Throughout
this paper we identify an operator o with the operator sequence of length 1 that consists of only o.

Introduction
∗

Depth-first search methods such as IDA (Korf 1985) have
difficulty in domains with many alternative paths to the same
state. Pruning techniques aim to overcome this by identifying operators that need not be applied at a given search node
because doing so is certain to produce a state that can be
reached by a different path that is no more costly than the
current one. This can greatly reduce the search time without
sacrificing the optimality of the solution found.
One such pruning technique is sleep sets (Godefroid
1996; Wehrle and Helmert 2012). Sleep sets use the commutativity of operators as the basis for pruning decisions. A
different technique, move pruning (Holte and Burch 2014),
is based on a much richer notion of operator sequence redundancy than commutativity, but is limited to pruning relatively short operator sequences whereas sleep sets can prune
arbitrarily long sequences. Consequently, move pruning and
sleep sets are incomparable in terms of pruning power: there
exist operator sequences that one of them can prune, but the
other cannot, and vice versa (Holte and Burch 2014).
The first contribution of this paper is an evaluation and
comparison of sleep sets and move pruning on a large set of
benchmark problems from the international planning competitions. We show that both pruning methods substantially
improve IDA∗ ’s search time and that neither method dominates the other in terms of search time. The second conCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Definition 1. A total order, O, on operator sequences is

3291

