Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Structured Sparsity with Group-Graph Regularization
Xin-Yu Dai, Jian-Bing Zhang, Shu-Jian Huang, Jia-Jun Chen, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{daixinyu,zjb,huangsj,chenjj,zhouzh}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

In many application areas, such as computer vision, bioinformatics and natural language processing, there are usually inherent structural properties in the data. Adequately
exploiting such structural information may lead to better performance, and thus, great efforts have been made to developing structured sparsity regularization methods.
One popular approach, known as group sparsity (Yuan
and Lin 2006), is to consider the feature clustering structures. By clustering features into groups and then enforcing
sparsity at the group level, improved learning performances
have been observed in many tasks (Yuan and Lin 2006;
Bach 2008; Guo and Xue 2013). Another popular approach,
known as graph sparsity (Jacob, Obozinski, and Vert 2009;
Huang, Zhang, and Metaxas 2011; Mairal and Yu 2013), is
to consider the link structure of graph embedded features.
By embedding the features into a graph and enforcing sparsity in the connectivity, better performances may be obtained
with a subgraph containing a small number of connected features.
It is noteworthy that in previous studies either group sparsity regularization or graph sparsity regularization was used.
However, in many scenarios both group and graph structure
properties exist simultaneously in an essential way. Thus
considering only group sparsity or graph sparsity may lead
to loss of structured information. For example, in the task of
splice site prediction, the genes at different positions naturally form many groups, among where there are some dependencies. The importances of the groups vary, depending on
their positions and dependences to each other groups. Thus,
the graph sparsity can be enforced by the group structure.
In this paper, we propose the g 2 -regularization method
which enforces group-graph sparsity to make use of the advantages of both the group and graph structures. The combination of group sparsity and graph sparsity enforcement is
non-trivial because the groups of features are embedded into
the graph. The enforcement of group-graph sparsity with the
g 2 -regularization leads to a solution with a subgraph containing a small number of connected groups. We present an
effective approach which performs the optimization with the
g 2 -regularizer using minimum cost network flow and proximal gradient. Experiments on both synthetic and real data
show that, the g 2 -regularization leads to better performance
than only group sparsity or graph sparsity. In addition, considering both the group and graph structures together is more

In many learning tasks with structural properties, structural sparsity methods help induce sparse models, usually leading to better interpretability and higher generalization performance. One popular approach is to use
group sparsity regularization that enforces sparsity on
the clustered groups of features, while another popular approach is to adopt graph sparsity regularization
that considers sparsity on the link structure of graph
embedded features. Both the group and graph structural properties co-exist in many applications. However,
group sparsity and graph sparsity have not been considered simultaneously yet. In this paper, we propose a g 2 regularization that takes group and graph sparsity into
joint consideration, and present an effective approach
for its optimization. Experiments on both synthetic and
real data show that, enforcing group-graph sparsity lead
to better performance than using group sparsity or graph
sparsity only.

Introduction
It is well known that sparse models can be better than nonsparse models in many scenarios, and many regularizers
have been developed to enforce sparsity constraints (Tibshirani 1994; Yuan and Lin 2006; Huang, Zhang, and Metaxas
2011; Chen et al. 2013). Formally, given the optimization
objective:
minp L (w) + λΩ (w)
(1)
w∈R

where L(w) is the loss function, Ω (w) is the regularizer,
w and λ are the model parameter and control parameter,
respectively. One can adopt `1 -norm to realize the regularizer such that only a few features will be used in the
learned model. Such an approach, known as Lasso (Tibshirani 1994), has been applied to many tasks as a demonstration on how sparse models can achieve better generalization
performance than non-sparse models; moreover, with fewer
features used, the sparse models are usually with reasonable
interpretability. Thus, the exploration of effective sparsity
regularization methods has become a hot topic during the
past few years.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1714

