Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Pruning Game Tree by Rollouts
Bojun Huang
Microsoft Research
bojhuang@microsoft.com

Abstract

in Markov Decision Process (Péret and Garcia 2004) (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006), and game playing (Tesauro and
Galperin 1996) (Abramson 1990). In the context of game
tree evaluation, a rollout is a process that simulates the game
from the current state (the root of the game tree) to a terminating state (a leaf node), following a certain rollout policy
that determines each move of the rollout in the state space. A
rollout algorithm is a sequence of rollout processes, where
information obtained from one rollout process can be utilized to reinforce the policies of subsequent rollouts, such
that the long-term performance of the algorithm may converge towards the (near-)optimal policy.
In particular, a specfic class of rollout algorithms, called
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), has substantially advanced the state-of-art in Computer GO (Gelly et al. 2012)
and General Game Playing (Finnsson and Björnsson 2008).
The key idea of MCTS is to use the average outcome of
rollouts to approximate the minimax value of a game tree,
which is shown to be effective in dynamic games (Coulom
2006). On the other hand, however, people also observed
that existing MCTS algorithms appear to lack the capability of making “narrow lines” of tactical plans as traditional
game-tree search algorithms do. For example, Ramanujan,
Sabharwal, and Selman (2012) show that UCT, as a popular
rollout algorithms in game playing, is prone to being misled
by over-estimated nodes in the tree, thus often being trapped
in sub-optimal solutions in some situations.
As a result, researchers have been trying to combine
MCTS algorithms with traditional game tree search algorithms, in order to design unified algorithms that share the
merits of both sides (Baier and Winands 2013) (Lanctot et
al. 2013) (Coulom 2006). Unfortunately, one of the major
difficulties for the unification is that most traditional α-βlike algorithms are based on minimax search, which seems
to be a different paradigm from rollout.
In this paper, we show that two classic game-tree search
algorithms, α-β and MT-SSS*, can be implemented as rollout algorithms. The observation offers a new perspective
to understand these traditional game-tree search algorithms,
one that unifies them with their modern “competitors” under
the generic framework of rollout. Specifically,
• We define a broad family of rollout algorithms, and
prove that any algorithm in this family is guaranteed
to correctly evaluate game trees by visiting each leaf

In this paper we show that the α-β algorithm and its successor MT-SSS*, as two classic minimax search algorithms, can
be implemented as rollout algorithms, a generic algorithmic
paradigm widely used in many domains. Specifically, we define a family of rollout algorithms, in which the rollout policy
is restricted to select successor nodes only from a subset of
the children list. We show that any rollout policy in this family (either deterministic or randomized) is guaranteed to evaluate the game tree correctly with a finite number of rollouts.
Moreover, we identify simple rollout policies in this family
that “implement” α-β and MT-SSS*. Specifically, given any
game tree, the rollout algorithms with these particular policies
always visit the same set of leaf nodes in the same order with
α-β and MT-SSS*, respectively. Our results suggest that traditional pruning techniques and the recent Monte Carlo Tree
Search algorithms, as two competing approaches for game
tree evaluation, may be unified under the rollout paradigm.

Introduction
Game tree evaluation formulates a logic process to make
optimal worst-case plans for sequential decision making
problems, a research topic usually benchmarked by twoplayer board games. Historically, classic game-tree search
algorithms like α-β and its successors have successfully
demonstrated human-champion-level performance in tactical games like Chess, but their computational complexity
suffers from exponential growth with respect to the depth
of the game tree. In order to reduce the size of the game tree
under consideration, these traditional game-tree search algorithms have to be complemented by domain-specific evaluation functions, a task that is very difficult in some domains,
such as GO and General Game Playing.
Recently, rollout algorithms have been introduced as a
new paradigm to evaluate large game trees, partially because of their independence of domain-specific evaluation
functions. In general, rollout algorithm is a generic algorithmic paradigm that has been widely used in many domains, such as combinatorial optimization (Bertsekas, Tsitsiklis, and Wu 1997) (Glover and Taillard 1993), stochastic optimization (Bertsekas and Castanon 1999), planning
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1165

