Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi-Robot Auctions for Allocation of Tasks with Temporal Constraints
Ernesto Nunes and Maria Gini
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Minnesota
200 Union St SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455
{enunes, gini}@cs.umn.edu

Abstract

This paper makes two major contributions:
1. We propose the Temporal Sequential Single-Item auction
(TeSSI) algorithm, which allocates tasks using a variant
of the sequential single-item auction algorithm. The main
cost function used in TeSSI is the makespan (i.e., the time
the last robot finishes its final task), but we also use (TeSSIduo) a combination of makespan and total distance traveled. Each robot maintains temporal consistency of its
allocated tasks using a simple temporal network (STN).
TeSSI produces more compact schedules than other algorithms because each robot finds the optimal place in
its schedule for each new task before bidding on it. The
makespan of the resulting simple temporal network is
used to bid. The proposed algorithm supports both offline
allocation of tasks, when all the tasks are known upfront,
and online allocation, when tasks arrive dynamically.
2. We analyze the algorithm’s complexity, and show experimentally that it outperforms a baseline greedy algorithm
and the consensus-based bundle auction (CBBA) in experiments with synthetic data and with datasets from vehicle routing problems with time windows (Solomon 1987).

We propose an auction algorithm to allocate tasks that have
temporal constraints to cooperative robots. Temporal constraints are expressed as time windows, within which a task
must be executed. There are no restrictions on the time windows, which are allowed to overlap. Robots model their temporal constraints using a simple temporal network, enabling
them to maintain consistent schedules. When bidding on a
task, a robot takes into account its own current commitments
and an optimization objective, which is to minimize the time
of completion of the last task alone or in combination with
minimizing the distance traveled. The algorithm works both
when all the tasks are known upfront and when tasks arrive
dynamically. We show the performance of the algorithm in
simulation with different numbers of tasks and robots, and
compare it with a baseline greedy algorithm and a state-ofthe-art auction algorithm. Our algorithm is computationally
frugal and consistently allocates more tasks than the competing algorithms.

Introduction
Auctions are becoming a widely accepted method for allocating tasks to cooperative robots. In an auction allocation
method, robots bid on tasks based on the amount of effort
needed to complete them. Typically, the effort depends on
the distance between the robot location and the task location plus any additional cost for doing the task itself, such as
resources consumed (e.g., time spent) in doing the task.
So far, limited attention has been devoted to auctions for
allocation of tasks that have to be completed within a specified time window, even if in the real world many tasks have
such temporal constraints. For example, a region may need
surveillance at regular intervals, a fleet of unmanned aerial
vehicles may need to arrive to a task within seconds of each
other (Alighanbari, Kuwata, and How 2003), and repairmen
have to reach customers within specified time windows.
Time windows make task allocation difficult because the
algorithms need to take into account both the spatial and
the temporal relationships among the tasks (Kumar, Cirillo,
and Koenig 2013). Dealing with overlapping time windows
in task allocation remains an open problem (Koenig, Keskinocak, and Tovey 2010).

Related Work
Methods for multi-robot task allocation can be broadly categorized into centralized, decentralized, and hybrid; and depending on the optimality of the solution, exact or heuristic.
A recent example of a centralized method uses an efficient
mixed-integer linear programming approach for multi-robot
scheduling with spatial constraints (Gombolay, Wilcox, and
Shah 2013). Centralized methods can achieve optimal results, but are not suitable for field operations where communication can be limited and unreliable, and faults are common. Hence, we choose a decentralized approach.
Among decentralized approaches, auctions have enjoyed
popularity as a multi-robot coordination method (Dias et
al. 2006; Korsah et al. 2010). Auctions move the burden of computation onto individual robots and are robust
to local changes or failures, since the auction can proceed with the remaining robots when some robots malfunction (Nanjanath and Gini 2010). In sequential single-item
auctions (Lagoudakis et al. 2005; Koenig et al. 2006) one
task is allocated at a time, so robots can account for previous
commitments while bidding. The auction is cleared in polynomial time producing solutions that are a provable factor

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2110

