Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Regularized Linear Dynamical System Framework
for Multivariate Time Series Analysis
Zitao Liu and Milos Hauskrecht
Computer Science Department
University of Pittsburgh
210 South Bouquet St., Pittsburgh, PA, 15260 USA

Abstract

In clinical domain, in order to get accurate sequential predictions of the patients’ parameters, such as platelets counts,
time series of hemoglobin, hematocrit and red blood cell
measurements should be considered (Batal et al. 2013). Developing and learning accurate models of MTS are critical
for their successful applications in outcome prediction, decision support, and optimal control.
A large spectrum of models have been developed and
successfully applied in MTS modeling and forecasting
(Du Preez and Witt 2003; Ljung and Glad 1994). However,
MTS modeling of real-world data poses numerous challenges. First, a large number of MTS collected in the realworld problems have a relatively short span (Bence 1995).
For example, in biology, more than 80% of all time series in gene expression datasets are short (less than 80 data
points) (Ernst, Nau, and Bar-Joseph 2005). In economics,
econometric MTS, such as gross domestic product, consumer price index, etc, are measured quarterly or yearly
which leads to MTS’ lengths of less than 200 (Data 2014). In
the clinical domain, patients’ clinical MTS are usually less
than 50 due to the fact that the majority of patients’ hospitalizations is less than two weeks (Liu, Wu, and Hauskrecht
2013). A short-span complex MTS undoubtedly poses a hard
modeling problem since the existing well-developed models
and algorithms may easily overfit the data when they are
applied to such time series. Second, while in some cases
the problem of short-span MTS may be alleviated by learning the models from multiple short-span MTS instances, the
number of MTS instances available in the datasets is often
limited and for many problems it is restricted to just one time
series we want to learn from (e.g. various time series in economics or business) and the model overfitting remains a big
concern.
In this paper we study and develop solutions that are applicable and can learn models from short-span MTS. Our
work focuses on the refinements of a popular model for MTS
analysis: the Linear Dynamical System (LDS) (a.k.a Kalman
filter) (Kalman 1960) and its application to MTS forecasting. We aim to develop an algorithm to automatically learn
an LDS that performs better forecasting when learned from
a small amount of complex MTS data.
Briefly, the LDS is a classical and widely used model
for real-valued sequence analysis, that is applicable to
many real-world domains, such as engineering, astronau-

Linear Dynamical System (LDS) is an elegant mathematical framework for modeling and learning Multivariate Time Series (MTS). However, in general, it is
difficult to set the dimension of an LDS’s hidden state
space. A small number of hidden states may not be able
to model the complexities of a MTS, while a large number of hidden states can lead to overfitting. In this paper,
we study learning methods that impose various regularization penalties on the transition matrix of the LDS
model and propose a regularized LDS learning framework (rLDS) which aims to (1) automatically shut down
LDSs’ spurious and unnecessary dimensions, and consequently, address the problem of choosing the optimal number of hidden states; (2) prevent the overfitting
problem given a small amount of MTS data; and (3)
support accurate MTS forecasting. To learn the regularized LDS from data we incorporate a second order cone
program and a generalized gradient descent method into
the Maximum a Posteriori framework and use Expectation Maximization to obtain a low-rank transition matrix of the LDS model. We propose two priors for modeling the matrix which lead to two instances of our
rLDS. We show that our rLDS is able to recover well
the intrinsic dimensionality of the time series dynamics and it improves the predictive performance when
compared to baselines on both synthetic and real-world
MTS datasets.

Introduction
Multivariate time series (MTS) analysis is an important statistical tool to study the behavior of time dependent data and
to forecast its future values depending on the history of variations in the data (Reinsel 2003). MTS modeling takes into
account the sequences of values of several contemporaneous variables changing with time. By analyzing the influence of other observable variables known or suspected to
be related to the time series of interest, better understanding
and forecasting are usually obtained. For example, in economics, forecasting consumer price index usually depends
on the time series of money supply, the index of industrial
production and treasury bill rates (Kling and Bessler 1985).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1798

