Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Comparison of Qualitative and Metric Spatial
Relation Models for Scene Understanding
Akshaya Thippur , Chris Burbridge† , Lars Kunze† , Marina Alberti
John Folkesson , Patric Jensfelt , Nick Hawes†


†

Centre for Autonomous Systems, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
Intelligent Robotics Lab, School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, United Kingdom
we demonstrate how models of the spatial conﬁguration of
objects, learnt over prior observations of real scenes, can allow a robot to recognise the objects in novel scenes more
reliably.
Our work is performed in the context of developing a mobile service robot for long-term autonomy in indoor human
environments, from ofﬁces to hospitals. The ability for a
robot to run for weeks or months in its task environment
opens up a new range of possibilities in terms of capabilities. In particular, any task the robot performs will be done in
an environment it may have visited many times before, and
we wish to ﬁnd ways to capture the contextual knowledge
gained from previous visits in a way that enables subsequent
behaviour to be improved. The use of context to improve
object recognition is just one example of this new intelligent
robotics paradigm.
In this paper we focus on the task of table-top scene understanding, and more speciﬁcally what objects are present
on a table-top. Whilst the objects present on a single table
may change in position, their overall arrangement has some
regularity over time as inﬂuenced by the amount and type
of use to which the table is put. For example, if this table is
used for computing, then a (relatively static) monitor will be
present, with a keyboard in front of it and mouse to one side.
A drink, or paper and a pen, may be within an arm’s length
of the keyboard, as may headphones or a cellphone. This
arrangement may vary across different tables in the same
building, but the overall pattern of arrangements will contain
some common underlying structure. It is this structure we
aim to exploit in order to improve the recognition of tabletop objects, e.g. knowing that the object to the right of a
keyboard is more likely to be a mouse than a cellphone.
As the absolute positions of objects on a table (or their relative positions with respect to some ﬁxed part of the table) is
quite unlikely to generalise across a range of different tables,
we are investigating relational models of space, i.e. ways of
encoding the position of a target object relative to the position of one or more landmark objects. Using a data set of
table-top scenes (Thippur et al. 2014) (brieﬂy described in
Section 3.1), in this paper we explore the performance of a
variety of representations for relative object position, plus
inference techniques for operating on them, on the task of
table-top scene understanding (Section 4). In particular we
investigate representations that use varying forms of spatial

Abstract
Object recognition systems can be unreliable when run
in isolation depending on only image based features, but
their performance can be improved when taking scene
context into account. In this paper, we present techniques to model and infer object labels in real scenes
based on a variety of spatial relations – geometric features which capture how objects co-occur – and compare their efﬁcacy in the context of augmenting perception based object classiﬁcation in real-world table-top
scenes. We utilise a long-term dataset of ofﬁce tabletops for qualitatively comparing the performances of
these techniques. On this dataset, we show that more
intricate techniques, have a superior performance but
do not generalise well on small training data. We also
show that techniques using coarser information perform
crudely but sufﬁciently well in standalone scenarios and
generalise well on small training data. We conclude
the paper, expanding on the insights we have gained
through these comparisons and comment on a few fundamental topics with respect to long-term autonomous
robots.

1

Introduction

Human environments are characterized by the objects they
contain and if robots are to perform useful service tasks
for humans, it is crucial that they are able to locate and
identify a wide variety of objects in everyday environments. State-of-the-art object recognition/classiﬁcation typically relies on matching the features extracted with models built through machine learning techniques. As the number of object classes a given system is trained to recognise
increases, the uncertainty of individual object recognition
tends to increase - due to the high chance of existence of
overlapping features between the training examples of such
classes. The reliability of such recognisers is also affected
when used by real robots in everyday environments, as objects may be partially occluded by scene clutter or only visible from certain angles, both potentially reducing the visibility of features for their trained models. In this paper we argue that the performance of a robot on an object recognition
task can be increased by the addition of contextual knowledge about the scene the objects are found in. In particular
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1632

