Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Generalized Reduced Linear Program for Markov Decision Processes
Chandrashekar Lakshminarayanan and Shalabh Bhatnagar
Department Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore-560012, India
{chandrul,shalabh}@csa.iisc.ernet.in

Abstract

in the number of state variables. Most practical MDPs suffer from the curse, i.e., have large number of states and J ∗ is
difficult to compute. A practical way to tackle the curse is to
compute an approximate value function J˜ instead of J ∗ . The
methods that compute J˜ instead of J ∗ are known as approximate dynamic programming (ADP) methods whose success
depends on the quality of approximation, i.e., on the quantity ||J ∗ − ˜
J||. Most ADP methods employ linear function
approximation (LFA), i.e., let J˜ = Φr∗ , where Φ is a feature
matrix and r∗ is a learnt weight vector. Dimensionality reduction is achieved by choosing Φ to have far fewer columns
in comparison to the number of states and this makes computing J˜ easier.
Approximate linear program (ALP) (de Farias and Roy
2003) employs LFA in the linear programming formulation
(Bertsekas 2013) of MDP. The ALP computes an approximate value function and offers sound theoretical guarantees. A serious shortcoming of the ALP is the large number of constraints (of the order of the number of states). A
technique studied in literature that tackles the issue of large
number of constraints is constraint sampling (de Farias and
Roy 2004; Farias and Roy 2006) wherein one solves a reduced linear program (RLP) with a small number of constraints sampled from the constraints of the ALP. (de Farias
and Roy 2004) presents performance guarantees for the RLP
when the constraints are sampled with respect to the stationary distribution of the optimal policy. Such an idealized assumption on the availability of the optimal policy (which in
turn requires knowledge of J ∗ ) is a shortcoming. Nevertheless, the RLP has been shown to perform empirically well
(de Farias and Roy 2004; 2003; Desai, Farias, and Moallemi
2009) even when the constraints are not sampled using the
stationary distribution of the optimal policy.
Motivated by the gap between the limited theoretical guarantees of the RLP as currently available in the literature and
its successful practical efficacy, in this paper, we provide a
novel theoretical framework to characterize the error due to
constraint reduction/approximation. The novelty and salient
points of our contribution are listed below:
• We define a generalized reduced linear program (GRLP)
which has a tractable number of constraints that are obtained
as positive linear combinations of the original constraints of
the ALP.

Markov decision processes (MDPs) with large number of
states are of high practical interest. However, conventional algorithms to solve MDP are computationally infeasible in this
scenario. Approximate dynamic programming (ADP) methods tackle this issue by computing approximate solutions. A
widely applied ADP method is approximate linear program
(ALP) which makes use of linear function approximation and
offers theoretical performance guarantees. Nevertheless, the
ALP is difficult to solve due to the presence of a large number of constraints and in practice, a reduced linear program
(RLP) is solved instead. The RLP has a tractable number of
constraints sampled from the original constraints of the ALP.
Though the RLP is known to perform well in experiments,
theoretical guarantees are available only for a specific RLP
obtained under idealized assumptions.
In this paper, we generalize the RLP to define a generalized
reduced linear program (GRLP) which has a tractable number of constraints that are obtained as positive linear combinations of the original constraints of the ALP. The main
contribution of this paper is the novel theoretical framework
developed to obtain error bounds for any given GRLP. Central to our framework are two max-norm contraction operators. Our result theoretically justifies linear approximation of
constraints. We discuss the implication of our results in the
contexts of ADP and reinforcement learning. We also demonstrate via an example in the domain of controlled queues that
the experiments conform to the theory.

Introduction
Markov decision process (MDP) is an important mathematical framework to study optimal sequential decision making
problems that arise in science and engineering. Solving an
MDP involves computing the optimal value-function (J ∗ ),
a vector whose dimension is the number of states. MDPs
with small number of states can be solved easily by conventional solution methods such as value/ policy iteration or linear programming (LP) (Bertsekas 2013). Dynamic programming is at the heart of all the conventional solution methods
for MDPs.
The term curse-of-dimensionality (or in short curse) denotes the fact that the number of states grows exponentially
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2722

