Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Real-Time Predictive Optimization for Energy
Management in a Hybrid Electric Vehicle
Alexander Styler and Illah Nourbakhsh

Abstract

load predictions, our approach calculates optimal controls in
real-time with respect to the distribution defined by that set.
With accurate predictions, our approach produces nearoptimal control decisions in hybrid vehicles, improving on
existing fixed and reactive policy architectures. The load predictions are based on prior observed data, so the performance
improves over the lifetime of a vehicle as more trips are
recorded. Over time, data set coverage improves and unique
trips become less likely. In practice, frequent commutes and
errands comprise the majority of trips for many drivers and
upcoming load is easily predicted. Continually collecting
trip data over the lifetime of the vehicle enables long-term
adaptation to changing routes, driver behaviors, and traffic
trends.
We evaluate our optimization approach on a simulated hybrid battery-supercapacitor energy management task. In this
vehicle, an electric battery acts as the primary energy source
for vehicle range and operation. A supercapacitor is coupled
to the system and acts as a small, highly efficient buffer. Either can be used to power the electric motor or receive energy
from regenerative braking. The task is to minimize the sum of
the current-squared on the battery pack, which helps improve
battery pack longevity and thermal stability. The supercapacitor can be pre-charged from the battery before high-power
loads such as steep hills or rapid accelerations. This task is
analogous to other hybrid vehicle energy sourcing tasks, but
is highly sensitive to prediction or control error due to the
small size of the buffer.
We compare our predictive system to an prescient optimal
controller that is given the upcoming demand a priori. Using
real world data collected over thousands of miles of trips in
several U.S. states, we test each control system in a hybrid
electric vehicle simulation that can replay each trip. We compare a batch system that has all other data available to make
predictions and an adaptive system that has only prior data
chronologically and grows its data set over time.

With increasing numbers of electric and hybrid vehicles on the
road, transportation presents a unique opportunity to leverage
data-driven intelligence to realize large scale impact in energy
use and emissions. Energy management in these vehicles is
highly sensitive to upcoming power load on the vehicle, which
is not considered in conventional reactive policies calculated
at design time. Advancements in cheap sensing and computation have enabled on-board upcoming load predictions which
can be used to optimize energy management. In this work,
we propose and evaluate a novel, real-time optimization strategy that leverages predictions from prior data in a simulated
hybrid battery-supercapacitor energy management task. We
demonstrate a complete adaptive system that improves over the
lifetime of the vehicle as more data is collected and prediction
accuracy improves. Using thousands of miles of real-world
data collected from both petrol and electric vehicles, we evaluate the performance of our optimization strategy with respect
to our cost function. The system achieves performance within
10% of the optimal upper bound calculated using a priori
knowledge of the upcoming loads. This performance implies
improved battery thermal stability, efficiency, and longevity.
Our strategy can be applied to optimize energy use in gaselectric hybrids, battery cooling in electric vehicles, and many
other load-sensitive tasks in transportation.

Introduction
The advent of hybrid and electric vehicles yields a compelling
new platform for artificial intelligence. These vehicles offer
numerous high-level control opportunities managing state of
charge, power fulfillment, battery temperature, and various
other internal systems. As sensing and computation become
cheaper, more complex intelligent controllers can be utilized
to manage these high-level tasks in real-time. Intelligent control in these systems can yield improved energy efficiency,
reduced emissions, and increased vehicle longevity.
In this work we demonstrate a data-driven adaptive optimization approach to manage energy in a passenger vehicle in
real-time. Cheap sensing technology allows rich state data to
be measured continuously, including GPS coordinates, speed,
and power load. This state data can be leveraged to make
real-time predictions of upcoming load based on prior observed state and load data. Given a set of independent sample

Related Work
The rapid adoption of hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) has
sparked a great interest in the application of learning and
intelligence to this domain. Several works have demonstrated
that optimization of energy management in HEVs, using a
priori knowledge of the power loads, results in superior performance over fixed reactive algorithms. The works show

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

737

