Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Recommending Positive Links in Signed
Social Networks by Optimizing a Generalized AUC
∗

Dongjin Song∗ and David A. Meyer†
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, USA, 92093-0409. Email: dosong@ucsd.edu
†
Department of Mathematics,University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, USA, 92093-0112. Email: dmeyer@math.ucsd.edu
Abstract

(items) to whom the user probably will create new connections. In signed social networks, however, given a user, the
aim could be to rank people (items) this user is interested in
(i.e., positive links) on the top and people (items) this user
is not interested in (i.e., negative links) at the bottom. To
achieve this goal, it is important to quantify effectively how
good such a ranking list is.
In the past few years, the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) (Hanley and Mcneil
1982) has shown its effectiveness for measuring the performance of binary classification or ranking. For instance,
Cortes and Mohri (2004) showed that the average AUC
is monotonically increasing as a function of the classification accuracy, while the standard deviation for uneven distributions and higher error rates was observed; Clauset et
al. (2008) as well as Menon and Elkan (2011) used AUC
to measure the effectiveness of link prediction; Rendle et
al. (2009) utilized AUC to quantify personalized ranking
performance within social networks.
The AUC, however, is not an appropriate way to quantify
the ranking performance in signed networks because it only
applies to the binary case, rather than to the triplet (positive, negative, and unknown) that we consider. In particular,
given a signed social network, if AUC treats positive links
as positive samples and the other links as negative samples,
it will be impossible to quantify the ranking quality of negative links since unknown status links can either be positive or
negative. Similarly, if AUC treats negative links as negative
samples and the other links as positive samples, it will not
measure the ranking performance of positive links correctly.
A plausible model for user behavior in signed social networks is that more extreme positive and negative relationships will be revealed before less extreme ones. Such a
model implies that a personalized ranking list of potential links should place positive links at the top, negative
links at the bottom, and unknown status links in the middle. Therefore, we propose a novel criterion—a generalized AUC (GAUC)—to quantify the ranking performance in
signed social networks, and develop a new algorithm to perform link recommendation. The contributions of our work
include:

With the rapid development of signed social networks
in which the relationships between two nodes can be
either positive (indicating relations such as like) or negative (indicating relations such as dislike), producing a
personalized ranking list with positive links on the top
and negative links at the bottom is becoming an increasingly important task. To accomplish it, we propose a
generalized AUC (GAUC) to quantify the ranking performance of potential links (including positive, negative, and unknown status links) in partially observed
signed social networks. In addition, we develop a novel
link recommendation algorithm by directly optimizing
the GAUC loss. We conduct experimental studies based
upon Wikipedia, MovieLens, and Slashdot; our results
demonstrate the effectiveness and the efficiency of the
proposed approach.

Introduction
Signed social networks, in which the relationship between
two nodes can be either positive (indicating relations such as
trust) or negative (indicating relations such as distrust), are
increasingly common in recent years. For instance, Slashdot
(Lampe, Johnston, and Resnick 2007; Brzozowski, Hogg,
and Szabo 2008; Kunegis, Lommatzsch, and Bauckhage
2009) is a social website of technology related news; in
Slashdot Zoo, users can tag each other as friends (like) or
foes (dislike) based upon their comments on different articles. Another example is Epinions (Guha et al. 2004), which
is a product review website with an active user community.
Users can express whether they trust or distrust other users
based upon their reviews. Unlike traditional unsigned social
networks which can be represented as binary adjacency matrices (with 1 indicating the existence of a link and 0 indicating the unknown status of a link), a signed network can be
modeled as an adjacency matrix in which an entry is 1 (or
−1) if the relationship is positive (or negative) and 0 if the
relationship is unknown.
One fundamental problem in signed social networks is
link recommendation. In unsigned social networks, link recommendation aims to suggest to each user a list of people

• we propose a generalized AUC which will be maximized
only if all positive links are ranked on top, all negative
links are ranked at the bottom, and all unknown status

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

290

