Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Scalable Planning and Learning
for Multiagent POMDPs
Christopher Amato

Frans A. Oliehoek

CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
camato@csail.mit.edu

Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam
Dept. of CS, University of Liverpool
frans.oliehoek@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract

with a subset of other agents. This structure enables a decomposition of the value function into a set of overlapping
factors, which can be used to produce high quality solutions
(Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2001; Nair et al. 2005; Kok and
Vlassis 2006). But unlike these previous approaches, we
will not assume a factored model, but only that the value
function can be approximately factored. We present two
variants of FV-POMCP that use different amounts of factorization of the value function to scale to large action and
observation spaces.
Not only is our FV-POMCP approach applicable to
large MPOMDPs, but it is potentially even more important for Bayesian learning where the agents have uncertainty
about the underlying model as modeled by Bayes-Adaptive
POMDPs (BA-POMDPs) (Ross et al. 2011). These models translate the learning problem to a planning problem, but
since the resulting planning problems have an infinite number of states, scalable sample-based planning approaches are
critical to their solution.
We show experimentally that our approach allows both
planning and learning to be significantly more efficient
in multiagent POMDPs. This evaluation shows that our
approach significantly outperforms regular (non-factored)
POMCP, indicating that FV-POMCP is able to effectively
exploit locality of interaction in both settings.

Online, sample-based planning algorithms for POMDPs have
shown great promise in scaling to problems with large state
spaces, but they become intractable for large action and observation spaces. This is particularly problematic in multiagent POMDPs where the action and observation space grows
exponentially with the number of agents. To combat this intractability, we propose a novel scalable approach based on
sample-based planning and factored value functions that exploits structure present in many multiagent settings. This approach applies not only in the planning case, but also in the
Bayesian reinforcement learning setting. Experimental results show that we are able to provide high quality solutions
to large multiagent planning and learning problems.

1

Introduction

Online planning methods for POMDPs have demonstrated
impressive performance (Ross et al. 2008) on large problems
by interleaving planning with action selection. The leading such method, partially observable Monte Carlo planning
(POMCP) (Silver and Veness 2010), achieves performance
gains by extending sample-based methods based on Monte
Carlo tree search (MCTS) to solve POMDPs.
While online, sample-based methods show promise in
solving POMDPs with large state spaces, they become intractable as the number of actions or observations grow.
This is particularly problematic in the case of multiagent
systems. Specifically, we consider multiagent partially observable Markov decision processes (MPOMDPs), which
assume all agents share the same partially observable view
of the world and can coordinate their actions. Because the
MPOMDP model is centralized, POMDP methods apply,
but the fact that the number of joint actions and observations scales exponentially in the number of agents renders
current POMDP methods intractable.
To combat this intractability, we provide a novel samplebased online planning algorithm that exploits multiagent
structure. Our method, called factored-value partially observable Monte Carlo planning (FV-POMCP), is based on
POMCP and is the first MCTS method that exploits locality of interaction: in many MASs, agents interact directly

2

Background

We first discuss multiagent POMDPs and previous work on
Monte Carlo tree search and Bayesian reinforcement learning (BRL) for POMDPs.

2.1

Multiagent POMDPs

An MPOMDP (Messias, Spaan, and Lima 2011) is a multiagent planning model that unfolds over a number of steps.
At every stage, agents take individual actions and receive
individual observations. However, in an MPOMDP, all individual observations are shared via communication, allowing
the team of agents to act in a ‘centralized manner’. We will
restrict ourselves to the setting where such communication
is free of noise, costs and delays.
An MPOMDP is a tuple hI, S, {Ai }, T, R, {Zi }, O, Hi
with: I, a set of agents; S, a set of states with designated initial state distribution b0 ; A = ×i Ai , the set of joint actions,
using action sets for each agent, i; T , a set of state transition

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1995

