Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Extended Property Paths: Writing More SPARQL Queries in a Succinct Way*
Valeria Fionda1 , Giuseppe Pirrò2 and Mariano P. Consens3
1

2

DeMaCS, University of Calabria, Italy
WeST, University of Koblenz-Landau, Germany
3
MIE, University of Toronto, Canada

Abstract

of languages, like Conjunctive Regular Path Queries (CRPQs) (Barceló et al. 2012; Alkhateeb, Baget, and Euzenat
2009), the evaluation problem can become too expensive,
making the class unattractive for practical purposes. Hence,
restricted classes of languages like acyclic CRPQs and
Nested Regular Expressions (NREs) (Pérez, Arenas, and
Gutierrez 2010) have been proposed. NREs are at the core of
navigational languages for RDF such as nSPARQL (Pérez,
Arenas, and Gutierrez 2010) and NautiLOD (Fionda, Gutierrez, and Pirrò 2012). Languages like TriAL (Libkin, Reutter, and Vrgoč 2013), TriQ (Arenas, Gottlob, and Pieris
2014) and NEMODEQ (Rudolph and Krötzsch 2013) are
grounded on (extensions of) Datalog. Other expressive languages like SPARQLeR (Kochut and Janik 2007) and extended CRPQs (Barceló et al. 2012) focus on discovering
paths.
In terms of expressiveness, Barceló et al. (Barceló, Pérez,
and Reutter 2012) showed that NREs cannot express queries
involving, for instance, path conjunction. SPARQL property paths are even less expressive than NREs because of
the lack of nesting and tests also within (arbitrary length)
paths. TriAL can capture queries not captured by NREs
and nSPARQL. However, NREs/nSPARQL queries can be
evaluated in linear time. Arenas et al. (Arenas, Gottlob, and Pieris 2014) studied the relationships between
TriQ, TriAL and NEMODEQ in terms of Datalog± programs (Cali et al. 2010). Fletcher et al. (Fletcher et al. 2011)
compared the expressiveness of navigational languages by
considering different sets of features. We compare EPPs
with closely-related languages in Section 3.3.
EPPs extend the expressive power of SPARQL property
paths and NREs-based languages with new features such as
path conjunction, path negation and powerful types of tests.
These features are partially available in the W3C standard
language XPath 2.0 used to query tree-like data (Berglund
et al. 2010). From a concrete point of view, with EPPs we
faced two main challenges: (i) how to make EPPs a conservative extension of SPARQL property paths; (ii) how to
make EPPs readily available in existing SPARQL processors.

We introduce Extended Property Paths (EPPs), a significant
enhancement of SPARQL property paths. EPPs allow to capture in a succinct way a larger class of navigational queries
than property paths. We present the syntax and formal semantics of EPPs and introduce two different evaluation strategies.
The first is based on an algorithm implemented in a custom
query processor. The second strategy leverages a translation
algorithm of EPPs into SPARQL queries that can be executed
on existing SPARQL processors. We compare the two evaluation strategies on real data to highlight their pros and cons.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the spread of graph-like data, the area of graph
databases has received renewed attention. SPARQL, the
W3C standard query language for data in RDF, has recently
been enhanced with property paths (Harris and Seaborne
2013) to support graph navigation capabilities. The regularexpression-like syntax of property paths enables to write
SPARQL navigational queries in a more succinct way and
extend the matching of triple patterns to arbitrary length
paths.
However, property paths offer limited navigation capabilities; queries like “Find my exclusive friends”, that is, my
friends that are not friend of any of my friends, cannot be expressed. To enhance the expressive power of property paths
and enable to write more navigational queries in a succinct
way, we introduce Extended Property Paths (EPPs). In designing EPPs we identified a core of new features and investigated how to make available such features; indeed, one can
devise a custom query processor like in (Alkhateeb, Baget,
and Euzenat 2009; Fionda and Pirrò 2013) and/or leverage
existing (SPARQL) processors. The goal of this paper is to
discuss the design and implementation of EPPs.
Related Work. Graph query languages have been deeply
studied (Wood 2012). It emerged that for certain classes
* V. Fionda’s work was supported by the European Commission, the European Social Fund and the Calabria region. G.
Pirrò was partially supported by the EU Framework Programme
for Research and Innovation under grant agreement no. 611242
(Sense4us).
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1.1

EPPs by Example

We now give an overview of EPPs via a concrete example.
The syntax and semantics of EPPs will be discussed in detail

102

