Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Towards Knowledge-Driven Annotation
Claire Gardent

Yassine Mrabet

CRP Henri Tudor∗
Luxembourg
yassine.mrabet@tudor.lu

CNRS/LORIA
Nancy, France
claire.gardent@loria.fr

Muriel Foulonneau

CRP Henri Tudor∗
Luxembourg
muriel.foulonneau@tudor.lu

Eric Ras

Elena Simperl

CRP Henri Tudor∗
Luxembourg
eric.ras@tudor.lu

University of Southampton
Southampton, United Kingdom
e.simperl@soton.ac.uk
Abstract

Text annotation can be considered as the association of
text fragments to entities described in a more-or-less structured data space. Therefore, the richer the data are the more
valuable the annotations are. This fundamental aspect explains the fast emergence of knowledge-based annotation
systems. Today, with hundreds of Knowledge Bases (KBs)
and more than 30 billion RDF1 facts, linked open data2 became indeed one of the richest data spaces to use for text
annotation.
Most existing approaches focused on the performance of
text annotation w.r.t. a specific (domain-related) KB. One of
the explored tracks consists in extracting references to RDF
resources using patterns defined by (hand written) regular
expressions augmented with semantic tags (Cimiano, Ladwig, and Staab 2005; Popov et al. 2003; Suchanek, Sozio,
and Weikum 2009). A second more scalable track consists
in using learning corpora (i) to compute link probabilities
between textual mentions and RDF entities or (ii) to train
classification models according to machine-learning algorithms. However, few KBs are linked to (big) textual corpora
that could be used for training. This fact led a wide majority of research works to focus on DBpedia3 as it allows using Wikipedia as a learning resource. However, using only
DBpedia as a target KB restricts the possible range of disambiguation. For instance, 57% of the named-entities in the
Text Analysis Conference (TAC) 2009 were found to refer
to an entity that did not appear in Wikipedia (McNamee et
al. 2009) and Freebase is known to have at least 9 times as
many entities. Moreover, the semantic annotation of domain
specific texts would arguably benefit from semantic annotation methods targeting a related, domain specific KB.
In this paper, we present a novel, unsupervised and KBagnostic approach to text annotation which associates Noun
Phrases (NP) to RDF resources. Our approach differs from
previous works in three main ways. First, it is knowledgerather than text- or pattern-driven. Instead of using distributional similarity or patterns as a basis for semantic annotation, our approach solely relies on the RDF data. As a result, it is corpus independent; avoids data sparsity issues and

While the Web of data is attracting increasing interest
and rapidly growing in size, the major support of information on the surface Web are still multimedia documents. Semantic annotation of texts is one of the main
processes that are intended to facilitate meaning-based
information exchange between computational agents.
However, such annotation faces several challenges such
as the heterogeneity of natural language expressions,
the heterogeneity of documents structure and context
dependencies. While a broad range of annotation approaches rely mainly or partly on the target textual
context to disambiguate the extracted entities, in this
paper we present an approach that relies mainly on
formalized-knowledge expressed in RDF datasets to
categorize and disambiguate noun phrases. In the proposed method, we represent the reference knowledge
bases as co-occurrence matrices and the disambiguation problem as a 0-1 Integer Linear Programming (ILP)
problem. The proposed approach is unsupervised and
can be ported to any RDF knowledge base. The system
implementing this approach, called KODA, shows very
promising results w.r.t. state-of-the-art annotation tools
in cross-domain experimentations.

Introduction
With the exponential growth of information and the continuous specialization of domain-related knowledge, automatic text annotation becomes more and more important
for largely computerized tasks such as information retrieval,
eLearning activities, question answering or knowledge acquisition methods. In the last decade, this topic has been addressed by numerous works and from different perspectives
including Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Yates et al.
2007; Popov et al. 2003), Databases (Gottlob et al. 2004;
Venetis et al. 2011), and the Semantic Web (Cimiano, Ladwig, and Staab 2005; Suchanek, Sozio, and Weikum 2009;
Mendes et al. 2011; Dill et al. 2003).
∗

On the 1st of January 2015, CRP Henri Tudor and CRP Gabriel
Lippmann will merge to form the Luxembourg Institute of Science
& Technology (http://www.list.lu)
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdf-syntax/
http://www.linkeddata.org
3
http://www.dbpedia.org
2

2425

