Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Axiomatic Approach to Link Prediction
Sara Cohen and Aviv Zohar
Rachel and Selim Benin School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Israel
{sara, avivz}@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract

data sets, while performing less favorably on others (LibenNowell and Kleinberg 2007). This is not surprising given
that different dynamics often take part in the formation of
networks from diverse domains. However, this also means
that given a specific domain, there is currently no way to
predict which functions are likely to work well over this
domain. Some attempts have been made to train functions (Al Hasan et al. 2006) in order to automatically choose
a well-performing function.
Except for a few notable exceptions (e.g. (Sarkar,
Chakrabarti, and Moore 2011)), most link prediction functions do not have strong theoretical underpinnings, and it
is not always clear which properties they uphold. In this
work, we apply an axiomatic approach to the characterization of link prediction functions, in an attempt to formalize
their underlying assumptions and basic components. This
can be helpful in the future in determining whether a specific function would be a good choice for a specific domain
(by seeing whether the underlying assumptions are compatible), and can also be useful as a starting point for defining
new link prediction functions.
The axiomatic approach has been widely used in the context of social choice, including celebrated results such as Arrow’s impossibility result (Arrow 1951), and the GibbardSatterthwaite theorem (Gibbard 1973; Satterthwaite 1975).
Axiomatic treatments of this flavor, that expose deep impossibilities, show us the limits of what voting rules and
preference aggregation can achieve: certain sets of desirable
properties (or axioms) cannot all be satisfied within a single voting rule. Compromises must therefore be made when
choosing which rule to use.
A second flavor of axiomatization is to find characterization results for algorithms or rules (e.g., axiomatization
of the Shapley value in cooperative game theory (Shapley
1953)). Such characterizations show how a set of properties
uniquely determines the rule or algorithm to be used, implying again that any property not already satisfied by the
algorithm will not be added without the loss of another.
A clear progression from these classic results extends to
the domain of other algorithms that rank, for example, ranking the vertices in a graph in order to determine their centrality or “importance”. Such is the case with the PageRank
algorithm, that was originally constructed to rank individual pages in the web-graph to aid in finding relevant search

Link prediction functions are important tools that are used to
predict the evolution of a network, to locate hidden or surprising links, and to recommend new connections that should be
formed. Multiple link prediction functions have been developed in the past. However, their evaluation has mostly been
based on experimental work, which has shown that the quality of a link prediction function varies significantly depending
on the input domain. There is currently very little understanding of why and how a specific link prediction function works
well for a particular domain. The underlying foundations of
a link prediction function are often left informal—each function contains implicit assumptions about the dynamics of link
formation, and about structural properties that result from
these dynamics.
We draw upon the motivation used in characterizations of
ranking algorithms, as well as other celebrated results from
social choice, and present an axiomatic basis for link prediction. This approach seeks to deconstruct each function into
basic axioms, or properties, that make explicit its underlying assumptions. Our framework uses “property templates”
that can be considered as general choices made by a function designer, such as what score is assigned to a 2-vertex
graph, which vertices are irrelevant to the score, how removing edges or contracting vertices affects the score, and more.
Using this framework, we fully characterize four well known
link prediction functions and show that they are in fact derived from different variants of a single basic set of property
templates.

1

Introduction

Link prediction functions are widely used in a variety
of fields where complex networks are naturally studied.
Uses range from applications in social networks to discover
hidden or surprising connections and to suggest possible
“friends” to users, through collaborative filtering (Huang,
Li, and Chen 2005), scientific collaboration networks, biological and chemical networks, and more.
Several link prediction functions exist, each inspired by
different underlying principles of network formation and
creation (Leskovec et al. 2008; Qiu, He, and Yen 2011).
Such functions have mostly been evaluated empirically, and
have usually been found to work well in practice on specific
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

58

