Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

SCRAM: Scalable Collision-Avoiding Role Assignment with
Minimal-Makespan for Formational Positioning
Patrick MacAlpine and Eric Price and Peter Stone
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78701, USA
{patmac, ecprice, pstone}@cs.utexas.edu
Abstract

pings of agents to target positions operate under the constraint that no agents collide.
Previous work on assigning agents to target positions has
focused on minimizing the sum of distances all agents must
travel which is the well known assignment problem (Pentico
2007). Our work differs as we minimize the makespan (time
for all agents to reach goal positions) instead of the sum of
distances traveled. Minimizing the makespan is a decisive
factor in performance when agents are moving to target positions to complete a shared task where all agents must be in
place before the task can be completed and/or started. Such
tasks include those requiring agents be synchronized when
they start jobs at their target positions (e.g. mobile robots
assuming necessary positions on an assembly line) and scenarios for which the bottleneck is the time it takes for the last
agent to get to its target position (e.g. warehouse robots delivering items for an order to be shipped and mobile robots
used as pixels to display images (Alonso-Mora et al. 2012)).
We refer to our role assignment as SCRAM (Scalable Collision-avoiding Role Assignment with Minimalmakespan). It provides a collision free mapping of agents
to target positions, minimizes the makespan, and scales to
thousands of agents. Primary contributions of this paper include a complete specification of SCRAM, the presentation
of role assignment functions for assigning agents to target
positions, algorithms (both new and existing) for computing
the role assignment functions,1 as well as a thorough theoretical and empirical analysis of the role assignment problem,
with application to the RoboCup robot soccer domain and
potentially far beyond.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a formulation of the role assignment problem
we are solving. Two role assignment functions, as well as
algorithms implementing them, are presented in Section 3,
with an empirical evaluation of them given in Section 4. Section 5 provides case studies of positioning systems incorporating SCRAM role assignment used within the RoboCup
2D and 3D simulation domains, Section 6 discusses related
work and extensions, and Section 7 concludes.

Teams of mobile robots often need to divide up subtasks efficiently. In spatial domains, a key criterion for doing so may
depend on distances between robots and the subtasks’ locations. This paper considers a specific such criterion, namely
how to assign interchangeable robots, represented as point
masses, to a set of target goal locations within an open two dimensional space such that the makespan (time for all robots
to reach their target locations) is minimized while also preventing collisions among robots. We present scaleable (computable in polynomial time) role assignment algorithms that
we classify as being SCRAM (Scalable Collision-avoiding
Role Assignment with Minimal-makespan). SCRAM role
assignment algorithms use a graph theoretic approach to
map agents to target goal locations such that our objectives
for both minimizing the makespan and avoiding agent collisions are met. A system using SCRAM role assignment
was originally designed to allow for decentralized coordination among physically realistic simulated humanoid soccer
playing robots in the partially observable, non-deterministic,
noisy, dynamic, and limited communication setting of the
RoboCup 3D simulation league. In its current form, SCRAM
role assignment generalizes well to many realistic and realworld multiagent systems, and scales to thousands of agents.

1

Introduction

Coordinated movement among mobile agents is an important research area with many applications such as search and
rescue and warehouse operations. Research within this space
spans multiple topics including role assignment (deciding
which agent moves to which position or role) (Chaimowicz,
Campos, and Kumar 2002; Michael et al. 2008; Ji, Azuma,
and Egerstedt 2006), path planning (paths agents take to assigned positions) (Mellinger, Kushleyev, and Kumar 2012;
Sharon et al. 2012), and collision avoidance (Hokayem,
Spong, and Siljak 2007; Richards and How 2002).
The work in this paper focuses on role assignment—specifically tackling the problem of assigning homogeneous mobile agents to move to a set of fixed target positions such that an agent is present at every target position in
as little time as possible. Path planning and collision avoidance issues are addressed during role assignment, as map-

1
Videos of SCRAM role assignment in action, as well as
C++ implementations of the role assignment algorithms, can be
found at http://www.cs.utexas.edu/∼AustinVilla/sim/3dsimulation/
AustinVilla3DSimulationFiles/2013/html/scram.html

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2096

