Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Reward Shaping for Model-Based Bayesian Reinforcement Learning
Hyeoneun Kim, Woosang Lim, Kanghoon Lee, Yung-Kyun Noh and Kee-Eung Kim
Department of Computer Science
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Daejeon 305-701, Korea
hekim@ai.kaist.ac.kr, quasar17@kaist.ac.kr, khlee@ai.kaist.ac.kr,
nohyung@kaist.ac.kr and kekim@cs.kaist.ac.kr

shaping, we can transform rewards by a shaping function in
order to mitigate the sparsity and delay in rewards. A popular approach to shaping is potential-based shaping, where
the domain knowledge is leveraged to encode the desirability of states into the potential function while the optimal policy remains unchanged. We address two main challenges in
using shaping for model-based BRL. First, instead of using a
static or ﬁxed shaping function deﬁned from a-priori domain
knowledge, can we make the shaping function adapt to experiences (i.e. observed transitions)? Second, when shaping
is used with heuristic search, can we preserve the soundness
and completeness of the search heuristic?
We present a set of domain-independent shaping functions that (1) does not use a-priori knowledge of the true
underlying environment, (2) adapts to experiences, and (3)
preserves the soundness and completeness of the heuristic used for real-time search. We experimentally show that
these shaping functions signiﬁcantly improve learning performance in standard benchmark domains.

Abstract
Bayesian reinforcement learning (BRL) provides a formal framework for optimal exploration-exploitation
tradeoff in reinforcement learning. Unfortunately, it is
generally intractable to ﬁnd the Bayes-optimal behavior except for restricted cases. As a consequence, many
BRL algorithms, model-based approaches in particular,
rely on approximated models or real-time search methods. In this paper, we present potential-based shaping
for improving the learning performance in model-based
BRL. We propose a number of potential functions that
are particularly well suited for BRL, and are domainindependent in the sense that they do not require any
prior knowledge about the actual environment. By incorporating the potential function into real-time heuristic search, we show that we can signiﬁcantly improve
the learning performance in standard benchmark domains.

Introduction
A reinforcement learning (RL) agent interacts with an unknown environment to maximize the total reward. One
of the unique challenges for the agent is the well-known
exploration-exploitation tradeoff: without complete knowledge about the environment, the agent has to explore untried actions that may lead to better long-term rewards, but
at the same time, it also needs to execute actions that are
known to yield the largest rewards given the current knowledge about the environment. Bayesian reinforcement learning (BRL) provides a principled mathematical framework
for computing Bayes-optimal actions that achieve an ideal
balance between exploration and exploitation.
Although the Bayes-optimal action has a succinct formulation in model-based BRL, where the agent attempts
to build an explicit model of the environment for learning,
it is computationally intractable except for restricted cases.
As a consequence, most model-based BRL algorithms rely
on constructing approximated models that are tractable to
solve, or real-time heuristic search methods that build search
trees on-the-ﬂy.
The main focus of this paper is on shaping rewards for
improving the learning performance of BRL algorithms. In

Background
BAMDP: A model-based BRL framework
We start with the model of the underlying environment,
which is assumed to be a discrete-state Markov decision process (MDP) deﬁned as a 5-tuple M = S, A, T, R, γ, where
S is the set of environment states, A is the set of agent actions, T (s, a, s ) is the transition probability Pr(s |s, a) of
making transition to state s from state s by executing action a, R(s, a, s ) ∈ [Rmin , Rmax ] is the nonnegative reward
(i.e., Rmin ≥ 0) earned from the transition s, a, s , and
γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. The agent that interacts
with the environment executes actions by following a policy
π : S → A, which prescribes the action to be executed in
each state.
The performance criterion for π we use in this paper is the
expected discounted return V π for state st at timestep t,
∞
V π (st ) = E[ τ =t γ τ R(sτ , π(sτ ), sτ +1 )],
deﬁned as the state value function. The Bellman optimality
equation states that the state value function for the optimal
policy π ∗ satisﬁes

V ∗ (s) = maxa s T (s, a, s )[R(s, a, s ) + γV ∗ (s )] (1)

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3548

