Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Extracting Bounded-Level Modules from Deductive RDF Triplestores
Marie-Christine Rousset

Federico Ulliana

Univ. Grenoble Alpes
CNRS, LIG, 38000, Grenoble, France
IUF (Institut Universitaire de France)
marie-christine.rousset@imag.fr

Université de Montpellier II
CNRS, LIRMM, 34000, Montpellier, France
GrahpIK Team, INRIA Sophia-Antipolis
ulliana@lirmm.fr

Abstract

Yet, more and more huge RDF datasets are flourishing in
the Linked Data and some of them, like DBPedia or YAGO
(Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), are increasingly
reused in other more specialized datasets. RDF is a graph
data model based on triples accepted as the W3C standard
for Semantic Web data, with a simple ontology language,
RDF Schema (RDFS). The W3C proposed OWL for
writing expressive ontologies based on DL constructors.
Whereas OWL is often seen as an extension of RDFS, this
is not exactly the case. Both RDFS and the RDF query
language (SPARQL) feature the possibility of accessing at
the same time the ontology data and schema, by making
variables ranging over classes or properties. This domain
meta-modeling goes beyond the first-order setting typically
considered in DL (De Giacomo, Lenzerini, and Rosati
2011). As a consequence, DL modularization frameworks
are not applicable to popular RDF datasets like DBpedia
or YAGO. Also, the clear separation between the ABox
and the TBox made in DL to define the semantics of
modules is not appropriate for RDF where facts and schema
statements can be combined within a single RDF triplestore
to accommodate heterogeneous knowledge from the Web.
Another limit of the current approaches is that the existing
semantics do not allow to limit the size of the extracted
modules. As discussed in (Grau et al. 2008), the risk in
practice is to output large portions of the initial ontologies,
thus jeopardizing the gains of modularization.

We present a novel semantics for extracting bounded-level
modules from RDF ontologies and databases augmented with
safe inference rules, à la Datalog. Dealing with a recursive
rule language poses challenging issues for defining the module semantics, and also makes module extraction algorithmically unsolvable in some cases. Our results include a set of
module extraction algorithms compliant with the novel semantics. Experimental results show that the resulting framework is effective in extracting expressive modules from RDF
datasets with formal guarantees, whilst controlling their succinctness.

Introduction
The Semantic Web consolidated a legacy of ontologies and
databases today seen as reference systems for building new
Semantic Web applications. To illustrate, consider a medical application for anatomy, whose goal is to showcase the
structure of the human body, the most common pathologies and diseases, and the scientists that contributed to their
study. A structural description of human anatomy can be
drawn from FMA1 or My Corporis Fabrica (MyCF).2 A taxonomy of clinical terms about diseases can be extracted from
SNOMED, 3 while biographical informations about scientists implied in studies can be taken from DBPedia.4 These
reference system contain knowledge that can be reused to
minimize the introduction of errors in the application. However, it is inconvenient to integrate in the application the
whole datasets, as they contain complementary data and ontology axioms that are logically redundant. It is thus preferable to extract lightweight fragments of these reference systems - the modules - that are relevant for the application, and
then to build on top of them.
While extracting modules from ontologies has
been largely investigated for Description Logics (DL)
(Grau et al. 2008; Konev et al. 2008), module extraction from RDF triplestores has received little attention.

Contributions. As a first contribution, we propose a unifying framework for RDF ontologies and databases we call
deductive RDF triplestores, which is based on RDF triplestores equipped with safe Datalog inference rules. This rule
language allows to capture in a uniform manner OWL constraints that are useful in practice, such as property transtivity or symmetry, but also domain-specific rules with practical relevance for users in many domains of interest.
The second and main contribution of the paper is a parametric semantics for bounded-level modules allowing to effectively control their size. We employ a notion of level of
detail for modules in such a deductive setting. For example,
a signature ( subClassOf, partOf )3 [ eye ] limits the moduledata extracted from a triplestore, by allowing to retrieve a
description of all subclasses and subparts of the eye up to
three levels.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
fma.biostr.washington.edu
2
www.mycorporisfabrica.org
3
www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct
4
www.dbpedia.org

268

