Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Multi-Level Task Groups in Multi-Task Learning
Lei Han1 and Yu Zhang1,2∗

1

2

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
The Institute of Research and Continuing Education, Hong Kong Baptist University (Shenzhen)

Zhang 2013; Zhang and Yeung 2014), and some assume
the task structure is hierarchical (Daumé III 2009; Jalali et
al. 2010; Görnitz et al. 2011; Lozano and Swirszcz 2012;
Zweig and Weinshall 2013). Among them, some interesting
MTL algorithms assume that the tasks form several clusters
and aim to learn the underlying task groups. For example,
Jacob et al. (2008) design a regularizer based on the k-means
clustering algorithm to directly learn the task clusters with
the number of cluster predeﬁned, Kang et al. (2011) identify
the task groups by learning the cluster assignments based on
relaxed integer programming, Kumar and Daume III (2012)
generalize the non-overlapping cluster assignments for tasks
to overlapping ones, and Zhong and Kwok (2012) focus on
learning feature-level task groups where different features in
one task can have different task groups.
However, all the existing task grouping techniques are
limited to learn the task groups at only a single level based
on the model parameters but in real-world applications, the
structure between tasks can be so complex that the singlelevel task grouping is not enough to model it. For example,
to ﬁnd the cross-talks from gene expressions, the correlated
genes are often interacted with multi-level clusters as studied
in (Kim and Xing 2010; Han et al. 2014). However, we are
not aware of any work which can learn the multi-level task
clusters from data automatically.
In this paper, we want to ﬁll this gap by learning multilevel task groups as well as the parameters learning to model
the complex task relations. Speciﬁcally, we propose a MultiLevel Task Grouping (MeTaG) method which decomposes
the parameter matrix (i.e., a matrix containing the model parameters of all the tasks) into a sum of H component matrices
with each component matrix corresponding to one level. In
order to learn the task groups in each level, we impose a 2
norm on the pairwise difference among the column vectors
(corresponding to tasks) of each component matrix to construct level-speciﬁc task groups without the need to predeﬁne
the number of the groups. The proposed objective function is
convex but non-smooth, and the smoothing proximal gradient
method (Chen et al. 2011) is employed to seek the global optimum efﬁciently. Moreover, we provide theoretical analysis
for the proposed MeTaG method by proving a error bound between the estimation by our MeTaG method and the ground
truth. We further show that with an assumption on the noise
for the true grouping pattern, our MeTaG method can recover

Abstract
In multi-task learning (MTL), multiple related tasks
are learned jointly by sharing information across them.
Many MTL algorithms have been proposed to learn the
underlying task groups. However, those methods are limited to learn the task groups at only a single level, which
may be not sufﬁcient to model the complex structure
among tasks in many real-world applications. In this paper, we propose a Multi-Level Task Grouping (MeTaG)
method to learn the multi-level grouping structure instead of only one level among tasks. Speciﬁcally, by
assuming the number of levels to be H, we decompose
the parameter matrix into a sum of H component matrices, each of which is regularized with a 2 norm on the
pairwise difference among parameters of all the tasks to
construct level-speciﬁc task groups. For optimization, we
employ the smoothing proximal gradient method to efﬁciently solve the objective function of the MeTaG model.
Moreover, we provide theoretical analysis to show that
under certain conditions the MeTaG model can recover
the true parameter matrix and the true task groups in each
level with high probability. We experiment our approach
on both synthetic and real-world datasets, showing competitive performance over state-of-the-art MTL methods.

Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) (Caruana 1997) seeks to improve
the generalization performance of multiple learning tasks by
sharing common information among them. MTL has gained
its popularity among a wide range of applications including
image annotation (Fan, Gao, and Luo 2008), speech recognition (Parameswaran and Weinberger 2010), disease progression predication (Zhou et al. 2011) and so on.
Many MTL algorithms have been proposed to learn task
structure and model parameters from data simultaneously.
For example, some works aim to identify the existent of
the outlier tasks (Chen, Zhou, and Ye 2011; Gong, Ye, and
Zhang 2012), some assume that the model parameters of all
the tasks lies in a low dimensional subspace (Ando and Zhang
2005; Chen, Liu, and Ye 2010; Chen, Zhou, and Ye 2011),
some works learn the task relations (Zhang, Yeung, and Xu
2010; Zhang and Schneider 2010; Zhang and Yeung 2010;
∗

Both authors contribute equally.
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2638

