Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

SmartShift: Expanded Load Shifting
Incentive Mechanism for Risk-Averse Consumers
Bochao Shen

Balakrishnan Narayanaswamy

Ravi Sundaram

CCIS
Northeastern University
Boston MA, 02115
ordinary@ccs.neu.edu

Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla CA, 92093
muralib@cs.ucsd.edu

CCIS
Northeastern University
Boston MA, 02115
koods@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract

states that ”the difficulties that have appeared in California
and elsewhere are intrinsic to the design of current electricity
markets, in which demand exhibits virtually no price responsiveness and supply faces strict production constraints”.
Research at the intersection of computer science and
economics has established that incentives are a powerful
way to allocate scarce resources (Courcoubetis and Weber
2003). Incentive mechanisms incorporating information exchange require back and forth communication between the
consumers and the producers. Conventional electricity infrastructure is not designed to support such a dialog, instead relying on unilateral actions by the producers such as
price-regulation and load-shedding. Fortunately, the introduction of new communication (Sood et al. 2009) and control (Farhangi 2010) infrastructure will allow increased consumer participation in the smart grid.
Traditionally, economists and electricity companies have
focused on pricing as a mechanism to solve these two problems in a systematic way. However, homes and small businesses have an inherent and systemic requirement for stable electricity costs (Chao 2010). It is understood that ”Consumers generally shy away from markets when products are
complicated, supply is uncertain, prices are volatile, and information is lacking” (Chao 2012). We demonstrate that exposing risk-averse consumers to the actual real-time costs
of electricity production, will result in a reduction in aggregate demand leading to reduced revenue for the generators
and distributors with potential knock-on effects for the economy at large. At the same time, the volatility of real-time
pricing can have strong effects on grid stability (Roozbehani, Dahleh, and Mitter 2012). A second concern with realtime pricing, is that consumer prices may increase (Allcott
2009) or net electricity consumption may decrease (Allcott 2011), depending on the model. We initiate the study
of a new model of incentives and utility-customer interaction. To reduce volatility, whilst yet accounting for enduser constraints (e.g., washer must be run only during the
day), we introduce an inter-temporal characteristic to the
customer ‘bidding’ language. More importantly, we ensure
that the customer and the utility will both be no worse off
under our scheme than under flat-rate pricing. Our mechanism, SmartShift, does this by rewarding consumers who
shift consumption with increased allocations for the same
cost. Consumers are paid in kind and not cash, advantaging

Peak demand for electricity continues to surge around the
world. The supply-demand imbalance manifests itself in
many forms, from rolling brownouts in California to power
cuts in India. It is often suggested that exposing consumers to
real-time pricing, will incentivize them to change their usage and mitigate the problem - akin to increasing tolls at
peak commute times. We show that risk-averse consumers
of electricity react to price fluctuations by scaling back on
their total demand, not just their peak demand, leading to
the unintended consequence of an overall decrease in production/consumption and reduced economic efficiency. We propose a new scheme that allows homes to move their demands
from peak hours in exchange for greater electricity consumption in non-peak hours - akin to how airlines incentivize a passenger to move from an over-booked flight in exchange for,
say, two tickets in the future. We present a formal framework
for the incentive model that is applicable to different forms of
the electricity market. We show that our scheme not only enables increased consumption and consumer social welfare but
also allows the distribution company to increase profits. This
is achieved by allowing load to be shifted while insulating
consumers from real-time price fluctuations. This win-win is
important if these methods are to be embraced in practice.

Introduction
Power utilities worldwide face at least two major challenges.
The first is Peak Demand - a period in which the demand for
power is significantly higher than average. In order to satisfy a large peak demand, utilities (generation/distribution
companies) have to make large capital investments including new ‘peaking’ generation stations, larger capacity lines,
transformers, and operational expenditures including expensive purchases of electricity on the “spot market” (Harris
2006). For example, it is estimated that a 5% lowering of
demand would have resulted in a 50% price reduction during the peak hours of the California electricity crisis in
2000-2001 (International Energy Agency 2003). As a result of the quadratic dependence between resistive losses
and transmitted current, peaks also lead to substantial energy wastage. The second challenge faced by power utilities is that of Supply-Demand imbalance. (Borenstein 2002)
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

716

