Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Efficient Forest-Based Tabu Search Algorithm
for the Split-Delivery Vehicle Routing Problem
Zizhen Zhang,1 Huang He,1 Zhixing Luo,2 Hu Qin,3 Songshan Guo1
1

Sun Yat-Sen University, China
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong S.A.R
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{zhangzizhen@gmail.com}
2

search algorithm to solve the k-SDVRP in which the vehicle
capacity, all customer demands and the quantity delivered
to each customer are integer numbers. After analyzing this
tabu search algorithm, we believe that it can also deal with
the SDVRP. Further, (Archetti, Speranza, and Savelsbergh
2008) devised an optimization-based heuristic for the kSDVRP based on the algorithm by (Archetti, Speranza, and
Hertz 2006). Most of heuristics were developed for the SDVRP with the minimum possible number of vehicles, such as
a scatter search algorithm by (Mota, Campos, and Corberán
2007), two column generation based heuristics by (Jin, Liu,
and Eksioglu 2008) and (Archetti, Bianchessi, and Speranza
2011), an adaptive memory algorithm by (Aleman, Zhang,
and Hill 2010) and a tabu search algorithm with vocabulary
building approach by (Aleman and Hill 2010). (Berbotto,
Garcı́a, and Nogales 2013) proposed a randomized granular
tabu search algorithm for the k-SDVRP with the minimum
possible number of vehicles. (Ho and Haugland 2004) developed a tabu search algorithm for the SDVRP with time
windows.
In this paper, we propose a novel solution approach for
the SDVRP, where vehicle capacity and customer demands
are not required to be integer numbers, the number of vehicles is not limited to the minimum possible number, and
the customer demands may exceed the vehicle capacity. The
main contributions are threefold. First, we find a novel way
to represent the solutions of the SDVRP, which is the combination of a set of vehicle routes and a forest. Second, based
on this solution representation, we propose three classes of
neighborhood search operators. Finally, we prove the effectiveness of our solution approach by extensive experiments
on 67 benchmark instances.

Abstract
The split-delivery vehicle routing problem (SDVRP) is
a natural extension of the classical vehicle routing problem (VRP) that allows the same customer to be served
by more than one vehicle. This problem is a very challenging combinatorial optimization problem and has attracted much academic attention. To solve it, most of
the literature articles adopted heuristic approaches in
which the solution is represented by a set of delivery
patterns, and the search operators were derived from
the traditional VRP operators. Differently, our approach
employs the combination of a set of routes and a forest
to represent the solution. Several forest-based operators
are accordingly introduced. We integrate the new operators into a simple tabu search framework and then
demonstrate the efficiency of our approach by conducting experiments on existing benchmark instances.

1

Introduction

The split-delivery vehicle routing problem (SDVRP) has
been studied by a number of researches; see (Archetti and
Speranza 2008; 2012) for an overview. The defining characteristic of the SDVRP that distinguishes it from the classical vehicle routing problem (VRP) is that each customer
can be served by more than one vehicle. Obviously, when
the demand of a customer is lager than the vehicle capacity, it has to be split and the customer has to be visited more
than once. As shown by (Dror and Trudeau 1989), when all
customer demands are less than or equal to the vehicle capacity, split delivery can also lead to substantial cost savings.
Some real-life applications validating the importance of the
SDVRP can be found in (Mullaseril, Dror, and Leung 1997;
Sierksma and Tijssen 1998; Song, Lee, and Kim 2002).
Many research efforts have been spent in designing
heuristics for the SDVRP and its variants. The first heuristic for the SDVRP was the local search algorithm by (Dror
and Trudeau 1989), which employs two types of problemspecific local search operators, namely k-split interchange
and route addition. Eighteen years later, (Chen, Golden, and
Wasil 2007) developed a heuristic that combines an MIP
model and a record-to-record travel algorithm for this problem. (Archetti, Speranza, and Hertz 2006) proposed a tabu

2

Problem Description and Properties

The SDVRP is defined on a complete and directed graph
G = (V, E), where V = {0, 1, . . . , n} is the vertex set
and E = {(i, j) : i, j ∈ V, i 6= j} is the edge set. Vertex 0 is known as the depot and the set of remaining vertices VC = {1, . . . , n} denotes the set of n customers. Each
customer i ∈ VC has a positive demand di and each edge
(i, j) has a non-negative travel cost ci,j , where the cost matrix [ci,j ] satisfies the triangle inequality. There is a sufficient
number of homogeneous vehicles available each with a capacity Q. We define a delivery pattern p as a vertex sequence

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3432

