Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Planning with Numeric Timed Initial Fluents
Chiara Piacentini, Maria Fox, Derek Long
Informatics Department
King’s College London
London, UK
email: name.surname@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract

the electrical demand profiles), against which the planner
needs to actively react to maintain some numeric constraints
through an extended period of time.
Despite the practical value of TIFs, currently no IPC
benchmark domain with TIFs is available and only the
PDDL planners POPF 2 (Coles et al. 2010) and UPMurphi (Della Penna et al. 2009) are capable of dealing with
them directly, treating them just as an extension of TILs.

Numeric Timed Initial Fluents represent a new feature
in PDDL that extends the concept of Timed Initial Literals to numeric fluents. They are particularly useful to
model independent functions that change through time
and influence the actions to be applied. Although they
are very useful to model real world problems, they are
not systematically defined in the family of PDDL languages and they are not implemented in any generic
PDDL planner, except for POPF 2 and UPMurphi.
In this paper we present an extension of the planner
POPF 2 ( POPF - TIF ) to handle problems with numeric
Timed Initial Fluents. We propose and evaluate two contributions: the first is based on improvements of the
heuristic evaluation, while the second considers alternative search algorithms based on a mixture of Enforced
Hill Climbing and Best First Search.

1

2

Planning with Exogenous Events

The effect of exogenous events (both TILs and TIFs) is generally to delay resources, remove resources or violate active
conditions. The latter case occurs when the problem has actions with over all conditions (conditions that must hold
during the entire duration of an action) or trajectory constraints. The major difference between TILs and TIFs is due
to the presence of active constraints. In the case of a propositional domain, an active constraint involves only a proposition that is required to be false or true throughout the duration of the action. If a TIL modifies that proposition, it
makes the precondition of that action true (or false) and we
can deduce that the action cannot intersect the time-point of
the TIL.
An interesting case arises when the condition contains
some expressions including a fluent changed by TIFs and
some other fluent controlled by actions. In this case, if the
condition would be violated because of the application of a
TIF, the planner can choose to apply an action to balance the
value of the other fluent expression. When the action with
the over all constraint cannot be postponed or timed to
avoid the critical TIFs, we can see that applying the correct
balancing action is essential to find the solution. For this,
when we add TIFs in a planning problem, the planner needs
an extension that is beyond the simple extension of TILs to
numeric fluents.

Introduction

Timed Initial Literals (TILs) were first introduced in PDDL
during the IPC-4 to model deterministic unconditional exogenous events that become true or false at time points. Numeric Timed Initial Fluents (TIFs) are a natural extension
of TILs that express changes of numeric fluents, allowing
the addition or the deletion of resources independently of
actions in the plan.
We only consider exogenous events that assign values to
fluents and do not allow relative changes by increase or decrease effects. Such effects can be reformulated using only
TIF assignment by decomposing fluents into two parts, one
modified by actions and the other by TIFs.
For example, given a domain fluent (x):
(at 1 (= (x) 1))
(at 2 (= (x) 4))

In real world problems, TIFs are often used to describe
discretised functions of time that are independent of the actions chosen by the planner. In particular, there is a class of
“real world” problems, such as the Unit Commitment Problem (UCP) (Campion et al. 2013) and the Electrical Balancing Problem (EB) (Piacentini et al. 2013), characterised
by the presence of background functions (in these cases

3 Implementation of POPF - TIF
We extend POPF 2 (Coles et al. 2010) to POPF - TIF by the
modification of the heuristic and two new alternative search
algorithms.
3.1

Modifying the Heuristic Evaluation

It has been observed (Baier and Botea 2009) that the FF
relaxed plan heuristic sometimes oversimplifies the struc-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4196

