Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Mining User Consumption Intention from Social Media
Using Domain Adaptive Convolutional Neural Network
Xiao Ding† , Ting Liu†∗ , Junwen Duan† , Jian-Yun Nie‡
†

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{xding, tliu, jwduan}@ir.hit.edu.cn
‡
University of Montreal, Canada
nie@iro.umontreal.ca
recommend me a smartphone of about $600.” explicitly indicates that the user wants to buy a smartphone. The goal of
this work is to automatically infer people’s consumption intention from user-generated content and find the appropriate
products to satisfy their needs.
Previously, researchers have developed numerous approaches to identify individual intentions. For example, the
existing e-commerce recommender systems can recommend
the right product to a user, based on what the user has bought
or browsed, and what his/her friends have bought (Wang
and Zhang 2013). However, most of them do not incorporate the linguistic information of users, and recommend the
most relevant item rather than what the user needs the most.
Analysing user sentiment and opinion can also be related to
identifying user commercial intents (Wang, Qian, and Feng
2013). For example, “I like the design of iphone 6!” implies
that the user may want to buy “iphone 6”. However, mining
consumption intention is orthogonal to sentiment analysis
as well as opinion mining and thus provides a different perspective.
In this paper, we explore the linguistic relationships between users’ consumption intention and their social media
data in different domains. To this end, on the one hand,
it is necessary to investigate and combine lexical and sentence level clues from diverse syntactic and semantic structures in a sentence. For example, to identify that the sentence “My baby has infantile anorexia.” contains user consumption intention, we should leverage the keywords (e.g.
“baby”, “anorexia”) and the meaning of the entire sentence.
On the other hand, we should endow our model with domain
adaptation capacity because large-scale annotated data may
be available only in some domains.
Inspired by Collobert et al. (2011), we exploit a CNNbased framework termed Consumption Intention Mining
Model (CIMM) to extract lexical and sentence level features for identifying user consumption intention. CIMM has
a convolutional layer that projects each word within a context window to a lexical contextual feature vector. Then,
CIMM uses a max pooling layer to extract the most salient
lexical features to form a fixed-length sentence level feature vector. The sentence level feature vector can be then fed
to feedforward neural network layers, which perform affine
transformations followed by non-linear functions to extract
highly non-linear and effective features.

Abstract
Social media platforms are often used by people to
express their needs and desires. Such data offer great
opportunities to identify users’ consumption intention
from user-generated contents, so that better tailored
products or services can be recommended. However,
there have been few efforts on mining commercial intents from social media contents. In this paper, we investigate the use of social media data to identify consumption intentions for individuals. We develop a Consumption Intention Mining Model (CIMM) based on
convolutional neural network (CNN), for identifying
whether the user has a consumption intention. The
task is domain-dependent, and learning CNN requires
a large number of annotated instances, which can be
available only in some domains. Hence, we investigate
the possibility of transferring the CNN mid-level sentence representation learned from one domain to another by adding an adaptation layer. To demonstrate the
effectiveness of CIMM, we conduct experiments on two
domains. Our results show that CIMM offers a powerful
paradigm for effectively identifying users’ consumption
intention based on their social media data. Moreover,
our results also confirm that the CNN learned in one domain can be effectively transferred to another domain.
This suggests that a great potential for our model to significantly increase effectiveness of product recommendations and targeted advertising.

Introduction
People often post their needs and desires on social media. Mining users’ intents, especially commercial intents,
from social media is of great interests to product/service
providers, such as public company, government, or nonprofit institutions, to help them better understand their potential customers and thus improve their offerings or advertising strategy to the general public.
This paper focuses on mining user consumption intention
from social media. A post with consumption intention means
that it explicitly or implicitly indicates that the user wants to
purchase a specific product or service. For example, “Please
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2389

