Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Lazier Than Lazy Greedy
Baharan Mirzasoleiman

Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru

Amin Karbasi

ETH Zurich
baharanm@inf.ethz.ch

Google Research Mountain View
ashwinkumarbv@google.com

Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Jan Vondrák

Andreas Krause

IBM Almaden
jvondrak@us.ibm.com

ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract

can potentially enclose more uncovered items when considered with elements in A rather than B. This intuitive diminishing returns property can be systematically formalized
through submodularity (c.f., Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher
(1978)). More precisely, a submodular function f : 2V → R
assigns a subset A ⊆ V a utility value f (A) –measuring the
representativeness of the set A– such that
f (A ∪ {i}) − f (A) ≥ f (B ∪ {i}) − f (B)
for any A ⊆ B ⊆ V and i ∈ V \ B. Note that
.
∆(i|A) = f (A ∪ {i}) − f (A) measures the marginal gain
of adding a new element i to a summary A. Of course,
the meaning of representativeness (or utility value) depends
very much on the underlying application; for a collection
of random variables, the utility of a subset can be measured in terms of entropy, and for a collection of vectors, the
utility of a subset can be measured in terms of the dimension of a subspace spanned by them. In fact, summarization through submodular functions has gained a lot of interest in recent years with application ranging from exemplarbased clustering (Gomes and Krause 2010), to document
(Lin and Bilmes 2011; Dasgupta, Kumar, and Ravi 2013)
and corpus summarization (Sipos et al. 2012), to recommender systems (Leskovec et al. 2007; El-Arini et al. 2009;
El-Arini and Guestrin 2011).
Since we would like to choose a summary of a manageable size, a natural optimization problem is to find a summary A∗ of size at most k that maximizes the utility, i.e.,
A∗ = argmaxA:|A|≤k f (A).
(1)

Is it possible to maximize a monotone submodular function
faster than the widely used lazy greedy algorithm (also known
as accelerated greedy), both in theory and practice? In this
paper, we develop the first linear-time algorithm for maximizing a general monotone submodular function subject to
a cardinality constraint. We show that our randomized algorithm, S TOCHASTIC -G REEDY, can achieve a (1 − 1/e − ε)
approximation guarantee, in expectation, to the optimum solution in time linear in the size of the data and independent of
the cardinality constraint. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm on submodular functions arising
in data summarization, including training large-scale kernel
methods, exemplar-based clustering, and sensor placement.
We observe that S TOCHASTIC -G REEDY practically achieves
the same utility value as lazy greedy but runs much faster.
More surprisingly, we observe that in many practical scenarios S TOCHASTIC -G REEDY does not evaluate the whole fraction of data points even once and still achieves indistinguishable results compared to lazy greedy.

Introduction
For the last several years, we have witnessed the emergence
of datasets of an unprecedented scale across different scientific disciplines. The large volume of such datasets presents
new computational challenges as the diverse, feature-rich,
unstructured and usually high-resolution data does not allow
for effective data-intensive inference. In this regard, data
summarization is a compelling (and sometimes the only)
approach that aims at both exploiting the richness of largescale data and being computationally tractable. Instead of
operating on complex and large data directly, carefully constructed summaries not only enable the execution of various data analytics tasks but also improve their efficiency and
scalability.
In order to effectively summarize the data, we need to
define a measure for the amount of representativeness that
lies within a selected set. If we think of representative elements as the ones that cover best, or are most informative
w.r.t. the items in a dataset then naturally adding a new element to a set of representatives, say A, is more beneficial
than adding it to its superset, say B ⊇ A, as the new element

Unfortunately, this optimization problem is NP-hard for
many classes of submodular functions (Nemhauser and
Wolsey 1978; Feige 1998). We say a submodular function is
monotone if for any A ⊆ B ⊆ V we have f (A) ≤ f (B). A
celebrated result of Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher (1978)
–with great importance in artificial intelligence and machine
learning– states that for non-negative monotone submodular functions a simple greedy algorithm provides a solution
with (1 − 1/e) approximation guarantee to the optimal (intractable) solution. This greedy algorithm starts with the
empty set A0 and in iteration i, adds an element maximizing the marginal gain ∆(e|Ai−1 ). For a ground set V of
size n, this greedy algorithm needs O(n · k) function evaluations in order to find a summarization of size k. However, in many data intensive applications, evaluating f is

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1812

