Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Outlier-Robust Convex Segmentation
Itamar Katz and Koby Crammer
Department of Electrical Engineering
The Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, 32000 Israel
(itamark@tx,koby@ee).technion.ac.il
Abstract

of this algorithm, denoted by WTD-ORCS. We show that
for the case of K = 2 segments and no outliers, a specific
choice of the weights leads to a solution which recovers the
exact solution of an un-relaxed optimization problem.
We evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithms
on two speech segmentation tasks, for both clean sources
and sources contaminated with added non-stationary noise.
Our algorithms outperform other algorithms in both the
clean and outlier-contaminated setting. Finally, based on the
empirical results, we propose a heuristic approach for approximating the number of outliers.
Notation: The samples to be segmented are denoted by
{xi ∈ Rd }ni=1 , and their associated quantities (both variables and solutions) are µi , zi ∈ Rd . The same notation
with no subscript, µ, denotes the collection of all µi ’s. The
same holds for x, z. We abuse notation and use µi to refer to
both the ‘centroid’ vector of a segment (these are not center
of mass, due to the regularization term), and to the indexes
of measurements assigned to that segment.

We derive a convex optimization problem for the task of
segmenting sequential data, which explicitly treats presence of outliers. We describe two algorithms for solving
this problem, one exact and one a top-down novel approach, and we derive a consistency results for the case
of two segments and no outliers. Robustness to outliers
is evaluated on two real-world tasks related to speech
segmentation. Our algorithms outperform baseline segmentation algorithms.

1

Introduction

Segmentation of sequential data, also known as changepoint detection, is a fundamental problem in the field of unsupervised learning, and has applications in diverse fields
such as speech processing (Brent 1999; Qiao, Shimomura,
and Minematsu 2008; Shriberg et al. 2000), text processing (Beeferman, Berger, and Lafferty 1999), bioinformatics
(Olshen et al. 2004) and network anomaly detection (LévyLeduc and Roueff 2009), to name a few. We are interested in
formulating the segmentation task as a convex optimization
problem that avoids issues such as local-minima or sensitivity to initializations. In addition, we want to explicitly incorporate robustness to outliers. Given a sequence of samples
{xi }ni=1 , for xi ∈ Rd , our goal is to segment it into a few
subsequences, where each subsequence is homogeneous under some criterion. Our starting point is a convex objective
that minimizes the sum of squared distances of samples xi
from each sample’s associated ‘centroid‘, µi . Identical adjacent µi s identify their corresponding samples as belonging
to the same segment. In addition, some of the samples are
allowed to be identified as outliers, allowing reduced loss
on these samples. Two regularization terms are added to the
objective, in order to constrain the number of detected segments and outliers, respectively.
We propose two algorithms based on this formulation,
both alternate between detecting outliers, which is solved
analytically, and solving the problem with modified samples , which can be solved iteratively. The first algorithm,
denoted by Outlier-Robust Convex Sequential (ORCS) segmentation, solves the optimization problem exactly, while
the second is a top-down hierarchical version of the algorithm, called TD-ORCS. We also derive a weighted version

2

Outlier-Robust Convex Segmentation

Segmentation is the task of dividing a sequence of n data
samples {xi }ni=1 , into K groups of consecutive samples, or
segments, such that each group is homogeneous with respect
to some criterion. A common choice of such a criterion often involves minimizing the squared Euclidean distance of
a sample to some representative sample µi . This criterion
is highly sensitive to outliers and indeed, as we show empirically below, the performance of segmentation algorithms
degrades drastically when the data is contaminated with outliers. It is therefore desirable to incorporate robustness to
outliers into the model. We achieve this by allowing some
of the input samples xi to be identified as outliers, in which
case we do not require µi to be close to these samples. To
this end we propose to minimize:
( n
)
1X
2
min
kxi − zi − µi k
µ,z
2 i=1
s.t.

n−1
X
i=1
n
X

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

i=1

2701

n
o
1 kµi+1 − µi kp > 0 ≤ K − 1 ,
n
o
1 kzi kq > 0 ≤ M ,

