Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Belief Revision Games
Nicolas Schwind

Katsumi Inoue

Transdisciplinary Research Integration Center
National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan
email: schwind@nii.ac.jp

National Institute of Informatics
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies
Tokyo, Japan
email: inoue@nii.ac.jp

Gauvain Bourgne

Sébastien Konieczny

Pierre Marquis

CNRS & Sorbonne Universités,
UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7606,
LIP6, F-75005, Paris, France
email: Gauvain.Bourgne@lip6.fr

CRIL - CNRS
Université d’Artois
Lens, France
email: konieczny@cril.fr

CRIL - CNRS
Université d’Artois
Lens, France
email: marquis@cril.fr

Abstract

Charles want to prepare the final exam of the ”Basics of programming” course. Each student has some feelings about
the topics which will be considered by their teacher for
this exam. At start, Alice believes that ”Binary search” will
not be among the topics of the final exam, unlike ”Bubble
sort”; Bob believes that ”Binary search” will be kept by
the teacher, and that if ”Bubble sort” is kept then ”Quick
sort” will be chosen as well by the teacher; finally, Charles
just feels that ”Binary search” will not be considered by
the teacher. Each pair of friends exchange their opinions
by sending e-mails in the evening. Each student is ready
to make her opinion evolve by adopting the opinions of her
friends when this does not conflict with hers, and by considering as most plausible any state of affairs which is as close
as possible to the set of opinions at hand (her own one plus
her friends’ ones) in the remaining case. At the end of each
day, Alice e-mails to Bob with her feelings, Bob to both Alice
and Charles, and Charles to Bob. One is asked now about
what can be inferred from this description. Some of the key
questions are: (1) How beliefs must be updated? (2) Will
agents always agree on some pieces of belief if they agree
on it at the beginning of the game? (3) Will they eventually
stop changing their beliefs?
In the following, we present a formal setting for BRGs.
Our very objective is to provide some answers to the questions above. Thus, we address question (1) by putting forward a set of revision policies which are based on existing belief merging operators from the literature and the induced belief revision operators. We identify a set of valuable properties for BRGs. They include unanimity preservation which models question (2) and convergence which
models question (3). For each revision policy under consideration, we determine whether such properties are satisfied
or not. An extended version (including proofs) is available
at http://www.cril.fr/brg/brg-long.pdf.

Belief revision games (BRGs) are concerned with the dynamics of the beliefs of a group of communicating agents.
BRGs are “zero-player” games where at each step every agent
revises her own beliefs by taking account for the beliefs of
her acquaintances. Each agent is associated with a belief state
defined on some finite propositional language. We provide a
general definition for such games where each agent has her
own revision policy, and show that the belief sequences of
agents can always be finitely characterized. We then define a
set of revision policies based on belief merging operators. We
point out a set of appealing properties for BRGs and investigate the extent to which these properties are satisfied by the
merging-based policies under consideration.

Introduction
In this paper, we introduce belief revision games (BRGs),
that are concerned with the dynamics of the beliefs of a
group of communicating agents. BRGs can be viewed as
“zero-player” games: at each step of the game each agent
revises her current beliefs (expressed in some finite propositional language) by taking account for the beliefs of her acquaintances. The aim is to study the dynamics of the game,
i.e., the way the beliefs of a group of agents evolve depending on how agents are ready to share their beliefs. BRGs
could be useful to model the evolution of beliefs in a group
of agents in social networks, and to study several interesting
notions such as influence, manipulation, gossip, etc. In this
paper we mainly focus on the definition of BRGs, using formal tools coming from belief change theory, and investigate
their behavior with respect to a set of expected logical properties. Let us introduce a motivating example of a BRG.
Example 1 Consider a group of three undergraduate students, Alice, Bob and Charles, following the same CS curriculum. Bob is a friend of both Alice and Charles, but
Alice and Charles do not know each other. Alice, Bob and

Belief Revision Games
Belief sets are represented using a propositional language
LP defined from a finite set of propositional variables P and

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1590

