Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Bayesian Active Learning-Based Robot Tutor
for Children’s Word-Reading Skills
Goren Gordon and Cynthia Breazeal
Personal Robots Group, MIT Media Lab,
20 Ames Street E15-468
Cambridge, MA 02139
{ggordon,cynthiab}@media.mit.edu
Abstract

form these tasks while being engaging (Brown, Kerwin,
and Howard 2013), believable and social (Saerbeck et al.
2010), i.e. a companion for the child (Breazeal and Scassellati 1999). Thus, an integrated approach is required, that
takes into account personalization, AI of the robot, curriculum and entertainment aspects.
In this contribution we have developed an integrated
child-tablet-robot (Jeong et al. 2014) experimental design
that attempts to address these specific concerns, in the context of learning how to read words. The setup consists of a
social robot that is portrayed as a younger peer who wishes
to learn to read, thus putting the child in the empowering
position of the teacher. This also enables continuous assessment of the child, by having the robot ask questions as a
less informed companion. Crucially, we developed an algorithm that allows the proper and efficient assessment of the
child’s word-reading skills and adapted the interaction between robot and child to each child’s specific level. A unique
tablet app was also developed to facilitate an engaging storymaking game that can be co-played by the child and robot.
We show that the algorithm developed adequately represents the child’s word-reading skills. Moreover, we show
that across a wide age range (4-8 years old), the same algorithm properly assesses each child’s skills. We further show
that an active-learning approach, in which assessment is performed via maximizing expected information gain (MacKay
1992), results in a better assessment than other tested methods, e.g. random and border-of-knowledge assessments.
Finally, we ask whether children properly perceive their
own teaching skills. This question is addressed by having the
robot actually acquire knowledge with the same algorithm
that assesses the child’s knowledge, and testing the agreement between the child’s perception of the robot’s reading
skills and its actual child-like learning. We show that this
agreement, which relates to theory-of-mind (Astington and
Jenkins 1999), is age dependent, wherein below 5 years of
age, children wrongly over-estimate the robot’s skill, and
above that age, a more accurate representation of the robot’s
reading skill is developed.

Effective tutoring requires personalization of the interaction to each student. Continuous and efficient assessment of the student’s skills are a prerequisite for
such personalization. We developed a Bayesian activelearning algorithm that continuously and efficiently assesses a child’s word-reading skills and implemented
it in a social robot. We then developed an integrated
experimental paradigm in which a child plays a novel
story-creation tablet game with the robot. The robot
is portrayed as a younger peer who wishes to learn
to read, framing the assessment of the child’s wordreading skills as well as empowering the child. We
show that our algorithm results in an accurate representation of the child’s word-reading skills for a large
age range, 4-8 year old children, and large initial reading skill range. We also show that employing childspecific assessment-based tutoring results in an age- and
initial reading skill-independent learning, compared to
random tutoring. Finally, our integrated system enables
us to show that implementing the same learning algorithm on the robot’s reading skills results in knowledge
that is comparable to what the child thinks the robot has
learned. The child’s perception of the robot’s knowledge is age-dependent and may facilitate an indirect assessment of the development of theory-of-mind.

Introduction
Socially assistive robotics is an emerging field which strives
to create socially interactive robots that aid people in many
different aspects such as care for the elderly and education (Tapus, Maja, and Scassellatti 2007; Fasola and Mataric
2013). Educational assistive robots interact with children
and help them develop in an educational setting (Movellan et al. 2009; Saerbeck et al. 2010; Kory, Jeong, and
Breazeal 2013; Fridin 2014). However, in order to tutor children in an effective manner, one must personalize the interaction and the curriculum to each child. This personalization can be achieved by proper assessment of the student’s
current skill and adaptation of the behavior and material
taught to the student’s level (Wise, Ring, and Olson 2000;
Chambers et al. 2011). However, as opposed to standardized tests or tablet educational games, the robot should per-

Bayesian Active Learning Algorithm
The goal of the developed algorithm is to properly and efficiently assess a child’s word-reading skills, which is here
defined as the probability that the child knows how to read

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1343

