Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Computing Nash Equilibrium in
Interdependent Defense Games
Hau Chan and Luis E. Ortiz

Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
{hauchan,leortiz}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract

more thorough motivation, account of their design decisions and derivation, related work and description of a few
example applications of IDD games, including models for
airline-baggage security. (Other applications include computer security, vaccination, and house/apartment fire protection. There is a recent survey by Laszka, Felegyhazi, and
Buttyan, 2014, to highlight other aspects of IDS games.)
IDD games build on the work of economists and riskanalysis experts (Heal and Kunreuther 2005) on interdependent security (IDS) games. Hence, they can, in principle, apply to any setting in which IDS games do. A major distinction here is that the “bad event” is modeled as a result of
some deliberate strategic attack by an attacker. The attacker
determines which site to attack, given the potential one-hop
attack risk transfer, to maximize the network’s overall damage from attacks to sites on the system.
The adaptation of IDS games via the introduction of a
strategic attacker, which explicitly induces risk via a deliberate attack, partly motivate the creation of IDD games (Chan,
Ceyko, and Ortiz 2012). By explicitly modeling the attacker
as a strategic agent, IDD games move away from the previously standard in security-type models in which the attack
was considered as a non-strategic random event (e.g., Johnson et al., 2010).
As Chan, Ceyko, and Ortiz (2012) state, there are three
main components of IDD games:

Roughly speaking, Interdependent Defense (IDD) games,
previously proposed, model the situation where an attacker
wants to cause as much damage as possible to a network
by attacking one of the sites in the network. Each site must
make an investment decision regarding security to protect itself against a direct or indirect attack, the latter due to potential transfer-risk from an unprotected neighboring site. The
work introducing IDD games discusses potential applications
to model the essence of real-world scenarios such as the 2006
transatlantic aircraft plot. In this paper, our focus is the study
of the problem of computing a Nash Equilibrium (NE) in
IDD games. We show that an efficient algorithm to determine
whether some attacker’s strategy can be a part of a NE in an
instance of IDD games is unlikely to exist. Yet, we provide
a dynamic programming algorithm to compute an approximate NE when the graph/network structure of the game is
a directed tree with a single source, and show that it is an
FPTAS. We also introduce an improved heuristic to compute
an approximate NE on arbitrary graph structures. Our experiments show that our heuristic is more efficient, and provides
better approximations, than best-response-gradient dynamics
for the case of Internet games, a class of games introduced
and studied in the original work on IDD games.

Introduction
In this paper, we provide further computational results to
Interdependent Defense (IDD) games, a model introduced
by Chan, Ceyko, and Ortiz (2012). Roughly speaking, IDD
games model the interaction among strategic agents, represented by sites embedded in a network, and an attacker. The
sites have the objective to protect themselves from the attacker by making individual, voluntary investment decisions
regarding their own security. The attacker aims to cause as
much damage as possible. A key aspect is that the costeffectiveness of each site’s decision, as well as the attacker’s
own strategy, depend on both the risk of a successful direct
attack initiated at a site and the potential one-hop transfer of
the risk from one site to another through the network.
We now present a rough summary of IDD games. We
delay a formal definition until the respective section. We
refer the reader to (Chan, Ceyko, and Ortiz 2012) for a

1. There is a notion of, and the means for, attack transfer and
transfer risks.
In IDD games, there is a notion of indirect risk, because
a site can, with some probability, “transfer” a deliberate
attack only once to another neighboring site in the network graph. As a result, sites must make investment decisions based not only on the potential of a deliberate direct
attack, but also on the potential indirect risk from neighboring sites. As a side note, if the neighboring sites invest
in protection against a direct attack, then it is not possible for the attack to transfer. Hence, one can alternatively
view the transfer probabilities as implicitly inducing a directed graph over the network of sites.
2. There is an attacker who aims to cause the most damage.
Moreover, the attacker determines which site to attack
based on the amount of damage it can cause to a site
directly, or to the site’s neighbors indirectly, less the at-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

842

