Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Personalized Interest-Forgetting Markov Model for Recommendations ∗
Jun Chen, Chaokun Wang and Jianmin Wang
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P.R. China.
chenjun14@mails.thu.edu.cn, {chaokun, jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

elapses. In this paper, we address the item recommendation
problem from a novel perspective that incorporates people’s
forgetting of interest. Specifically, we integrate the interestforgetting mechanism with Markov model which is widely
used in the existing recommendation methods.

Intelligent item recommendation is a key issue in AI
research which enables recommender systems to be
more “human-minded” when generating recommendations. However, one of the major features of human —
forgetting, has barely been discussed as regards recommender systems. In this paper, we considered people’s forgetting of interest when performing personalized recommendations, and brought forward a personalized framework to integrate interest-forgetting property with Markov model. Multiple implementations of
the framework were investigated and compared. The experimental evaluation showed that our methods could
significantly improve the accuracy of item recommendation, which verified the importance of considering
interest-forgetting in recommendations.

Why interest-forgetting is important? Forgetting is like
a filter that removes the out-of-date and the irrelevantto-present information from people’s mind. However, this
property of human agents has barely been considered in
recommender systems in the literature to the best of our
knowledge. The forgetting of interest shares similar concept
with those of the context-aware recommendations (Wang,
Rosenblum, and Wang 2012; Hariri, Mobasher, and Burke
2012) and the temporal recommendations (Koren 2009;
Xiang et al. 2010) where people’s long-term interest is usually weakened or ignored compared with their short-term interest in recommendations. However, the interest-forgetting
in our work puts its focus on simulating people’s mind activities for decision making other than only understanding user
contexts. Interest-forgetting enables recommender systems
to behave more like real people, which will further lead to
more accurate recommendations. In addition, it is obvious
that different people have different ways in forgetting interest, e.g., the speed of forgetting, the initial amount of interest
as well as the relearning rate. To personalize the interestforgetting for different people is also a vital problem.

Introduction
Recommender systems have been so common in people’s
daily lives as it has become increasingly difficult for people
to find items which are interesting and useful to them in the
era of big data. As a representative of the most successful
recommendation methods, the family of collaborative filtering has been seeking ways to reconstruct people’s preferences from their feedbacks on previous consumptions (Koren 2009). The modeling of user preferences is essential
for systems to better “understand” people. However, understanding is never enough for intelligent recommender systems which are supposed to be more “human-minded”. Recommendations could be more accurate and personalized if
the system behaves like the person who is using it.
One of the most prominent features of human beings
is the memory forgetting (Averell and Heathcote 2011;
Ebbinghaus 1885). People’s memory on a certain object is
not permanent and is losing from time to time unlike that
of computers. When returning back from breaks, the quality of people’s work negatively correlates with the length of
break while positively correlates with the levels of experience that people achieved before the breaks (Anzanello and
Fogliatto 2011). Similar to memory, we believe that people’s
interest on items also shares the feature of forgetting as time

Why integrate with Markov model? Many item recommendation applications have been observed with the firstorder Markov property or high-order ones (Rendle, Freudenthaler, and Schmidt-Thieme 2010; Cheng et al. 2013). In a
Markov chain, discrete stochastic states are represented by
random variables, which is naturally in line with the interestforgetting mechanism that the older the item occurs in the
consumption history, the larger amount of interest on it will
be lost. Besides, Markov models have successfully been
applied in recommender systems due to their solid mathematical foundations (Raftery 1985; Dimitrakakis 2010;
Begleiter, El-Yaniv, and Yona 2004). Thus, it is sensible and
straightforward to integrate interest-forgetting with Markov
model for intelligent recommendations.
Challenges and Contributions To address the issue
of performing personalized recommendation considering
interest-forgetting with Markov model, we are confronted

∗

Corresponding author: Chaokun Wang.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16

