Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

The Boundary Forest Algorithm for Online
Supervised and Unsupervised Learning
Charles Mathy

Nate Derbinsky

José Bento

Disney Research
Boston
cmathy@disneyresearch.com

Wentworth Institute
of Technology
derbinskyn@wit.edu

Boston
College
jose.bento@bc.edu

Jonathan Rosenthal

Jonathan Yedidia

Disney Research
Boston
jon.rosenthal@disneyresearch.com

Disney Research
Boston
yedidia@disneyresearch.com

We present here the Boundary Forest (BF) algorithm that
satisﬁes all these properties, and as a bonus, is transparent
and easy to implement. The data structure underlying the BF
algorithm is a collection of boundary trees (BTs). The nodes
in a BT each store a training example. The BT structure can
be efﬁciently queried at query time and quickly modiﬁed
to incorporate new data points during training. The word
“boundary” in the name relates to its use in classiﬁcation,
where most of the nodes in a BT will be near the boundary
between different classes. The method is nonparametric and
can learn arbitrarily shaped boundaries, as the tree structure
is determined from the data and not ﬁxed a priori. The BF
algorithm is very ﬂexible; in essentially the same form, it
can be used for classiﬁcation, regression and nearest neighbor retrieval problems.

Abstract
We describe a new instance-based learning algorithm
called the Boundary Forest (BF) algorithm, that can be
used for supervised and unsupervised learning. The algorithm builds a forest of trees whose nodes store previously seen examples. It can be shown data points one at
a time and updates itself incrementally, hence it is naturally online. Few instance-based algorithms have this
property while being simultaneously fast, which the BF
is. This is crucial for applications where one needs to
respond to input data in real time. The number of children of each node is not set beforehand but obtained
from the training procedure, which makes the algorithm
very ﬂexible with regards to what data manifolds it can
learn. We test its generalization performance and speed
on a range of benchmark datasets and detail in which
settings it outperforms the state of the art. Empirically
we ﬁnd that training time scales as O(DN log(N )) and
testing as O(Dlog(N )), where D is the dimensionality
and N the amount of data.

Related work
There are several existing methods, including KD-trees
(Friedman, Bentley, and Finkel 1977), Geometric Nearneighbor Access Trees (Brin 1995), and Nearest Vector trees
(Lejsek, Jónsson, and Amsaleg 2011) that build tree search
structures on large datasets (see (Samet 2006) for an extensive bibliography). These algorithms typically need batch
access to the entire dataset before constructing their trees,
in which case they may outperform the BF, however we
are interested in an online setting. Two well known treebased algorithms that allow online insertion are cover trees
(Beygelzimer, Kakade, and Langford 2006) and ball trees.
The ball tree online insertion algorithm (Omohundro 1989)
is rather costly, requiring a volume minimizing step at each
addition. The cover tree, on the other, has a cheap online
insertion algorithm, and it comes with guarantees of query
time scaling as O(c6 logN ) where N is the amount of data
and c the so-called expansion constant, which is related to
the intrinsic dimensionality of the data. We will compare to
cover trees below. Note that c in fact depends on N as it is
deﬁned as a worse case computation over the data set. It can
also diverge from adding a single point.
Tree-based methods can be divided into those that rely on

Introduction
The ability to learn from large numbers of examples, where
the examples themselves are often high-dimensional, is vital in many areas of machine learning. Clearly, the ability
to generalize from training examples to test queries is a key
feature that any learning algorithm must have, but there are
several other features that are also crucial in many practical
situations. In particular, we seek a learning algorithm that is:
(i) fast to train, (ii) fast to query, (iii) able to deal with arbitrary data distributions, and (iv) able to learn incrementally
in an online setting. Algorithms that satisfy all these properties, particularly (iv), are hard to come by, however they
are of immediate importance in problems such as real time
computer vision, robotic control, and more generally, problems which involve learning from and responding quickly to
streaming data.
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2864

