Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Topic Segmentation with An Ordering-Based Topic Model
Lan Du, John K Pate and Mark Johnson
Department of Computing, Macquarie University
Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia
{Lan.Du, John.Pate, Mark.Johnson}@mq.edu.au

Abstract

ural language text usually exhibits a topic structure, where a
topically coherent segment consists of a set of thematically
related text units, e.g., sentences or paragraphs (Halliday and
Hasan 1976; Hearst 1997). Topics discussed in documents
do not appear in an arbitrary order, but are ordered to facilitate the reader’s comprehension. Modelling these structures
with an order-aware probabilistic generative model should
improve modelling accuracy.
In this paper we are interested in modelling documents
from the same domain, because these documents are likely
to share a common structure that similar topics tend to be
discussed in a similar order. For example, consider the three
English Wikipedia articles about Sydney, Melbourne and
Brisbane, the three biggest cities in Australia. These articles describe the cities in terms of History, Geography, Culture, Economy, Education, Infrastructure, etc. These topics
are generally discussed in the same order. For instance, History and Geography appear first, and Geography is discussed
after History; Economy is always discussed before Education, which in turn precedes Infrastructure. Each topic is discussed in only one section, and the paragraphs in a section
share the same topic. There is variation in the topic ordering,
e.g., the Culture and Economy sections appear in opposite
order in the Sydney and Melbourne articles.
Therefore, we want a model that can capture the regularity discussed above so that there is a canonical topic
ordering shared amongst documents from the same domain, and each document-specific topic ordering varies according to the canonical ordering. We propose a simple
ordering-based topic model that constrains latent topic assignments by topic orderings, as in the global model proposed by Chen et al. (2009). In our model, we represent
the topic structure of a document as an ordering of topics,
and generate from each topic a sequence of adjacent paragraphs. Our representation guarantees that each topic appears at most once in each document. We then posit a generalised Mallows model (GMM) (Fligner and Verducci 1986;
1988) over the entire set of orderings.
Documents from the same domain do not mention all of
the topics of the domain, which means the number of topics
and the exact topics discussed in each individual document
vary from document to document. To capture the variation,
we use a finite feature model (FFM) (Griffiths and Ghahramani 2011), which defines a distribution over binary ma-

Documents from the same domain usually discuss similar topics in a similar order. However, the number of
topics and the exact topics discussed in each individual document can vary. In this paper we present a simple topic model that uses generalised Mallows models
and incomplete topic orderings to incorporate this ordering regularity into the probabilistic generative process of the new model. We show how to reparameterise the new model so that a point-wise sampling algorithm from the Bayesian word segmentation literature
can be used for inference. This algorithm jointly samples not only the topic orders and the topic assignments
but also topic segmentations of documents. Experimental results show that our model performs significantly
better than the other ordering-based topic models on
nearly all the corpora that we used, and competitively
with other state-of-the-art topic segmentation models on
corpora that have a strong ordering regularity.

Introduction
A great amount of effort in Machine Learning and Natural
Language Processing has focused on developing more comprehensive topic models that can model discourse structures
found in natural language texts. They seek to model various aspects of language by taking classical topic models,
like Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), as a building block, and manipulate the graphical structure to incorporate various kinds of information
into the generative process, either as specific model variables or priors. One shared intuition among these models is
to use not only the word co-occurrence patterns but also discourse, syntactic, or semantic constraints. They include, for
example, syntactic topic models (Griffiths et al. 2004; BoydGraber and Blei 2009), topic collocation models (Wang, McCallum, and Wei 2007; Griffiths, Steyvers, and Tenenbaum
2007; Johnson 2010)), and Regularised Topic Models (Newman, Bonilla, and Buntine 2011), all of which have been
shown to improve topic modelling accuracy.
Instead of considering discourse features at a word level,
as in the aforementioned models, we are interested in structural features at the level of sentences and paragraphs. NatCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2232

