Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Effectively Predicting Whether and
When a Topic Will Become Prevalent in a Social Network
Weiwei Liu12 , Zhi-Hong Deng1∗ , Xiuwen Gong3 , Frank Jiang4 and Ivor W. Tsang2
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education),
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
2
Center for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
3
School of Mathematics and Computer Science, Anhui Normal University, Wuhu, China
4
School of Engineering and IT, University of New South Wales, Australia
liuweiwei863@gmail.com, zhdeng@cis.pku.edu.cn, gongxiuwen@gmail.com,
F.Jiang@adfa.edu.au, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Effective forecasting of future prevalent topics plays an
important role in social network business development.
It involves two challenging aspects: predicting whether
a topic will become prevalent, and when. This cannot
be directly handled by the existing algorithms in topic
modeling, item recommendation and action forecasting.
The classic forecasting framework based on time series
models may be able to predict a hot topic when a series
of periodical changes to user-addressed frequency in a
systematic way. However, the frequency of topics discussed by users often changes irregularly in social networks. In this paper, a generic probabilistic framework
is proposed for hot topic prediction, and machine learning methods are explored to predict hot topic patterns.
Two effective models, PreWHether and PreWHen, are
introduced to predict whether and when a topic will become prevalent. In the PreWHether model, we simulate the constructed features of previously observed frequency changes for better prediction. In the PreWHen
model, distributions of time intervals associated with
the emergence to prevalence of a topic are modeled. Extensive experiments on real datasets demonstrate that
our method outperforms the baselines and generates
more effective predictions.

Figure 1: The frequency of topic addressed by users in social
networks
ied the internal mechanisms of generating such time series.
However, these methods cannot be used to predict whether
a topic will become prevalent and when it will become popular in social networks.
Other typical time series forecasting models include Autoregressive (AR) models, integrated (I) models, and moving average (MA) models (Gershenfeld 1999). These models
depend linearly on historical data. Combining these models produces models such as autoregressive moving average (ARMA) and autoregressive integrated moving average
(ARIMA) (Prado and West 2010; Box and Jenkins 1990).
However, when applied to topic modeling, these models effectively predict a hot topic on condition that a full cycle is
observed when a series periodically changes. This condition
is inconsistent with the practices of topic evolution, in which
frequency with which a topic series is discussed by users often changes irregularly. For example, we divide April 2009
into 10 equal time windows; five hot topics are detected in
this month, and the frequency of these topics is counted in
every time window. The results are shown in Figure 1. These
hot topics do not exhibit clear predictability, and it is ineffective to analyze the patterns of these hot topics. Another
well-recognized aspect is to effectively predict a topic as

Introduction
Forecasting (Brockwell and Davis 2002) has emerged as
an important activity in economics, commerce, marketing,
statistics and various branches of science. Most of the existing methods are based on time series analysis. Examples
of time series include daily stock prices, monthly accidental deaths, annual rainfall, and the market index. Predictive
patterns to be discovered in such time series may consist of
(a) increasing or decreasing trends, (b) seasonal patterns, (c)
apparent sharp changes, and (d) outlying observations. Several literatures (Brillinger 1981; Madsen 2008) have stud∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

210

