Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Counter Abstraction Technique for the Verification of Robot Swarms
Panagiotis Kouvaros and Alessio Lomuscio
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
{p.kouvaros,a.lomuscio}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

be active in the swarm initially and while the swarm evolves.
Therefore we need to be able to validate properties of the
swarm irrespective of the number of robots present. The aim
of the paper is to provide a general methodology for the verification of temporal and epistemic properties of a variety of
swarms with an unbounded number of participants.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2
we formalise swarms via a form of interpreted systems and
give the syntax of our specification language. In Section 3
we present a novel approach for solving the verification
problem for swarm systems by giving sufficient conditions
for the identification of a cutoff. In Section 4 we present an
implementation and discuss our results in the context of the
alpha algorithm for swarms (Winfield et al. 2008). We conclude in Section 5 by discussing related work.

We study parameterised verification of robot swarms
against temporal-epistemic specifications. We relax
some of the significant restrictions assumed in the literature and present a counter abstraction approach that
enable us to verify a potentially much smaller abstract
model when checking a formula on a swarm of any size.
We present an implementation and discuss experimental results obtained for the alpha algorithm for robot
swarms.

1

Introduction

A robot swarm is a collection of behaviourally identical
robotic agents (Şahin and Winfield 2008). Typically, each
agent interacts with its peers and the environment by following simple, local, nature-inspired protocols that enable
the swarm to achieve sophisticated, global behaviour (Engelbrecht 2006). Swarm robots are attractive as they may
provide an efficient and robust mechanism to achieve complex tasks (Beni 2005; Tan and Zheng 2013), such as remote
surveillance (Spears et al. 2005), search and rescue (Pettinaro et al. 2002), and de-mining (Zafar, Qazi, and Baig
2006). This is in contrast with single-robot systems that are
often extremely complex, expensive and offer little or no
fault-tolerance.
While robot swarms are appealing, predicting their collective behaviour is known to be problematic as this may
depend on the number of robots present and their interaction
among themselves and with their environment. Yet, without
assurances on their resulting behaviour, robot swarms cannot be deployed in a large range of scenarios. Model checking (Clarke, Grumberg, and Peled 1999) is a widely used
verification technique in reactive systems and Multi-Agent
Systems (MAS). It involves encoding a system S by means
of a mathematical model MS and checking whether the
model MS satisfies a property P , or MS |= φS , where φS is
a logical formula representing the property P under analysis.
A fundamental assumption in traditional model checking is
that all the components present in the system are defined and
modelled at design time. This cannot be assumed in robotic
swarms where we often do not know how many robots will

2

Semantics for Robot Swarms

Interpreted systems are a standard semantics for describing multi-agent systems (Fagin et al. 2003). Given the
asynchronous nature of swarm-based systems, we here develop a variant of interleaved interpreted systems (Lomuscio, Penczek, and Qu 2010), a class of interpreted systems
constraining the interleaved evolution of the agents’ actions,
to give a model for the evolution of swarms. Specifically, we
extend and generalise parameterised interleaved interpreted
systems (Kouvaros and Lomuscio 2013b), a semantics used
to model multi-agent systems with an unbounded number
of agents. In this setting we make the following assumptions on a swarm system: (i) the robotic agents composing
the swarm are behaviourally identical and relatively simple;
(ii) each agent interacts with its peers and the environment;
(iii) each agent may evolve asynchronously from the rest of
the swarm; (iv) each agent may become inactive while the
rest of the swarm continues its evolution; (v) the number
of agents present in the swarm is unknown at design time.
For the common technical details we follow the presentation
in (Kouvaros and Lomuscio 2013b).

Swarm Systems
We assume that a swarm is composed of an arbitrary number
of identical robotic agents interacting with an environment.
The behaviour of the agents and the environment is specified
by a template agent T = (L, ι, Act, P, t) and a template
environment E = (LE , ιE , ActE , PE , tE ). A template agent

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2081

