Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Solving Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems
Using Logic Programming
Tiep Le, Tran Cao Son, Enrico Pontelli, William Yeoh
Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
{tile, tson, epontell, wyeoh}@cs.nmsu.edu

Abstract

by each agent is an “ad-hoc” implementation. In this paper, we are interested in investigating the benefits of using
declarative programming techniques to solve DCOPs, along
with the use of a general constraint solver, used as a black
box, as each agent’s local constraint solver. Specifically, we
propose an integration of DPOP (Petcu and Faltings 2005),
a popular DCOP algorithm, with answer set programming
(ASP) (Niemelä 1999; Marek and Truszczyński 1999) as the
local constraint solver of each agent.
This paper contributes to both areas of DCOPs and ASP.
For the DCOP community, we demonstrate that using ASP
as the local constraint solver provides a number of benefits including the ability to capitalize on (i) the highly expressive ASP language to more concisely define input instances (e.g., by representing constraint utilities as implicit
functions instead of explicitly enumerating them) and (ii) the
highly optimized ASP solvers to exploit problem structure
(e.g., propagating hard constraints to ensure consistency).
For the ASP community, while the proposed algorithm
does not make the common contribution of extending the
generality of the ASP language, it makes an equally important contribution of increasing the applicability of ASP
to model and solve a wide array of multi-agent coordination and resource allocation problems currently modeled as
DCOPs. Furthermore, it also demonstrates that general offthe-shelf ASP solvers, which are continuously honed and
improved, can be coupled with distributed message passing protocols to outperform specialized imperative solvers,
thereby validating the significance of the contributions from
the ASP community. Therefore, in this paper, we make the
first step of bridging the two areas of DCOPs and ASP in an
effort towards deeper integrations of DCOP and ASP techniques that are mutually beneficial to both areas.

This paper explores the use of answer set programming
(ASP) in solving distributed constraint optimization problems (DCOPs). It makes the following contributions: (i) It
shows how one can formulate DCOPs as logic programs;
(ii) It introduces ASP-DPOP, the first DCOP algorithm that
is based on logic programming; (iii) It experimentally shows
that ASP-DPOP can be up to two orders of magnitude faster
than DPOP (its imperative-programming counterpart) as well
as solve some problems that DPOP fails to solve due to memory limitations; and (iv) It demonstrates the applicability of
ASP in the wide array of multi-agent problems currently
modeled as DCOPs.

Introduction
Distributed constraint optimization problems (DCOPs) are
problems where agents need to coordinate their value assignments to maximize the sum of resulting constraint utilities (Modi et al. 2005; Petcu and Faltings 2005; Mailler
and Lesser 2004; Yeoh and Yokoo 2012). Researchers have
used them to model various multi-agent coordination and resource allocation problems (Maheswaran et al. 2004; Zivan,
Glinton, and Sycara 2009; Zivan, Okamoto, and Peled 2014;
Lass et al. 2008; Kumar, Faltings, and Petcu 2009; Ueda,
Iwasaki, and Yokoo 2010; Léauté and Faltings 2011).
The field has matured considerably over the past decade,
as researchers continue to develop better algorithms. Most
of these algorithms fall into one of the following three
classes: (i) search-based algorithms (Modi et al. 2005;
Gershman, Meisels, and Zivan 2009; Zhang et al. 2005),
where the agents enumerate combinations of value assignments in a decentralized manner; (ii) inference-based algorithms (Petcu and Faltings 2005; Farinelli et al. 2008),
where the agents use dynamic programming to propagate
aggregated information to other agents; and (iii) samplingbased algorithms (Ottens, Dimitrakakis, and Faltings 2012;
Nguyen, Yeoh, and Lau 2013), where the agents sample the
search space in a decentralized manner. The existing algorithms have been designed and developed almost exclusively
using imperative programming techniques, where the algorithms define a control flow, that is, a sequence of commands to be executed. In addition, the local solver employed

Background: DCOPs
A
distributed
constraint
optimization
problem
(DCOP) (Modi et al. 2005; Petcu and Faltings 2005;
Mailler and Lesser 2004; Yeoh and Yokoo 2012) is defined
by hX , D, F, A, αi, where: X = {x1 , . . . , xn } is a set of
variables; D = {D1 , . . . , Dn } is a set of finite domains,
where Di is the domain of variable xi ; F = {f1 , . . . , fm }
is a set of constraints, where each ki -ary constraint
fi : Di1 × Di2 × . . . × Diki 7→ N ∪ {−∞, 0} specifies
the utility of each combination of values of the variables in

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1174

