Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Adaptive Sampling with Optimal Cost for Class-Imbalance Learning
Yuxin Peng
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

the algorithm-level approaches do not change the data set,
but try to make the minority samples more important than
the majority samples by adjusting the cost of samples.
In the data-level approaches, the random over-sampling
of minority positive samples and the random undersampling of majority negative samples are two concise but
effective methods (Batista, Prati, & Monard 2004; Estabrooks, Jo, & Japkowicz 2004; Molinara, Ricamato, &
Tortorella 2007). More complex over-sampling methods
include the synthetic minority over-sampling technique
(SMOTE) (Chawla, Hall, & Bowyer 2002) which creates
new "synthetic" samples between the existing minority
samples, the borderline-SMOTE algorithm (Han, Wang, &
Mao 2005) which is a modification of SMOTE, the adaptive synthetic sampling approach (ADASYN) (He et al.
2008) which generates more synthetic minority class samples from hard samples with a weighted distribution for
minority class examples, and the DataBoost-IM (Guo &
Viktor 2004) approach which combines boosting, ensemble-based learning algorithm and data generation to solve
the class imbalance problem. Liu, Wu, & Zhou (2006,
2009) propose two under-sampling approaches named
EasyEnsemble and BalanceCascade to study the classimbalance problem, and the experiment result showed the
effectiveness of the two approaches. Ertekin, Huang, &
Giles (2007) adopt the active learning algorithm. And Yuan, Li, & Zhang (2006) propose the support cluster machines (SCMs) algorithm to under-sample the majority
class through an iteration of the clustering step and shrinking step. In addition, Tang et al. (2009) propose granular
SVMs-repetitive under-sampling algorithm (GSVM-RU),
which utilizes SVMs to select the negative samples called
negative local support vectors.
In the algorithm-level approaches, some assign different
costs to the samples of different classes, and make the minority positive samples more important than the majority
negative samples during the training process. They adopt
the different penalty constants C+ and C− for the positive
and negative examples, which have been reported to be
effective (Sun, Kamel, & Wang 2006; Nguyen, Zeno, &
Lars 2010). However, Wu & Chang (2005) point out that

Learning from imbalanced data sets is one of the challenging problems in machine learning, which means the number
of negative examples is far more than that of positive examples. The main problems of existing methods are: (1) The
degree of re-sampling, a key factor greatly affecting performance, needs to be pre-fixed, which is difficult to make
the optimal choice; (2) Many useful negative samples are
discarded in under-sampling; (3) The effectiveness of algorithm-level methods are limited because they just use the
original training data for single classifier. To address the
above issues, a novel approach of adaptive sampling with
optimal cost is proposed for class-imbalance learning in this
paper. The novelty of the proposed approach mainly lies in:
adaptively over-sampling the minority positive examples
and under-sampling the majority negative examples, forming different sub-classifiers by different subsets of training
data with the best cost ratio adaptively chosen, and combining these sub-classifiers according to their accuracy to create a strong classifier. It aims to make full use of the whole
training data and improve the performance of classimbalance learning classifier. The solid experiments are
conducted to compare the performance between the proposed approach and 12 state-of-the-art methods on challenging 16 UCI data sets on 3 evaluation metrics, and the results
show the proposed approach can achieve superior performance in class-imbalance learning.

Introduction
Class-imbalance learning issue often occurs in classification, which means the number of negative examples is far
more than that of positive examples in the training data,
and is popular in practice. The class-imbalance learning is
a major factor to affect the performance of classifiers,
which has been extensively studied in the existing works.
Generally speaking, the existing methods can be divided
into two categories: data-level approaches and algorithmlevel approaches. The data-level approaches re-sample the
data set to get a more balanced class distribution, which
includes under-sampling and over-sampling methods. And
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2921

