Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Correcting Misspelled Queries in Email Search
Abhijit Bhole and Raghavendra Udupa
Microsoft Research
9 Lavelle Road, Bangalore - 560001
{a-abhina, raghavu}@microsoft.com

Abstract

needs to be searched are highly specific to the user in Email
Search. Unlike Web Search where the target document collection is the Web and is the same for all users, in Email
Search the user is searching the relatively small, primarily
private and substantially more familiar collection of emails.
Therefore, the search intent of email users is very specific
to and scoped by their mail data. Consequently, aggregated
query logs of multiple users are unlikely to be useful in correcting the misspelled query of an individual user.
Personalized and context specific corrections are important in Email Search. A scientific collaborator of the
eminent computer scientist Peter Norvig might type the
query “noarvig flies” while intending to type “norvig files”
whereas an entomologist who is searching her mail folder
for mails on the subject of black fly season in the Alaskan
city of Noorvik might also type “noarvig flies”. As this example illsutrates, spelling correction algorithms that leverage user’s mail data can provide personalized corrections to
the user. A generic spelling correction algorithm using an
open domain dictionary or trained with Web Search query
logs would not be helpful as the query has to be corrected
differently for different users. Further, even on the same
mailbox, the information need of a user can be different
for the same misspelled query. To give an example, “july
patents” is a more relevant correction to the misspelled query
“july parents” than “julie parents” when the user is searching the folder containing mails she has received from her
company’s intellectual property attorneys. However, “julie
parents” would be more appropriate when searching in her
personal folder or if she recently received a mail from Julie’s
parents. Thus, the same query needs to be corrected differently when the user is searching in different folders and at
different instances of time.

We consider the problem of providing spelling corrections for misspelled queries in Email Search using
user’s own mail data. A popular strategy for general
query spelling correction is to generate corrections from
query logs. However, this strategy is not effective in
Email Search for two reasons: 1) query log of any single user is typically not rich enough to provide potential
corrections for a new query 2) corrections generated using query logs of other users are not particularly useful
since the mail data as well as search intent are highly
specific to the user. We address the challenge of designing an effective spelling correction algorithm for Email
Search in the absence of query logs. We propose SpEQ,
a Machine Learning based approach that generates corrections for misspelled queries directly from the user’s
own mail data.

Introduction
We consider the problem of correcting misspelled user
queries in Email Search. Automatic query spelling correction can contribute significantly to a positive user experience and an increased productivity in Email Search. However, there have been few efforts to address this pervasive
problem. With the exception of Gmail 1 there is no mail
client in our knowledge that providing query spelling corrections. This is in contrast with Web Search where every
search engine provides a reasonably effective query spelling
correction feature using rich logs of session data produced
by hundreds of millions of users (Cucerzan and Brill 2004;
Duan and Hsu 2011; Chen, Li, and Zhou 2007; Ahmad and
Kondrak 2005).
The success of query log based spelling correction in
Web Search suggests its adoption to Email Search. However,
there are two significant drawbacks. Firstly, the effectiveness
of query log based approaches in Web Search is largely due
to the availability of rich query logs which embody the “the
intelligence of crowd”. In contrast, query log of any user in
Email Search is substantially smaller in size and is unlikely
to provide a good coverage of that user’s future queries. Secondly, search intent as well as the document collection that

Contributions
Motivated by the above discussion, we develop SpEQ, a Machine Learning based spelling correction algorithm that has
the following capabilities:
• Corrections are given for misspelled queries even when
the user’s search history is not available
• Corrections are personalized for every user

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.gmail.com

• Corrections are context specific (i.e. relevant to the current mail state of the user)

4266

