Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Sense-Aware Semantic Analysis:
A Multi-Prototype Word Representation Model Using Wikipedia
Zhaohui Wu† , C. Lee Giles‡†
†

Computer Science and Engineering, ‡ Information Sciences and Technology
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
zzw109@psu.edu, giles@ist.psu.edu

Abstract

since different words could have a different number of
senses. Second, the sense-specific context clusters are generated from free text corpus, whose quality cannot be
guaranteed nor evaluated (Purandare and Pedersen 2004;
Schütze 1998). It is possible that contexts of different word
senses could be clustered together because they might share
some common words, while contexts of the same word sense
could be clustered into different groups since they have no
common words. For example, apple “Apple Inc.” and apple
“Apple Corps” share many contextual words in Wikipedia
such as “computer”, “retail”, “shares”, and “logs” even if we
consider a context window size of only 3.
Thus, the question posed would be how can we build a
sense-aware semantic profile for a word that can give accurate sense-specific prototypes in terms of both number and
quality? And for a given context of the word, can the model
assign the semantic representation of a word that corresponds
to the specific sense?
By comparing existing methods that adopted automatic
sense induction from free text based on context clustering, a
better way to incorporate sense-awareness into semantic modeling is to do word sense disambiguation for different occurrences of a word using manually complied sense inventories
such as WordNet (Miller 1995). However, due to knowledge
acquisition bottleneck (Gale, Church, and Yarowsky 1992b),
this approach may often miss corpus/domain-specific senses
and may be out of date due to changes in human languages
and web content (Pantel and Lin 2002). As such, we will use
Wikipedia, the largest encyclopedia knowledge base online
with rich semantic information and wide knowledge coverage,
as a semantic corpus on which to test our Sense-aware Semantic Analysis SaSA. Each dimension in SaSA is a Wikipedia
concept/article1 where a word appears or co-occurs with. By
assuming that occurrences of a word in Wikipedia articles
of similar subjects should share the sense, the sense-specific
clusters are generated by agglomerative hierarchical clustering based on not only the text context, but also Wikipedia
links and categories that could ensure more semantics, giving
different words their own clusters. The links give unique identification of a word occurrence by linking it to a Wikipedia
article which provides helpful local disambiguated information. The categories give global topical labels of a Wikipedia

Human languages are naturally ambiguous, which makes
it difficult to automatically understand the semantics of
text. Most vector space models (VSM) treat all occurrences of a word as the same and build a single vector
to represent the meaning of a word, which fails to capture any ambiguity. We present sense-aware semantic
analysis (SaSA), a multi-prototype VSM for word representation based on Wikipedia, which could account for
homonymy and polysemy. The “sense-specific” prototypes of a word are produced by clustering Wikipedia
pages based on both local and global contexts of the
word in Wikipedia. Experimental evaluation on semantic
relatedness for both isolated words and words in sentential contexts and word sense induction demonstrate its
effectiveness.

Introduction
Computationally modeling semantics of text has long been a
fundamental task for natural language understanding. Among
many approaches for semantic modeling, distributional semantic models using large scale corpora or web knowledge
bases have proven to be effective (Deerwester et al. 1990;
Gabrilovich and Markovitch 2007; Mikolov et al. 2013).
Specifically, they provide vector embeddings for a single
text unit based on the distributional context where it occurs,
from which semantic relatedness or similarity measures can
be derived by computing distances between vectors. However,
a common limitation of most vector space models is that each
word is only represented by a single vector, which cannot capture homonymy and polysemy (Reisinger and Mooney 2010).
A natural way to address this limitation could be building
multi-prototype models that provide different embeddings for
different senses of a word. However, this task is under studied with only a few exceptions (Reisinger and Mooney 2010;
Huang et al. 2012), which cluster the contexts of a word into
K clusters to represent multiple senses.
While these multi-prototype models showed significant
improvement over single prototype models, there are two
fundamental problems yet to be addressed. First, they simply predefine a fixed number of prototypes, K, for every word in the vocabulary, which should not be the case
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2188

Each concept corresponds to a unique Wikipedia article.

