Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Are Features Equally Representative?
A Feature-Centric Recommendation
Chenyi Zhang1,2 , Ke Wang2∗ , Ee-peng Lim3 , Qinneng Xu4 , Jianling Sun1 and Hongkun Yu5
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
3
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
4
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, City University of Hong kong
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{chenyiz,wangk}@sfu.ca, eplim@smu.edu.sg, qinnengxu3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, sunjl@zju.edu.cn, hyu50@illinois.edu
2

Abstract

sign principle of this approach is that liking same items (as
other users) leads to liking more same items.
Hybrid approaches combine content-based filtering and
collaborative filtering. Despite their differences, all these approaches are item-centric in that major activities such as rating collection, model building, and rating prediction are centered around items. In this work, we consider another design
principle: liking same features (as other users) leads to
liking more same features, which leads to a new approach
called feature-centric recommendation. Let us motivate this
design principle and our approach.

Typically a user prefers an item (e.g., a movie) because she
likes certain features of the item (e.g., director, genre, producer). This observation motivates us to consider a featurecentric recommendation approach to item recommendation:
instead of directly predicting the rating on items, we predict
the rating on the features of items, and use such ratings to
derive the rating on an item. This approach offers several advantages over the traditional item-centric approach: it incorporates more information about why a user chooses an item,
it generalizes better due to the denser feature rating data, it
explains the prediction of item ratings through the predicted
feature ratings. Another contribution is turning a principled
item-centric solution into a feature-centric solution, instead
of inventing a new algorithm that is feature-centric. This approach maximally leverages previous research. We demonstrate this approach by turning the traditional item-centric latent factor model into a feature-centric solution and demonstrate its superiority over item-centric approaches.

1.1

Motivation

The objective of recommender systems is to predict user
preferences on items based on preferences observed on other
items in the past. Two basic approaches are content-based
filtering and collaborative filtering:
Content-based filtering: In this approach, keywords or
features are used to describe the items and a user profile is
built using the past item ratings to summarize the types of
items this user likes. This approach follows the design principle that liking a feature in the past leads to liking the
feature in future. A drawback is that if a user A has not
liked any feature of an item X in the past, X will not be
recommended to the user, even though many users with the
same profile as A like X.
Collaborative filtering: This approach addresses the
above problem by collaborative learning: if a user A liked
some items that were also liked by user B, A is likely to
share the same preference with B on another item. The de-

A user likes an item because of some specific features of
the item. When a user likes an item, she may like some features of the item but is not impressed with other features;
consequently, two users may like the same item for different
reasons. For example, a user may like the rate of a hotel but
not its service, while another user may like the cleanliness
of the hotel but nothing else. If the above observation holds,
the design principle “liking same items (as other users) leads
to liking more same items” practised by the standard collaborative filtering may not work.
To explain our point, let us consider the toy example with
four items W ={anti-allergy, rose}, X={anti-allergy, rose},
Y ={anti-allergy, orange}, and Z={sun proof, rose} where
{} contains the features for the item. In the history, suppose
that user A loves W and X due to “anti-allergy” and user
B loves W , X, and Z due to “rose”. In traditional collaborative filtering, it will recommend Z to user A since A and
B both like W and X whereas A would rather love Y . On
the other hand, for content-based filtering, Y has the feature
“anti-allergy” and Z has the feature “rose” as in W and X.
Therefore, the score is the same, but it is obvious that A will
love Y more than Z from the view of feature level.
User’s preferences on features are available in many real
life rating systems. For example, in the hotel rating systems
a user can rate specific features (cleanliness, service, etc.)

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

∗
Work done while visiting the Living Analytics Research Centre, Singapore Management University

1

Introduction

389

