Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploring the KD45n Property of a Kripke Model
after the Execution of an Action Sequence ∗
Tran Cao Son and Enrico Pontelli

Chitta Baral and Gregory Gelfond

Computer Science Department
New Mexico State University

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Arizona State University

the resulting state, we should be able to conclude that the
following formulae are true (Ki ϕ and Bi ϕ represent that i
knows that ϕ is true (or i knows ϕ, for short) and i believes
that ϕ is true (i believes ϕ); h denotes the coin being heads
up): K1 h (1 knows h); ¬K2 h∧¬K2 ¬h (2 does not know
h); K1 (¬K2 h∧¬K2 ¬h) (1 knows that 2 does not know h);
B2 (¬K1 h∧¬K1 ¬h) (2 believes that 1 does not know h);
K1 (B2 (¬K1 h∧¬K1 ¬h)) (1 knows that 2 believes that 1
does not know h); etc. Intuitively, and as well accepted, the
distinction between knowledge and beliefs is that knowledge
must be true in the actual world while beliefs could be false.
But when one looks at the formulations in (Baltag and
Moss 2004; Baltag, Moss, and Solecki 1998) the Kripke
models have only one accessibility relation and only one
modality is deﬁned; in (Baltag and Moss 2004) it is referred to as “knowledge”. As one can notice, replacing
B2 (¬K1 h ∧ ¬K1 ¬h) by K2 (¬K1 h ∧ ¬K1 ¬h) would not
be intuitive. Also, the action and update model papers do
not analyze the properties of the resulting Kripke models.
In this paper, we propose a method for drawing conclusions regarding both knowledge and beliefs of agents
(e.g., the above mentioned formulae) after the execution of
a sequence of actions, in the spirit of belief updates (and
update models) rather than the belief revision based approaches2 used in (Segerberg 1998; Baltag and Smets 2008;
van Benthem 2007; van Ditmarsch 2005). We achieve this
goal by noting that knowledge is reducible to true belief in
certain logics (Halpern, Samet, and Segev 2009). To see
how this works, let us revisit the introductory example. The
initial state of beliefs of agents 1 and 2 can be represented by
the pointed Kripke model on the top-left of Fig. 1 (the actual
world has a double circle). The logic of this model, together
with the axiom Ki ϕ ↔ Bi ϕ ∧ ϕ (indicating knowledge is
true belief), has ¬Ki h∧¬Ki ¬h (i = 1, 2) as a consequence.
The update model representing “1 peeks into the box while 2
is looking away” is given in the bottom-left of Fig. 1 which
encodes the view of the action occurrence of each agent. Intuitively, it says that 1 sees the action occurs (denoted by the
event σ) while 2 does not (τ ). The result of the update is
the pointed Kripke model on the right. It is easy to check
that the logic speciﬁed by the result of the update (with the

Abstract
The paper proposes a condition for preserving the KD45n
property of a Kripke model when a sequence of update models is applied to it. The paper deﬁnes the notions of a primitive
update model and a semi-reﬂexive KD45n (or sr-KD45n )
Kripke model. It proves that updating a sr-KD45n Kripke
model using a primitive update model results in a sr-KD45n
Kripke model, i.e., a primitive update model preserves the
properties of a sr-KD45n Kripke model. It shows that several update models for modeling well-known actions found
in the literature are primitive. This result provides guarantees that can be useful in presence of multiple applications of
actions in multi-agent system (e.g., multi-agent planning).

Introduction and Motivations
In a multi-agent action setting, agents need to not just reason
about the properties of the world, but also about their knowledge and beliefs about the world and about other agents’ own
knowledge and beliefs. Among the various formalizations of
multi-agent actions and their impact on a physical and mental world, the action models introduced in (Baltag and Moss
2004; Baltag, Moss, and Solecki 1998) and later extended to
update models in (van Benthem, van Eijck, and Kooi 2006;
van Ditmarsch, van der Hoek, and Kooi 2007) are the most
widely accepted. For example, these action models and
update models1 have been employed in the study of epistemic planning problems in MAS (Bolander and Andersen
2011; Löwe, Pacuit, and Witzel 2011; van der Hoek and
Wooldridge 2002; Baral et al. 2013).
However, there is something fundamental missing in these
formulations. Let us consider a variant of the coin example
from (Baltag and Moss 2004): there are two agents, 1 and
2, and a coin in a box. The coin lies heads up, but the two
agents are unaware of this fact. Let us assume that agent
1 alone learns that the coin lies heads up (e.g., by peeking into the box while 2 is looking away). Intuitively, in
∗
The ﬁrst two authors were partially supported by NSF-HRD
1345232.
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For the sake of simplicity, we will use the generic term “update model” to denote both “action models” and “update models.”
Furthermore, we will frequently use the terminology “execution of
an action” to indicate the result of applying an update model.

2
The belief revision based approach needs an additional ordering relation and is orthogonal to our approach.

1604

