Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Ranking with Recursive Neural Networks and
Its Application to Multi-Document Summarization
Ziqiang Cao1∗
1

Furu Wei2

Li Dong3

Sujian Li1

Ming Zhou2

Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, MOE, China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
3
Beihang University, Beijing, China
{ziqiangyeah, lisujian}@pku.edu.cn {furu,v-ldo, mingzhou}@microsoft.com
Conroy et al. 2004; Li et al. 2007), feature engineering is a
necessary but labor-intensive task. It is thus desirable to let
the model itself discover explanatory factors from data.
To this end, we develop a ranking framework upon recursive neural networks (R2N2) to rank sentences for multidocument summarization. It concerns the sentence ranking
task as a hierarchical regression process, which evaluates
the salience of all the non-terminal nodes in the parsing
tree. This process is modeled by recursive neural networks
(RNN). The learning ability of RNN has been proved in
many NLP tasks, such as syntactical parsing (Socher, Manning, and Ng 2010), sentiment analysis (Socher et al. 2013)
and discourse parsing (Li, Li, and Hovy 2014). With the
guide of supervisions from the word level to the sentence
level, RNN is able to learn ranking features automatically.
An example of this ranking framework is shown in Figure
1. In this parsing tree, recursive neural networks measure the
importance of all these non-terminal nodes. Word-level and
sentence-level ranking scores are obtained at pre-terminal
and root nodes respectively. To be speciﬁc, R2N2 uses handcrafted word features as inputs. In the forward propagation
step, it recursively computes the representation of a parent
node with the combination of its pair of children. Then regression is processed at all the non-terminal nodes, based on
the learned features concatenating these hand-crafted ones.
In the backward propagation step, weights of the model are
updated with the guide of given supervisions over the tree.
It is noted the scored parsing tree is similar to the sentiment
classiﬁcation treebank (Socher et al. 2013), where a sentiment label is attached to every non-terminal node. Nevertheless, (Socher et al. 2013) aims to extract the global semantic
representation of each node whereas R2N2 tries to learn better local ranking features. We conduct extensive experiments
on the DUC 2001, 2002 and 2004 multi-document summarization datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that
R2N2 outperforms state-of-the-art extractive summarization
approaches.
R2N2 makes three contributions to multi-document summarization:

Abstract
We develop a Ranking framework upon Recursive Neural
Networks (R2N2) to rank sentences for multi-document summarization. It formulates the sentence ranking task as a hierarchical regression process, which simultaneously measures the salience of a sentence and its constituents (e.g.,
phrases) in the parsing tree. This enables us to draw on
word-level to sentence-level supervisions derived from reference summaries. In addition, recursive neural networks are
used to automatically learn ranking features over the tree,
with hand-crafted feature vectors of words as inputs. Hierarchical regressions are then conducted with learned features
concatenating raw features. Ranking scores of sentences and
words are utilized to effectively select informative and nonredundant sentences to generate summaries. Experiments on
the DUC 2001, 2002 and 2004 multi-document summarization datasets show that R2N2 outperforms state-of-the-art extractive summarization approaches.

Introduction
Extractive summarization (Over and Yen 2004) aims to generate a short text summary for a document or a set of
documents through selecting salient sentences in the document(s). Generally, there are two major components in extractive summarization systems, namely sentence ranking
and sentence selection. The former gives an informative
score to every sentence to measure its importance while
the latter, built on both the salience scores and redundancy
among sentences, chooses sentences to generate a summary.
Sentence ranking has been extensively investigated in extractive summarization. Different granularities of text (e.g.,
sentences or n-grams) are scored in the task. Some methods (Ouyang, Li, and Li 2007; Li et al. 2007) directly measure the salience of sentences while others (Gillick and
Favre 2009; Li, Qian, and Liu 2013) ﬁrstly rank words (or
bi-grams) and then combine these scores to rank sentences.
Both words and sentences hold supervisions derived from
reference summaries. However, it is not well-studied how
to take full advantage of them, although more supervisions
are expected to build a better model. In addition, regardless
of sentence ranking models (Osborne 2002; Galley 2006;

• It transforms sentence ranking into a hierarchical regression task. Therefore more supervision knowledge can be
taken into account;

∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• It is capable of automatically learning additional ranking

2153

