Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Sub-Merge: Diving Down to the Attribute-Value Level
in Statistical Schema Matching
Zhe Lim and Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein∗
Department of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, Australia
zhe@infinitelooplabs.com brubinstein@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Matching and merging data from conflicting sources is the
bread and butter of data integration, which drives search verticals, e-commerce comparison sites and cyber intelligence.
Schema matching lifts data integration—traditionally focused
on well-structured data—to highly heterogeneous sources.
While schema matching has enjoyed significant success in
matching data attributes, inconsistencies can exist at a deeper
level, making full integration difficult or impossible. We propose a more fine-grained approach that focuses on correspondences between the values of attributes across data sources.
Since the semantics of attribute values derive from their use
and co-occurrence, we argue for the suitability of canonical correlation analysis (CCA) and its variants. We demonstrate the superior statistical and computational performance
of multiple sparse CCA compared to a suite of baseline algorithms, on two datasets which we are releasing to stimulate
further research. Our crowd-annotated data covers both cases
that are relatively easy for humans to supply ground-truth,
and that are inherently difficult for human computation.

Figure 1: Depictions of how attribute-value matching fits
within (a) data integration and (b) data cleaning.
matching proposes to normalize source structure at the attribute level, say identifying course duration and time in
the Stanford and Berkeley catalogs, sub-attribute level differences can remain, e.g., not matching Autumn quarter
and Fall semester. It is data cleaning at this important
attribute-value level that we address in this paper.
Attribute-value matching fits naturally as a stage within
two common scenarios shown in Figure 1. In data integration the stage can make use of partial-matchings of
records (Köpcke, Thor, and Rahm 2010; Köpcke and Rahm
2010; Winkler 2006), and provides the normalization required to complete record merging (Zhao et al. 2012). It
can also run subsequent to instance-based schema matching (Rahm and Bernstein 2001; Bernstein, Madhavan, and
Rahm 2011), as a fellow instance-based method. In both
settings, attribute-value matching can improve integration
quality. It also endows immediate benefit: we may wish to
surface for example genres when browsing movies in an
integrated catalog (e.g., streaming on the Xbox); or enable
faceted search over many sellers (e.g., Amazon.com), or a
product comparison website (e.g., Google Shopping).
We explore a suite of IR- and statistics-based approaches
on real-world data, concluding multiple sparse canonical
correlation analysis (multiple sparse CCA) to be superior
both in terms of matching quality and (surprisingly) run-

Introduction
Data integration has enjoyed a remarkable level of attention
from the academic communities in databases (entity resolution, noisy joins), IR (information extraction), machine
learning & statistics (record linkage), NLP (co-reference
resolution), that is matched only by its real-world impact.
Starting mid-20th century in statistics, the earliest literature
in the area sought to integrate official statistics in health
and census data (Dunn 1946). While early database applications helped combine customer records, data integration has seen renewed focus thanks to routine crawls of
the deep web, sharing of data by businesses, and open-data
initiatives. These modern applications have placed new requirements on data integration, such as scalability to large
sources (both in number of records and attributes), to many
sources, to sources with heterogeneous schemas, and data
that is semi-structured or unstructured altogether. Schema
matching (Rahm and Bernstein 2001; Bernstein, Madhavan,
and Rahm 2011) was born out of the need to align source
schemas—the set of attributes of a dataset. Where schema
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1791

