Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Extracting Adverse Drug Reactions from Social Media
Andrew Yates, Nazli Goharian, and Ophir Frieder
Information Retrieval Lab
Department of Computer Science
Georgetown University
{andrew, nazli, ophir}@ir.cs.georgetown.edu

Abstract

loss” and “alopecia,” as the same concept. While it is also
possible to perform concept extraction without a dictionary,
concept extraction methods are often dictionary-based because extracted ADR concepts must appear in some knowledge base regardless of whether the concept extraction is
dictionary-based; otherwise, there is no way to determine
the relationships between extracted ADRs and the ADRs
listed on drug labels.
Dictionary-based ADR extraction requires two components: a dictionary-based concept extraction method and
an ADR thesaurus to identify relationships between ADR
terms. We use an existing ADR thesaurus (Yates and Goharian 2013) and propose three dictionary-based concept extraction methodologies. We compare these methods against
several previously proposed methods (baselines) using both
a forum corpus and a Twitter corpus. We find that our proposed methods substantially outperform the previously proposed methods in several different scenarios; when used to
filter the output of other methods, our Multinomial NB and
LLDA methods achieve the highest precision and F1 on the
forum corpus, respectively; our CRF methods achieves the
highest precision on the Twitter corpus.
Annotations indicating the concepts expressed in a document are traditionally used both to evaluate concept extraction methods and to train them. To alleviate the difficulty
of obtaining annotations for a large social media corpus, we
propose an alternate evaluation scheme for concept extraction in the ADR domain that uses the ADRs listed on drug
labels to predict the ADRs that a method should extract.
We explore both how well this “known ADR” evaluation
approximates an evaluation using annotations and whether
“known ADR” groundtruth can be used as training data for
supervised methods.
Our contribution is an exploration of how well our proposed and existing concept extraction methods can be used
to detect adverse drug reactions (ADRs) in social media (i.e.,
forum posts and tweets), including: (i) the proposal of three
concept extraction methods; (ii) an evaluation of how well
our proposed methods and existing baselines perform on
social media; (iii) the proposal of an alternate evaluation
scheme for the ADR domain that does not require annotations, an exploration of how well this alternate evaluation
approximates an evaluation using annotations, and an exploration of how well this alternate evaluation scheme’s ground

The potential benefits of mining social media to learn about
adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are rapidly increasing with the
increasing popularity of social media. Unknown ADRs have
traditionally been discovered by expensive post-marketing
trials, but recent work has suggested that some unknown
ADRs may be discovered by analyzing social media. We propose three methods for extracting ADRs from forum posts
and tweets, and compare our methods with several existing
methods. Our methods outperform the existing methods in
several scenarios; our filtering method achieves the highest F1 and precision on forum posts, and our CRF method
achieves the highest precision on tweets. Furthermore, we
address the difficulty of annotating social media on a large
scale with an alternate evaluation scheme that takes advantage of the ADRs listed on drug labels. We investigate how
well this alternate evaluation approximates a traditional evaluation using human annotations.

1

Introduction

The benefits of mining social media are rapidly increasing
with social media’s increasing popularity and the increasing amount of social media data available. According to the
2013 Health Online survey conducted by Pew1 , 59% of U.S.
adults have ”looked online for health information in the past
year,” which suggests that social media may also contain a
wealth of health-related information. Extracting ADRs from
social media is an important task because it can be used to
augment clinical trials; in the case of recent drugs, it is possible for unknown ADRs to be discovered (i.e., to discover
side effects that are not listed on the drug’s label) (McNeil
et al. 2012). Similarly, unknown interactions between drugs
can be discovered (White et al. 2013).
In this work, we explore concept extraction methods for
detecting ADRs in social media. Precision is particularly
important for this task because any unknown ADRs discovered must go through a long clinical investigation to be validated. We focus on ADR extraction via dictionary-based
methods in which an ADR dictionary is created from the
terms in an ADR thesaurus. The thesaurus is necessary to
treat two synonymous ADR terms or phrases, such as “hair
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Health-online.aspx

2460

