Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

This Time the Robot Settles for a Cost: A Quantitative Approach to
Temporal Logic Planning with Partial Satisfaction
Morteza Lahijanian1 , Shaull Almagor2 , Dror Fried1 , Lydia E. Kavraki1 , and Moshe Y. Vardi1
1

Department of Computer Science at Rice University, Houston, TX, 77005, USA
{morteza,dror.fried,kavraki,vardi}@rice.edu
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering at The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
shaull@cs.huji.ac.il
Abstract
The specification of complex motion goals through temporal
logics is increasingly favored in robotics to narrow the gap
between task and motion planning. A major limiting factor of
such logics, however, is their Boolean satisfaction condition.
To relax this limitation, we introduce a method for quantifying the satisfaction of co-safe linear temporal logic specifications, and propose a planner that uses this method to synthesize robot trajectories with the optimal satisfaction value. The
method assigns costs to violations of specifications from userdefined proposition costs. These violation costs define a distance to satisfaction and can be computed algorithmically using a weighted automaton. The planner utilizes this automaton and an abstraction of the robotic system to construct a
product graph that captures all possible robot trajectories and
their distances to satisfaction. Then, a plan with the minimum
distance to satisfaction is generated by employing this graph
as the high-level planner in a synergistic planning framework.
The efficacy of the method is illustrated on a robot with unsatisfiable specifications in an office environment.

1

carpet
robot

slippers
carpet

Figure 1: A mobile robot in a room with the task specification, “do not go on the carpets until the slippers are reached.”
antees provided by its synthesis algorithms (Bhatia, Kavraki,
and Vardi 2010a; 2010b; DeCastro and Kress-Gazit 2013).
A major barrier of utilizing the existing LTL planners in
realistic environments, however, is their Boolean satisfaction condition. These frameworks output a plan only if the
plan fully satisfies the specification. Even though generating
a satisfying plan is ideal, there are scenarios where the full
realization of a task may not be possible; nevertheless, parts
of the specification may still be achievable and of interest
to the user. For example, consider the robotic scenario depicted in Fig. 1 with the user specification, “do not go on
the carpets until the slippers are reached.” Clearly, this specification is unsatisfiable as the robot must go on a carpet
first to reach the slippers. Now imagine that reaching slippers is of a higher priority to the user than avoiding carpets.
With this information, the desired robot behavior is obviously to reach the slippers by violating the carpet constraint
only once. As robots enter unstructured environments, such
scenarios become more common. This paper introduces a
method for quantification of satisfaction of an LTL specification and proposes a planner that handles such scenarios.
Quantification of the satisfaction condition of temporal
logic statements is an active area of research in theoretical computer science and logic. Recent work (Almagor,
Boker, and Kupferman 2013) augments LTL with quantityoperators to allow reasoning about the quality of satisfaction. While this framework can be theoretically adapted to
plan synthesis settings, in practice, the method suffers from
overheads (constructing a large number of automata), which
makes it, as of yet, impractical. Simulation distances have
also been employed to define measures of correctness over
temporal logic specifications (Černỳ, Henzinger, and Radhakrishna 2012). Their applicability in planning for robotic

Introduction

Robots are rapidly evolving from simple instruments for
repetitive tasks to increasingly sophisticated machines capable of performing challenging operations in our daily environment. As they make their way out of custom-made
workspaces in factories, algorithms that integrate task and
motion planning (ITMP) are needed to enable robots to autonomously execute high-level tasks in unstructured environments. Many works, e.g., (Dornhege et al. 2009; Srivastava et al. 2013), approach ITMP by combining discrete planning in the task space with motion planning in the robot’s
continuous state space. Traditionally, classical AI planners
(Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004) are employed at the
task level. In another line of ITMP research, temporal logics, namely linear temporal logic (LTL) (Clarke, Grumberg,
and Peled 1999), has been suggested to remove ambiguity from the specifications and formalize the planning procedure (Kress-Gazit, Fainekos, and Pappas 2007; Kloetzer
and Belta 2008; Wongpiromsarn, Topcu, and Murray 2010;
Bhatia et al. 2011). The power of these methods lie in the expressivity of LTL and the correctness and completeness guarCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3664

