Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Machine Teaching:
An Inverse Problem to Machine Learning and
an Approach Toward Optimal Education
Xiaojin Zhu

Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin–Madison
Madison, WI, USA 53706
jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu
Abstract

A

D

A(D)

I draw the reader’s attention to machine teaching, the problem of finding an optimal training set given a machine learning algorithm and a target model. In addition to generating
fascinating mathematical questions for computer scientists to
ponder, machine teaching holds the promise of enhancing education and personnel training. The Socratic dialogue style
aims to stimulate critical thinking.

∗

θ
−1 ∗

Α (θ )

−1

Α

Θ

D
D
Given a training set D 2 D, machine learning returns a
model A(D) 2 ⇥. Note A in general is many-to-one. Conversely, given a target model ✓⇤ 2 ⇥ the inverse function
A 1 returns the set of training sets that will result in ✓⇤ . Machine teaching aims to identify the optimal member among
A 1 (✓⇤ ). However, A 1 is often challenging to compute,
and may even be empty for some ✓⇤ . Machine teaching must
handle these issues.
Q: Isn’t machine teaching just active learning / experimental
design?
No. Recall active learning allows the learner to “ask
questions” by selecting items x and asking an oracle for its label y (Settles 2012). Consider learning a
noiseless threshold classifier in [0, 1], as shown below.

Of Machines
Q: I know machine learning; What is machine teaching?
Consider a “student” who is a machine learning algorithm, for example, a Support Vector Machine (SVM) or
kmeans clustering. Now consider a “teacher” who wants the
student to learn a target model ✓⇤ . For example, ✓⇤ can be
a specific hyperplane in SVM, or the location of the k centroids in kmeans. The teacher knows ✓⇤ and the student’s
learning algorithm, and teaches by giving the student training examples. Machine teaching aims to design the optimal
training set D.
Q: What do you mean by optimal?
One definition is the cardinality of D: the smaller |D| is,
the better. But there are other definitions as we shall see.
Q: If we already know the true model ✓⇤ , why bother training
a learner?
The applications are such that the teacher and the learner
are separate entities, and the teacher cannot directly “hard
wire” the learner. One application is education where the
learner is a human student. A more sinister “application”
is security where the learner is an adaptive spam filter, and
the “teacher” is a hacker who wishes to change the filtering
behavior by sending the spam filter specially designed messages. Regardless of the intention, machine teaching aims to
maximally influence the learner via optimal training data.
Q: How is machine teaching an inverse problem to machine
learning?
One may view a machine learning algorithm A as a function mapping the space of training sets D to a model space
⇥, see this figure:

ε

{
0

θ∗

1

To learn the decision boundary ✓⇤ up to ✏, active learning
needs to perform binary search with log( 1✏ ) queries. In contrast, in machine teaching the teacher only needs two examples: (✓⇤ 2✏ , 1), (✓⇤ + 2✏ , +1). The key difference is that
the teacher knows ✓⇤ upfront and doesn’t need to explore.
Note passive learning, where training items x are sampled
iid uniformly from [0, 1], requires O( 1✏ ) items.
Q: So the teacher can create arbitrary training items?
That is one teaching setting. Another setting is “poolbased teaching” where the teacher is given a pool of candidate items and can only select (or modify) those items.
There are many other aspects of the teaching setting that one
can consider: whether teaching is done in a batch or sequentially, whether the teacher has full knowledge of the learner,
whether the learner is unsupervised or supervised, how to
define training set optimality, and so on.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4083

