Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Collaborative Filtering with Localised Ranking
Charanpal Dhanjal and Stéphan Clémençon

Romaric Gaudel

Institut Mines-Télécom; Télécom ParisTech: CNRS LTCI
F-75634 Paris Cédex 13, France
charanpal.dhanjal@telecom-paristech.fr
stephan.clemencon@telecom-paristech.fr

LIFL: UMR University of Lille/CNRS 8022
& INRIA Lille - Nord Europe
F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cédex, France
romaric.gaudel@inria.fr

Abstract

a missing element. The aim of recommendation systems is
to find for each user wi a function fi which is an approximation of fi∗ according to some loss function. This problem
is challenging on real datasets since there is a large fraction of missing elements, and irrelevant items are generally
unknown. In addition, the sample of observations is often
drawn from a non-uniform distribution.
To address these issues, we propose a novel method to
obtain a strong top ranking of items based on the theoretically well studied local Area Under the ROC Curve (local
AUC) metric (Clémençon and Vayatis 2007). The method
relies on matrix factorisation to represent parameters, which
generally performs well and scales to large numbers of users
and items. One essentially finds a low rank approximation
of the unobserved entries according to a certain rank-based
loss function. The resulting method has a smooth differentiable objective function and can be solved using stochastic
gradient descent. We show how to perform the optimisation
in parallel so it can make effective use of modern multicore
CPUs. The resulting method is studied empirically in relation to other state-of-the-art matrix factorisation methods on
a selection of synthetic and real datasets.
This paper is organised as follows. In the next section we
motivate and derive the Maximum Local AUC (MLAUC)
algorithm. Following, there is a review on related work on
matrix factorisation methods including those based on top-`
rank-based losses. The MLAUC algorithm is then evaluated
empirically in Section 4 and finally we conclude with a summary and some perspectives.

In recommendation systems, one is interested in the ranking
of the predicted items as opposed to other losses such as the
mean squared error. Although a variety of ways to evaluate
rankings exist in the literature, here we focus on the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) as it widely used and has a strong
theoretical underpinning. In practical recommendation, only
items at the top of the ranked list are presented to the users.
With this in mind we propose a class of objective functions
which primarily represent a smooth surrogate for the real
AUC, and in a special case we show how to prioritise the top
of the list. This loss is differentiable and is optimised through
a carefully designed stochastic gradient-descent-based algorithm which scales linearly with the size of the data. We mitigate sample bias present in the data by sampling observations
according to a certain power-law based distribution. In addition, we provide computation results as to the efficacy of the
proposed method using synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

A recommendation system (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin
2005; Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009) takes a set of items
that a user has rated and recommends new items that the
user may like in the future. Such systems have a broad
range of applications such as recommending books (Linden, Smith, and York 2003), CDs (Linden, Smith, and York
2003), movies (Szomszor et al. 2007; Basu et al. 1998) and
news (Das et al. 2007). To formalise the recommendation
problem let {w1 , . . . , wm } ⊆ W be the set of all users
and let {y1 , . . . , yn } ⊆ Y be the items that can be recommended. Each user wi is associated to a utility function fi∗ which measures whether item y is useful to wi .
We consider the implicit recommendation problem, where
fi∗ : Y → {−1, 1}. For example, the value of the utility
function represents whether a person has read a particular
research paper, or bought a product.
We are thus presented with a set of observations
{(wi , y, fi∗ (y)) : wi ∈ W, y ∈ Y} as a training sample.
This training sample can also be represented as a matrix
X ∈ {−1, 0, 1}m×n such that Xij = 1 if the ith user is
interested in the jth item, and Xij = −1 if the item is irrelevant, otherwise the corresponding element is 0 to indicate

2

Maximum Local AUC

The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) is a common way
to evaluate rankings. Consider user w ∈ W then the AUC
is the expectation that a uniformly drawn positive item y is
greater with respect to a uniformly drawn negative item y 0
under a scoring function f : Y 7→ R
AUC(f ) = EU [I(f (y) > f (y 0 ))],
where U is the uniform distribution and I is the indicator
function that is 1 when its input is true and otherwise 0. In
the following text we try to maximise a quantity closely related to the AUC for all users, however there are two complications that make things more difficult. The first is that
we cannot distinguish between irrelevant and unrated items.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2554

