Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Goal Recognition Design for Non-Optimal Agents
Sarah Keren and Avigdor Gal

Erez Karpas

{sarahn@tx,avigal@ie}.technion.ac.il
Technion — Israel Institute of Technology

karpase@csail.mit.edu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract

observations, goal recognition design is an offline task. Accordingly, the computational efficiency of the grd analysis is
not a key concern. Instead, the effectiveness of the grd analysis is measured according to its ability to asses and minimize the maximal number of observations that need to collected in during the online recognition process.
Previous work in grd analysis (Keren, Gal, and Karpas
2014) involves the classification of an observation sequence
as distinctive if it is a prefix to a plan to only one goal and
non-distinctive otherwise. Accordingly, the worst case distinctiveness (wcd) measure is defined as the maximal nondistinctive path.
Keren et al. (2014) offer ways to calculate and minimize
the wcd of the grd model that rely on three simplifying assumptions, namely that the system is assumed to be fully
observable, the outcomes of actions are deterministic, and
that the agents are assumed to be optimal. These assumptions lead to a compact analysis of the grd model and its
compilation to classical planning in a straightforward manner.
In this work we relax the optimality assumption and offer innovative tools for a grd analysis that accounts for nonoptimal agents. Non-optimal behavior can be modeled in
various ways and can account for settings where agents behave non-optimally, either intentionally or naı̈vely. We focus our attention on a setting we call Bounded Non-Optimal,
where an agent is assumed to have a specified budget for
diverting from an optimal path. Bounded Non-Optimal is
suitable for settings where agents are not fully familiar with
their environment and may therefore act close to but yet not
in a fully optimal manner, as well as for settings where deceptive agents aim at achieving time-sensitive goals, with
some flexibility in their schedule.
In addition to exploring the general Bounded NonOptimal case we investigate a special case we call Bounded
Deception in which an agent behaves non-optimally with the
intention of misleading an observer. In this scenario one possible goal is the focus of attention and is referred to as the
POI (point of interest) of the system. Agents heading to POI
are assumed to have a budget for diverting from an optimal
path to their goal, which they use to follow an optimal path
to a different goal. In this setting we seek to compute the
maximal number of steps an agent aiming at POI can advance on an optimal path to a different goal and still achieve

Goal recognition design involves the offline analysis of goal
recognition models by formulating measures that assess the
ability to perform goal recognition within a model and finding efficient ways to compute and optimize them. In this work
we present goal recognition design for non-optimal agents,
which extends previous work by accounting for agents that
behave non-optimally either intentionally or naı̈vely. The
analysis we present includes a new generalized model for
goal recognition design and the worst case distinctiveness
(wcd) measure. For two special cases of sub-optimal agents
we present methods for calculating the wcd, part of which are
based on novel compilations to classical planning problems.
Our empirical evaluation shows the proposed solutions to be
effective in computing and optimizing the wcd.

Introduction
Goal recognition design (grd) (Keren, Gal, and Karpas
2014) involves the offline analysis of goal recognition models, interchangeably called in the literature plan recognition (Pattison and Long 2011; Kautz and Allen 1986;
Cohen, Perrault, and Allen 1981; Lesh and Etzioni 1995;
Ramirez and Geffner 2009; Agotnes 2010; Hong 2001), by
formulating measures that assess the ability to perform goal
recognition within a model and finding efficient ways to
compute and optimize them.
Goal recognition design is applicable to any domain for
which quickly performing goal recognition is essential and
in which the model design can be controlled. Such problems
include intrusion detection (Jarvis, Lunt, and Myers 2004;
Kaluza, Kaminka, and Tambe 2011; Boddy et al. 2005), assisted cognition (Kautz et al. 2003), and computer games
(Kabanza et al. 2010; Albrecht, Zukerman, and Nicholson
1998; Ha et al. 2011). In computer games for example,
goal recognition aims at quickly understanding the user’s
intention in order to enhance her user experience. Goal
recognition design offers a tool for designing and modifying
these virtual environments, by e.g., preventing certain actions from being performed, in order to guarantee improved
real-time goal recognition abilities.
Notice that whereas goal recognition focuses on finding
efficient ways to perform the online analysis of incoming
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3298

