Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

VecLP: A Realtime Video Recommendation System for Live TV Programs
Sheng Gao†, Dai Zhang†, Honggang Zhang†,
Jianxin Liao†, Chao Huang‡, Yongsheng Zhang‡, Jun Guo†
†Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
‡DOCOMO Beijing Communication Labs.
{gaosheng, zhangdai, guojun} @bupt.edu.cn, liaojianxin@ebupt.com, {zhangy, huangc}@docomolabs-beijing.com.cn

Abstract
We propose VecLP, a novel Internet Video
recommendation system working for Live TV
Programs in this paper. Given little information on the
live TV programs, our proposed VecLP system can
effectively collect necessary information on both the
programs and the subscribers as well as a large volume
of related online videos, and then recommend the relevant Internet videos to the subscribers. For that, the key
frames are firstly detected from the live TV programs,
and then visual and textual features are extracted from
these frames to enhance the understanding of the TV
broadcasts. Furthermore, by utilizing the subscribers’
profiles and their social relationships, a user preference
model is constructed, which greatly improves the
diversity of the recommendations in our system. The
subscriber’s browsing history is also recorded and used
to make a further personalized recommendation. This
work also illustrates how our proposed VecLP system
makes it happen. Finally, we dispose some sort of new
recommendation strategies in use at the system to meet
special needs from diverse live TV programs and throw
light upon how to fuse these strategies.

Figure 1: The user interface of our VecLP system. 1-user
registration and login module; 2-EPG information of the TV
program; 3-Recommendation lists with different recommendation strategies.
Program Guide (EPG), sometimes just a name like Football
World, which is far beyond the need of traditional recommendation systems. (2) The ”cold-start” issue seems to be
more serious in the live program case since the subscribers
tend to visit an online live TV program page without providing enough personal preferences.
In this paper, we thus propose a novel video recommendation system for live TV programs to handle the above challenges. The major contributions of this demonstration are
three-fold: (1) A new application of Internet video recommendation system is proposed in a live TV program situation, which fulfills the potential information needs of TV
subscribers. (2) In this recommendation system, we put forward effective solutions to make up the information shortage by means of a user preference model developed from
his/her social information and browsing history. (3) Several
new recommendation strategies in use at the VecLP system
are disposed to fit special needs of different kinds of live TV
programs.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the Internet evolving from
”text” to ”multimedia”. Online TV programs, with their
high quality and easy-accessibility, have become users’
main source of information and entertainment. Often, when
watching a live TV program, the subscribers may have
potential needs for certain related and interesting Internet videos to be recommended automatically to them as a
supplement. However, many video hosting websites, like
YouTube, Vimeo or YouKu, cannot provide such service.
Even in most existing systems, many studies have attempted
to bring visual content analysis into the scope of contentbased video recommendations (Yang et al. 2007), without
working for the live TV programs.
Moreover, there are several challenges on video recommendation for live TV programs: (1) Little priori information is known about the live program before it is played,
and the only information can be extracted from Electronic

System Design
The VecLP system is divided into two parts: the offline part
and the online part. The offline part functions to construct
a video and social media library, separately, by searching
the Internet according to the expanded EPG information and
utilizing the social network information. While the online

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4274

