Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Toward Mobile Robots Reasoning Like Humans
Jean Oh, Arne Suppé, Felix Duvallet, Abdeslam Boularias,
Luis Navarro-Serment, Martial Hebert, Anthony Stentz
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Jerry Vinokurov, Oscar Romero, Christian Lebiere
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Robert Dean
General Dynamics Robotic Systems, Westminster, MD 21157
front of) to identify an actual goal location that can be referred to as the back of the building, and ﬁnally plan a path
around the building to that goal. In a ﬁeld application, the
robot must also deal with an incomplete model of the world
and uncertainty due to perception and motion constraints.
While numerous previous studies have focused on some
components of the overall system (e.g., outdoor robot navigation (Bonin-Font, Ortiz, and Oliver 2008), cognitive capabilities for simulated environments (Anderson et al. 2004),
scene classiﬁcation and object detection (Lai et al. 2012),
or language understanding for indoor robots (Tellex et al.
2011)), relatively little work exists to bring these capabilities together in one ﬁelded system.
Existing cognitive approaches to robotics generally focus only on the cognitive side and do not necessarily address actual robotics challenges (Trafton et al. 2013), e.g.,
the perception task is commonly simpliﬁed or is assumed
to be complete and accurate. By contrast, our system acknowledges the current limitations of robotic perception; to
cope with imperfect perception, we use a probabilistic world
model that combines information from multiple sources including not only sensory perception but also general knowledge (learned ofﬂine) and linguistic clues.

Abstract
Robots are increasingly becoming key players in
human-robot teams. To become effective teammates,
robots must possess profound understanding of an environment, be able to reason about the desired commands
and goals within a speciﬁc context, and be able to communicate with human teammates in a clear and natural
way. To address these challenges, we have developed an
intelligence architecture that combines cognitive components to carry out high-level cognitive tasks, semantic perception to label regions in the world, and a natural
language component to reason about the command and
its relationship to the objects in the world. This paper
describes recent developments using this architecture on
a ﬁelded mobile robot platform operating in unknown
urban environments. We report a summary of extensive
outdoor experiments; the results suggest that a multidisciplinary approach to robotics has the potential to create
competent human-robot teams.

1

Introduction

As robots become an integral part of human-robot teams,
they will require new modalities for control, as well as sensing and reasoning capabilities that operate at the same level
of their human counterparts. To become useful teammates,
these robots will need to be able to understand natural language, recognize semantically meaningful objects around
them, and perform high-level reasoning once given a task.
This level of understanding would enable human teammates
to easily cooperate with complex robots without requiring
specialized interfaces, protocols, or training.
For example, in Figure 1, a human operator might command the robot to “navigate quickly to the back of the building that is behind the car.” Completing this task successfully requires that the robot understand the components of
the command, locate a car and a building and reason about
their spatial relationships (without a map), hypothesize the
complete shape of the building (which it may only see the

Navigate quickly to the back of the
building that is behind the car.

Fig. 1: The Husky platform executing symbolic navigation.

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

We have integrated multidisciplinary components into a
combined intelligence architecture that enables a robot to

1371

