Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Weakly-Supervised Grammar-Informed Bayesian CCG Parser Learning
Dan Garrette∗
†

Chris Dyer†

Jason Baldridge‡

Noah A. Smith†

∗
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, dhg@cs.utexas.edu
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, {cdyer,nasmith}@cs.cmu.edu
‡
Department of Linguistics, University of Texas at Austin, jbaldrid@utexas.edu

Abstract

PHRASE , but instead have a detailed recursive structure. Instead of VERB, a CCG category might encode information
such as “this category can combine with a noun phrase to
the right (an object) and then a noun phrase to the left (a
subject) to produce a sentence.”
Practical interest in CCG has grown in the last few years
within an array of NLP applications—of particular note are
semantic parsing (Zettlemoyer and Collins 2005) and machine translation (Weese, Callison-Burch, and Lopez 2012).
As these tasks mature and move into new domains and languages, the ability to learn CCG parsers from scarce data will
be increasingly important. In this regard, CCG has particular appeal—both theoretical and practical—in the setting of
weakly-supervised learning because the structure of its categories and its small set of universal rules provide a foundation for constructing linguistically-informative priors that
go beyond general preferences for sparseness that are commonly expressed with generic priors. In this paper, we show
that the intrinsic structure of CCG categories can be exploited
cross-linguistically to learn better parsers when supervision
is scarce.
Our starting point is the method we presented in Garrette et al. (2014) for specifying a probability distribution
over the space of potential CCG categories. This distribution served as a prior for the training of a hidden Markov
model (HMM) supertagger, which assigns a category to each
word in a sentence (lexical categories are often called “supertags”). The prior is designed to bias the HMM toward the
use of cross-linguistically common categories: those that are
less complex or those that are modifiers of other categories.
This method improves supertagging performance in limited
data situations; however, supertags are just the start of a full
syntactic analysis of a sentence, and—for all but very short
sentences—an HMM is very unlikely to produce a sequence
of supertags that can actually be combined into a complete
tree. Here we model the entire tree, which additionally requires supertags for different words to be compatible with
each other.
Bisk and Hockenmaier (2013) present a model of CCG
parser induction from only basic properties of the CCG formalism. However, their model produces trees that use only
a simplified form of CCG consisting of just two atomic categories, and they require gold-standard part-of-speech tags
for each token. We wish to model the same kinds of complex

Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG) is a lexicalized grammar formalism in which words are associated
with categories that, in combination with a small universal set of rules, specify the syntactic configurations
in which they may occur. Previous work has shown that
learning sequence models for CCG tagging can be improved by using priors that are sensitive to the formal
properties of CCG as well as cross-linguistic universals. We extend this approach to the task of learning
a full CCG parser from weak supervision. We present
a Bayesian formulation for CCG parser induction that
assumes only supervision in the form of an incomplete
tag dictionary mapping some word types to sets of potential categories. Our approach outperforms a baseline model trained with uniform priors by exploiting
universal, intrinsic properties of the CCG formalism to
bias the model toward simpler, more cross-linguistically
common categories.

Introduction
Supervised learning of natural language parsers of various
types (context-free grammars, dependency grammars, categorial grammars, and the like) is by now a well-understood
task with plenty of high-performing models—when training data is abundant. Learning from sparse, incomplete information is, naturally, a greater challenge. To build parsers
for domains and languages where resources are scarce, we
need techniques that take advantage of very limited kinds
and amounts of supervision. The strategy we pursue in this
paper is to approach the problem in a Bayesian framework,
using priors built from linguistic knowledge such as grammar universals, linguistic typology, and cheaply obtained annotations from a linguist.
We focus on the task of learning parsers for Combinatory
Categorial Grammar (CCG) (Steedman 2000; Steedman and
Baldridge 2011) without having access to annotated parse
trees. CCG is a lexicalized grammar formalism in which every constituent in a parse is assigned a category that describes its grammatical role in the sentence. CCG categories,
in contrast to the labels used in standard phrase structure
grammars, are not atomic labels like ADJECTIVE or VERB
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2246

