Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A New Granger Causal Model for Influence Evolution in
Dynamic Social Networks: The Case of DBLP
Belkacem Chikhaoui, Mauricio Chiazzaro, Shengrui Wang
Prospectus Laboratory, Department of Computer Science
University of Sherbrooke, Canada
{belkacem.chikhaoui, mauricio.chiazzaro, shengrui.wang}@usherbrooke.ca

Abstract

2009), indirect influence (Kim, Newth, and Christen 2013;
Shuai et al. 2012), and external influence (Myers, Zhu, and
Leskovec 2012). However, these influence measures have
been proposed for the purpose of detecting influential users
and are not intended for assessing the influence between
communities. Moreover, none of these measures studies the
evolution of influence over time. With the rapid growth of
social networks, detecting communities without assessing
their overall influence in the network is now considered insufficient. This in turn suggests the need to study how communities influence each other and how this influence evolves
over time. Finally, studying influence at the community level
may reveal many more interesting patterns than merely looking at pairwise influence between users. These points constitute the major rationale for the work reported here.
In this paper, we propose an effective model for analyzing
influence evolution in dynamic social networks. A weighted
temporal multigraph is employed in order to represent the
dynamics of social networks. The evolution of influence between communities is then assessed by incorporating the
Granger causality (Granger 1969). Our model also makes it
possible to predict the influence between communities using
random forest regression. The combination of these methods
yields an integrated framework for studying and predicting
influence evolution. The major contributions of this paper
can be summarized as follows:

This paper addresses a new problem concerning the
evolution of influence relationships between communities in dynamic social networks. A weighted temporal multigraph is employed to represent the dynamics
of the social networks and analyze the influence relationships between communities over time. To ensure the
interpretability of the knowledge discovered, evolution
of the influence relationships is assessed by introducing
the Granger causality. Through extensive experiments,
we empirically demonstrate the suitability of our model
for studying the evolution of influence between communities. Moreover, we empirically show how our model is
able to accurately predict the influence of communities
over time using random forest regression.

Introduction
Users in real-world social networks are organized into communities that are distinguished by number of users, preferences and interests, social influence, etc. (Zhang et al. 2013).
Discovering and estimating social influence, with the aim of
understanding how users affect each other, is an important
research issue that has received considerable attention from
the AI research community (Belák, Lam, and Hayes 2012;
Mehmood et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2013). In fact, detecting
influential users in social networks and assessing their influence makes it possible to study information propagation in
the network, which is very helpful in developing online advertisements, marketing campaigns and recommender systems (Barbieri and Bonchi 2014; Ye, Liu, and Lee 2012).
Much research has been conducted recently on detecting communities and studying influence in social networks
(Chen, Wang, and Yang 2009; Leskovec, Lang, and Mahoney 2010). Detecting communities provides insight into
the structure of the social network, whereas detecting influential users allows us to understand information dynamics and propagation and network evolution. Different types
of influence have been proposed, such as pairwise influence (Goyal, Bonchi, and Lakshmanan 2010; Yin and Zhang
2012), social influence locality (Zhang et al. 2013), community influence (Belák, Lam, and Hayes 2012; Mehmood et
al. 2013), topic influence (Liu et al. 2012; 2010; Tang et al.

1. Proposing an effective model for influence evolution using the Granger causality.
2. Combining weighted temporal multigraphs and the
Granger causality for representing dynamic social networks and studying the evolution of inter-community influence.
3. Predicting the influence between communities over time
using random forest regression.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, we give
an overview of related work in Section 2. Section 3 describes the proposed model in terms of weighted temporal multigraph representation, influence evolution and prediction. The results of our experiments on real social network datasets are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5
presents our conclusions.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

51

