Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Placing Influencing Agents in a Flock
Katie Genter and Peter Stone
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712 USA
{katie,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

we alter the birds’ environment so as to induce them to alter
their path.
Our previous work has considered how randomly placed
influencing agents should behave so as to influence the flock
to face a particular direction or maneuver along a path so as
to avoid an obstacle (Genter and Stone 2014). In our current
research summarized in this abstract, we wish to examine
how the influencing agents should be placed in the flock.
Specifically, we are considering: where should influencing
agents be initially located within a flock to maximize their
influence on the flock?

Flocking is a emergent behavior exhibited by many different animal species, including birds and fish. In our
work we consider adding a small set of influencing
agents, that are under our control, into a flock. Following ad hoc teamwork methodology, we assume that we
are given knowledge of, but no direct control over, the
rest of the flock. In our ongoing work highlighted in this
abstract, we are specifically considering the problem of
where to initially place influencing agents that we add
to such a flock. We use these influencing agents to influence the flock to behave in a particular way - for example, to fly in a particular orientation or fly in a particular
pattern such as to avoid an obstacle.

Problem Definition
We use a simplified version of Reynolds’ Boid algorithm for
flocking (Reynolds 1987) in which each agent calculates its
orientation for the next time step to be the average heading of
its neighbors at the current time step. An agent’s neighbors
are the agents located within some set radius of the agent.
In order to calculate its orientation for the next time step,
each agent computes the vector sum of the velocity vectors
of each of its neighbors and adopts a scaled version of the
resulting vector as its new orientation. At each time step,
each agent moves one step in the direction of its current vector and then calculates its new heading based on those of
its neighbors. All agents maintain constant, identical speeds.
Our domain is not a torus, so once agents leave the visible
domain we consider them lost forever and irretrievable by
influencing agents.
The n agents that comprise the flock consist of k influencing agents and m flocking agents, where k + m = n. The
influencing agents attempt to influence the flock to travel in
a pre-defined direction — we refer to this direction as θ∗ .
We conclude that the flock has converged to θ∗ when every
agent that is not lost forever and is not an influencing agent
is facing within 0.1 radians of θ∗ .

Introduction
Flocking is an dynamic, emergent swarm behavior found in
various species in nature. Each animal in a swarm follows
a simple local behavior rule that results in a group behavior that often appears well organized and stable. In this abstract, we briefly introduce some of our ongoing work on
the problem of leading a team of flocking agents in an ad
hoc teamwork setting. An ad hoc teamwork setting is one in
which one or more teammates — which we call influencing
agents — must determine how to best achieve a team goal
when given a set of possibly suboptimal teammates that we
are unable to directly control or alter (Stone et al. 2010).
As a motivating example, imagine that a flock of migrating birds is flying directly towards a dangerous area, such as
a wind farm or an airport. Our goal is to encourage the birds
to avoid the dangerous area without significantly disturbing
them. Since there is no way to directly control the flight path
of the birds, we must instead alter the environment so as to
induce the flock to alter their flight path as desired.
In our work, we assume that each bird in the flock dynamically adjusts its heading based on that of its immediate
neighbors. We assume that we control one or more influencing agents — perhaps in the form of robotic birds1 or ultralight aircraft2 — that are perceived by the rest of the flock as
one of their own. It is through these influencing agents that

Control of Influencing Agents
In recent work we considered how to influence a large, nonstationary flock to (1) quickly orient towards a target orientation and (2) maneuver through turns quickly but with minimal agents becoming lost as a result of these turns (Genter
and Stone 2014). We introduced a 1-step lookahead algorithm for determining the individual behavior of each influencing agent. This 1-step lookahead algorithm considered

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
www.mybionicbird.com
2
www.operationmigration.org

4160

