Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Lower and Upper Bounds for SPARQL Queries over OWL Ontologies
Birte Glimm and Yevgeny Kazakov

Ilianna Kollia and Giorgos Stamou

University of Ulm, Germany
<firstname.surname>@uni-ulm.de

National Technical University of Athens, Greece
ilianna2@mail.ntua.gr, gstam@cs.ntua.gr

Abstract

gies under the OWL Direct Semantics entailment regime of
SPARQL 1.1.
Since computing the answers to a query over an expressive knowledge base is computationally very costly, approximation techniques have been proposed that use a weakened version of the KB to compute a lower bound (yields
sound but potentially incomplete results) and a strengthened version to compute an upper bound (yields complete but potentially unsound results) for the query answers (Zhou et al. 2014; Pan, Thomas, and Zhao 2009;
Ren, Pan, and Zhao 2010). The weakened and strengthened
versions are typically approximated in a simpler logic, for
which more efficient reasoning algorithms can be used. Another well-known technique is to compute the bounds from
a pre-model, i.e., a complete and clash-free tableau generated by a DL reasoner (Kollia and Glimm 2012). Facts
that are derived deterministically are used as lower bound,
while also non-deterministically derived facts are considered for the upper bound. For simple queries, the lower
bound allows for simply reading off the answers, while answers in the “gap”, i.e., potential answers in the upper but
not the lower bound, usually have to be checked individually by performing a consistency check with a fully fledged
OWL 2 DL reasoner. Following Zhou et al. (2014), we
refer to the technique of first computing lower and upper
bounds and then checking the answers in the gap as hybrid approach. Since performing many consistency checks
is unlikely to work well in practice, Zhou et al. also propose optimizations such as extracting relevant fragments of
the ontology for checking a potential answer and an adaptation of the summarization technique (Dolby et al. 2009;
2007).
In this paper, we also follow the hybrid approach, but we
significantly extend the form of allowed queries. Furthermore, we present a way of using the knowledge in the ontology to extend the query such that the additionally added
parts allow for better query planning and an overall faster
query evaluation. Compared to query evaluation with standard static query planning (Kollia and Glimm 2013) our empirical analysis with a prototypical implementation shows an
improvement of up to four orders of magnitude in the query
execution times due to the proposed optimizations.
The idea of modifying the query for better query planning
and evaluation has been presented before in the database

The paper presents an approach for optimizing the evaluation
of SPARQL queries over OWL ontologies using SPARQL’s
OWL Direct Semantics entailment regime. The approach is
based on the computation of lower and upper bounds, but
we allow for much more expressive queries than related approaches. In order to optimize the evaluation of possible
query answers in the upper but not in the lower bound, we
present a query extension approach that uses schema knowledge from the queried ontology to extend the query with additional parts. We show that the resulting query is equivalent
to the original one and we use the additional parts that are
simple to evaluate for restricting the bounds of subqueries of
the initial query. In an empirical evaluation we show that the
proposed query extension approach can lead to a significant
decrease in the query execution time of up to four orders of
magnitude.

Introduction
Query answering—the computation of answers to users’
queries w.r.t. ontologies and data—is an important task in
the context of the Semantic Web. Ontologies formulated in
the Web Ontology Language OWL (Motik, Patel-Schneider,
and Parsia 2009) correspond to Description Logic (DL)
knowledge bases (KBs) (Baader et al. 2007), i.e., to theories in a decidable fragment of First-Order Logic. Many
Description Logic reasoners support some form of query answering, but while much effort has been spent on optimizing
standard reasoning tasks for expressive DLs, e.g., the computation of subsumption relations between concepts (unary
predicates), less attention has been given to optimizing the
evaluation of more complex query patterns. The need for
an efficient evaluation of complex queries over OWL ontologies becomes more urgent with the standardization of
the SPARQL 1.1 Entailment Regimes (Glimm and Ogbuji
2013), which extend the SPARQL Query Language (Harris
and Seaborne 2013) with the capability of querying also for
answers that are entailed by the queried ontology, whereas
without entailment regimes only explicitly stated knowledge
is taken into account. In this paper, we propose a way
of exploiting the knowledge in the ontology to more efficiently evaluate complex queries over OWL 2 DL ontoloCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

109

