Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Identifying At-Risk Students in Massive Open Online Courses
Jiazhen He†?
†

James Bailey†?

Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein†

Rui Zhang†

Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
?
Victoria Research Laboratory, National ICT Australia
jiazhenh@student.unimelb.edu.au, {baileyj, brubinstein, rui.zhang}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

Table 1: Student participation in the first offering of Discrete
Optimization (DisOpt) launched in 2013; actions are measured in terms of viewing/downloading lectures and completing quizzes/assignments.
DisOpt MOOC
Number of students enrolled
51,306
Number of students with actions
27,679
Number of students completed
795

Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) have received
widespread attention for their potential to scale higher
education, with multiple platforms such as Coursera,
edX and Udacity recently appearing. Despite their successes, a major problem faced by MOOCs is low completion rates. In this paper, we explore the accurate early
identification of students who are at risk of not completing courses. We build predictive models weekly, over
multiple offerings of a course. Furthermore, we envision
student interventions that present meaningful probabilities of failure, enacted only for marginal students. To
be effective, predicted probabilities must be both wellcalibrated and smoothed across weeks. Based on logistic regression, we propose two transfer learning algorithms to trade-off smoothness and accuracy by adding a
regularization term to minimize the difference of failure
probabilities between consecutive weeks. Experimental
results on two offerings of a Coursera MOOC establish
the effectiveness of our algorithms.

Early prediction can help instructors design interventions
to encourage course completion before a student falls too
far behind. We focus on Coursera MOOCs, which often
last for several weeks with students engaging in activities
such as watching/downloading lectures, attempting assignments/quizzes, and posting to/viewing discussion forums.
To obtain early predictions, we build models weekly and
leverage multiple offerings of a course to obtain ground truth
to supervise the training of our models. Exploration of predictive analysis on MOOCs across multiple offerings has
been limited thus far, but is nonetheless important, since data
distributions across offerings is likely non-stationary: e.g.,
different cohorts of students enroll in offerings, and course
materials (lectures and assignments) are refined over time.
It is not clear a priori whether a model trained on previous
offerings will serve a new offering well.
A key aspect of our approach is a plan for interventions that involve presenting at-risk students with meaningful probabilities of failure. We hypothesize that such carefully crafted interventions could help students become aware
of their progress and potentially persist. However a necessary condition for such an approach to be effective, is to have
probabilities that are well calibrated. By focusing on intervening with only those students near the pass/fail borderline,
we aim for students who could be motivated by being ‘nearly
there’ in succeeding in the class. Our intervention plan expressly avoids displaying failure probabilities for high-risk
students, for fear of discouraging them from further participation in the course. Therefore calibration is not necessary
across the entire unit interval, only near 0.5.
By examining individual students’ failure-probability trajectories, we observe huge fluctuations across weeks, which
is undesirable for a number of reasons, such as confus-

Introduction
With the booming popularity of Massive Open Online
Courses (MOOCs), such as Coursera, edX and Udacity,
MOOCs have attracted the attention of educators, computer scientists and the general public. MOOCs aim to make
higher education accessible to the world, by offering online
courses from universities for free, and have attracted a diverse population of students from a variety of age groups,
educational backgrounds and nationalities. Despite these
successes, MOOCs face a major problem: low completion
rates. For example, Table 1 shows the student participation
in the first offering of a Coursera MOOC Discrete Optimization by The University of Melbourne in 2013, which
illustrates low completion rates seen by other MOOCs. Of
51,306 students enrolled, only 795 students completed: a
completion rate of 1.5%. And only 27,679 (about 54%)
students ever engaged in lectures and quizzes/assignments;
even restricted to this group, the completion rate was a mere
2.9%.
In this paper, we explore the accurate and early identification of students who are at risk of not completing courses.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1749

