Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Moral Decision-Making by Analogy: Generalizations versus Exemplars
Joseph A. Blass, Kenneth D. Forbus
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
2133 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Contact: joeblass@u.northwestern.edu

Despite the two scenarios having strong surface and
structural similarities as well as identical utilitarian
considerations, participants in this study generally said that
taking the proposed action was morally acceptable in the
first scenario but not in the second scenario.
In addition to making non-utilitarian moral decisions,
humans tend to be able to judge the moral value of actions
and situations quickly and with little conscious reasoning; in
fact, there is evidence that justifications for moral judgments
come after the judgment has been made (Haidt 2001).
Furthermore, research suggests that our moral rules are not
innate or learned by rote, but are acquired culturally from
exposure to moral narratives (Darley and Shultz 1990).
These features suggest that purely first-principles, rulebased reasoning is not sufficient to account for moral
reasoning.
Analogical reasoning involves comparing structured
cases. Analogical reasoning can be unconscious (Day and
Gentner 2003), and is therefore an intriguing approach for
modeling moral decision-making. However, analogical
retrieval often results in a match with strong surface
similarities, rather than structural or relational similarities,
although experts do not show this pattern (Novick 1988).
This poses a problem for cases such as the two bomb
scenarios, since each scenario is most surface-similar to the
other, and therefore the likely target of a match for someone
who knows one scenario and is evaluating the other.
A potential solution is to use analogical generalizations,
built from similar-enough exemplars, which emphasize
what is common between them while deprecating facts
unique to individual exemplars. If presented in an order
conducive to assimilation, generalizations will be formed on
the basis of higher-order relations shared across cases
(Kuehne et al. 2000); as the generalizations grow, these facts
become more important than facts unique to cases. The
Sequential Analogical Generalization Engine (SAGE), has

Abstract
Moral reasoning is important to model accurately as AI
systems become ever more integrated into our lives. Moral
reasoning is rapid and unconscious; analogical reasoning,
which can be unconscious, is a promising approach to model
moral reasoning. This paper explores the use of analogical
generalizations to improve moral reasoning. Analogical
reasoning has already been used successfully to model moral
reasoning in the MoralDM model, but it exhaustively
matches across all known cases, which is computationally
intractable and cognitively implausible for human-scale
knowledge bases. We investigate the performance of an
extension of MoralDM to use the MAC/FAC model of
analogical retrieval over three conditions, across a set of
highly confusable moral scenarios.

Introduction
Research on moral reasoning and decision-making in
humans has revealed that certain moral decisions are based
on moral rules rather than utilitarian considerations. These
rules are concerned with the morality of actions rather than
their outcomes (Baron and Spranca 1997). Furthermore,
people are sensitive to structural differences, leading us to
make different judgments even when considering cases that
seem similar on the surface. Consider these two scenarios
(from Waldmann and Dietrich 2007) below:
Bomb 1: “In a restaurant, a bomb threatens to kill 9
guests. The bomb could be thrown onto the patio,
where 1 guest would be killed [but the 9 would be
spared].”
Bomb 2: “In a restaurant, a bomb threatens to kill 9
guests. One [separate] guest could be thrown on the
bomb, which would kill this one guest [but the 9
would be spared].”

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

501

