Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Visualizing Inference
Henry Lieberman and Joe Henke
MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA 01239 USA

Abstract
Graphical visualization has demonstrated enormous power
in helping people to understand complexity in many branches of science. But, curiously, AI has been slow to pick up on
the power of visualization.
Alar is a visualization system intended to help people understand and control symbolic inference. Alar presents dynamically controllable node-and-arc graphs of concepts, and
of assertions both supplied to the system and inferred. Alar
is useful in quality assurance of knowledge bases (finding
false, vague, or misleading statements; or missing assertions). It is also useful in tuning parameters of inference, especially how “liberal vs. conservative” the inference is
(trading off the desire to maximize the power of inference
versus the risk of making incorrect inferences). We present
a typical scenario of using Alar to debug a knowledge base.

Figure 1. An Alar visualization, centered on the assertion
“Orange is a food”. Inferred assertions (green) use related knowledge about food to infer new assertions, e.g. “Orange AtLocation grocery store”.

Visualizing concepts and assertions in AI

In the Assertion view, nodes represent assertions, a triple
of Concept-Relation-Concept (e.g. “Fork UsedFor Eating”). Links represent similarity of assertions (not necessarily that one assertion logically implies another, although
for a link between an assertion in the knowledge base
(black) and an inferred assertion (green), it is usually the
case that it exerts a strong influence. The size of the dot
indicates its truth value.

We present Alar, a visualization system for a large commonsense ontology and knowledge base, ConceptNet, and
its associated heuristic inference technique, AnalogySpace
[Speer et al 08]. Alar can visualize both graphs of concepts, and also graphs of assertions. Alar is based on display of dynamic node-and-arc graphs, dynamically adjusting using the force-directed layout of the visualization
toolkit D3JS [Bostock 14].

We believe the visualization of assertion graphs to be particularly novel. Visualization of related sets of assertions
can be a powerful tool in debugging knowledge bases and
inference. The assumption is that the inference space has a
kind of smoothness characteristic – inference about similar
concepts should have similar truth values. When incorrect
assertions are inferred, they are often connected to incorrect assertions in the knowledge base, so can be easily
spotted. Discontinuities in the assertion space can also be a
clue that some important knowledge is missing from the
knowledge base. Finally, incorrect assertions can also appear when inference is “too liberal” – it concluded something without sufficient evidence.

In the Concept view, nodes represent Concepts (like elements of an ontology), and links represent similarity between concepts. Link thickness represents the degree of
similarity, and lines exert a proportional spring-like “force”
in the dynamic graph pulling its nodes closer (working
against a repelling force that spaces out the nodes). Concepts with similar meanings will be seen to cluster together. Words with, say, more than one meaning, will find
themselves pulled between clusters that represent each of
their meaning contexts.
____________________________
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4280

