Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Lagrangian Decomposition Algorithm for Allocating Marketing Channels
Daisuke Hatano, Takuro Fukunaga, Takanori Maehara, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
National Institute of Informatics
JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project
{hatano,takuro,maehara,k keniti}@nii.ac.jp

Abstract

2012) who proposed the influence maximization problem
with budget constraints (which is called a (source-node) bipartite influence model). Specifically, we may model the
problem as a bipartite graph in which one side is the set of
possible marketing channels and the other side is the set of
customers. An edge between a channel i and a customer j
indicates that i may influence j with some probability that
depends on the budget allocated to i. There are a few more
constraints in this model, and we shall provide more details
in the next subsection. This model was extended by (Soma
et al. 2014).
In this paper, we consider a different problem. In the context of computational advertising, three participants come
into play; namely advertisers, customers, and publishers (=
marketing channels, who make money by showing advertisements). The purpose of advertisers is to maximize the
influence on customer decisions and then convert potential
customers into loyal buyers, subject to budget constraints.
However in practice, the slots for publishers are limited
and moreover publishers need to increase impressions/clicks
from users (so they want to display many different advertisements). Therefore a “match maker,” who allocates the slots
to advertisers appropriately, is desperately needed for these
three participants. This fact motivates numerous previous
studies on advertisement allocations (e.g., (Feldman et al.
2010; Goel et al. 2010)). However, in the (bipartite) influence maximization problem, this aspect was not previously
taken into account; therefore, our purpose here is to model
the above-mentioned problem in terms of a “match maker.”
Specifically, we consider the following conditions;
1. In order for all advertisers to be satisfied, we seek to guarantee that each advertiser will convert some given number
of customers into loyal buyers in expectation.
2. In order to allocate some very “influential” marketing
channel to advertisers as fairly as possible, for each marketing channel, we impose some “upper bound” of budget
for each advertiser.
3. We limit the number of available slots for each marketing
channel.
Our purpose is to find a solution satisfying the above three
conditions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time
the influence maximization problem has been considered in
terms of a “match maker.” Let us now formulate our problem

In this paper, we formulate a new problem related to the
well-known influence maximization in the context of computational advertising. Our new problem considers allocating
marketing channels (e.g., TV, newspaper, and websites) to advertisers from the view point of a match maker, which was not
taken into account in previous studies on the influence maximization. The objective of the problem is to find an allocation
such that each advertiser can influence some given number of
customers while the slots of marketing channels are limited.
We propose an algorithm based on the Lagrangian decomposition. We empirically show that our algorithm computes
better quality solutions than existing algorithms, scales up to
graphs of 10M vertices, and performs well particularly in a
parallel environment.

1

Introduction

A major decision in a marketing plan deals with the allocation of a given budget among marketing channels, such as
TV, newspaper, and websites, in order to maximize the impact on a set of potential customers. This problem can be
formulated as follows. Suppose that we have estimates for
the extent to which marketing channels can influence customer decisions and convert potential customers into loyal
buyers, and that we would like to market a new product that
will possibly be adopted by a large fraction of the customers.
How should we choose a few influential marketing channels
that can provoke a cascade of influence?
This problem is closely related to the well-known “influence maximization” problem that finds a small set of the
most influential individuals in a social network so that their
aggregated influence in the network is maximized. The
seminal work by (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003)
provides the first systematic study of influence maximization as a combinatorial optimization problem. The influence maximization problem further motivated the research
community to conduct extensive studies on various aspects
of these problems (e.g., (Chen, Wang, and Wang 2010;
Chen, Wang, and Yang 2009; Borgs et al. 2014; Romero,
Meeder, and Kleinberg 2011; Du et al. 2013)).
The above-mentioned problem for marketing channels
was first considered by (Alon, Gamzu, and Tennenholtz
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1144

