Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

What’s Hot in the SAT and ASP Competitions
Marijn J. H. Heule∗

Torsten Schaub†

The University of Texas at Austin, United States
marijn@cs.utexas.edu

University of Potsdam, Germany
torsten@cs.uni-potsdam.de

Abstract

ing techniques during search. Roughly speaking, lingeling
and plingeling alternate each second between a conflictdriven clause learning (CDCL) engine and inprocessing.
Since SAT Competition 2013, it is mandatory for solvers
participating in the unsatisfiability tracks to emit refutation
proofs to ensure that the results are correct. A new proof
format for refutations, called DRAT, introduced this year
supports expressing all techniques used in state-of-the-art
solvers compactly. Some solvers, such as lingeling, use techniques that cannot be expressed using resolution and cannot be expressed in the SAT Competition 2013 formats.
One technique that cannot be expressed using resolution,
but is used in some top solvers, is bounded variable addition (Manthey, Heule, and Biere 2013). The DRAT format
facilitates expressing this (and other techniques) compactly,
and DRAT proofs were efficiently checked during SC14 using the DRAT-trim tool (Wetzler, Heule, and Hunt 2014).
The results on random benchmarks were exciting this year
as the (single core) solver dimetheus (Gableske 2014a) by
Oliver Gableske outperformed all other solvers, even parallel ones (which ran on twelve cores), on random benchmarks
with a huge margin. dimetheus consists of two engines,
one based on Message Passing (MP) (Gableske 2014b) and
one based on Stochastic Local Search (SLS) (Balint and
Schöning 2012). The MP engine is used to initialize the
SLS engine with an “almost satisfying” assignment. None
of the other solvers that participated in SC14 used an MP
engine, but the success of dimetheus might change that in
future competitions.
There are several challenges regarding SAT solvers. First,
just a few years ago, parallel versions of top-tier SAT solvers
frequently performed worse than the sequential versions
(measured in wall-clock time). The last two years, parallel
SAT solver performance clearly improved, the gains on a
12-core machine are still modest. This holds for both CDCL
and SLS solvers. Second, the unsatisfiability results of parallel SAT solvers cannot be validated efficiently, in contrast
to checking the results of sequential SAT solvers. Bridging
this gap would increase the trust in the results of parallel
SAT solvers. Third, although we witnessed a huge performance boost of a local search solver on random benchmarks
this year, SLS solvers still perform poorly on most industrial
benchmarks. Achieving similar speed-ups by SLS solvers on
industrial benchmarks will be a big challenge.

During the Vienna Summer of Logic, the first FLoC Olympic
Games were organized, bringing together a dozen competitions related to logic. Here we present the highlights of
the Satisfiability (SAT) and Answer Set Programming (ASP)
competitions.

Introduction
The SAT Competitions, organized since 2002, have been the
driving force of SAT solver development. The performance
of contemporary SAT solvers is incomparable to those of a
decade ago. As a consequence, SAT solvers are used as the
core search engine in many utilities, including tools for hardware and software verification. In 2014, the SAT Competition was organized for the ninth time. As in earlier editions,
SAT Competition 2014 consisted of three categories: industrial, hard-combinatorial, and random benchmarks. Similarly, the ASP Competition has a great impact on system
development in ASP. Unlike the SAT Competition, its emphasis lies on modeling and tracks reflecting different language fragments with an increasing level of expressiveness.

What’s Hot in SAT
The SAT Competition 2014 (SC14) was larger than any of
its earlier editions: 79 participants from 14 countries submitting a total of 137 solvers. The number of participating
solvers was restricted to 70 by limiting the number of solvers
per (co-)author. A large timeout of 5,000 seconds was used
for each solver/benchmark pair. SC14 consumed 400,000
hours of CPU time, which were executed in only five days
on the Lonestar cluster at Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The University of Texas at Austin.
The big winner of SC14 was Armin Biere, whose tools
lingeling (sequential) and plingeling (parallel) (Biere 2014)
solved most industrial benchmarks and also performed well
on hard-combinatorial instances. The crucial difference between lingeling and most other top solvers is inprocessing (Järvisalo, Heule, and Biere 2012): applying preprocess∗

Supported by DARPA contract number N66001-10-2-4087.
Affiliated with Inria Rennes, France, and Simon Fraser University, Canada.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4322

