Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Estimating Temporal Dynamics of Human Emotions
Seungyeon Kim∗ and Joonseok Lee∗ and Guy Lebanon† and Haesun Park∗
∗

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
†
Amazon, Seattle, WA, USA
{seungyeon.kim, jlee716}@gatech.edu, glebanon@gmail.com, hpark@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract

we demonstrate a temporal model on data consisting of timestamped blog posts. We construct the sentiment or emotion
ground truth from an emotion label for the text.
The temporal model is useful in two ways. First, it leads
to a predictive model that estimates the current emotional
state of the author within a specific time context. This predictive model is more accurate than static analysis, which ignores time information. Second, the model is useful in confirming or refuting psychological models concerning human
emotions and their dependency on time. Specifically, we reexamine the circadian rhythm model from psychology and
investigate its higher order generalizations and its variance
across multiple individuals.

Sentiment analysis predicts a one-dimensional quantity
describing the positive or negative emotion of an author. Mood analysis extends the one-dimensional sentiment response to a multi-dimensional quantity, describing a diverse set of human emotions. In this paper,
we extend sentiment and mood analysis temporally and
model emotions as a function of time based on temporal
streams of blog posts authored by a specific author. The
model is useful for constructing predictive models and
discovering scientific models of human emotions.

1

Introduction

2

Sentiment analysis predicts the presence of a positive or
negative emotion y ∈ R in a document x. Recent attempts (Mishne 2005; Kim et al. 2013) generalize sentiment analysis by introducing a multivariate response variable y ∈ Rd , which corresponds to a more complex emotional state. For example, a classical model from psychology
examines a two-dimensional emotional quantity in which
the first dimension corresponds to sentiment and the second corresponds to the level of engagement (aroused vs.
calm). Sentiment analysis and its generalizations are important tools in industry, attracting a considerable amount of
attention from the research community.
The analysis of human emotions based on text has focused mostly on static analysis, that is the analysis of documents solely based on its own content ignoring temporal
dependences. This paper explores a temporal model for human emotions that applies to a sequential stream of text
documents written by the same author across different time
points. Our model is somewhat similar to Brownian motion
and the Kalman filter and generalizes the latent space emotion model in Kim et al. (2013).
Most papers on sentiment analysis use movie or item reviews, which are poorly suited to temporal modeling. Reviews relate to specific stationary truth and are unlikely to
significantly change based on the time of authoring. Blog
posts, however, are free expressions of the author’s emotions
and thus depend more on the time of authoring. Therefore,

Related Work

Most sentiment or mood analysis work focus on extracting a
richer set of features in a single document; it is somewhat
orthogonal to our contribution. Pang and Lee (2008) and
Liu (2012) are good surveys of this field. Mishne (2005),
Généreux and Evans (2006), and Keshtkar and Inkpen
(2009) are also notable as they extended binary sentiment
to multivariate emotions using multiclass classifiers. Kim et
al. (2013) is the most closely aligned to our work because of
its similar multi-dimensional latent variable formulation.
Several studies have devoted to the temporal variation
of sentiment even though they have not examined interdocument dependencies. Mishne and Maarten (2006) explored a trend of emotions, yet they did not include temporal dependencies in their model. Mao and Lebanon (2007;
2009) introduced temporal variation in topics and sentiments
within a single document.
Supervised and temporal topic models are also similar to
our model. Supervised topic models (Blei and McAuliffe
2007; Ramage et al. 2009) include similar graphical models except for their use of discrete latent variables and lack
of temporal dependencies. Temporal topic models (Blei and
Lafferty 2006; Wei, Sun, and Wang 2007; Wang, Blei, and
Heckerman 2009; Hong et al. 2011), by contrast, do not
use supervised label information. Conditional Random Field
(CRF) (Lafferty, Pereira, and McCallum 2001) includes both
dependencies; however, it does not use specific time information. Additional examples of temporal modeling of text
documents include Lebanon, Mao, and Dillon (2007); Mao,
Dillon, and Lebanon (2007); Lebanon and Zhao (2008).

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

168

