Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Hierarchical Monte-Carlo Planning
Ngo Anh Vien

Marc Toussaint

Machine Learning and Robotics Lab
University of Stuttgart, Germany
vien.ngo@ipvs.uni-stuttgart.de

Machine Learning and Robotics Lab
University of Stuttgart, Germany
marc.toussaint@ipvs.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

to an action hierarchy which is a hierarchy of macro actions with multiple abstract levels, the complexity of planning would be enormously reduced. Hence, the integration
of an action hierarchy into planning algorithms would let
them be scalable to very large problems (Dietterich 2000;
Pineau 2004).
In this paper, we propose new MCTS methods for hierarchical planning, which seamlessly integrates an action hierarchy in POMCP (as well as UCT). Our formulation is
generally made for POMDPs. To demonstrate the efficiency
of the novel MCTS method, we evaluate it on various hierarchical planning domains in MDPs, POMDPs and a Bayesian
reinforcement learning setting.

Monte-Carlo Tree Search, especially UCT and its POMDP
version POMCP, have demonstrated excellent performance
on many problems. However, to efficiently scale to large domains one should also exploit hierarchical structure if present.
In such hierarchical domains, finding rewarded states typically requires to search deeply; covering enough such informative states very far from the root becomes computationally expensive in flat non-hierarchical search approaches. We
propose novel, scalable MCTS methods which integrate a
task hierarchy into the MCTS framework, specifically leading to hierarchical versions of both, UCT and POMCP. The
new method does not need to estimate probabilistic models
of each subtask, it instead computes subtask policies purely
sample-based. We evaluate the hierarchical MCTS methods
on various settings such as a hierarchical MDP, a Bayesian
model-based hierarchical RL problem, and a large hierarchical POMDP.

Related Work
MCTS algorithms (Coulom 2006; Browne et al. 2012) have
long been applied to planning under uncertainty, and recently received wide attention from many other communities. Among those, UCT (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006)
is one of the most successful examples and has been extensively applied, e.g., to Computer Go (Gelly and Silver
2011), Amazon (Lorentz 2008), Game Playing (Finnsson
and Björnsson 2008). UCT was previously combined with
macro actions (Powley, Whitehouse, and Cowling 2013) in
a simple form that repeats executing the same actions for
a fixed period of time steps. Existing MCTS algorithms,
including UCT, cannot efficiently cope with long-horizon
problems. When the terminal states can only be reached after
many time steps, MCTS algorithms must extensively build
a very deep search tree which requires a large number of
rollout simulations which is exponential in the tree depth.
In order to tackle long-horizon problems, planning algorithms are usually integrated with macro actions or a task
hierarchy, which constitutes a hierarchical planning style.
Macro actions and action hierarchies have previously been
used for planning and learning in MDP (Barto and Mahadevan 2003). Later the idea was extended for POMDPs
(Hansen and Zhou 2003; Theocharous and Kaelbling 2003;
Pineau 2004; He, Brunskill, and Roy 2010; Lim, Hsu, and
Sun 2011; Ma and Pineau 2014). These work range from
offline planning (Hansen and Zhou 2003; Theocharous and
Kaelbling 2003; Pineau 2004; Lim, Hsu, and Sun 2011;
Ma and Pineau 2014) to online planning (He, Brunskill,
and Roy 2010), and with assumption of known subgoals
(Hansen and Zhou 2003; Theocharous and Kaelbling 2003;

Introduction
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Coulom 2006) has become a standard approach to a wide variety of planning
problems. In particular UCT (Upper Confidence Bound applied to Trees) for MDPs (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006)
and its extension to POMDPs (POMCP) (Silver and Veness
2010) became the state-of-the-art for many challenging large
problems such as Computer Go and other games. POMCP
and UCT have shown to be promising in tackling two notorious problems in planning: the curse of dimensionality,
which means the exponential growth of complexity with the
size of the state space, and the curse of history which means
the exponential growth of complexity with the length of the
planning horizon.
However, the complexity of non-hierarchical planning
is still exponential in the horizon and the performance of
POMCP and UCT degrades when not given enough computational time. The exponential growth of necessarily visited nodes, which is O(|A|T ) (if T is the horizon), is due
to the action branching after each step. If macro actions
are used instead of primitive actions, the branching number would decrease to O(|A|T /L ) (if L is the maximum
number of steps executed by macro actions) (He, Brunskill, and Roy 2010). However, if policies were restricted
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3613

