Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Justified Representation in Approval-Based Committee Voting
Haris Aziz

Markus Brill

Vincent Conitzer

NICTA and UNSW,
Sydney 2033, Australia

Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA

Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA

Edith Elkind

Rupert Freeman

Toby Walsh

University of Oxford
Oxford OX1 3QD, UK

Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA

NICTA and UNSW,
Sydney 2033, Australia

Abstract

Much of the prior work in AI on multi-winner rules focuses on the setting where voters’ preferences are total orders of the candidates; notable exceptions are (LeGrand,
Markakis, and Mehta 2007) and (Caragiannis, Kalaitzis, and
Markakis 2010). In contrast, in this paper we consider
approval-based rules, where each voter lists the subset of
candidates that she approves of. There is a growing literature on voting rules that are based on approval ballots. One
of the advantages of approval ballots is their simplicity: such
ballots reduce the cognitive burden on voters (rather than
providing a full ranking of the candidates, a voter only needs
to decide which candidates to approve) and are also easier to
communicate to the election authority. The most straightforward way to aggregate approvals is to have every approval
for a candidate contribute one point to that candidate’s score
and select the candidates with the highest score. This rule is
called Approval Voting (AV ). AV has many desirable properties in the single-winner case (Brams, Kilgour, and Sanver
2006; Endriss 2013), including its “simplicity, propensity to
elect Condorcet winners (when they exist), its robustness to
manipulation and its monotonicity” (Brams 2010, p. viii).
However, for the case of multiple winners, the merits of AV
are “less clear” (Brams 2010, p. viii). For example, AV may
fail proportional representation: if the goal is to select k winners, 51% of the agents approve the same k candidates, and
the remaining agents approve a disjoint set of k candidates,
then the agents in minority do not get any of their approved
candidates selected.

We consider approval-based committee voting, i.e., the setting where each voter approves a subset of candidates, and
these votes are then used to select a fixed-size set of winners
(committee). We propose a natural axiom for this setting,
which we call justified representation (JR). This axiom requires that if a large enough group of voters exhibits agreement by supporting the same candidate, then at least one voter
in this group has an approved candidate in the winning committee. We show that for every list of ballots it is possible
to select a committee that provides JR. We then check if this
axiom is fulfilled by well-known approval-based voting rules.
We show that the answer is negative for most of the rules we
consider, with notable exceptions of PAV (Proportional Approval Voting), an extreme version of RAV (Reweighted Approval Voting), and, for a restricted preference domain, MAV
(Minimax Approval Voting). We then introduce a stronger
version of the JR axiom, which we call extended justified representation (EJR), and show that PAV satisfies EJR, while
other rules do not. We also consider several other questions
related to JR and EJR, including the relationship between
JR/EJR and unanimity, and the complexity of the associated
algorithmic problems.

1

Introduction

Aggregation of preferences is a central problem in the field
of social choice, and has received a considerable amount of
attention from the artificial intelligence research community
(see e.g., Conitzer 2010). While the most-studied scenario is
that of selecting a single candidate out of many, it is often the
case that one needs to select a fixed-size set of winners (committee): this includes domains such as parliamentary elections, the hiring of faculty members, or (automated) agents
deciding on a set of plans (Elkind, Lang, and Saffidine 2014;
LeGrand, Markakis, and Mehta 2007; Davis, Orrison, and
Su 2014). The study of algorithmic complexity of voting
rules that output committees is an active research direction
(see, e.g., Procaccia, Rosenschein, and Zohar 2008; Meir,
Procaccia, and Rosenschein 2008; Caragiannis, Kalaitzis,
and Markakis 2010; Lu and Boutilier 2011; Betzler, Slinko,
and Uhlmann 2013; Skowron, Faliszewski, and Slinko 2013;
Cornaz, Galand, and Spanjaard 2012; Skowron et al. 2013).

As a consequence, over the years, several multi-winner
rules based on approval ballots have been proposed (see
e.g., Kilgour 2010). Under Proportional Approval Voting
(PAV ), each agent’s contribution to the committee’s total
score depends on how many candidates from the agent’s approval set have been elected. A sequential variant of this rule
is known as Reweighted Approval Voting (RAV ). Another
way to modulate the approvals is through computing a satisfaction score for each agent based on the ratio of the number
of their approved candidates appearing in the committee and
their total number of approved candidates; this idea leads to
Satisfaction Approval Voting (SAV ). One could also use a
distance-based approach: Minimax Approval Voting (MAV )
selects a set of k candidates that minimizes the maximum
Hamming distance from the submitted ballots. All the rules
informally described above have a more egalitarian objec-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

784

