Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Fast and Accurate Prediction of Sentence Specificity
Junyi Jessy Li and Ani Nenkova
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
{ljunyi,nenkova}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

It is clear that the specificity of text is expressed on multiple levels, and can be quantified at the level of words (people vs. students vs. Mary Smith) (Reiter and Frank 2010;
Krahmer and van Deemter 2012), sentences, as in the example above (Mathew and Katz 2009; McKinlay and Markert
2011), or full texts or paragraphs, where the distinction boils
down to determining if the intended audience of a text are
lay people or experts (Elhadad et al. 2005).
For the work presented in this paper, we focus on the task
of predicting sentence level specificity. Indictors of word
specificity are used as features in the prediction task, and
overall text specificity can be computed as a function of
the specificity of the individual sentences in the text. This
framework was introduced by Louis and Nenkova (2011a).
In that work, specificity at the sentence level was already
indirectly labeled in a corpus originally developed for a
different type of analysis in discourse processing. Supervised methods for sentence specificity trained on this repurposed data, using a rich set of syntactic and lexical features,
yielded good accuracy on a test set of sentences manually
labeled for specificity (Louis and Nenkova 2012). These experiments confirmed that predicting sentence specificity is a
viable task. The authors further used their automatic classifier to show differences in content specificity in summarization, where human summaries are significantly less specific
than the original text being summarized but machine summaries are significantly more specific (Louis and Nenkova
2011b). They also showed that considerations of sentence
specificity are at play in text quality assessment: science
journalism articles that were considered to be written exceptionally well were overall more general and contained fewer
stretches of contiguous specific sentences than other science
journalism pieces (Louis and Nenkova 2013).
Despite the positive findings, several crucial questions remain. First, it remains unclear if specificity can be computed
quickly so that it can become practical as a module in realistic applications. The original method incorporated syntactic,
part of speech, named entity and language model features.
In our work we explore light features that can be computed
with string operations alone, possibly allowing look up in a
static dictionary. We present experiments to show that such
an impoverished feature set will still be able to achieve results better than chance but considerably inferior to the state
of the art approach. However, using co-training in a semi-

Recent studies have demonstrated that specificity is an important characterization of texts potentially beneficial for a
range of applications such as multi-document news summarization and analysis of science journalism. The feasibility
of automatically predicting sentence specificity from a rich
set of features has also been confirmed in prior work. In this
paper we present a practical system for predicting sentence
specificity which exploits only features that require minimum
processing and is trained in a semi-supervised manner. Our
system outperforms the state-of-the-art method for predicting sentence specificity and does not require part of speech
tagging or syntactic parsing as the prior methods did. With
the tool that we developed — S PECITELLER — we study the
role of specificity in sentence simplification. We show that
specificity is a useful indicator for finding sentences that need
to be simplified and a useful objective for simplification, descriptive of the differences between original and simplified
sentences.

1

Introduction

Sentences vary in the level of details they convey. Clearly
written texts tailor the specificity of content to the intended
reader and exhibit clear patterns in the flow of specificity
(Scanlan 2000; Higgins et al. 2004). Consider the following
two sentences, talking about test cheating:
[general] Evidence of widespread cheating has surfaced in
several states in the last year or so.
[specific] California’s education department suspects adult
responsibility for erasures at 40 schools that changed wrong
answers to right ones on a statewide test.

Both sentences convey the information that (exam) cheating is taking place. The first sentence is rather general: it
contains a vague piece of information on the extent of cheating (widespread), location of cheating (several states) and
time of the cheating (in the last year or so) and says nothing about exactly what cheating consisted of. The second
is more specific, conveying that it was not students who did
the cheating and that 40 schools in California were suspected
and what activities constituted the cheating, making the extent, location and exact events much more precise.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2281

