Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploiting Determinism to Scale Relational Inference
Mohamed-Hamza Ibrahim and Christopher Pal and Gilles Pesant
Department of Computer and Software Engineering, École Polytechnique Montréal
2500, Chemin de Polytechnique, Universite de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada

Abstract

2008; Ahmadi et al. 2013; Kersting 2012) uses the symmetry present in the structure of the network to reduce its
size. Lazy Inference (Poon, Domingos, and Sumner 2008;
Singla and Domingos 2006b) uses sparseness to ground
out the theory lazily (i.e., we do not need to instantiate
atoms and clauses that have default values), which yields
gains in memory and time. Coarse-to-Fine Inference (Kiddon and Domingos 2011) uses an induced type hierarchy
over a domain’s objects to apply sequences of increasingly
fine approximations of inference to control the trade-off between lifting and accuracy. Although determinism sometimes poses a significant challenge to probabilistic inference,
it remains an intrinsic part of the structure of SRL models.
One approach (Allen and Darwiche 2003) based on recursive conditioning has been proposed to exploit determinism
in order to speed up exact inference by using standard logical techniques such as unit propagation. But the approach
does not scale to large real-world problems. More recently,
an efficient algorithm (Papai, Singla, and Kautz 2011) based
on ideas from constraint programming has been introduced
to use determinism in order to prune objects in the domain of
atoms by enforcing generalized arc consistency on the set of
hard constraints in the theory. For each hard constraint, the
algorithm iteratively performs two main operations (join and
project) and therefore its complexity (both space and time)
is sensitive to the complexity of those operations that are in
some cases exponential in the number of atoms. In our work
we take advantage of determinism in the underlying model
to improve the scalability of inference for large, real-world
problems.

One key challenge in statistical relational learning (SRL)
is scalable inference. Unfortunately, most real-world problems in SRL have expressive models that translate into large
grounded networks, representing a bottleneck for any inference method and weakening its scalability. In this paper we
introduce Preference Relaxation (PR), a two-stage strategy
that uses the determinism present in the underlying model to
improve the scalability of relational inference. The basic idea
of PR is that if the underlying model involves mandatory (i.e.
hard) constraints as well as preferences (i.e. soft constraints)
then it is potentially wasteful to allocate memory for all constraints in advance when performing inference. To avoid this,
PR starts by relaxing preferences and performing inference
with hard constraints only. It then removes variables that violate hard constraints, thereby avoiding irrelevant computations involving preferences. In addition it uses the removed
variables to enlarge the evidence database. This reduces the
effective size of the grounded network. Our approach is general and can be applied to various inference methods in relational domains. Experiments on real-world applications show
how PR substantially scales relational inference with a minor
impact on accuracy.

Introduction
Relational and deterministic dependencies in data have been
addressed with the emergence of statistical relational learning (SRL) (Getoor and Taskar 2007). Typically in SRL the
theory is propositionalized to a grounded network wherein
any probabilistic inference like MC-SAT or belief propagation can be applied. However this approach can be very timeconsuming: the grounded network is typically large, which
slows down inference, and this can be problematic for learning when using inference as a subroutine.
Many SRL models, if not most, feature a set of structural
properties like determinism, sparseness, symmetry, redundancy, and type hierarchy. Markov Logic is a powerful SRL
formalism that exhibits these properties, and a simple way
to enhance the scalability of inference on the underlying
SRL model such as those instantiated by Markov logic is
to exploit such properties. For instance, Lifted Inference(de
Salvo Braz, Amir, and Roth 2005; Singla and Domingos

It is common for many real-world problems in SRL
to have expressive models that combine deterministic and
probabilistic dependencies. The former often appear in the
form of mandatory (i.e. hard) constraints that must be satisfied in any world with a non-zero probability. The latter
are typically formulated as preferences (i.e. soft constraints),
and dissatisfying them is not impossible, but less probable.
Thus, if a query atom X which is involved with a set of
constraints C = {H, S} (where H and S are its subsets of
hard and soft constraints respectively) violates one of the
hard constraints h in H, then its marginal probability will be
zero, even if it satisfies its other hard and soft constraints in
C − {h}. A variable violates a hard constraint if there is a
truth value for that variable such that the constraint is vio-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1756

