Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

SMT-Based Nonlinear PDDL+ Planning
Daniel Bryce

Sicun Gao

SIFT, LLC.
dbryce@sift.net

MIT CSAIL
sicung@csail.mit.edu

David Musliner & Robert Goldman
SIFT, LLC.
{musliner, rpgoldman}@sift.net
Abstract

and can be made very small. Furthermore, if dReal identifies
a problem as unsat, it is guaranteed to be correct.
SMT solvers have been developed for solving problems
in formal verification. Adapting them to planning problems requires us to introduce new solving strategies for SMT
solvers. As a main contribution of this work, we describe a
novel variable and value selection strategy, which extends
similar heuristics in SAT-based planning (Rintanen 2012).
Our LRF encoding translates PDDL+ problems to hybrid
system problems, that are much more complicated than traditional discrete planning, which only involves SAT-solving.
We need to solve SMT formulas that contain modes (discrete states), flows (continuous change in each mode), invariants (constraints in each mode), and guarded jumps between modes with discrete change. The heuristic, which is a
variation on the h1 heuristic (Haslum and Geffner 2000),
guides the SAT solver to construct feasible sequences of
modes and to remove unreachable modes from the LRF encoding. Given a sequence of modes, the jumps correspond
to PDDL+ happenings. We also present a new heuristic for
ICP that favors early start times for instantaneous actions.
Our approach addresses PDDL+ with instantaneous actions and processes. We accommodate durative actions by
first compiling them into instantaneous start and end actions
that control a process. We evaluate our solver on both linear
and nonlinear variations of the generator and car problems
from the literature and a new domain that plans how to dribble a ball subject to nonlinear drag and gravity. We show that
dReal is capable of finding non-trivial solutions and that our
heuristics improve its scalability.
In the following, we describe dReal, an SMT solver for
LRF . We present our encoding of PDDL+ planning as an
LRF hybrid system and illustrate the encoding with a simplified version of the car domain. We then discuss our SAT
variable selection heuristic and ICP time branching heuristic. We finish by empirically evaluating dReal and illustrate
its potential for adapting SAT based planning to handle nonlinear continuous change.

PDDL+ planning involves reasoning about mixed discretecontinuous change over time. Nearly all PDDL+ planners
assume that continuous change is linear. We present a new
technique that accommodates nonlinear change by encoding
problems as nonlinear hybrid systems. Using this encoding,
we apply a Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) solver to
find plans. We show that it is important to use novel planningspecific heuristics for variable and value selection for SMT
solving, which is inspired by recent advances in planning as
SAT. We show the promising performance of the resulting
solver on challenging nonlinear problems.

Introduction
Hybrid planning problems expressed in PDDL+ (Fox and
Long 2006) model mixed discrete and continuous change.
Prior work on PDDL+ plan synthesis assumes that continuous change is linear (Coles et al. 2012; Bogomolov et al.
2014; Coles and Coles 2014; Shin and Davis 2005). We
present a Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) encoding of
PDDL+ planning that accommodates nonlinear continuous
change, and develop novel planning-specific heuristics that
build upon advances for SAT planning (Rintanen 2012).
We reduce PDDL+ planning to reachability problems
of hybrid systems (Henzinger 1996), which are encoded
and solved as first-order logic formulas over the real numbers (we call them LRF -formulas (Gao, Avigad, and Clarke
2012)). We use the framework of δ-complete decision procedures over the reals (Gao, Avigad, and Clarke 2012), and
apply the dReal SMT solver to decide δ-satisfiability or unsatisfiability of the logic formulas. Showing δ-satisfiability
then involves finding bounds on ~x (the continuous state variables) such that the lower and upper bound on each numeric
constraint has width no more than δ. The dReal solver accomplishes this by first using a DPLL-based SAT solver to
find a set of literals that satisfy each Boolean constraint. It
then applies an Interval Constraint Propagation (ICP) solver
to refine the intervals on each numeric variable constrained
by the literals. Because of the relaxation from SMT to δSMT, we obtain a “tube” (Fox, Howey, and Long 2006) that
may contain a feasible plan up to δ-bounded numerical errors. Fortunately, δ controls the precision of these intervals

SMT Solving for LRF -Formulas
Our work formulates LRF encodings of hybrid systems to
express PDDL+ planning. We use the dReal solver to solve
(i.e., find satisfying solutions of) these encodings. As part of
this work, we extend the dReal solver to use heuristics that

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3247

