Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Predicting the Demographics of Twitter Users from Website Traffic Data
Aron Culotta and Nirmal Kumar Ravi

Jennifer Cutler

Department of Computer Science
Illinois Institute of Technology
Chicago, IL 60616
aculotta@iit.edu, nravi@hawk.iit.edu

Stuart School of Business
Illinois Institute of Technology
Chicago, IL 60616
jcutler2@stuart.iit.edu

Abstract

a profile (e.g., income, education level); by restricting learning to a small set of labeled profiles, the generalizability of
the classifier is limited. Additionally, most past work has focused on text as the primary source of evidence, making limited use of network evidence.
In this paper, we use regression to predict six demographic variables (gender, age, ethnicity, education, income,
and child status) of a set of Twitter users based solely on
whom they follow. Rather than using a standard supervised
approach, we construct a distantly labeled dataset consisting of web traffic demographic data from Quantcast.com.
By pairing web traffic data for a site with the followers of
that site on Twitter.com, we fit a regression model between a
set of Twitter users and their expected demographic profile.
With this data, we explore several questions:

Understanding the demographics of users of online social networks has important applications for health,
marketing, and public messaging. In this paper, we predict the demographics of Twitter users based on whom
they follow. Whereas most prior approaches rely on a
supervised learning approach, in which individual users
are labeled with demographics, we instead create a distantly labeled dataset by collecting audience measurement data for 1,500 websites (e.g., 50% of visitors to
gizmodo.com are estimated to have a bachelor’s degree). We then fit a regression model to predict these
demographics using information about the followers of
each website on Twitter. The resulting average heldout correlation is .77 across six different variables (gender, age, ethnicity, education, income, and child status).
We additionally validate the model on a smaller set of
Twitter users labeled individually for ethnicity and gender, finding performance that is surprisingly competitive
with a fully supervised approach.

1

RQ1. Can the demographics of a set of Twitter users be
inferred from network information alone? We find
across six demographic variables an average held-out
correlation of .77 between the web traffic demographics of a website and that predicted by a regression
model based on the site’s Twitter followers. We can
learn, for example, that high-income users are likely
to follow The Economist and young users are likely
to follow PlayStation.

Introduction

Social media are increasingly being used to make inferences
about the real world, with application to politics (O’Connor
et al. 2010), health (Dredze 2012), and marketing (Gopinath,
Thomas, and Krishnamurthi 2014). Understanding the demographic makeup of a sample of social media users is critical to further progress in this area, as it allows researchers
to overcome the considerable selection bias in this uncontrolled data. Additionally, this capability will help public
messaging campaigns ensure that the target demographic is
being reached.
A common approach to demographic inference is supervised classification — from a training set of annotated users,
a model is fit to predict user attributes from the content
of their writings (Argamon et al. 2005; Schler et al. 2006;
Rao et al. 2010; Pennacchiotti and Popescu 2011; Burger et
al. 2011; Rao et al. 2011; Al Zamal, Liu, and Ruths 2012).
This approach has a number of limitations: collecting human
annotations is costly and error-prone; many demographic
variables of interest cannot easily be labeled by inspecting

RQ2. Can a regression model be extended to classify individual users? Using a hand-labeled validation set
of users annotated with gender and ethnicity, we find
that the regression model is competitive with a fullysupervised approach.
RQ3. How much follower information is needed for inference? We find that the identities of only 10 followed accounts per user, chosen at random, is sufficient to achieve 90% of the accuracy obtained using
200 followed accounts.
In the remainder of the paper, we will first review related work, then describe the data collected from Twitter and
QuantCast and the feature representation used for the task;
next, we will present regression and classification results;
finally, we will conclude and outline directions for future
work.1
1
Code is available here: https://github.com/tapilab/aaai-2015demographics.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

72

