Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Boosted Multi-Task Model for Pedestrian Detection with Occlusion Handling
Chao Zhu and Yuxin Peng∗
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
Beijing 100871, China
{zhuchao, pengyuxin}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

in real world scenes such as in street scenes or crowded
places. For example, according to the Caltech pedestrian
benchmark, over 70% of its pedestrians appear occluded in
at least one frame of a video sequence and 19% are occluded
in all frames, where the occlusion was categorized as heavy
(35%-80% occluded) in nearly half of these cases. Therefore, a pedestrian detector capable of handling occlusions is
preferred to yield more robust detection results.
One kind of common method for occlusion handling is
to estimate the visibility of body parts of pedestrians. This
is particularly effective for those approaches based on deformable part-based models (DPM) (Felzenszwalb et al.
2010). DPM sums the scores of all the part detectors within
a given window, and identifies the window as positive pedestrian if the summed score is higher than a pre-defined threshold. In the case of occlusion happens, some parts of pedestrians are occluded, resulting in very low scores for the corresponding part detectors, and consequently the summed score
will also be low, leading to false negatives. Visibility estimation of parts could help the detection of occluded pedestrians, since it identifies which body parts are visible and which
body parts are occluded, where the effects of occluded parts
are reduced in the summed score. Usually additional information is required for visibility estimation, e.g., motion information, depth information or segmentation results (Enzweiler et al. 2010). However, such information is not always available.
Another kind of common method for occluded pedestrian
detection is to train a set of occlusion-specific detectors, one
for each occlusion level. At test time, if the occlusion level
is known (a priori or estimated), a corresponding occlusionspecific detector will be applied to detect occluded pedestrians; otherwise, all the occlusion-specific detectors will be
applied, and their detection results will then be merged directly. The disadvantages of this method lie in two aspects:
on one hand, training such a number of detectors is costly,
and the efficiency requirement will be critical as the scale
of data or number of classes grows; on the other hand, these
occlusion-specific detectors are trained independently, while
the relationship among them is ignored.
We believe that the relationship among different occlusion levels should be explored for robust occluded pedestrian detection. For example, heavy occluded samples suffer
a serious missing of useful pedestrian information, and the

Pedestrian detection is a challenging problem in computer vision. Especially, a major bottleneck for current
state-of-the-art methods is the significant performance
decline with increasing occlusion. A common technique
for occlusion handling is to train a set of occlusionspecific detectors and merge their results directly. These
detectors are trained independently and the relationship among them is ignored. In this paper, we consider
pedestrian detection in different occlusion levels as different but related problems, and propose a multi-task
model to jointly consider their relatedness and differences. The proposed model adopts multi-task learning
algorithm to map pedestrians in different occlusion levels to a common space, where all models corresponding
to different occlusion levels are constrained to share a
common set of features, and a boosted detector is then
constructed to distinguish pedestrians from background.
The proposed approach is evaluated on the challenging
Caltech pedestrian detection benchmark, and achieves
state-of-the-art results on different occlusion-specific
test sets.

Introduction
Pedestrian detection is a challenging problem in computer
vision, and has attracted a lot of attention for decades, since
reliable detection of pedestrians is important in practical applications such as video surveillance, driving assistance and
robot navigation. Thanks to more powerful features, more
sophisticated models and more effective detection strategies,
pedestrian detection has achieved impressive progress in recent years (Dollár et al. 2012). However, occlusion is still
a major obstacle for satisfactory detection. Most state-ofthe-art methods assume that pedestrians are fully visible or
little occluded, and their performances decline significantly
with increasing occlusion level. For example, the mean miss
rate of the best detector nowadays achieves 36% for pedestrians with no occlusion on the Caltech pedestrian detection benchmark (Dollár et al. 2012), while increasing significantly to 49% for pedestrians with no more than 35% occluded, and further increasing drastically to 79% for pedestrians with 35%-80% occluded. Occlusions occur frequently
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3878

