Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Word Segmentation for Chinese Novels
Likun Qiu and Yue Zhang
Singapore University of Technology and Design
20 Dover Drive, Singapore 138682
qiulikun@gmail.com, yue zhang@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Word segmentation is a necessary first step for automatic syntactic analysis of Chinese text. Chinese segmentation is highly accurate on news data, but the accuracies
drop significantly on other domains, such as science and
literature. For scientific domains, a significant portion
of out-of-vocabulary words are domain-specific terms,
and therefore lexicons can be used to improve segmentation significantly. For the literature domain, however,
there is not a fixed set of domain terms. For example,
each novel can contain a specific set of person, organization and location names. We investigate a method for
automatically mining common noun entities for each
novel using information extraction techniques, and use
the resulting entities to improve a state-of-the-art segmentation model for the novel. In particular, we design
a novel double-propagation algorithm that mines noun
entities together with common contextual patterns, and
use them as plug-in features to a model trained on the
source domain. An advantage of our method is that no
retraining for the segmentation model is needed for each
novel, and hence it can be applied efficiently given the
huge number of novels on the web. Results on five different novels show significantly improved accuracies,
in particular for OOV words.

1

Figure 1: Flowchart of the proposed method.
terms, which form a relatively stable vocabulary. For novels, however, OOV words are usually named entities such as
person, location and organization names, and other common
noun entities that are specific to the setting of each individual
novel. Apparently, novel-specific lexicons or annotated sentences can reduce a large proportion of segmentation errors
for a specific novel (Zhang et al. 2014). However, the large
number of novels on the web makes it unfeasibly expensive
to annotate resources manually for each novel.
This paper addresses the domain adaptation problem for
segmenting Chinese novels by automatically mining novelspecific noun entities using information extraction (IE) techniques. Our method does not use any target-domain annotation, such as domain dictionaries or small-scale annotated target-domain sentences. There has been work on
semi-supervised word segmentation under the same setting, typically by incorporating target-domain statistics into source news-domain training (Suzuki and Isozaki 2008;
Chang and Han 2010; Wang et al. 2011). However, such
methods require the retraining of a statistical model for each

Introduction

Word segmentation is a necessary first step for automatic syntactic analysis of Chinese text. Statistical Chinese
word segmentation systems perform highly accurately on
the news domain, thanks to large-scale manually-annotated
training data. However, robust wide-coverage Chinese word
segmentation is still an open problem, because the performance usually degrades significantly for other domains, such as science and literature. There has been a line
of research on improving cross-domain word segmentation
(Chang and Han 2010; Liu and Zhang 2012; Li and Xue
2014); for scientific texts such as patents, a domain dictionary can enhance the performance significantly.
The challenges to word segmentation for the literature domain, and novels in particular, are quite different from those
for scientific texts. For scientific domains such as chemistry
and computer science, OOV words mainly belong to domain
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2440

