Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Maximin Separation Probability Clustering ∗
Gao Huang†‡ , Jianwen Zhang§ , Shiji Song†‡ , Zheng Chen§
†

Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
‡
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
§
Microsoft Research, Beijing
huang-g09@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jiazhan@microsoft.com
shijis@tsinghua.edu.cn, zhengc@microsoft.com
Abstract

have shown encouraging results in terms of clustering accuracy. However, there are still two important issues which are
not well addressed.
The first issue is the problem of anisotropic feature scaling (AFS), which arises frequently in practice when features
correspond to variables with different units. In contrast to supervised classification, clustering algorithms are more susceptible to AFS due to the absence of labels. Supposing we
amplify the values of a certain feature by a large factor (e.g.,
change the unit of time from minute to second), then the
maximal margin in MMC, or the maximal volume in MVC,
will be dominated by this feature, and the clustering results
are very likely to be affected. A common solution to this
problem is preprocessing the data so that the values of each
feature lie in a proper range. Although effective in practice,
data preprocessing is generally performed independently of
the clustering process, making it difficult to be optimized.
The second issue is the lack of a consistent measure for
evaluating clustering quality. In supervised classification, we
can leverage labeled training data to evaluate how confident
we are in the learned model. However, it is a challenge to
define a quality measure for clustering without true labels.
Though the clustering measures of existing clustering algorithms, such as energy in k-means, maximum margin in
MMC, entropy or mutual information in information-based
clustering, can be used as measures for clustering quality,
they are basically problem dependent. For example, some of
these measures are not invariant to problem size or are sensitive to feature scaling.
This paper tries to address the aforementioned issues by
resorting to the key intuition of discriminative clustering: if
a clustering is good, then we should be able to learn a classifier from the clustering labels with high generalization accuracy. However, it is usually difficult to evaluate the generalization performance without true labels. In this paper,
we define a novel clustering metric named Minimum Separation Probability (MSP) based on the Minimax Probability
Machine (MPM) (Lanckriet et al. 2003), and propose a clustering approach by maximizing MSP, which is called Maximin1 Separation Probability Clustering (MSPC). It can be

This paper proposes a new approach for discriminative
clustering. The intuition is, for a good clustering, one
should be able to learn a classifier from the clustering
labels with high generalization accuracy. Thus we define a novel metric to evaluate the quality of a clustering labeling, named Minimum Separation Probability (MSP), which is a lower bound of the generalization accuracy of a classifier learnt from the clustering
labeling. We take MSP as the objective to maximize
and propose our approach Maximin Separation Probability Clustering (MSPC), which has several attractive properties, such as invariance to anisotropic feature scaling and intuitive probabilistic explanation for
clustering quality. We present three efficient optimization strategies for MSPC, and analyze their interesting
connections to existing clustering approaches, such as
maximum margin clustering (MMC) and discriminative
k-means. Empirical results on real world data sets verify that MSP is a robust and effective clustering quality measure. It is also shown that the proposed algorithms compare favorably to state-of-the-art clustering
algorithms in both accuracy and efficiency.

Introduction
Clustering is an unsupervised learning paradigm that aims
to discover interesting groups in given data sets. It arises
in a wide range of contexts, and various clustering algorithms have been proposed in the literature. In recent
years, there is a new branch of research efforts on clustering, which connects the objective of clustering with that
of classification. Some of the representative approaches include Maximum Margin Clustering (MMC) (Xu et al. 2004;
Valizadegan and Jin 2007; Zhang, Tsang, and Kwok 2007;
Li et al. 2009; Zhou et al. ), Maximum Volume Clustering
(MVC) (Niu et al. 2013) and linear discriminative analysis (LDA) based clustering (De la Torre and Kanade 2006;
Ding and Li 2007). These methods focus on maximizing discrimination between clusters, thus are usually referred to as
discriminative clustering (DC). Empirically these methods
∗
This work was done during Gao Huang’s internship at Microsoft Research.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

The term minimax is used in (Lanckriet et al. 2003) since it
considers minimizing the maximum probability of misclassification.

2680

