Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Data Science for Social Good
2014 KDD Highlights
Wei Wang
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
weiwang@cs.ucla.edu

Scalable Methods for Big Data

Introduction

Scalability is crucial to big data applications and can be addressed by clever sampling and approximation, parallel
computing, and/or levering sparsity properties. Substantial
efforts were devoted to scale up graph algorithms on pageRank estimation (Lofgren 2014), betweenness centrality
(Yoshida 2014), graph sampling (Ahmed 2014), and graph
partition (Bourse 2014). Li and co-authors (Li 2014) investigated this issue in the context of topic modeling. Sampling
is employed in topic modeling inference in order to associate latent variables with observations. Leveraging the sparsity property, they proposed an efficient algorithm that approximates a dense, slowly changing distribution buy the
combination of Metropolis-Hastings step, use of sparsity,
and amortized constant time sampling via Walker's alias
method. It scales linearly to the number of instantiates topics
in the document rather than the total number of topics, leading to an order of magnitude speedup. This algorithm is generic, and has wide applications in statistical modeling. This
paper was recognized with the Best Research Paper Award.

As the premier international forum for data science, data
mining, knowledge discovery and big data, the ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining (KDD) brings together researchers and practitioners
from academia, industry, and government to share their
ideas, research results and experiences. Partnered with
Bloomberg, it celebrated its 20th years in 2014 with the
theme “Data Science for Social Good”.
Among academic conferences, the KDD conference typically has an emphasis on research motivated by real-world
applications. It is this synergy of research in areas such as
algorithms, computational geometry, database, graph theory, machine learning, natural language processing, statistics, visualization, and many others when applied to problems arising in diverse fields, such as the Web, medicine,
biology, and marketing, driving our field forward and making it vibrant and fun. The breadth of topics covered in the
2014 research program is truly comprehensive and nicely
balanced among social and information networks, data mining for social good, graph mining, statistical techniques for
big data, topic modeling, recommender systems, data
streams, scalable methods, Web mining, clustering, feature
selection, applications to health care and medicine, public
safety, advertising, social analytics, personalization, workforce analytics, health, and many more.

Social Media Analysis
Social media analysis continues to attract attentions from researchers and practitioners. Topic modeling, especially in
the context of discovery of topics and monitoring topic evolution in social media, is a popular topic. Tong and co-authors (Tong 2014) developed a Topics Crowd Service (TCS)
model to discover latent topics in crowd-oriented service
data, using belief propagation and pairwise sketching. Schubert and co-authors (Schubert 2014) investigated the problem of early detection of emerging topics before they become hot tags in social media streams. Tsytsarau and coauthors (Tsytsarau 2014) studied the dynamics of news
events and their relation to changes of sentiment expressed

Research Highlights
In the following, we highlight some research advances presented at the 2014 KDD conference.

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4330

