Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Gene Selection in Microarray Datasets
Using Progressively Refined PSO Scheme
Yamuna Prasad, K. K. Biswas
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
New Delhi, India 110016
{yprasad, kkb}@cse.iitd.ac.in

Proposed Methods

Abstract

In the first version, we develop a hybrid PSO using a linear SVM weight vector to generate top K genes and applying standard PSO on this gene set to carry out gene selection (named PSW method). The Progressively Refined PSO
method starts by exploring the whole search space randomly
in the first step and then in the successive steps the search
space is refined. The PSO method is applied iteratively on
this reduced search space maintaining a non-decreasing accuracy to reduce the gene set (steps 4 - 10). This process iterates as long as the gene set keeps on reducing but stops as
soon as classification accuracy gets degraded (step 6 - 8, i.e
stopping criteria). The algorithm returns the reduced set of
informative genes and the best accuracy achieved (referred
to as RPSW approach henceforth).

In this paper we propose a wrapper based PSO method
for gene selection in microarray datasets, where we
gradually refine the feature (gene) space from a very
coarse level to a fine grained one, by reducing the gene
set at each step of the algorithm. We use the linear
support vector machine weight vector to serve as the
initial gene pool selection. In addition, we also examine integration of other filter based ranking methods
with our proposed approach. Experiments on publicly
available datasets, Colon, Leukemia and T2D show that
our approach selects only a very small subset of genes
while yielding substantial improvements in accuracy
over state-of-the-art evolutionary methods.

Introduction
Algorithm 1: Progressively Refined PSO

DNA microarray technology produces expression levels of
thousands of genes simultaneously in a sample. The data
produced through microarray technology has expression levels of thousands of genes while the sample size is very small.
This raises the issue of generalization in the classification
process to determine which genes are responsible for cancer
detection (Li et al. 2008). Gene selection plays a very important role in improving accuracy of classifiers. Amongst various approaches wrapper based methods have been shown to
have higher accuracies.
In the literature, hybrid Particle Swarm Optimization
(PSO/GA) method with Wilcoxon’s rank test (Li et al.
2008), Novel Hybrid Framework (NHF) (Zhao et al. 2011),
Genetic Swarm Algorithm (GSA) (Ganesh K. et al. 2012)
and Binary Matrix Shuffling Filter (BMSF) (Zhang et al.
2012) have been shown to outperform many state-of-the-art
gene selection methods.
In this paper, we propose a wrapper based PSO method
which progressively refines the selected gene set. The initial top ranking gene set is obtained through linear SVM
weight vector, as well through Wilcoxon’s rank test (Li et
al. 2008). Our experiments on five publicly available benchmark microarray datasets show that our proposed method
selects minimal subsets of genes while improving the overall prediction accuracy.

Input: Dataset X, Number of features M , Number of
particles n, Number of PSO iterations T , Maximum
iterative depth D, Acceleration constants C1 and C2
and inertia weight ω.
Output: Selected genes S, Global best accuracy G.
1. Initialize F LAG = False.
2. Assign all features to set S (i.e. |S| = M ) and set G = 0.
3. for iter = 1 to D do
4.

Execute PSO (Li et al. 2008) using X, M , n,
T , C1, C2 and ω.

5.

Compute the best subset of genes GB and global best
accuracy G0 .

6.

if G0 ≥ G, then S = GB.

7.

if |S| = M , then F LAG = True.

8.

if (F LAG is True or G0 < G ), then Break.

9.

Set M = |S| and G = G0 .

10.

Reduce the dataset X to X 0 with selected genes S.

11. end for
12. Return S and G

The complexity of algorithm increases as the iterative
depth increases. We have used linear SVM (Fan et al. 2008)
to evaluate the fitness of the particles. The total complexity

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4288

