Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Assessing the Robustness of Cremer-McLean
with Automated Mechanism Design∗
Michael Albert

Vincent Conitzer

Giuseppe Lopomo

The Ohio State University
Fisher School of Business
2100 Neil Ave., Fisher Hall 844
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Michael.Albert@fisher.osu.edu

Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
conitzer@cs.duke.edu

Duke University
The Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708, USA
glopomo@duke.edu

Abstract

component to the item that is estimated by each of the buyers individually, such as those for oil drilling rights. More
generally, for any item for which there is a resale market, an
agent’s valuation will generally include a component that is
dependent on the valuation of the rest of the community, and
as a consequence, will be correlated to the extent that potential resale is a motivation for purchase. Hence, assuming
some degree of correlation seems quite reasonable.
The correlation assumption in the Cremer-McLean result
requires that every buyer valuation corresponds to a unique
conditional distribution over the external signal(s) (e.g., the
other buyer’s valuations), and further, that these conditional
distributions are linearly independent of each other. In this
paper, we explore a relaxation of this correlation assumption. Namely, we let a buyer type consist of a valuation and
a distribution over the external signal(s), and allow multiple
types to have the same distribution (but different valuations).
More specifically, buyer types are partitioned into subsets,
where within each subset all types have the same conditional
distribution over the external signal(s), but within the subset, the conditional distributions are identical, implying that
within such a subset, the buyer’s valuation is independent
of the external signal(s). This setup allows us to gradually
move away from the Cremer-McLean assumption and analyze how quickly the revenue drops as we do so, thereby
assessing the brittleness of the Cremer-McLean result.
To achieve this, we first obtain some structural insights
into optimal mechanisms for our relaxed setting, generalizing the corresponding insights from Cremer-McLean. These
insights lead us to an algorithm for computing the optimal
revenue that is much more efficient than solving the full linear program. This allows us to run much larger simulations
of distributions with zero partial correlation over subsets of
various sizes.
We find that as the size of the subsets of buyer types corresponding to the same conditional distribution increases
the optimal revenue quickly converges to that achievable
under a significantly simpler mechanism, namely a second price auction with a reserve. Thus, in addition to
increasing our understanding of how to solve for optimal
mechanisms under a broader class of distributions, our result informs the practicality of full surplus extraction along
the lines of Cremer and McLean (1985). Our zero partial correlation assumption can be interpreted as there being

In a classic result in the mechanism design literature, Cremer
and McLean (1985) show that if buyers’ valuations are sufficiently correlated, a mechanism exists that allows the seller
to extract the full surplus from efficient allocation as revenue.
This result is commonly seen as “too good to be true” (in
practice), casting doubt on its modeling assumptions. In this
paper, we use an automated mechanism design approach to
assess how sensitive the Cremer-McLean result is to relaxing
its main technical assumption. That assumption implies that
each valuation that a bidder can have results in a unique conditional distribution over the external signal(s). We relax this,
allowing multiple valuations to be consistent with the same
distribution over the external signal(s). Using similar insights
to Cremer-McLean, we provide a highly efficient algorithm
for computing the optimal revenue in this more general case.
Using this algorithm, we observe that indeed, as the number
of valuations consistent with a distribution grows, the optimal
revenue quickly drops to that of a reserve-price mechanism.
Thus, automated mechanism design allows us to gain insight
into the precise sense in which Cremer-McLean is “too good
to be true.”

Introduction
One of the chief problems in mechanism design, specifically
in the case of a monopolistic seller with one or more buyers,
is to provide incentives for buyers to share their private information. Typically this requires the seller to share some of the
expected surplus from allocating the item with the buyer(s)
in exchange for his private information. However, Cremer
and McLean (1985) show that if buyers’ valuations satisfy a
correlation condition, then this is not necessary: the seller is
able to extract the full surplus in expectation. This result is
highly regarded, but it has perhaps not had the impact one
might have expected. But why not?
A standard assumption in the mechanism design literature
is that buyer valuations are independently distributed, and
therefore, knowing the valuation of one agent gives no information about other agents’ valuations. This independence is
clearly violated in auctions in which their is a common value
∗

Conitzer thanks NSF and ARO for support under grants CCF1101659, IIS-0953756, CCF-1337215, W911NF-12-1-0550, and
W911NF-11-1-0332.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

763

