Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Egalitarian Collective Decision Making under Qualitative Possibilistic
Uncertainty: Principles and Characterization
Nahla Ben Amor and Fatma Essghaier

Hélène Fargier

LARODEC,
Institut Superieur de Gestion de Tunis,
Tunisia

IRIT-CNRS,
University of Toulouse
France

Abstract

Following Fleming (1952), Harsanyi (1955) showed that
if the collective preference satisfies von Neumann and Morgenstern’s axioms (i.e. when the ex-ante preference is an
expected utility) and the preference relations of the agents
also satisfy these axioms (i.e. when the ex-post preferences
also follow the EU model) then the sole possible collective
decision making approach (satisfying Pareto unanimity) is
the utilitarian one. Making a step further Myerson (1981)
proved that only the choice of an utilitarian social welfare
function can reconciliate the ex-ante and ex-post approaches.
These results rely on the assumption that the knowledge
of the agents about the consequences of their decisions is
rich enough to be modelled by probabilistic lotteries. When
the information about uncertainty cannot be quantified in a
probabilistic way the topic of possibilistic decision theory
is often a natural one to consider (Dubois and Prade 1995;
Dubois et al. 1998; Giang and Shenoy 2000; Dubois, Prade,
and Sabbadin 2001; Dubois et al. 2002; Dubois, Fargier, and
Perny 2003). The present paper raises the question of collective decision making under possibilistic uncertainty. The
next Section recalls the basic notions on which our work relies (decision under possibilistic uncertainty, collective utility functions, etc.). We then present four egalitarian possibilistic utilities and show that if both the collective preference and the individual preferences do satisfy Dubois and
Prade’s axioms (1995), and in particular risk aversion, then
an egalitarian CUF is mandatory. This theorem can be considered as an ordinal counterpart to Harsanyi’s theorem. For
space reasons, proofs are omitted; they can be found online
at url ftp://ftp.irit.fr/IRIT/ADRIA/PapersFargier/aaai15.pdf.

This paper raises the question of collective decision
making under possibilistic uncertainty; We study four
egalitarian decision rules and show that in the context
of a possibilistic representation of uncertainty, the use
of an egalitarian collective utility function allows to
get rid of the Timing Effect. Making a step further,
we prove that if both the agents’ preferences and the
collective ranking of the decisions satisfy Dubois and
Prade’s axioms (1995), and particularly risk aversion,
and Pareto Unanimity, then the egalitarian collective
aggregation is compulsory. This result can be seen as
an ordinal counterpart of Harsanyi’s theorem (1955).
Keywords: Decision under Uncertainty, Possibility Theory, Collective Choice, Egalitarianism, Timing Effect.

Introduction
The handling of collective decision problem under uncertainty resorts on (i) the identification of a theory of decision
making under uncertainty (DMU) that captures the decision
makers’ behaviour with respect to uncertainty and (ii) the
specification of a collective utility function (CUF) as it may
be used when the problem is not pervaded with uncertainty.
One also needs to precise when the utility of the agents is
to be evaluated: before (ex-ante) or after (ex-post) the realisation of the uncertain events. In the first case, the global
utility function is a function of the DMU utilities of the different agents; in the second case it is an aggregation, w.r.t.
the likelihood of the final states, of the collective utilities
of the states. For instance, in the probabilistic framework,
the comparison of decisions is based on the expected utility model axiomatized by von Neumann and Morgenstern
(1944). When several agents are involved, utilitarianism prescribes the maximization of the sum of the expected utilities
(ex-ante) or the expected utility of the sum of the agents’
utilities (ex-post) - both actually coincide. An egalitarian approach can be based either on the min of the expected utilities (ex-ante), or on the expected utility of the least satisfied
of the agents (ex-post) - but the two approaches can lead
to divergent rankings. This phenomenon has been called the
"Timing Effect" by Myerson (1981) in the early eighties.

Background
Collective utility functions
Let us consider a multi-agent decision problem defined by
a set A = {1, . . . , p} of agents, each agent i ∈ A being
supposed to express her preferences on a set of alternatives
(say, a set X), by a ranking function or a utility function ui
that associates to each element of X a value in a subset of
R+ (typically in the interval [0, 1]). The problem is then to
determine, for each x ∈ X, a collective utility degree that
reflects the collective preference.
When this collective preference depends only on the individual utilities of the agents, the collective utility can be

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3482

