Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Greedy Policies for the Easy-First Framework
Jun Xie, Chao Ma, Janardhan Rao Doppa† , Prashanth Mannem
Xiaoli Fern, Tom Dietterich, and Prasad Tadepalli
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University
{xie,machao,mannemp,xfern,tgd,tadepall}@eecs.oregonstate.edu
† School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Washington State University
jana@eecs.wsu.edu

Abstract

The Easy-first approach performs greedy search according to a learned policy (scoring function), which plays a
critical role in its effectiveness. The focus of this paper is to
study principled ways of learning policies to ensure the success of Easy-first. In particular, we propose a novel online
learning algorithm that learns a linear policy for the Easyfirst approach. Our contributions are as follows:

Easy-first, a search-based structured prediction approach, has been applied to many NLP tasks including
dependency parsing and coreference resolution. This
approach employs a learned greedy policy (action scoring function) to make easy decisions first, which constrains the remaining decisions and makes them easier.
We formulate greedy policy learning in the Easy-first
approach as a novel non-convex optimization problem
and solve it via an efficient Majorization Minimization
(MM) algorithm. Results on within-document coreference and cross-document joint entity and event coreference tasks demonstrate that the proposed approach
achieves statistically significant performance improvement over existing training regimes for Easy-first and is
less susceptible to overfitting.

• We formulate greedy policy learning as optimizing a nonconvex objective consisting of two parts. The first part
employs hinge loss to ensure that the learned policy ranks
at least one good action higher than all the bad actions.
The second part regularizes the weight vector to avoid
overly-aggressive updates and over-fitting.
• We develop an efficient majorization-minimization algorithm to optimize the proposed non-convex objective,
which iteratively minimizes a convex upper-bound of the
objective.
• We evaluate our approach in two NLP domains:
within-document entity coreference resolution and crossdocument joint entity and event coreference resolution.
Our results demonstrate that the proposed approach
achieves statistically significant performance improvement over the baseline training approaches for the Easyfirst framework and is less prone to overfitting.

Introduction
Easy-first is a general search-based structured prediction
framework that has been successfully applied to a variety of natural language processing tasks including POS
tagging (Shen, Satta, and Joshi 2007), dependency parsing (Goldberg and Elhadad 2010), and coreference resolution (Stoyanov and Eisner 2012; Ratinov and Roth 2012;
Hajishirzi et al. 2013). In this framework, the output is constructed incrementally by making the easiest (most confident) decision at each decision step to gather more evidence for making hard decisions later. Consider the following example from the EECB corpus for joint entity and event
coreference resolution across documents (Lee et al. 2012).
(a) A 4.2 magnitude earthquake struck near a remote
area of eastern Sonoma County.
(b) A tremor struck Sonoma County.
The coreference resolution decisions for the two verb
mentions “struck” and for the two noun mentions containing “Sonoma County” are easy. In contrast, the decision on
the two noun mentions “A 4.2 magnitude earthquake” and
“A tremor” is hard based on the lexical, syntactic, and semantic constraints or features (Haghighi and Klein 2010;
Ng 2010). Once we resolve the coreference of the two verbs
and the two “Sonoma County” mentions, we have stronger
evidence to help resolve the other two noun mentions.

Easy-first Framework and Baseline
This section first formally introduces the Easy-first framework and presents a generic online training procedure. We
then describe a popular online learning algorithm for Easyfirst, which serves as our baseline.

Easy-first: inference and training
Given structured inputs x ∈ X and outputs y ∈ Y, we assume a task-specific non-negative loss function L. The loss
function L(x, y 0 , y) : X × Y × Y 7→ R+ associates a
loss with labeling an input x with y 0 when its true output
is y. There are two key elements in the Easy-first framework: 1) the search space Sp , whose states correspond to
partial structured outputs, and 2) an action scoring function
f , which is used to construct the complete structured output.
The search space, Sp is a 2-tuple hI, Ai, where I is the
initial state function, and A(s) is a function that gives the
set of allowed actions from a given state. Given the actions

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2339

