Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Just Count the Satisfied Groundings: Scalable Local-Search and
Sampling Based Inference in MLNs
Deepak Venugopal

Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
dxv021000@utdallas.edu

Somdeb Sarkhel

Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
somdeb.sarkhel@utdallas.edu

Abstract

Vibhav Gogate

Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
vgogate@hlt.utdallas.edu

based and local-search based inference algorithms. This bottleneck is counting the true groundings of a first-order formula f given a world ω. We observed that existing MLN
systems such as Alchemy (Kok et al. 2006) and Tuffy (Niu
et al. 2011) solve this counting problem using the following naive generate-and-test approach: generate each possible grounding and test whether it is true in ω. This naive
approach is the chief reason for their poor scalability and is
particularly problematic because algorithms such as Gibbs
sampling (Geman and Geman 1984; Venugopal and Gogate
2012) and MaxWalksat (Kautz, Selman, and Jiang 1997)
perform the above operation in every iteration.
In this paper, we propose a novel, practical approach for
solving the aforementioned counting problem. The key advantages of our approach are that it never grounds the full
MLN and in most cases is orders of magnitude better than
the “generate-and-test” approach. Specifically, we encode
each formula (f ) as a CSP (C) such that the number of solutions to C can be directly used to count the satisfied groundings of f . The main advantage of this encoding is that we can
now leverage several years of advances in CSPs and graphical model inference and use virtually any exact/approximate
inference algorithm along with its associated guarantees to
efficiently solve the counting problem.
We demonstrate the power of our approach by showing
that it greatly improves the computational complexity of two
popular approximate inference algorithms: Gibbs Sampling
and MaxWalkSAT. We show that in both these algorithms,
the main computational steps involve solving the encoded
CSP, where the constraints change over time (dynamic CSP).
To solve this dynamic CSP, we compile an exact junction
tree for the CSP and account for the changing constraints
by modifying the junction tree messages. We evaluated both
algorithms on a wide variety of MLN benchmarks and compared them with algorithms implemented in two existing
MLN systems, Alchemy and Tuffy. Our experiments clearly
show that our new algorithms are several orders of magnitude more scalable than existing systems.

The main computational bottleneck in various sampling
based and local-search based inference algorithms for
Markov logic networks (e.g., Gibbs sampling, MC-SAT,
MaxWalksat, etc.) is computing the number of groundings of
a first-order formula that are true given a truth assignment to
all of its ground atoms. We reduce this problem to the problem of counting the number of solutions of a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) and show that during their execution,
both sampling based and local-search based algorithms repeatedly solve dynamic versions of this counting problem.
Deriving from the vast amount of literature on CSPs and
graphical models, we propose an exact junction-tree based
algorithm for computing the number of solutions of the dynamic CSP, analyze its properties, and show how it can be
used to improve the computational complexity of Gibbs sampling and MaxWalksat. Empirical tests on a variety of benchmarks clearly show that our new approach is several orders of
magnitude more scalable than existing approaches.

Introduction
A large number of application domains (e.g. NLP, computer
vision, robotics, etc.) require rich modeling languages that
are capable of handling uncertainty. Markov logic networks
(MLNs) (Domingos and Lowd 2009) combine logical and
probabilistic representations (Getoor and Taskar 2007), and
are therefore ideally suited for such applications. At a high
level, MLNs use weighted first-order formulas to define a
compact template for generating large Markov networks.
Naturally, one can perform inference in MLNs by performing inference over the (ground) Markov network. However, this approach is not scalable because in large realworld domains, the ground Markov network can have millions of variables and features. For example, consider a simple first-order formula ∀x, ∀y, ∀z, ∀u R(x, y) ∨ S(y, z) ∨
T(z, u) and assume that each logical variable has 100 objects (constants) in its domain. Grounding this formula gives
rise to 100 million ground formulas and performing any kind
of inference (even approximate inference) on such a large
Markov network is an extremely challenging task.
In this paper, we identify the main computational bottleneck in MLN inference, which specifically affects sampling-

Background and Preliminaries
First-Order Logic
We assume a strict subset of first-order logic, called finite
Herbrand logic. Thus, we assume that we have no function

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3606

