Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Efficient Extraction of QBF (Counter)models from
Long-Distance Resolution Proofs
Valeriy Balabanov1 , Jie-Hong R. Jiang1 , Mikoláš Janota2 , and Magdalena Widl3
1

GIEE, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
2
INESC-ID, Lisbon, Portugal
3
Vienna University of Technology, Austria

Abstract

Many successful techniques in QBF solving were inspired by well-known techniques in SAT solving, notably, conflict-driven clause learning (CDCL) (MarquesSilva and Sakallah 1996), among others. Learning in CDCLbased SAT solvers hinges on resolution, a fundamental
technique in automated reasoning. CDCL was generalized
for QBF solving (Zhang and Malik 2002) based on Qresolution (Kleine Büning, Karpinski, and Flögel 1995), a
sound and complete inference rule for QBFs. QBF solving was further improved by allowing solution-driven cube
learning, where Q-resolution on clauses is dualized to
Q-resolution on cubes (Giunchiglia, Narizzano, and Tacchella 2006).1 In addition to Q-resolution, long-distance Qresolution (LQ-resolution) was introduced (Zhang and Malik 2002) and formalized in terms of inference rules (Balabanov and Jiang 2012). Although it strengthens the deductive power of Q-resolution, its superiority over Q-resolution
was not clear until Egly et al. 2013 demonstrated (empirically with strong theoretical evidence) that LQ-resolution
can produce exponentially shorter proofs than Q-resolution
(Egly, Lonsing, and Widl 2013).
Similar to resolution in SAT, (Q and LQ) resolution in
QBF solving is essential not only in learning but also in
certification. Not until the recent unifying work (Balabanov
and Jiang 2012; Goultiaeva, Van Gelder, and Bacchus 2011),
QBF certification was incomplete with two unconnected
forms of certificates: the syntactic form of Q-resolution
proofs and the semantic form of Skolem-function models (but no Herbrand-function countermodels). QBF certification is important not only in ensuring the correctness
of QBF solving, but also in real-life applications where
models and countermodels have to be constructed. E.g., a
(counter)model could represent a concrete plan leading to
a goal state in a planning problem, a functional implementation of a Boolean relation in logic synthesis, a winning
strategy in a two player game, etc. In prior work (Balabanov and Jiang 2012), a linear-time algorithm was devised to convert Q-resolution proofs to (counter)models.
Thereby, (counter)models can be obtained from state-ofthe-art learning based QBF solvers without relying on spe-

Many computer science problems can be naturally and
compactly expressed using quantified Boolean formulas (QBFs). Evaluating the truth or falsity of a QBF
is an important task, and constructing the corresponding model or countermodel can be as important and
sometimes even more useful in practice. Modern search
and learning based QBF solvers rely fundamentally on
resolution and can be instrumented to produce resolution proofs, from which in turn Skolem-function models
and Herbrand-function countermodels can be extracted.
These (counter)models are the key enabler of various
applications. Not until recently the superiority of longdistance resolution (LQ-resolution) to short-distance
resolution (Q-resolution) was demonstrated. While a
polynomial algorithm exists for (counter)model extraction from Q-resolution proofs, it remains open whether
it exists for LQ-resolution proofs. This paper settles this
open problem affirmatively by constructing a lineartime extraction procedure. Experimental results show
the distinct benefits of the proposed method in extracting high quality certificates from some LQ-resolution
proofs that are not obtainable from Q-resolution proofs.

Introduction
Quantified Boolean formulas (QBFs) extend propositional
formulas by adding quantifiers to the language of propositional logic. This extension lifts the computational complexity from the NP-complete propositional satisfiability
(SAT) problem to the PSPACE-complete quantified Boolean
satisfiability (QSAT) problem, and increases the descriptive power to allow compact encodings for a broad range
of problems not economically expressible in propositional
logic (Schaefer and Umans 2002). QBF applications include, for example, planning (Rintanen 2007), ontology reasoning (Kontchakov et al. 2009), formal verification (Dershowitz, Hanna, and Katz 2005; Benedetti and Mangassarian 2008), design debugging (Staber and Bloem 2007), logic
synthesis (Jiang, Lin, and Hung 2009), etc. This broad range
of QBF applications and the tremendous success of modern
SAT solvers motivate the increasing effort being dedicated
to QBF solving.

1

In this paper, we do not specifically distinguish between clause
and cube Q-resolutions, and we refer to the former and the latter
when the falsity and truth, respectively, of a QBF are considered.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3694

