Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Abstract View on Modularity in Knowledge Representation
Yuliya Lierler

Miroslaw Truszczynski

Department of Computer Science
University of Nebraska at Omaha
Omaha, NE 68182, USA
ylierler@unomaha.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506, USA
mirek@cs.uky.edu

Abstract

logic. An essential element of a multi-context system is
the notion of a bridge rule used to model information flow
between contexts. The formalism of Brewka and Eiter
achieves its generality thanks to an abstract notion of a
logic that eliminates syntactic and semantic particulars
from consideration.

Modularity is an essential aspect of knowledge representation
theory and practice. It has received substantial attention. We
introduce model-based modular systems, an abstract framework for modular knowledge representation formalisms, similar in scope to multi-context systems but employing a simpler information-flow mechanism. We establish the precise
relationship between the two frameworks, showing that they
can simulate each other. We demonstrate that recently introduced modular knowledge representation formalisms integrating logic programming with satisfiability and, more generally, with constraint satisfaction can be cast as modular systems in our sense. These results show that our formalism offers a simple unifying framework for studies of modularity in
knowledge representation.

• Mx-systems (Tasharrofi and Ternovska 2011) that view a
theory as a representation of a set of interpretations. Consequently, modules in the mx-system setting are simply
sets of interpretations of some vocabulary. Modules have
inputs and outputs. That allows them to be composed into
larger modular systems. An mx-system may have several
module components and a (possibly) complex structure
that describes information flow between modules.
• Abstract modular inference systems (Lierler and
Truszczynski 2014) that are designed to facilitate modeling solvers of multi-logic systems. Abstract modular
inference systems represent theories in a logic in abstract
terms: via inferences these theories support.

Introduction
Modularity is crucial in design, analysis and reasoning
about complex systems. It has long been recognized as
one of the key techniques in software development. Modularity has also played an important role in artificial intelligence and, in particular, in knowledge representation
and reasoning. Formalisms and implemented systems supporting modular knowledge representation and exploiting
modularity in efficient reasoning include logic programming modules (Oikarinen and Janhunen 2006), modular
logic programs (Lierler and Truszczynski 2013), HEXprograms (Eiter et al. 2005), constraint answer set programming (Lierler 2014), and logics FO(ID) (Denecker and Ternovska 2008; de Cat et al. 2014) and SM(ASP) (Lierler and
Truszczynski 2011). These formalisms address issues in (i)
knowledge modeling such as principled modular knowledge
base design, and (ii) reasoning where they exploit modular
structure to improve the performance of solvers.
To identify and study general principles of modularity
in knowledge representation, researchers proposed several
general frameworks such as:

The focus of the first framework, abstract multi-context systems, is on knowledge modeling in multi-logic, modular environments. The focus of the latter two formalisms is on
principles of reasoning in such environments.
In this work, we propose the notion of an abstract modelbased modular system, a conceptually simpler alternative
to nonmonotonic multi-context systems by Brewka and
Eiter (2007). Modeling contextual information and the flow
of information among contexts have long been among the
central problems of knowledge representation (McCarthy
1987; Giunchiglia 1993). Applications in multi-agent systems provide a compelling motivation for formal frameworks to represent multi-context systems and study their
properties. The contexts are commonly modeled by theories
in some logics, and the information flow between contexts
is modeled by bridge rules. To develop a general framework
for studies of multi-context systems, Brewka and Eiter introduced an abstract representation of a logic and extended
the concept of a bridge rule. Since their inception, multicontext systems have received substantial attention and inspired implementations of hybrid reasoning systems including DMCS (El-Din Bairakdar et al. 2010).
We base our abstract modular systems on a slightly modified notion of the abstract logic by Brewka and Eiter (2007).

• Abstract multi-context systems (Brewka and Eiter 2007)
that provide an abstract view on multi-context systems
(McCarthy 1987; Giunchiglia 1993). These systems are
constructed from contexts, each being a theory in some
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1532

