Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

FACES: Diversity-Aware Entity Summarization
Using Incremental Hierarchical Conceptual Clustering
Kalpa Gunaratna, Krishnaprasad Thirunarayan and Amit Sheth
Kno.e.sis, Wright State University, Dayton OH, USA
{kalpa, tkprasad, amit}@knoesis.org

Abstract

long time (Nenkova and McKeown 2012; Mani 2001). Unsupervised summarization techniques for text have been extensively used in the recent past due to their flexibility to
adapt to the nature of datasets and ability to create dynamic
summaries (Wang and Li 2010). Document summarization
is different from entity summarization because documents
are unstructured and contain frequent words that can be exploited for summarization. In contrast, RDF entity descriptions are structured and do not have frequent word appearances. (Cheng, Tran, and Qu 2011) proposed an algorithm to
create RDF entity summaries considering these differences
and taking insights from hypertext document ranking on the
Web. It is based on PageRank centrality measure and utilizes
relatedness and uniqueness of features (i.e., property-value
pairs). Furthermore, they showed that entity summaries can
be used for quick identification of the original entity.
We hypothesize that centrality measures (including popularity) and ranking mechanisms alone are not sufficient to
improve the quality of entity summaries. Rather the added
use of orthogonal semantic groups of facts to diversify the
summaries can be more effective. To investigate our hypothesis, we propose the FACeted Entity Summarization
(FACES) approach. Our contributions are two fold:

Semantic Web documents that encode facts about entities on the Web have been growing rapidly in size and
evolving over time. Creating summaries on lengthy Semantic Web documents for quick identification of the
corresponding entity has been of great contemporary
interest. In this paper, we explore automatic summarization techniques that characterize and enable identification of an entity and create summaries that are
human friendly. Specifically, we highlight the importance of diversified (faceted) summaries by combining
three dimensions: diversity, uniqueness, and popularity. Our novel diversity-aware entity summarization approach mimics human conceptual clustering techniques
to group facts, and picks representative facts from each
group to form concise (i.e., short) and comprehensive
(i.e., improved coverage through diversity) summaries.
We evaluate our approach against the state-of-the-art
techniques and show that our work improves both the
quality and the efficiency of entity summarization.

Introduction
Linking Open Data (LOD) initiative encouraged data publishers to put data on the web and link them to other related
datasets. The LOD bubble that originated few years ago with
a limited number of datasets has now grown into a very large
data space. The entity descriptions in these datasets evolve
over time (Auer et al. 2013) and grow in length. For example, DBpedia is a very large and central dataset in the LOD
cloud extracted from Wikipedia. The English version 3.9 of
DBpedia has 4 million entities described in over 800 million RDF triples (facts), averaging about 200 triples per entity. This amount of information is too much for the quick
identification of an entity for an user. Therefore, selecting
a small subset of the original triples associated with an entity as a summary is necessary for quick/convenient identification/access of entity-related information. This problem
has been called Entity Summarization (Cheng, Tran, and Qu
2011) in the literature.
Document summarization has been a topic of interest for
data mining and information retrieval communities for a

1. We identify conceptually similar groups of facts of an
RDF entity by adapting and modifying an incremental hierarchical conceptual clustering algorithm called Cobweb
(Fisher 1987) and introduce an algorithm to rank facts
within a group.
2. We combine three dimensions: diversity, popularity, and
uniqueness, to create human friendly entity summaries in
time efficient manner.
Moreover, FACES has the following distinct characteristics compared to other entity summarization tools: (1) It
selects facts considering diversity which eliminates redundancy (by filtering similar features). (2) It is dynamic as
it is not affected by the order of input facts and is robust
with regards to evolving facts (thus applicable in streaming
contexts). (3) It is relatively fast due to its hierarchical and
incremental processing structure. FACES groups conceptually similar facts in order to select the highest ranked feature
(based on uniqueness and popularity) from each group to
form a faceted (diversified) entity summary. We show that
FACES outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches using a

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

116

