Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Incentives for Subjective Evaluations with Private Beliefs
Goran Radanovic and Boi Faltings
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne
(EPFL)
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
{goran.radanovic, boi.faltings}@epfl.ch

Abstract

Instead of using the ground truth, peer evaluation techniques score an agent against her peers, i.e. against agents
who also participate in the evaluation process. Many peer
evaluation methods have been developed in recent years,
most of them fitting one of the following categories.
Knowledge dependent mechanisms require knowledge
about agents’ beliefs. The peer prediction methods (Miller,
Resnick, and Zeckhauser 2005; Jurca and Faltings 2006;
2007) are representatives of this category. These mechanisms are minimal in a sense that they only elicit desired
information. The collective revelation of (Goel, Reeves, and
Pennock 2009) can also be placed in this category.
Common prior mechanisms are a group of mechanisms
that assume common prior belief among agents, but this
prior does not need to be known to the mechanism. A typical
representative of this group is the Bayesian Truth Serum (Prelec 2004), with its variants (Witkowski and Parkes 2012b;
Radanovic and Faltings 2013; 2014), in which agents provide an additional report along with the information that the
mechanism wants to elicit. In this group, we can also include the knowledge-free mechanism of (Zhang and Chen
2014) and the minimum truth serum of (Riley 2014).
The private prior mechanism of (Witkowski and Parkes
2012a) for elicitation of binary information does not require
knowledge about agents’ beliefs nor do the agents have to
have a common prior. However, the mechanism assumes a
temporal separation in the elicitation process, i.e. agents first
provide their prior beliefs to the mechanism, and then they
make evaluations that they report to the mechanism.
Weakly truthful mechanisms do not necessarily provide
strong incentives for truthfulness (Lambert and Shoham
2008) or may not necessarily be truthful (Jurca and Faltings
2011). In this group of mechanisms, we can also add the
output agreement mechanism of (Waggoner and Chen 2013;
2014) that elicits common knowledge, rather than agents’
private information.
It is not surprising that all the aforementioned mechanisms require a certain restriction on either: knowledge
about agents’ beliefs, homogeneity of agents’ beliefs, structure of elicitation process or structure of the information
being elicited. In fact, several impossibility results (Jurca and Faltings 2011; Waggoner and Chen 2013; 2014;
Radanovic and Faltings 2013; 2014) indicate that in a single shot elicitation process, one cannot do much better.

The modern web critically depends on aggregation of
information from self-interested agents, for example
opinion polls, product ratings, or crowdsourcing. We
consider a setting where multiple objects (questions,
products, tasks) are evaluated by a group of agents.
We first construct a minimal peer prediction mechanism that elicits honest evaluations from a homogeneous population of agents with different private beliefs. Second, we show that it is impossible to strictly
elicit honest evaluations from a heterogeneous group
of agents with different private beliefs. Nevertheless,
we provide a modified version of a divergence-based
Bayesian Truth Serum that incentivizes agents to report
consistently, making truthful reporting a weak equilibrium of the mechanism.

Introduction
The main idea behind a participatory web approach is that
any participant can provide her private information which
is then aggregated into the web content. There are numerous examples, ranging from hotel reviews on TripAdvisor1
to human intelligence tasks on MTurk2 . Since private information cannot be easily verified, one of the key challenges is
to incentivize participants to invest effort and provide their
true opinions.
We model this scenario with a group of agents evaluating
a set of similar objects. The agents represent rational participants, while objects can be anything that the participants can
provide their opinions about: questions in case of opinion
polling, product evaluations in case of product reviewing, or
subjective tasks in case of crowdsourcing.
The standard information elicitation techniques often
score responses against the ground truth, as it is for proper
scoring rules or prediction markets (Savage 1971; Gneiting and Raftery 2007; Lambert and Shoham 2009; Hanson
2003; Chen and Pennock 2007). However, in our scenario
the ground truth is not known to a mechanism designer, or
might not even be well defined.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.tripadvisor.com
2
https://www.mturk.com/

1014

