Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Probabilistic Attributed Hashing
Mingdong Ou1 , Peng Cui1 , Jun Wang2 , Fei Wang3 , Wenwu Zhu1

Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. Beijing, China
2
Data Science, Alibaba Group, Seattle, WA, USA.
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut. Storrs, CT. USA.
oumingdong@gmail.com, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, jwang@ee.columbia.edu, feiwang03@gmail.com, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

read papers written by a specific group of researchers. This
property sheds lights on similarity search, where low-level
features alone perform poorly. How to integrate attributes
with low-level features for large-scale similarity search is
of paramount significance for information retrieval, recommendation, and other real-world applications.
Hashing is a class of efficient methods for large-scale
similarity search (Indyk and Motwani 1998; Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008; Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012;
Liu et al. 2011). Most of the existing methods are designed
to map low-level features to binary code space, namely
Hamming space. Typically, attribute data has specific characteristics, such as high-dimensional, sparse, and categorical properties. For instance, in the public image dataset
NUS-WIDE (Chua et al. 2009), a small subset of Flickr,
there are over 400, 000 unique textual tags and each image is associated with just 18 tags on average. However,
most of the existing hashing learning methods are more
feasible for dense and continuous feature representations.
Specifically, many of the linear projection methods rely
on the estimation of a data covariance matrix for finding optimal projections (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008;
Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012; Gong and Lazebnik 2011;
Strecha et al. 2012), but it is difficult to estimate the data covariance for extremely high-dimensional and sparse attribute
data due to the well-known sample complexity issue. In addition, some existing supervised and semi-supervised learning frameworks for hash function design require acquiring a
set of pairwise labels that can often be estimated by computing the amounts of commonly shared semantic tags (Zhang
et al. 2010; Liu et al. 2011; Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012).
Due to extremely sparse attributes, such estimation for pairwise similarity will be much less reliable. Therefore, it remains a challenging issue to effectively leverage the attribute
data into the hash function design.
In order to incorporate attributes to design more effective
hash function, we need to address the following three challenges. First, how to exploit the complementary relationship
between attributes and low-level features? Low-level features are often less descriptive but easily available. Although
more descriptive, user-generated attributes often tend to be
incomplete. Thus, the resulted hashing can expect to benefit
much from the complementary properties of attributes and
low-level features. Second, how to accommodate the differ-

Abstract
Due to the simplicity and efficiency, many hashing
methods have recently been developed for large-scale
similarity search. Most of the existing hashing methods focus on mapping low-level features to binary
codes, but neglect attributes that are commonly associated with data samples. Attribute data, such as
image tag, product brand, and user profile, can represent human recognition better than low-level features. However, attributes have specific characteristics, including high-dimensional, sparse and categorical properties, which is hardly leveraged into the existing hashing learning frameworks. In this paper, we propose a hashing learning framework, Probabilistic
Attributed Hashing (PAH), to integrate attributes with low-level features. The connections between attributes and low-level features are built through
sharing a common set of latent binary variables, i.e.
hash codes, through which attributes and features can
complement each other. Finally, we develop an efficient
iterative learning algorithm, which is generally feasible
for large-scale applications. Extensive experiments and
comparison study are conducted on two public datasets,
i.e., DBLP and NUS-WIDE. The results clearly demonstrate that the proposed PAH method substantially outperforms the peer methods.

Introduction
Attributes, which are often derived from human knowledge,
represent characteristics of entities (e.g. users, images, etc.)
in different aspects. From the view point of computational
intelligence, attributes are imperative to improve data usability through giving a new view from human cognition. Thus,
attributes have been ubiquitously used in various application scenarios, such as image and video tags in social media platform, product attributes (e.g. brands, materials etc.)
in e-commerce, user profiles (e.g. age, gender etc.) in social networks and so on. These attributes provide an effective and efficient way for data management and organization. More importantly, users’ interaction behaviors on entities show obvious patterns over entity attributes. For example, people tend to purchase products of a specific brand,
like images and videos with a specific group of tags, and
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2894

