Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Sorted Neighborhood for the Semantic Web
Mayank Kejriwal, Daniel P. Miranker
University of Texas at Austin
{kejriwal,miranker}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Entity Resolution (ER) concerns identifying logically equivalent entity pairs across databases. To avoid Θ(n2 ) pairwise
comparisons of n entities, blocking methods are used. Sorted
Neighborhood is an established blocking method for relational databases. It has not been applied on graph-based data
models such as the Resource Description Framework (RDF).
This poster presents a modular workflow for applying Sorted
Neighborhood to RDF. Real-world evaluations demonstrate
the workflow’s utility against a popular baseline.

Entity Resolution (ER) is the abstract problem of identifying pairs of entities across databases that are syntactically
disparate but logically equivalent. The problem goes by multiple names in the AI community, examples being record
linkage, instance matching, and coreference resolution (Elmagarmid, Ipeirotis, and Verykios 2007).
The dominant data model in the Semantic Web is
the graph-based Resource Description Framework (RDF)
model. In RDF1 , entities are represented by nodes and edges
denote properties between nodes (Figure 1).
In Figure 1, Cathy Ridley is a single logical entity but has
two syntactic mentions. The goal of ER is to link such pairs
of logically equivalent mentions using sameAs edges (Ferraram, Nikolov, and Scharffe 2013).
Given n entities and a sophisticated similarity function
that determines whether an entity pair should be linked using
sameAs, a naı̈ve ER application would be quadratic. Scalability indicates a two-step approach. The first step is a blocking method, which clusters entities into possibly overlapping
blocks, such that entities sharing a block are likely to be duplicates, and merit further similarity comparisons. Entities
not sharing a block are never compared, leading to savings
(Christen 2012).
In the relational database community, blocking methods
are well-researched (Christen 2012), with a popular approach being Sorted Neighborhood (SN) (Hernández and
Stolfo 1995). Despite excellent empirical performance, SN
has never been applied to linked data (Schmachtenberg,
Bizer, and Paulheim 2014). Linked Open Data (LOD) con-

Figure 1: A simple instance of ER in an RDF graph
Table 1: Tuples sorted using blocking key values (BKVs)
ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

First Name
Cathy
Catherine
Cathy
John
J.
John
John

Last Name
Ransom
Ridley
Ridley
Rogers
Rogers
Ridley
Ridley Sr.

Zip
77111
77093
77093
78751
78732
77093
77093

BKV
CR7
CR7
CR7
JR7
JR7
JR7
JRS7

tinues to grow and currently contains billions of resources2 .
Linked data is often accessed through a SPARQL-endpoint,
where SPARQL3 is a declarative pattern-matching query
language.
Blocking has recently become an active area of research
in the Semantic Web community (Isele, Jentzsch, and Bizer
2011), but SN has been challenging to apply to linked data.
One reason is that RDF data can be schema-free and may not
include type information (especially on Linked Open Data),
while SN explicitly assumes structured tuples. Consider Table 1 for an application of SN. First, a provided blocking
key is used to extract blocking key values (BKVs) from tuples. Using + as the concatenation operator, the blocking key
applied on Table 1 was Initials(First Name)+Initials(Last
Name)+Initials(Zip). Next, BKVs are used as sorting keys.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
www.w3.org/RDF

2
3

4174

linkeddata.org
www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/

