Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Mining User Interests from Personal Photos
Pengtao Xie, Yulong Pei, Yuan Xie and Eric Xing
{pengtaox,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu,{yulongp, yxie1}@andrew.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract
Personal photos are enjoying explosive growth with the
popularity of photo-taking devices and social media.
The vast amount of online photos largely exhibit users’
interests, emotion and opinions. Mining user interests
from personal photos can boost a number of utilities,
such as advertising, interest based community detection
and photo recommendation. In this paper, we study the
problem of user interests mining from personal photos.
We propose a User Image Latent Space Model to jointly
model user interests and image contents. User interests
are modeled as latent factors and each user is assumed
to have a distribution over them. By inferring the latent
factors and users’ distributions, we can discover what
the users are interested in. We model image contents
with a four-level hierarchical structure where the layers
correspond to themes, semantic regions, visual words
and pixels respectively. Users’ latent interests are embedded in the theme layer. Given image contents, users’
interests can be discovered by doing posterior inference.
We use variational inference to approximate the posteriors of latent variables and learn model parameters.
Experiments on 180K Flickr photos demonstrate the effectiveness of our model.

Car

Car

(a)

Tiger

Tree

Tiger

Tree

(b)

Car

Tiger

Tree

Car

Tiger

Tree

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Personal photos of four Flickr users. These photos clearly exhibit what these users show interest in. For example, from these photos, we can conjecture that the first
user loves cars and the second user is fond of flowers. (b)
Each user has a distribution over latent user interests. By
identifying these distributions, we can discover users’ interests. For instance, from the learned distributions, we can see
that the man likes tiger and tree, but shows little interest in
car. The woman loves car and is indifferent to tiger and tree.
(c) We assume image contents are generated from latent interests. For example, the first image is more likely to be generated from tiger and tree interests while the second image
is likely to be generated from car and tree.

can boost a number of utilities, such as advertising, interest based community detection, photo recommendation, to
name a few. Taking Figure 1(a) as an example, if we can
discover the personal interests of the four users from their
albums, we can display car ads to the first user, recommend
users who also like flowers to the second user, recommend
sports news to the third user and recommend popular food
to the fourth user.
While a lot of works have been devoted to mining users’
interest from texts, links, click data and social information (Qiu and Cho 2006; Li et al. 2008; White, Bailey,
and Chen 2009; Wen and Lin 2010; Kim et al. 2012;
Hong, Doumith, and Davison 2013; Wang et al. 2013), image based user interests mining is largely unexplored. Feng
and Qian (Feng and Qian 2013; 2014), Wang et al (Wang et
al. 2009) leveraged both personal photos and their associated
textual information such as tags and comments to discover
users’ interest. Their methods are not applicable if the texts
data are absent.
In this paper, we build a model which can mine users’
interests directly from their personal photos and does not
reply on any text information. We propose a User Image La-

Introduction
With the prosperity of photo-taking devices such as digital
cameras and smart phones, people habitually take photos to
record interesting stuff and memorable events in their daily
life. Everyday, millions of photos are uploaded to photo
sharing social networks, like Flickr, Pinterest and Instagram.
Personal photos reveal people’s interests explicitly or implicitly. For instance, people loving pets tend to shoot a lot
of dog and cat images and share them on social media. People enjoying food frequently populate their online albums
with various food images. Figure 1(a) shows photos of four
Flickr users. Browsing these photos, we can easily figure out
that the first user likes cars, the second user is fond of flowers, the third user loves football and the fourth user enjoys
food. A picture is worth a thousand words. Compared with
texts, images are more natural to express users’ interests and
emotion. Mining users’ interests from their personal photos
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1896

