Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Simulator of Human Emergency Mobility following Disasters:
Knowledge Transfer from Big Disaster Data
Xuan Song† , Quanshi Zhang† , Yoshihide Sekimoto† , Ryosuke Shibasaki† ,
Nicholas Jing Yuan‡ and Xing Xie‡
†

Center for Spatial Information Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan
‡
2Microsoft Research, P.R. China
{songxuan,zqs1022,sekimoto,shiba}@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp, {nicholas.yuan,xing.xie}@microsoft.com
Abstract

Output: Simulated Human Emergency Mobility

The frequency and intensity of natural disasters has significantly increased over the past decades and this trend
is predicted to continue. Facing these possible and unexpected disasters, understanding and simulating of human emergency mobility following disasters will become the critical issue for planning effective humanitarian relief, disaster management, and long-term societal reconstruction. However, due to the uniqueness
of various disasters and the unavailability of reliable
and large scale human mobility data, such kind of research is very difficult to be performed. Hence, in this
paper, we collect big and heterogeneous data (e.g. 1.6
million users’ GPS records in three years, 17520 times
of Japan earthquake data in four years, news reporting
data, transportation network data and etc.) to capture
and analyze human emergency mobility following different disasters. By mining these big data, we aim to
understand what basic laws govern human mobility following disasters, and develop a general model of human emergency mobility for generating and simulating
large amount of human emergency movements. The experimental results and validations demonstrate the efficiency of our simulation model, and suggest that human
mobility following disasters may be significantly more
predictable and can be easier simulated than previously
thought.

Knowledge
Transfer

Input:
Emergency
Mobility
Simulator

important places
in the map,
disaster
information

Big and Heterogeneous Data

Human Mobility Data

Disaster Information Data

Transportation Network Data

Figure 1: Can we simulate human emergency mobility for
any disaster, any place and any people? By mining big
and heterogeneous data, we aim to discover general knowledge and understand what basic laws govern human mobility
following disasters. Can we develop a general model of human emergency mobility for generating or simulating large
amount of human emergency movements following different
disasters?

Introduction
Japan is one of the countries most affected by natural disasters. Two out of the five most expensive natural disasters
in recent history have occurred in Japan, costing huge economic loss and large number of people death in the years
2011 and 1995 only. Meanwhile, according to Japan Meteorological Agency, there were over 10681 earthquakes above
intensity one entire Japan in 2011 year only. These severe
natural disasters usually cause large population movements
and evacuations. Hence, understanding and simulating these
movements following disasters are critical for planning effective humanitarian relief, disaster management, and longterm societal reconstruction. However, such kind of research
is very difficult to be performed due to the fact that there

is no reliable approach for accurately sensing human mobility. Recently, however, people’s mobile phone data, GPS trajectories data, location-based online social networking data,
and IC card data have emerged and increased explosively.
The explosive increasing of these human mobile sensing
data becomes the “Big Data”, and offers a new way to circumvent methodological problems of earlier research for human behavior modeling because they offer high temporal
and spatial resolution, are instantaneously available, have
no interview bias, and provide longitudinal data for very
large populations. Recenly, Song et al. (Song et al. 2014a;
2014b) collected data from 1.6 million GPS users in Japan

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

730

