Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Integration and Evaluation of a Matrix
Factorization Sequencer in Large Commercial ITS
Carlotta Schatten, Ruth Janning, Lars Schmidt-Thieme
Information Systems and Machine Learning Lab, University of Hildesheim
Marienburger Platz 22
31148 Hildesheim, Germany

Abstract

tegration within already existing ITS is even more challenging since those systems were not intended to be combined
with Machine Learning methods, so the tendency is to develop ad-hoc learning environments. Such an integration is
becoming unfeasible for Machine Learning sequencing experiments also because large data set are needed, time is required to show students’ learning gains and it is necessary to
have enough tasks to sequence. This impose large scale experiment in sufficiently large systems, that cannot be created
ad-hoc.
In this paper we show how we adapted a machine learning
based domain independent sequencer, composed of a performance predictor and a score based task sequencing policy, in order to be integrated in a large commercial online
maths ITS. The latter is currently used in several countries
by children aged from 6 to 14, who are practicing on over
2000 tasks and 20 topics. Moreover, we discuss the obtained
online experiment’s results from different perspectives. The
developed sequencer showed the following promising characteristics:
1. Lightweight integrability of machine learning based sequencer in not ad-hoc constructed systems.
2. Having comparable response time as the actual rule based
system.
3. Achieving the same post-test results with almost no curriculum authoring effort.
4. Possessing a better user modeling, better adapting to the
knowledge acquisition rate of the students.
5. Outperforming the current sequencer in the perceived experience questionnaire.
In order to show how we achieved those results we present
our work as follows. In Section we present state of the art
of sequencing based on machine learning performance predictors and explain why they were not applicable for integration in our system. In Section we present the Vygotsky
Sequencer and in Section how we adapted it to a real time
working web service. In Section we present the designed
experiments and discuss the results.

Correct evaluation of Machine Learning based sequencers require large data availability, large scale experiments and consideration of different evaluation measures. Such constraints
make the construction of ad-hoc Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) unfeasible and impose early integration in already existing ITS, which possesses a large amount of tasks
to be sequenced. However, such systems were not designed
to be combined with Machine Learning methods and require
several adjustments. As a consequence more than a half of
the components based on recommender technology are never
evaluated with an online experiment. In this paper we show
how we adapted a Matrix Factorization based performance
predictor and a score based policy for task sequencing to be
integrated in a commercial ITS with over 2000 tasks on 20
topics. We evaluated the experiment under different perspectives in comparison with the ITS sequencer designed by experts over the years. As a result we achieve same post-test
results and outperform the current sequencer in the perceived
experience questionnaire with almost no curriculum authoring effort. We also showed that the sequencer possess a better
user modeling, better adapting to the knowledge acquisition
rate of the students.

Introduction
Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) are more and more becoming of crucial importance in education. Apart from the
possibility to practice any time, adaptivity and individualization are the main reasons for their widespread availability
as app, web service and software. Unfortunately, many Machine Learning methods applied to Learning Analytics are
born and die in laboratories due to the high integration requirements and constraints. As reported in (Manouselis et al.
2011) only one half of the developed task recommenders interacts, in a final evaluation stage, with students, whereas the
other half stays at design or prototype stage of development.
Adaptations of models to be integrated into already existing
systems cannot be evaluated as a whole and need to be observed from different perspectives (Brusilovsky 2001). This
is also important if we consider that in an integration experiment partners, especially if coming form different research
areas, have different interests and qualitative measures. In-

Background
Many Machine Learning techniques have been used to ameliorate ITS, especially in order to extend learning potential

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1380

