Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Complexity Results for Compressing Optimal Paths
Adi Botea

Ben Strasser

Daniel Harabor

IBM Research
Ireland

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Germany

NICTA
Australia

Abstract

tion. The latest work of this type is SRC (Strasser, Harabor, and Botea 2014); a compression scheme based on RunLength Encoding which is not only highly space competitive
but also the current state of the art in terms of query running
time. The idea behind SRC is simple: compute the firstmove matrix m, reorder its columns in a “good” way and
then apply run-length encoding to each row. An intuitive
definition of “good” in this case is a column ordering that
assigns adjacent IDs to elements having the same first-move
data – so they can be encoded together within the same run.
Experiments by Strasser, Harabor, and Botea (2014) employ heuristic methods for column ordering. They have
shown that “good” orderings can be computed efficiently
in practice. The ideal case for SRC is to create an RLEcompressed path database using an optimal column ordering. Several optimality criteria can be considered, such as
minimizing: the size of the compressed matrix; the expected
response time per query, when answering a query involves a
binary search through a compressed matrix row; or the maximum response time per query. Toy examples demonstrate
that these types of optimization are not equivalent to each
other. In this work we focus on minimizing the size of the
compressed matrix, since experiments have shown that the
size is a substantially more important bottleneck than the response time in practice (Strasser, Harabor, and Botea 2014).
Related (Kou 1977; Oswald and Reinelt 2009) and
weaker, less specific (Mohapatra 2009) results on RLEbased matrix compression are available in the literature.
However, as known, the NP-hardness of a class of problems
does not necessarily imply the NP-hardness of a subset of
the class. Thus, despite previous related results (Mohapatra 2009), it has been an open question whether the optimal
RLE-compression of a first-move matrix computed from an
input graph is tractable. Focusing on this, we prove general
intractability results, and also identify islands of tractability.
We formally define and study optimal RLE-compression
of first-move matrices produced from input graphs. We consider the case of directed input graphs and the case of undirected weighted input graphs. We show that both versions
are NP-complete. Focusing on such distinct types of graphs,
each result brings something new compared to the other. We
also show that, for graphs which can be decomposed along
articulation points, the problem can be decomposed into independent subproblems. If optimal orderings are available

In this work we give a first tractability analysis of Compressed Path Databases, space efficient oracles used to very
quickly identify the first arc on a shortest path. We study
the complexity of computing an optimal compressed path
database for general directed and undirected graphs. We find
that in both cases the problem is NP-complete. We also show
that, for graphs which can be decomposed along articulation points, the problem can be decomposed into independent parts, with a corresponding reduction in its level of difficulty. In particular, this leads to simple and tractable algorithms which yield optimal compression results for trees.

Introduction
A Compressed Path Database (CPD) is an index-based datastructure for graphs that is used to very quickly answer firstmove queries. Each such query takes as input a pair of nodes
from the graph, and asks for the first arc on a shortest path
from s to t. CPDs have successfully been applied in a number of contexts important to AI. For instance, Copa, a CPDbased pathfinding algorithm, was one of the joint winners
at the 2012 Grid-based Path Planning Competition (Botea
2012). A related algorithm, MtsCopa, is a fast method for
moving target search over known and partially known terrain (Botea et al. 2013; Baier et al. 2014).
A trivial CPD consists of a square matrix m with dimensions |V |×|V |. The matrix m, constructed during a precomputation step, stores in each cell, e.g. m[s, t], the identity of
a first arc on a shortest st-path. By convention we say that
rows of m correspond to fixed source nodes and the columns
to fixed target nodes. This is optimal in terms of query time
but the O(|V |2 ) space consumption quickly becomes prohibitive for larger graphs. The challenge is to design a compact representation of m that trades a small increase in query
times for a large decrease in space consumption.
A number of different matrix compression techniques
have been suggested for this purpose (Sankaranarayanan,
Alborzi, and Samet 2005; Botea 2011; Botea and Harabor
2013). In each case the objective is to conserve space by
grouping together entries of m which all share a common
source node and which all store the same first-arc informaCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1100

