Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Sequence-Form Algorithm for Computing
Stackelberg Equilibria in Extensive-Form Games
Branislav Bošanský1,2 , Jiřı́ Čermák1
1

Agent Technology Center, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University
bosansky@cs.au.dk, jiri.cermak@agents.fel.cvut.cz

Abstract

the current development in the game can be desirable (e.g.,
security procedures based on a suspicious behavior). Game
theory provides representation for modeling finite sequential
interactions between the players known as extensive-form
games (EFGs). This model is sufficiently generic to represent uncertainty in observation (i.e., players are not able to
perfectly observe the current state of the game), or stochastic
environment.
The problem of computing SE in EFGs has been studied
from the computational perspective and it was shown that
computing SE in extensive-form games with imperfect information and stochastic events is NP-hard (Letchford and
Conitzer 2010). However, a tailored algorithm for computing an exact SE in EFGs is currently missing. A baseline approach is thus to transform an EFG to a single step normalform game and use one of the existing approaches based
on computing multiple linear programs (LPs) (Conitzer and
Sandholm 2006), or formulating the problem as a mixedinteger linear program (MILP) (Paruchuri et al. 2008). This
transformation is, however, exponential and we show that
the scalability of the baseline approach is very limited.
This paper aims to address this issue and provides the first
specific algorithm for computing SE in two player EFGs.
Our approach exploits the compact representation of strategies known as the sequence form (Koller, Megiddo, and von
Stengel 1996; von Stengel 1996). We generalize two existing algorithms for computing SE in single-step games and
introduce two variants of our novel algorithm: (1) based on
solving multiple LPs, and (2) based on reformulating the
problem as a MILP. Moreover, the size of our MILP is linear
in the size of the game, and it contains only binary integer
variables; hence, it provides an upper bound on the computational complexity of the problem of computing SE and
shows that it is an NP-complete problem (Karp 1971).
We first give necessary technical background on EFGs,
Nash and Stackelberg solution concepts, following by the
description of the existing algorithms for computing each
of these concepts. Next, we describe our novel algorithm
that exploits the sequence form for computing SE in EFGs.
Finally, we experimentally demonstrate the scalability of
our algorithm on randomly generated games and a securityinspired search game. The results show that our MILP algorithm is significantly faster and can solve games several
magnitudes larger compared to the baseline approach.

Stackelberg equilibrium is a solution concept prescribing for
a player an optimal strategy to commit to, assuming the opponent knows this commitment and plays the best response.
Although this solution concept is a cornerstone of many security applications, the existing works typically do not consider situations where the players can observe and react to
the actions of the opponent during the course of the game.
We extend the existing algorithmic work to extensive-form
games and introduce novel algorithm for computing Stackelberg equilibria that exploits the compact sequence-form representation of strategies. Our algorithm reduces the size of the
linear programs from exponential in the baseline approach to
linear in the size of the game tree. Experimental evaluation
on randomly generated games and a security-inspired search
game demonstrates significant improvement in the scalability
compared to the baseline approach.

Introduction
Solving games and computing game-theoretic solutions is
one of the key topics of artificial intelligence. The best
known solution concepts in game theory is Nash equilibrium
that prescribes optimal strategy profile (one strategy for each
player) such that no player can gain anything by unilaterally
changing their strategy. However, a line of research that analyzes two-player games where the first player (termed the
leader) is able to commit to a publicly known strategy before
the other player (termed the follower) moves has received
a significant focus in recent years. This solution concept is
known as Stackelberg (or leader-follower) equilibrium (von
Stackelberg 1934; Leitmann 1978; von Stengel and Zamir
2004) and it is a cornerstone of many security applications
of game theory. The examples include airport security (Pita
et al. 2008), assigning Air Marshals to flights (Tsai et al.
2009), or protecting the coast (Shieh et al. 2012).
Most of the existing applications of Stackelberg equilibria
(SE) typically focus on single-step normal-form or Bayesian
games where the players do not learn anything during the
course of the game – the players are not able to observe
the actions performed by the opponent and cannot react to
this information. Such an assumption can be too strong in
practice, since conditioning the strategies of the players by
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

805

