Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Predisaster Preparation of Transportation Networks
Hermann Schichl∗

Meinolf Sellmann

Faculty of Mathematics
University of Vienna, Austria

IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY, U.S.A.

Abstract

non-linear objective. Due to the binary nature of investment
decisions the problem is obviously not convex. Furthermore,
we will show that it is hard to approximate and also neither
sub- nor super-modular. We then introduce a new type of extreme resource constraint and develop a practically effective
propagator which allows us to solve the existing benchmark
instances in milliseconds, two to three orders of magnitude
faster than existing methods. This then paves the way for
tackling harder benchmark instances which consider several
orders more non-interchangeable scenarios as well as correlated failure probabilities.

We develop a new approach for a pre-disaster planning
problem which consists in computing an optimal investment plan to strengthen a transportation network, given
that a future disaster probabilistically destroys links in
the network. We show how the problem can be formulated as a non-linear integer program and devise an
AI algorithm to solve it. In particular, we introduce a
new type of extreme resource constraint and develop a
practically efficient propagation algorithm for it. Experiments show several orders of magnitude improvements
over existing approaches, allowing us to close an existing real-world benchmark and to solve to optimality
other, more challenging benchmarks.

Problem Definition and Complexity
Definition 1. We are given an undirected graph G =
(N, E) with a node set N = {1, . . . , n} and an edge set
E = {{i, j} | i, j ∈ N, i < j}. Furthermore, we are
given four functions. An a priori survival probability function s : E → [0, 1], a survival probability after investment
function v : E → [0, 1], an edge length function l : E → IN,
and a cost of investment function c : E → IN. Finally,
we are given a budget limit C ∈ IN, as well as node pairs
(o1 , d1 ), . . . , (ok , dk ) ∈ N 2 and penalties Moh ,dh ∈ IN for
disconnecting the OD pair (oh , dh ).
Given a set I ⊆ E, we denote with pI : E → [0, 1],
with pI (i, j) = v(i, j) if {i, j} ∈ I and pI (i, j) = s(i, j)
otherwise, the survival probabilities after investing in links
in I. We consider the probability space (Ω, PI ) where Ω =
{F | F ⊆ Q
E} and PI is the unique
probability measure with
Q
PI (F ) = {i,j}∈F pI (i, j) {i,j} /∈F (1 − pI (i, j)). Finally,
for all o, d ∈ N let us denote with SPLIo,d : Ω → IN a
random variable over (Ω, PI ) such that SPLIo,d (F ) returns
the shortest-path length from o to d in the weighted graph
(N, F, l), and Mo,d if no path from o to d exists in (N, F )
(we omit a formal definition of shortest paths due to limited
space).
The Predisaster Transportation Network Preparation
Problem (PTNP) consists in P
selecting a subset I ⊆ E
of links to invest in such that {i,j}∈I c(i, j) ≤ C and
Pk
I
h=1 E(SPLoh ,dh ) is minimized.

Earthquake Preparation
We consider a real-world pre-disaster planning problem that
was introduced in (Peeta et al. 2010). Given a transportation network, where links are subject to probabilistic failure, the task is to use a limited budget to decrease the
failure probability on selected links such that the overall
expected shortest-path distance between a number of origin/destination pairs (OD-pairs) is minimized. The original model assumes independence between the failures of
links. Consequently, a priori an exact standard stochastic
programming approach would need to consider an exponential number of scenarios. Therefore, the approach in (Peeta
et al. 2010) solves the problem without guarantees on the
quality of the solution. Exploiting value-interchangeability,
a symmetry-notion from constraint programming, only very
recently (Prestwich, Laumanns, and Kawas 2013; 2014)
were able to reduce the number of scenarios massively to a
point where the benchmark introduced in (Peeta et al. 2010)
could be solved to optimality within a number of minutes.
The idea of combining scenarios that all lead to the same
value for the random variable considered (in our case: the
sum of all expected shortest path lengths between all origin/destination pairs) is very interesting for scenario generation in general. We build on this idea and formulate the predisaster planning problem as an integer programming problem with a very simple constraint structure and a heavily

The PTNP is a probabilistic version of the deterministic problem class of survivable network design problems
(SNDPs). Node- and link-survivable network design prob-

∗

This research was supported through grant P22239-N13 by the
Austrian Science Foundation FWF.

709

