Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Predicting Peer-to-Peer Loan Rates
Using Bayesian Non-Linear Regression
Zsolt Bitvai

Trevor Cohn

University of Shefﬁeld
Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom
z.bitvai@shef.ac.uk

University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
t.cohn@unimelb.edu.au

technique that modulates between addition and multiplication. We ﬁnd that this modulation beats a model with purely
additive or multiplicative kernel combination.
Each loan application contains rich information about
the borrower, third party credit scoring, textual information,
such as a questions and answers section as well as a cover
letter from the borrower explaining their background and the
purpose of the loan. There are around 1,000 – 1,500 words
of English text per document. In order to harness the semantic content from this text, we use LDA topic modelling and
TF/IDF scoring of terms. We ﬁnd that our model outperforms baselines and other well known linear and non-linear
learning algorithms such as support vector regression.

Abstract
Peer-to-peer lending is a new highly liquid market for
debt, which is rapidly growing in popularity. Here we
consider modelling market rates, developing a nonlinear Gaussian Process regression method which incorporates both structured data and unstructured text from
the loan application. We show that the peer-to-peer market is predictable, and identify a small set of key factors
with high predictive power. Our approach outperforms
baseline methods for predicting market rates, and generates substantial proﬁt in a trading simulation.

Introduction

Related Work

Peer-to-peer (P2P) lending is an emerging market that facilitates lending between individuals and small-medium sized
companies. One characteristic of these markets is that they
exhibit highly non-linear behavior, with substantial noise.
Temporal dynamics can be observed as well due to varying loan terms and changing market conditions. Last, social
lending involves signiﬁcant quantities of user generated text
which is an integral part of the loan application process. All
this key information can be incorporated in the Gaussian
Process framework which can handle non-linear mapping
functions. These latent functions are well suited to handle
noise, and the posterior of the model supports exploitation
of market inefﬁciencies via automatic trading.
In this paper we present a Gaussian Process regression
model for predicting market loan rates, which infers an underlying latent function linking the attributes of each loan
and its rate, while accounting for the considerable noise in
the data. This models not just the rates for unseen loans,
but also the uncertainty of the predictive posterior, which allows for full Bayesian inference, namely, to detect mispriced
loans on the market, and quantify expected proﬁts that could
be realized by buying and reselling loan parts at correct market value.
The Gaussian Process is a state of the art machine learning framework which allows for rich modelling of several
aspects of the data. We incorporate temporal variation, structured data, and unstructured text using a kernel combination

Text regression is the problem of predicting a quantiﬁable real world phenomenon from unstructured text inputs.
This has seen diverse applications including the prediction of stock volatility from company reviews (Kogan et al.
2009), market movements from news (Lerman et al. 2008),
movie revenues from critic reviews (Joshi et al. 2010) and
political opinion polls from social media posts (Lampos,
Preotiuc-Pietro, and Cohn 2013). Almost exclusively, these
approaches have used linear predictive models, which aids
model interpretability, nonetheless these approaches are inherently unable to handle non-linearities (one notable exception is Wang and Hua (2014), who modelled stock volatity
using a non-linear regression model). In particular, this is
likely to be problematic for ﬁnancial market data, which is
known to be noisy and highly non-linear (Atiya 2001). In
this paper we propose a Gaussian Process model with nonlinear kernels for modelling P2P lending rates, which we
show improves signiﬁcantly over linear modelling. We retain model interpretability through automatic relevance determination (ARD) and learned kernel importance weightings, which identify the relative importance of features and
feature groups.
In peer to peer lending, rich data is presented to investors
in order to allow them to make informed decisions. Having a way to combine several disparate features is important
because in our modelling problems, in common with many
others, we have rich structured data in addition to unstructured text. For example, Joshi et al. (2010) predicted movie
revenues not just from the text of critic reviews, but also used

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2203

