Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Approximate MaxEnt Inverse Optimal Control and
Its Application for Mental Simulation of Human Interactions
De-An Huang, Amir-massoud Farahmand,
Kris M. Kitani, J. Andrew Bagnell
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Abstract

pedestrian trajectories since current approaches only work
for problems with small state space. To extend IOC to deal
with the inherent high-dimensional nature of observed human activity from image data, previous approaches (Huang
and Kitani 2014; Walker, Gupta, and Hebert 2014) relied on
clustering techniques to quantize and reduce the size of the
state space. However, coarse discretization of the state space
resulted in non-smooth trajectories and inhibited the model’s
power to simulate the subtle qualities of activity dynamics.
At the heart of the problem of maximum entropy sequence
prediction is an inference procedure which requires enumeration of all possible action sequences into the future given a
set of observations. In the same way that the value function
is computed for optimal control, the log-partition function
of maximum entropy IOC can be computed using dynamic
programming – differing only in the substitution of the “softmax” operator for the “max” operator in the Bellman equations. This relationship was noted as early as (Rust 1994)
and formalized in (Ziebart et al. 2008). While dynamic programming renders this efficient for small scale problems,
more appropriate techniques are needed for dealing with
problems with large state spaces.
When the state space is large, one natural approach is
to use approximate dynamic programming for the approximate calculation of these functions. We draw our inspiration
from value function approximation methods, which have
been successful in solving high-dimensional control problems (Tesauro 1994; Ernst, Geurts, and Wehenkel 2005;
Riedmiller 2005; Mnih et al. 2013), to address the highdimensional challenges in our scenario.
The algorithmic contribution of this work is an approximate MaxEnt IOC algorithm, suitable for dealing with highdimensional problems, that uses an Approximate Value Iteration (AVI) algorithm to compute the softmax-based value
(log-partition) function. The AVI procedure uses a regression estimator at each iteration, where the choice of the estimator is not constrained. In particular, we utilize a reproducing kernel Hilbert space-based (RKHS) regularized estimator due to its flexibility and favourable properties – though
the framework is more general and allows other regression
estimators such as local averagers, random forests, boosting,
neural networks, etc. Efficient Monte Carlo sampling then
enables a dimension-independent estimate of the gradient of
the reward function.

Maximum entropy inverse optimal control (MaxEnt IOC) is
an effective means of discovering the underlying cost function of demonstrated human activity and can be used to predict human behavior over low-dimensional state spaces (i.e.,
forecasting of 2D trajectories). To enable inference in very
large state spaces, we introduce an approximate MaxEnt IOC
procedure to address the fundamental computational bottleneck stemming from calculating the partition function via
dynamic programming. Approximate MaxEnt IOC is based
on two components: approximate dynamic programming and
Monte Carlo sampling. We analyze this approximation approach and provide a finite-sample error upper bound on its
excess loss. We validate the proposed method in the context
of analyzing dual-agent interactions from video, where we
use approximate MaxEnt IOC to simulate mental images of
a single agents body pose sequence (a high-dimensional image space). We experiment with sequences image data taken
from RGB and RGBD data and show that it is possible to
learn cost functions that lead to accurate predictions in highdimensional problems that were previously intractable.

Introduction
The Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) Inverse Optimal Control (IOC) framework is an effective approach for discovering the underlying reward model of a rational agent and
enables robust sequence prediction over low-dimensional
state spaces (Ziebart et al. 2008; Ziebart, Bagnell, and Dey
2013). The IOC framework is particularly useful in the context of understanding and modeling human activities, where
the recovered reward model intuitively encodes a person’s
set of preferences. Furthermore, in the MaxEnt formulation of IOC, the soft-maximum value function (log-partition
function) compactly describes a global distribution over every possible action sequence. The log-partition function can
then be used to simulate and forecast human activities.
Of particular interest in this paper is recent work fusing
computer vision and IOC to mentally (visually) simulate human activities. By integrating visual attributes of the scene
as features of the reward function, it was shown that highly
accurate pedestrian trajectories can be simulated in novel
scenes (Kitani et al. 2012). The application of IOC to visual prediction problems, however, has been limited to 2D
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2673

