Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Robust Locality Preserving
Projection via p-Order Minimization
†

Hua Wang† , Feiping Nie‡ , Heng Huang‡∗

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Colorado School of Mines, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA
‡
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas 76019, USA
huawangcs@gmail.com, feipingnie@gmail.com, heng@uta.edu
Abstract

data objects, either computed from data attributes or directly obtained from experimental observations. These algorithms, such as ISOMAP (Tenenbaum, De Silva, and Langford 2000), Locally Linear Embedding (LLE) (Roweis and
Saul 2000), Laplacian Eigenmap (Belkin and Niyogi 2001),
Locality Preserving Projection (LPP) (Niyogi 2004), and
discriminant Laplacian embedding (Wang, Huang, and Ding
2010b), etc., generally assume that the observed data are
sampled from an underlying sub-manifold which is embedded in a high-dimensional observation space. Due to this reasonable assumption, manifold based learning methods have
achieved great success to solve problems in a large number
of real-world applications. Among these manifold learning
based projection methods, LPP has been widely accepted because it is able to learn a linear projection from the original
data, such that it can be easily applied to not only training
data but also out-of-sample data points.

Locality preserving projection (LPP) is an effective dimensionality reduction method based on manifold learning,
which is deﬁned over the graph weighted squared 2 -norm
distances in the projected subspace. Since squared 2 -norm
distance is prone to outliers, it is desirable to develop a robust LPP method. In this paper, motivated by existing studies
that improve the robustness of statistical learning models via
1 -norm or not-squared 2 -norm formulations, we propose a
robust LPP (rLPP) formulation to minimize the p-th order of
the 2 -norm distances, which can better tolerate large outlying data samples because it suppress the introduced biased
more than the 1 -norm or not squared 2 -norm minimizations.
However, solving the formulated objective is very challenging because it not only non-smooth but also non-convex. As
an important theoretical contribution of this work, we systematically derive an efﬁcient iterative algorithm to solve the
general p-th order 2 -norm minimization problem, which, to
the best of our knowledge, is solved for the ﬁrst time in
literature. Extensive empirical evaluations on the proposed
rLPP method have been performed, in which our new method
outperforms the related state-of-the-art methods in a variety
of experimental settings and demonstrate its effectiveness in
seeking better subspaces on both noiseless and noisy data.

In this paper, we address the issue of robustness of LPP
in the presence of outlier samples, which is deﬁned as the
data points that deviates signiﬁcantly from the rest majority of the data points. In classical LPP approach, the learning objective is formulated using the squared distance in
the projected subspace, which, same as other least square
based learning objectives in statistical learning, could be
signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by outlying observations. That is,
the traditional LPP formulation becomes inappropriate at
contaminated data sets, because large errors squared dominate the sum. Many previous works have been done to improve the robustness of the linear dimensionality reduction
methods via using the 1 -norm minimizations or not-squared
2 -norm minimizations (Baccini, Besse, and Falguerolles
1996; Ding et al. 2006; Gao 2008; Ke and Kanade 2005;
Kwak 2008; Wright et al. 2009; Nie et al. 2010; 2011;
Wang, Nie, and Huang 2014). The key motivation of these
prior works lies in that the not-squared 2 -norm distance or
error functions, say xi − xj 2 for the two vectors xi and
xj , can generally better tolerate the biases caused by the outlying data samples, especially when the outlier data samples
are far away from the normal data distributions. Following
the same intuition, we recognize that the distance with lower
orders, e.g., xi − xj p2 where 0 < p < 1, can achieve
the same goal for robustness with potentially better results
(Wang et al. 2013), because the bias caused by outlying data
samples can be further suppressed when p(< 1) is selected

Introduction
Dimensionality reduction (DR) algorithms seek to represent the input data in their lower-dimensional “intrinsic” subspace/sub-manifold, in which irrelevant features are
pruned and inherent data structures are more lucid. In the
early ages, DR algorithms assume that the input data objects are homogeneous but not relational, and thereby are
devised to deal with a set of attributes in the format of ﬁxed
length vectors. For example, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Jolliffe 2005) attempts to maximize the covariance among data points, while Linear Discriminant Analysis
(LDA) (Fukunaga 1990) aims at maximizing the class separability. In recent years, manifold learning has motivated
many DR algorithms using pairwise similarities between
∗

To whom all correspondence should be addressed. This work
was partially supported by NSF-IIS 1117965, NSF-IIS 1302675,
NSF-IIS 1344152, NSF-DBI 1356628, NSF-IIS 1423591.
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3059

