Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Balanced Trade Reduction for Dual-Role Exchange Markets
Dengji Zhao, Sarvapali D. Ramchurn, Enrico H. Gerding and Nicholas R. Jennings
Electronics and Computer Science
University of Southampton
Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
{d.zhao, sdr, eg, nrj}@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Abstract

and selling the same commodity at the same time, although
she be able to either buy or sell the same commodity. In
the ridesharing scenario, a commuter cannot drive and ride
at the same time, and in the EV charging scenario, an EV
cannot be charged and discharged at the same time. Another
important feature of these domains is that a trader do not decide to buy or sell by herself if she is flexible to either buy
or sell, which also gives us more opportunity to optimize social welfare. For example, in ridesharing, if every commuter
has to decide to either drive or ride before she participates
in the market, then if everyone decides to drive, we will end
up with no sharing. However, if every (or some) driver is
willing to ride with others, then we will be able to let some
drivers ride with others, which will then make the sharing
possible to save costs, reduce congestion and etc..
In designing an exchange mechanism, it is important to
achieve a number of desirable properties, namely: maximizing social welfare (i.e., efficient), preventing manipulations of agents (i.e., truthful), an agent never pays more
than what she gets (i.e., individually rational) and the market maker should not run the mechanism with a deficit (i.e.,
budget balanced). It is well known that designing an exchange mechanism that is efficient, truthful, individually rational and budget balanced is impossible (Myerson and Satterthwaite 1983). Since a loss-making mechanism does not
make economic sense in reality, we seek to find budget balanced mechanisms that can be applied in the real-world. In
order to achieve budget balance (i.e. removing deficit), there
have been several attempts via trading efficiency (Parkes,
Kalagnanam, and Eso 2001; Babaioff and Walsh 2005). One
approach that stands out from classical exchange mechanisms is McAfee’s trade reduction and its generalizations,
which are more relevant to this study (McAfee 1992; Gonen,
Gonen, and Pavlov 2007). The essential idea of McAfee’s
trade reduction is to reduce efficiency as little as possible
to get budget balanced, truthful, and individually rational
mechanisms.
Following McAfee’s approach, we design budget balanced mechanisms for a dual-role exchange. We limit to the
situation where each trader buys or/and sells a single-unit
of a commodity. We first show that McAfee’s trade reduction does not satisfy truthfulness in this type of exchange, although it is truthful under a special setting, called marginally
decreasing valuation domain. We therefore propose a new

We consider dual-role exchange markets, where traders
can offer to both buy and sell the same commodity in the
exchange but, if they transact, they can only be either a
buyer or a seller, which is determined by the market
mechanism. To design desirable mechanisms for such
exchanges, we show that existing solutions may not be
incentive compatible, and more importantly, cause the
market maker to suffer a significant deficit. Hence, to
combat this problem, following McAfee’s trade reduction approach, we propose a new trade reduction mechanism, called balanced trade reduction, that is incentive compatible and also provides flexible trade-offs between efficiency and deficit.

Introduction
Exchange markets (aka double auctions) are the most important institutions for modern economy, which are centralized
markets consisting of exchange rules for traders to buy and
sell commodities, e.g. stock exchanges. Most existing studies of exchanges are for the environments where a trader
is either a buyer or a seller, but not both, of certain commodities (Myerson and Satterthwaite 1983; McAfee 1992;
Wurman, Walsh, and Wellman 1998; Blum, Sandholm, and
Zinkevich 2006; Bredin, Parkes, and Duong 2007; Parsons,
Rodriguez-Aguilar, and Klein 2011).
In this paper, we study another type of exchanges. We call
it dual-role exchange, where a trader offers to both buy and
sell of certain commodities but when she transacts, she can
be only a seller or a buyer, which is determined by the market maker. There exist many real-world applications of dualrole exchanges. For example, in ridesharing/carpooling (Kamar and Horvitz 2009; Zhao et al. 2014), a driver would like
to sell his empty seats to riders at a reasonable price and may
also be willing to ride with other drivers (i.e., buy seats from
others) if the price they charge is lower than his driving cost.
Also, in electric vehicle (EV) charging (Kempton and Tomi
2005; Han, Han, and Sezaki 2010), an EV owner might buy
more electricity in order to finish a trip if the price is reasonable, otherwise, she might sell the power stored in the car
and use other transportations instead. All these applications
share a common feature: an agent cannot be both buying
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1064

