Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Improving Approximate Value Iteration with Complex Returns by Bounding
Robert Wright,1,2 Xingye Qiao, Lei Yu∗

Steven Loscalzo

Binghamton University1
Binghamton, NY
{rwright3, xqiao, lyu}@binghamton.edu

Information Directorate, Air Force Research Lab2
Rome, NY
steven.loscalzo@us.af.mil

Abstract

effect by the TD(λ) family of algorithms which utilize complex returns (weighted average of all n-step returns) in order
to reduce variance and produce a more accurate value estimate than the 1-step return (Sutton and Barto 1998). In
some off-policy learning settings where the behavior policy
is different from the target policy, importance sampling has
been employed to correct the off-policy bias in the n-step returns (Precup, Sutton, and Dasgupta 2001), and shown some
successes in policy iteration methods (Geist and Scherrer
2014; Hachiya et al. 2009). This method takes advantage
of prior knowledge of both the target policy and behavior
policy (both of which are assumed to have non-zero action
selection probabilities) to weight each return of a complex
backup and reduce the bias of the individual R(n) returns.

Approximate value iteration (AVI) is a widely used technique
in reinforcement learning. Most AVI methods do not take
full advantage of the sequential relationship between samples within a trajectory in deriving value estimates, due to
the challenges in dealing with the inherent bias and variance
in the n-step returns. We propose a bounding method which
uses a negatively biased but relatively low variance estimator
generated from a complex return to provide a lower bound
on the observed value of a traditional one-step return estimator. In addition, we develop a new Bounded FQI algorithm,
which efficiently incorporates the bounding method into an
AVI framework. Experiments show that our method produces
more accurate value estimates than existing approaches, resulting in improved policies.

Notwithstanding these advances, there has been little
progress in exploiting the n-step returns for value iteration.
The main reason for this lies in the fact that in the value iteration framework the target policy is always the optimal policy and is unknown, and it is a challenging issue to deal with
the off-policy bias of the n-step returns. The importance
sampling method suitable for the policy evaluation phase
in policy iteration does not apply here, since the required
prior knowledge about the target and behavior policies is not
available in the value iteration framework. This work takes
the first attempt in addressing this challenge.

Introduction
Approximate Value Iteration (AVI) is a popular framework for solving Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems
that combines classical value iteration with function approximation (Gordon 1995; Munos 2005; Riedmiller 2005;
Antos, Szepesvári, and Munos 2007). As an off-policy approach it can make effective use of all available samples. At
the heart of AVI is its 1-step backup update function which
makes use of the Bellman optimality equation (Sutton and
Barto 1998). AVI uses this update to iteratively refine the
estimated values for each of the individual samples it is provided. The accuracy of these sample value estimates determines the final quality of the value function approximation
and the overall success of the approach.
Samples in RL domains are most commonly collected in
episodic sequences known as trajectories. Given trajectories, the idea behind the 1-step return has been extended by
Temporal Difference (TD) (Sutton and Barto 1998) to produce the n-step return estimates which may be subject to
different variance and bias than the 1-step return depending on the learning contexts. In on-policy learning settings
where the behavior policy (the policy that generated the trajectory) and target policy (the policy being learned) are the
same, the idea of n-step returns has been exploited to great

For this purpose we propose a novel bounding method
which uses a negatively biased, but relatively low variance
complex return estimator to provide a lower bound on the
value of the sample label obtained from the traditional onestep return. The method is motivated by a statistical observation that a biased estimator with relatively small variance
can sometimes provide an effective bound on the value of
another estimator to produce a better estimator than either
one alone. The novelty of our approach is that we exploit
the off-policy bias down the trajectories, instead of trying to
correct it as the importance sampling approach would do. In
addition, we develop a new Bounded FQI algorithm, which
efficiently incorporates the bounding method into an AVI
framework. Finally, we provide an empirical analysis of our
method on a set of RL benchmarks demonstrating that the
bounding method produces more accurate value estimates
than existing approaches, resulting in improved policies.

∗

Yu is the last author who directs Wright’s PhD research.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3087

