Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Explaining Answer Set Programming in Argumentative Terms
Claudia Schulz
claudia.schulz@imperial.ac.uk
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
London SW7 2AZ, UK

Introduction

where it is important to understand why a decision was made
or why a potential decision was not reached.
In Argumentation Theory two types of approaches can
be distinguished: Abstract approaches such as Abstract Argumentation (AA) (Dung 1995) represent knowledge in
terms of arguments along with a conflict relation between
them. Different semantics exist, which are all determined
based on the conflicts between arguments, yielding sets of
accepted arguments called extensions. On the other hand,
structured approaches such as Assumption-Based Argumentation (ABA) (Bondarenko et al. 1997; Toni 2014) or ASPIC+ (Prakken 2010) represent knowledge in the form of
rules along with contrary relations between elements of the
rules. Especially the representation of knowledge in ABA,
where rules contain defeasible elements called assumptions,
is very close to the ASP representation as a logic program.
In structured approaches arguments can be constructed from
the rules and conflict relations between the arguments can be
inferred from the contrary relations. The semantics can then
be expressed in terms of extensions as in the case of abstract
approaches. Thus, an extension of a structured approach provides further information as to why an argument is part of it,
namely in terms of the conflict relation with other arguments
and the internal structure of the argument.

Argumentation Theory and Answer Set Programming (ASP)
are two prominent theories in the field of knowledge representation and non-monotonic reasoning, where Argumentation Theory stands for a variety of approaches following
similar ideas. The main difference between Argumentation
Theory and ASP is that the former focusses on representing
knowledge and reasoning about it in a way that resembles
human reasoning, neglecting the efficiency of the reasoning
procedure, whereas the latter is concerned with the efficient
computation of solutions to a reasoning problem, resulting
in a less human-understandable process.
In recent years, ASP has been frequently applied for
the computation of reasoning problems represented in
argumentation-theoretical-terms and has been found an efficient method for determining solutions to problems in
Argumentation Theory (Egly, Gaggl, and Woltran 2010;
Wakaki and Nitta 2008). My research is concerned with the
opposite direction, i.e. with applying Argumentation Theory
to ASP in order to explain the solutions to an ASP reasoning problem in a more human-understandable way. Developing such an explanation method also involves to investigate
both the exact relationship between different approaches in
Argumentation Theory in order to find the most suitable one
for explanations and their connection with ASP, in particular
with respect to their semantics.

Past Work - ABA-Based Answer Set
Justification

Background

Since reasoning problems in structured approaches of Argumentation Theory are represented in a very similar way to
ASP problems, I investigated the relationship between the
solutions of a problem computed by ASP and the solutions
of the same problem determined using Argumentation Theory. It turned out that consistent answer sets in ASP correspond to the stable extensions of both ASPIC+ (Schulz,
Sergot, and Toni 2013) and ABA (Schulz and Toni 2014),
in particular for every literal l in an answer set there exists
a (corresponding) argument with conclusion l in the corresponding stable extension and vice versa. Based on this correspondence, I developed a method called ArgumentationBased Answer Set Justification (Schulz, Sergot, and Toni
2013) for explaining why a literal is or is not part of an answer set in terms of the structure and relation information
of the corresponding argument in ASPIC+. This explana-

In Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Gelfond and Lifschitz
1991) knowledge is represented as a logic program, that
is in terms of rules containing defeasible elements called
negation-as-failure (NAF) literals, which are assumed to be
true as long as the contrary cannot be proven. The semantics of ASP are defined declaratively as a fixpoint, yielding
sets of accepted literals called answer sets, intuitively a set
of all non-contradictory conclusions drawn from the logic
program. Such an answer set does not provide any further
information as to why a literal is or is not part of it. This
can be a shortcoming, especially when using ASP in applications such as decision support systems or agent planning,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4253

