Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

English Light Verb Construction Identification Using Lexical Knowledge
Wei-Te Chen

Claire Bonial

Martha Palmer

Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado at Boulder
Weite.Chen@colorado.edu

Department of Linguistics
University of Colorado at Boulder
Claire.Bonial@colorado.edu

Department of Linguistics
University of Colorado at Boulder
Martha.Palmer@colorado.edu

Abstract

parison of the OntoNotes LVC annotations to the British
National Corpus1 LVC annotations, used by Tu and Roth
(2011), is given in Section 4. The description of our system
is presented in Section 5, and our experiments and results in
6, followed by concluding remarks and future work.

This research describes the development of a supervised
classifier of English light verb constructions, for example, take a walk and make a speech. This classifier relies
on features from dependency parses, OntoNotes sense
tags, WordNet hypernyms and WordNet lexical file information. Evaluation shows that this system achieves
an 89% F1 score (four points above the state of the art)
on the BNC test set used by Tu & Roth (2011), and an
F1 score of 80.68 on the OntoNotes test set, which is
significantly more challenging. We attribute the superior F1 score to the use of our rich linguistic features,
including the use of WordNet synset and hypernym relations for the detection of previously unattested light
verb constructions. We describe the classifier and its
features, as well as the characteristics of the OntoNotes
light verb construction test set, which relies on linguistically motivated PropBank annotation.

1

2

Related Work

There are two main approaches for the automatic identification of LVCs: contextually-based and statistically-based.
Contextually-based approaches detect the surrounding tokens and decide whether the verb, noun pair with these
context words should be considered an LVC. Vincze et al.
(2003) propose a contextually-based model, with a conditional random fields machine learning method, for detecting English and Hungarian LVCs. Evaluation showed that
their model performs well in various domains of LVCs
and performs well in detecting low-frequency LVCs. On
the other hand, the statistically-based approach finds LVCs
among verb, noun pairs from a well-defined set of verbs
and eventive nouns (nouns denoting events, like declaration), then a classifier function decides if a pair is an LVC
or not. Van de Cruys and Moirn (2007) propose a statistically and semantically-based method for recognizing
verb-preposition-noun dependency relation combinations of
LVCs. Furthermore, Gurrutxaga and Alegria (2012) detect
idiomatic and light verb-noun pairs from Basque, using statistical methods.
To compare these two approaches, Tu and Roth (2011)
proposed a Support Vector Machine (SVM) based classifier
to identify LVCs. They developed their system using both
contextual and statistical features and analyzed the deep interaction between them. They concluded that local contextual features perform better than statistical features on ambiguous examples, and combining them did not give better
performance. We also focus on contextual features and find
additional features that improve performance.

Introduction

As one construction in which the relational semantics of
verbs can be extended in novel ways, English light verb
constructions (LVCs) represent a powerfully expressive resource of English. These constructions, such as make an
offer and give a groan, are thought to consist of a semantically general verb and a noun that denotes an event or
state. However, an exact definition of an LVC, which would
precisely delimit these constructions from either idiomatic
expressions or compositional, ‘heavy’ usages of the same
verbs (e.g. She made a dress; He gave me a present; etc.)
remains under debate. As a result, it is no surprise that the
automatic detection of English LVCs also remains challenging, especially given the semi-productive nature of LVCs,
which allows for novel LVCs to enter the language. Novel
LVCs are particularly difficult to detect, yet it is key for Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems to identify and interpret LVCs correctly by recognizing, for example, that She
made an offer to buy the house for $1.5 million is an offering
event, rather than a making or creation event.
This research describes a system for the automatic detection of LVCs. Related work is given in Section 2, and relevant linguistic resources are described in Section 3. A com-

3

Resources

This research uses several resources: PropBank (PB)
(Palmer, Guildea, and Kingsbury 2005), the OntoNotes
(ON) sense groupings (Pradhan et al. 2007), WordNet (WN)

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2375

http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/XMLedition/

