Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Handling Uncertainty in Answer Set Programming
Yi Wang and Joohyung Lee
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, USA
{ywang485, joolee}@asu.edu

Abstract

Language LPMLN

We present a probabilistic extension of logic programs under the stable model semantics, inspired by the concept of
Markov Logic Networks. The proposed language takes advantage of both formalisms in a single framework, allowing
us to represent commonsense reasoning problems that require
both logical and probabilistic reasoning in an intuitive and
elaboration tolerant way.

Since a Markov Logic Network is based on the standard
first-order logic semantics, it “has the drawback that it cannot express (non-ground) inductive definitions” (Fierens et
al. 2013). Consider the following domain description (“α”
denotes “hard weight”).
w1 :
w2 :
...
α:
α:

Introduction
Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a successful logic programming paradigm that takes advantage of nonmonotonicity of the underlying semantics, the stable model semantics.
Many useful knowledge representation constructs and efficient solvers allow ASP to handle various commonsense
reasoning problems elegantly and efficiently. However, difficulty still remains when it comes to domains with uncertainty. Imprecise and vague information cannot be handled
well since the stable model semantics is mainly restricted
to Boolean values. Further, probabilistic information cannot
be handled since the stable model semantics does not distinguish which stable models are more likely to be true.
To address the first aspect of the issue, several approaches
to incorporating fuzzy logic into ASP have been proposed,
such as (Lukasiewicz 2006). However, most of the work
is limited to simple rules. In our previous work (Lee and
Wang 2014), we proposed a stable model semantics for
fuzzy propositional formulas, which properly generalizes
both fuzzy logic and the Boolean stable model semantics,
as well as many existing approaches to combining them.
The resulting language combines the many-valued nature of
fuzzy logic and the nonmonotonicity of stable model semantics, and consequently shows competence in commonsense
reasoning involving fuzzy values.
In this work, we focus on the other aspect of the issue, namely handling probabilistic information in commonsense reasoning. We adapt the idea of Markov Logic Networks (MLN) (Richardson and Domingos 2006), a wellknown approach to combining first-order logic and probabilistic graphical models in a single framework, to the context of logic programming. The resulting language LPMLN
combines the attractive features of each of the stable model
semantics and MLN.

Edge(1, 2)
Edge(2, 3)
Path(x, y) ← Edge(x, y).
Path(x, y) ← Path(x, z), Path(z, y).

The above weighted rules are intended to describe probabilistic reachability in a graph, which is induced by the probabilities of the involved edges. The relation Path, describing
the reachability between two vertices, is supposed to be the
transitive closure of the relation Edge. However, under the
MLN semantics, this is not the case.
We propose the language LPMLN , which overcomes such
a limitation. The syntax of an LPMLN program is essentially
the same as that of an MLN instance, except that weighted
formulas are replaced by weighted rules.
Similar to MLN, the weight of each rule can be either
a real number, or the symbol α that marks a rule a “hard
rule.” The weight of each interpretation is obtained from the
weights of the rules that form the maximal subset of the program for which the interpretation is a stable model.
More precisely, we assume a finite first-order signature σ
that contains no function constants of positive arity, so that
any non-ground LPMLN program can be identified with
its ground instance. Without loss of generality, we consider ground (i.e., variable-free) LPMLN programs. For any
ground LPMLN program P of signature σ, consisting of a set
of weighted rules w : R, and any Herbrand interpretation I
of σ, we define PI to be the set of rules in P which are satisfied by I. The weight of I, denoted by WP (I), is defined
as
!
X
WP (I) = exp
w
w:R ∈ P
R∈PI

if I is a stable model of PI ; otherwise WP (I) = 0. The
probability of I under P, denoted P rP [I], is defined as

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

WP (I)
J∈P W WP (J)

P rP [I] = lim P
α→∞

4218

