Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

TODTLER: Two-Order-Deep Transfer Learning
Jan Van Haaren

Andrey Kolobov

Jesse Davis

Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven, Belgium
jan.vanhaaren@cs.kuleuven.be

Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA
akolobov@microsoft.com

Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven, Belgium
jesse.davis@cs.kuleuven.be

Abstract

resolution. Nonetheless, by carrying over the structural patterns of the physics models, researchers have managed to
build a model for the frequency of terrorist attacks (Clauset
and Wiegel 2010).
In this paper, we introduce a principled framework for
deep transfer learning, along with an approximate procedure that implements it. In contrast to most other transfer
learning approaches, which concentrate on shallow transfer (Baxter et al. 1995; Banerjee, Liu, and Youngblood
2006) and hence operate on tasks from the same domain
(e.g., using information about the reactivity of one chemical to learn about the reactivity of another), our TODTLER
framework can perform transfer between completely different problems. Moreover, unlike existing milestone algorithms for deep transfer, DTM (Davis and Domingos 2009)
and TAMAR (Mihalkova, Huynh, and Mooney 2007), it offers a principled view of transfer learning, whose insights,
when implemented in the proposed approximation scheme,
allow it to outperform the state-of-the-art algorithm DTM in
a variety of scenarios.
At a high level, TODTLER views knowledge transfer
as the process of learning a declarative bias in the source
domain and transferring it to the target domain to improve the learning process. More specifically, we concentrate on learning Markov logic networks (MLNs), a flexible model that combines first-order logic with probabilities. We treat an MLN as an instantiation of a set of
second-order templates expressible in a language called
SOLT. The likelihood of an MLN model is thus partly determined by the learner’s prior distribution over the sets
of these second-order templates. The main insight of our
work is that transferring knowledge amounts to acquiring a posterior over the sets of second-order templates
by learning in the source domain and using this posterior
when learning in the target setting. As an example, consider the concept of transitivity, which can be expressed as
a second-order template R(X, Y) ∧ R(Y, Z) =⇒ R(X, Z). In
this clause, R is a predicate variable; therefore, this template is not specific to any domain, although its instantiations, e.g., Knows(X, Y) ∧ Knows(Y, Z) =⇒ Knows(X, Z),
are. In our framework, if learning in the source domain reveals instantiations of the transitivity template to contribute
to highly likely models, the learning process in the target
domain will prefer models with transitive relations as well.

The traditional way of obtaining models from data, inductive
learning, has proved itself both in theory and in many practical applications. However, in domains where data is difficult
or expensive to obtain, e.g., medicine, deep transfer learning
is a more promising technique. It circumvents the model acquisition difficulties caused by scarce data in a target domain
by carrying over structural properties of a model learned in
a source domain where training data is ample. Nonetheless,
the lack of a principled view of transfer learning so far has
limited its adoption. In this paper, we address this issue by
regarding transfer learning as a process that biases learning
in a target domain in favor of patterns useful in a source domain. Specifically, we consider a first-order logic model of
the data as an instantiation of a set of second-order templates.
Hence, the usefulness of a model is partly determined by the
learner’s prior distribution over these template sets. The main
insight of our work is that transferring knowledge amounts
to acquiring a posterior over the second-order template sets
by learning in the source domain and using this posterior
when learning in the target setting. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates our approach to outperform the existing
transfer learning techniques in terms of accuracy and runtime.

Introduction
Most research in building models from data has focused
on the paradigm of inductive learning. In this paradigm, a
learner tries to generalize the available training instances in
order to classify test instances from the same distribution as
the training set. Unfortunately, learning a good model in this
way can be difficult if the amount of available training data
is small. This is often the case in important problems, from
modeling side effects of a drug to predicting terrorist attacks,
where data is expensive or even impossible to obtain at will.
On the other hand, humans cope with a lack of training examples quite well by transferring knowledge and intuitions
from one setting to another, where the former is called the
source domain and the latter the target domain. For instance,
scientists have realized that forecasting terrorist activity has
analogies to certain models studied in physics. The concepts
and theoretical machinery from the field of physics are distinct from those used in the fields of sociology and conflict
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3007

