Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

asprin: Customizing Answer Set Preferences without a Headache
Gerhard Brewka

James Delgrande

Universität Leipzig
Leipzig, Germany
brewka@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, B.C., Canada
jim@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract

Javier Romero

Torsten Schaub∗

Universität Potsdam
Potsdam, Germany
{javier,torsten}@cs.uni-potsdam.de

From an abstract point of view, the aim is to determine the
preferred stable models of a given logic program and preference relation. That is, we determine a strict partial order
 on the stable models of a logic program P , representing a
preference relation, such that X  Y means that X is preferred to Y . Then, a stable model X of P is -preferred if
there is no other stable model Y such that Y  X. Restricting preferences to (strict) partial orders has the advantage
that a satisfiable program has preferred stable models.2
The next section gives an overview of the asprin system,
explaining its general functionality. We then describe in
more detail how preferences are represented and handled in
asprin via repeated calls to so-called preference programs.
The following section describes some of the underlying algorithms. We then report results of evaluations we have performed. We conclude with a discussion of related work.
We assume some familiarity with ASP. For a comprehensive introduction, see (Gebser et al. 2012), from which we
also take our notation. Our ASP encodings rely upon the
new ASP language standard ASPCore2.0 (Calimeri et al.
2012). Other notation is introduced when first used.

1

In this paper we describe asprin , a general, flexible, and extensible framework for handling preferences among the stable models of a logic program. We show how complex preference relations can be specified through user-defined preference types and their arguments. We describe how preference specifications are handled internally by so-called preference programs, which are used for dominance testing. We
also give algorithms for computing one, or all, optimal stable
models of a logic program. Notably, our algorithms depend
on the complexity of the dominance tests and make use of
multi-shot answer set solving technology.

Introduction
Preferences are pervasive. The computation of preferred, or
optimal, solutions is required in many real-world applications. Often this involves combining various qualitative and
quantitative preferences. Although preferences have been
widely studied in Answer Set Programming (ASP; (Baral
2003)) in various contexts (cf. (Delgrande et al. 2004)), current ASP systems are limited to optimization statements over
sum or count aggregates, as specified either by #minimize
statements or weak constraints. As well, these systems generally handle only a fixed, predefined, set of preferences.
We address these limitations in the system asprin, a general, flexible, and extensible framework for implementing
preferences among the stable models of a logic program.
Our framework is general and captures the major existing
approaches to preference. Also, it is extensible and allows
for an easy implementation of new or extended approaches
to preference handling. Our framework builds on recent control capabilities for multi-shot ASP solving (providing successive yet operational grounding and solving of changing
logic programs). This technology allows us to direct the
search for specific preferred solutions without modifying the
ASP solver. As well, it significantly reduces redundancies
found in an iterated setting. Finally, this technology paves
the way for the high customizability of our framework by
offering an implementation of preferences via ordinary ASP
encodings.

Overview of asprin
In a nutshell, asprin allows a user to declare and evaluate
preference relations among the stable models of an ASP
program. Preferences are declared within a program by
so-called preference statements. A preference statement is
composed of an identifier, a type, and an argument set. The
identifier names the preference relation, whereas the type
and argument define the relation. Here is an example:
#preference(costs, less(weight)){40 : sauna, 70 : dive}
(1)
This statement declares a preference relation named costs
with type less(weight) and argument set {40 : sauna, 70 :
dive}, and which minimizes the sum of weights of the atoms
mentioned in the argument. Hence, stable models with
neither sauna nor dive are preferred over those with only
sauna. Stable models with only dive are still less preferred,
while those with both sauna and dive are least preferred.

∗
Affiliated with Inria Rennes, France, and SFU, Canada.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
asprin stands for “ASP for preference handling”.

2
asprin can also reason with prioritized classical models: programs having these models as answer sets are easily designed.

1467

