Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Best-Response Planning of Thermostatically Controlled Loads
under Power Constraints
Frits de Nijs and Matthijs T. J. Spaan and Mathijs M. de Weerdt
{f.denijs, m.t.j.spaan, m.m.deweerdt}@tudelft.nl
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

Abstract

However, a large potential storage capacity can be found
in the various heat buffers operated by consumers: houses,
refrigerators and hot water reservoirs all need to be maintained at a certain temperature offset from the environment
temperature, to which they decay over time. This requires
constant action to counteract. The exact moment when these
buffers are heated or cooled, however, can often be shifted.
By storing more energy in the heat buffer now, we can later
‘extract’ this heat from the buffer in the form of reduced
loads. In this sense, we may think of heat buffers controlled
by thermostats as a kind of batteries (Hao et al. 2013). The
storage potential in these batteries can be exploited through
Demand Response.
These Thermostatically Controlled Loads (TCLs) can
themselves be controlled automatically by the system operator. Existing work has mainly focused on using Control
Theory to make an aggregation of TCLs closely follow an
available power signal (Callaway 2009; Hao et al. 2013).
There, control actions are applied every second, which requires the use of reactive systems. Their goal is to match
both positive and negative fluctuations. This implies that the
power available is always sufficient to cover demand, otherwise devices would begin to over- or under-perform.
Instead of using TCLs for balancing, we investigate the
potential of TCLs for buffering temporary drops in power
production, such as those caused by the fluctuations in renewable generation. These fluctuations typically occur on
longer timescales (Koch, Zima, and Andersson 2009), potentially violating the consumers’ comfort constraints if no
preventive action is taken. To respond to fluctuations before
they occur, we propose a planning approach with an objective to minimize the discomfort experienced by end-users.
In this paper we present a Power Constrained Planning
(PCP) problem formulation, in which the deviation from
the TCL setpoint is optimized under power availability constraints. For example for grids running in island mode, or
when only (own) renewable energy may be used, the available power should be modeled as a constraint. We model this
as a centralized planning problem with cooperative agents
because in such scenarios the system operator and the TCL
owners are both interested in a stable power supply, and
hence their objectives align. Because in such cases power
constraints may be too severe to guarantee comfort, we aim
to minimize the total discomfort.

Renewable power sources such as wind and solar are
inflexible in their energy production, which requires demand to rapidly follow supply in order to maintain energy balance. Promising controllable demands are airconditioners and heat pumps which use electric energy
to maintain a temperature at a setpoint. Such Thermostatically Controlled Loads (TCLs) have been shown
to be able to follow a power curve using reactive control. In this paper we investigate the use of planning
under uncertainty to pro-actively control an aggregation of TCLs to overcome temporary grid imbalance.
We present a formal definition of the planning problem
under consideration, which we model using the MultiAgent Markov Decision Process (MMDP) framework.
Since we are dealing with hundreds of agents, solving
the resulting MMDPs directly is intractable. Instead,
we propose to decompose the problem by decoupling
the interactions through arbitrage. Decomposition of
the problem means relaxing the joint power consumption constraint, which means that joining the plans together can cause overconsumption. Arbitrage acts as a
conflict resolution mechanism during policy execution,
using the future expected value of policies to determine
which TCLs should receive the available energy. We
experimentally compare several methods to plan with
arbitrage, and conclude that a best response-like mechanism is a scalable approach that returns near-optimal
solutions.

Introduction
Reliable incorporation of decentralized renewable energy
sources in power grids provides challenges for which Artificial Intelligence techniques can be employed. In order to take full advantage of wind and solar power, demand should follow their supply to maintain energy balance.
The problem of how to influence the demand is called Demand Response, which we address using planning-underuncertainty methodology. Planning to shift demands is most
useful when storage capacity is available, offering flexibility
by temporarily buffering energy. Unfortunately, large-scale
electrical storage is unfeasible at the moment.
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

615

