Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Robust Subspace Clustering via Thresholding Ridge Regression
Xi Peng1 , Zhang Yi2,∗ , Huajin Tang1,∗
1

Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 138632
2
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, P.R. China.
pangsaai@gmail.com, zhangyi@scu.edu.cn, htang@i2r.a-star.edu.sg.

Abstract

subspaces. As a result, inter-cluster data points (i.e., the data
points with different labels) may be wrongly grouped into
the same cluster. Errors removing aims at eliminating the effect of these errors (i.e., noises, etc.), which has lain at the
heart of subspace clustering. To achieve this so-called robust
subspace clustering, various methods have been proposed,
e.g., generalized principal component analysis (Vidal, Ma,
and Sastry 2005), local subspace affinity (Yan and Pollefeys 2006), spectral curvature clustering (Chen and Lerman 2009), local best-fit flats (Zhang et al. 2012), fix rank
representation (Liu et al. 2012), Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Peng, Zhang, and
Yi 2013), Low Rank Representation (LRR) (Lin, Liu, and
Su 2011; Liu et al. 2013), and Least Squares Regression
(LSR) (Lu et al. 2012).
In these approaches, representation-based spectral clustering methods have achieved state-of-the-art results in face
clustering. The key of spectral clustering is to build an affinity matrix W of which each entry Wij denotes the similarity between the connected data points. A ‘good’ affinity
matrix is a block-diagonal matrix (sparse similarity graph),
i.e., Wij = 0 unless the corresponding data points xi and
xj belong to the same cluster. A frequently-used measurement of Wij is Euclidean distance with Heat Kernel. However, this metric is sensitive to noise and cannot capture the
structure of subspace. Recently, SSC and LRR provide a
new way to construct the graph by using the sparse and lowrank representation, respectively. Moreover, they remove errors from the inputs by formulating the errors into their
objective functions. Both theoretical analysis and experimental results have shown that SSC and LRR can handle
some specific errors and have achieved impressive performance. Inspired by the success of SSC and LRR, numerous approaches have been proposed and the errors-removing
method is widely adopted in this field (Liu et al. 2012;
Lu et al. 2012; Liu and Yan 2011; Wang and Xu 2013;
Deng et al. 2013). One major limitation of these approaches
is that the structure of errors should be known as the priori. Clearly, this prior knowledge is difficult to achieve and
these algorithms may fail unless the adopted assumption is
consistent with the real structure of the errors.
Most existing methods solve the robust subspace clustering problem by removing the errors from the original data space and obtaining a good affinity matrix based

Given a data set from a union of multiple linear subspaces, a robust subspace clustering algorithm fits each
group of data points with a low-dimensional subspace
and then clusters these data even though they are grossly
corrupted or sampled from the union of dependent subspaces. Under the framework of spectral clustering, recent works using sparse representation, low rank representation and their extensions achieve robust clustering results by formulating the errors (e.g., corruptions)
into their objective functions so that the errors can be
removed from the inputs. However, these approaches
have suffered from the limitation that the structure of
the errors should be known as the prior knowledge.
In this paper, we present a new method of robust subspace clustering by eliminating the effect of the errors
from the projection space (representation) rather than
from the input space. We firstly prove that `1 -, `2 -, and
`∞ -norm-based linear projection spaces share the property of intra-subspace projection dominance, i.e., the
coefficients over intra-subspace data points are larger
than those over inter-subspace data points. Based on
this property, we propose a robust and efficient subspace clustering algorithm, called Thresholding Ridge
Regression (TRR). TRR calculates the `2 -norm-based
coefficients of a given data set and performs a hard
thresholding operator; and then the coefficients are used
to build a similarity graph for clustering. Experimental
studies show that TRR outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods with respect to clustering quality, robustness,
and time-saving.

Introduction
Subspace segmentation or subspace clustering (Vidal 2011)
fits each group of data points using a low dimensional subspace and performs clustering in the projection space, which
has attracted increasing interests from numerous areas such
as image analysis (Cheng et al. 2010), motion segmentation (Gear 1998), and face clustering (Ho et al. 2003). When
the data sets are clean and the subspaces are mutually independent, several existing approaches such as (Costeira and
Kanade 1998) are able to exactly resolve the subspace clustering problem. However, the data sets probably contain various noises or lie on the intersection of multiple dependent
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3827

