Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Risk Based Optimization for Improving Emergency Medical Systems
Sandhya Saisubramanian and Pradeep Varakantham and Hoong Chuin Lau
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
80 Stamford Road, Singapore 178902
{sandhyas, pradeepv, hclau}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
In emergency medical systems, arriving at the incident location a few seconds early can save a human life. Thus, this
paper is motivated by the need to reduce the response time
– time taken to arrive at the incident location after receiving
the emergency call – of Emergency Response Vehicles, ERVs
(ex: ambulances, ﬁre rescue vehicles) for as many requests as
possible. We expect to achieve this primarily by positioning the ”right” number of ERVs at the ”right” places and at
the ”right” times. Given the exponentially large action space
(with respect to number of ERVs and their placement) and the
stochasticity in location and timing of emergency incidents,
this problem is computationally challenging. To that end, our
contributions building on existing data-driven approaches are
three fold:

Figure 1: Process Flow
Increasing the ﬂeet size of ERVs continuously to meet the
varying demand and performance benchmarks is not practically feasible and hence research in EMS has focussed on
optimizing the utilization of existing emergency vehicles. In
this paper, we speciﬁcally focus on ambulances. However,
the formulations and mechanisms developed are applicable
to other emergency response settings. Figure 1 provides the
sequence of events in responding to an emergency request.
The signiﬁcance of optimization in EMS is best illustrated
by the rich research history it bears. The existing research
has speciﬁcally focussed on the twin problem areas of: ambulance allocation and reallocation to base locations and ambulance dispatch to incidents. A survey of the existing approaches (Brotcorne, Laporte, and Semet 2003) highlights
that much of the previous work in EMS has been on dispatch of ambulances from the base locations (Schmid 2012;
Andersson and Värbrand 2007; Ibri, Nourelfath, and Drias
2012). While dispatch is an important research problem,
given the practical difﬁculty of ascertaining the criticality
of an emergency request over phone, in many EMS systems,
ambulance dispatch procedure is ﬁxed wherein the requests
are served in the order of their arrival and from the nearest
base location that has an idle ambulance. Furthermore, dispatch problem can only be simpliﬁed with a good allocation
of ambulance to locations. Hence, our focus in this paper
is on the ﬁrst problem area of EMS – ERV allocation and
reallocation to the base locations.
In this paper, we focus on ambulance allocation and dynamic reallocation for the entire ambulance ﬂeet and not
for an individual ambulance (Maxwell et al. 2010). To facilitate the detection of patterns and avoid heuristic worst

1. Based on real world evaluation metrics, we provide a risk
based optimization criterion to learn from past incident
data. Instead of minimizing expected response time, we
minimize the largest value of response time such that the
risk of ﬁnding requests that have a higher value is bounded
(ex: Only 10% of requests should have a response time
greater than 8 minutes).
2. We develop a mixed integer linear optimization formulation to learn and compute an allocation from a set of input
requests while considering the risk criterion.
3. To allow for ”live” reallocation of ambulances, we provide
a decomposition method based on Lagrangian Relaxation
to signiﬁcantly reduce the run-time of the optimization formulation.
Finally, we provide an exhaustive evaluation on real-world
datasets from two asian cities that demonstrates the improvement provided by our approach over current practice and the
best known approach from literature.

Introduction
Emergency Medical Systems (EMS) – which aim to provide
timely care to victims of sudden and unforeseen accidents,
injuries or illnesses – are an integral part of the health care
system. Saving a few seconds in responding to an incident
can save a human life and due to this reason, many major
cities around the world invest heavily in building emergency
response systems that can reduce response time of ERVs.
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

702

