Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Using Machine Teaching to Identify
Optimal Training-Set Attacks on Machine Learners
Shike Mei and Xiaojin Zhu
Department of Computer Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53706, USA
{mei, jerryzhu}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract

Eckert 2012; Chung and Mok 2007; Tan, Killourhy, and
Maxion 2002; Lowd and Meek 2005; Wittel and Wu 2004;
Rubinstein et al. 2008). Our first contribution is a bilevel optimization framework that specifies training-set attacks. Intuitively, a malicious attacker seeking to cover their tracks
wants to make the fewest manipulations to the training set
as possible, and to make the learned model as close to the
original solution as possible but still incorporates their target attack. We formalize this intuition as a trade-off between
the attacker’s effort EA and risk RA , to be defined below.
Our second contribution is an efficient solution to the
bilevel optimization problem for a broad families of attack settings. The solution utilizes the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker
(KKT) conditions to convert the bilevel problem into a single level optimization problem. Our third contribution is a
demonstration of our training-set attack framework on support vector machines (SVMs), logistic regression, and linear regression. Defenses against training-set attacks are discussed at the end, and is left for future work.

We investigate a problem at the intersection of machine
learning and security: training-set attacks on machine
learners. In such attacks an attacker contaminates the
training data so that a specific learning algorithm would
produce a model profitable to the attacker. Understanding training-set attacks is important as more intelligent agents (e.g. spam filters and robots) are equipped
with learning capability and can potentially be hacked
via data they receive from the environment. This paper identifies the optimal training-set attack on a broad
family of machine learners. First we show that optimal training-set attack can be formulated as a bilevel
optimization problem. Then we show that for machine
learners with certain Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions
we can solve the bilevel problem efficiently using gradient methods on an implicit function. As examples,
we demonstrate optimal training-set attacks on Support
Vector Machines, logistic regression, and linear regression with extensive experiments. Finally, we discuss potential defenses against such attacks.

Training-Set Attacks and Machine Teaching
In this paper we assume the attacker has full knowledge of
the learning algorithm.1 The attacker seeks the minimum
training-set poisoning to attack the learned model. We consider machine learners that can be posed as an optimization
problem:

Introduction
The study on security threats to intelligent agents has a long
history (Nelson et al. 2009; Tan, Killourhy, and Maxion
2002; Rubinstein et al. 2008; Barreno et al. 2010; Laskov
and Lippmann 2010; Barreno et al. 2006; Dalvi et al. 2004;
Liu and Chawla 2009; Biggio, Fumera, and Roli 2013;
Laskov and Kloft 2009). One important type of threat is
training-set attack (a.k.a. causative or poisoning attack),
where an attacker modifies the training data in order to mislead a machine learner toward a model profitable to the attacker. We foresee training-set attacks to increase in the future as more intelligent systems (e.g. wearable devices, cars,
smart houses and robots) include a “life long learning” component. The attacker may not be able to directly hack the
machine learning code inside these systems, but may readily
poison the training data these systems receive.
In order to defend against training-set attacks, it is imperative to first formalize them mathematically. Prior work in
training-set attacks tends to utilize heuristic computational
methods and lacks a unifying framework (Xiao, Xiao, and

θ̂D ∈ argminθ∈Θ
s.t.

OL (D, θ)
gi (θ) ≤ 0, i = 1 . . . m
hi (θ) = 0, i = 1 . . . p

(1)
(2)
(3)

where D is the training data. In classic machine learning,
D is an iid sample from the underlying task distribution.
OL (D, θ) is the learner’s objective: For example, in regularized risk minimization OL (D, θ) = RL (D, θ) + λΩ(θ) for
some learner’s empirical risk function RL and regularizer
Ω. The g and h functions are potentially nonlinear; together
with the hypothesis space Θ they determine the feasible region. θ̂D is the learned model (recall argmin returns the set
of minimizers).
Given the machine learner, the attacker carries out the attack by manipulating the original training data (henceforth
1
This is a strong assumption but serves as a starting point toward understanding optimal attacks.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2871

