Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Consistent Knowledge Discovery from Evolving Ontologies
Freddy Lécué

Jeff Z.Pan

IBM Dublin Research Center, Ireland
freddy.lecue@ie.ibm.com

University of Aberdeen, UK
jeff.z.pan@abdn.ac.uk

systems. On the other hand inductive learning is limited by
the large ﬂuctuation of rules abstraction and its (high) theoretical complexity. Learning is also heavily biased by data
incompleteness and inconsistency, making knowledge subject to incorrectness (Dietterich and Michalski 1981). They
follow classic (raw) data mining techniques i.e., identiﬁcation of patterns using distance metrics (Ramaswamy, Rastogi, and Shim 2000) between syntactic values. (Srikant and
Agrawal 1995) capture such patterns through frequent itemset mining (Agrawal et al. 1996). Their approach discovers
recurring sequences of syntactic items and implication rules
among those items e.g., rules “buying milk implies buying
bread with a conﬁdence of 70%” are learnt in market basket
analysis. (Dehaspe and Raedt 1997) constrain all rules to be
represented following inductive logic programming (ILP),
which signiﬁcantly improve scalability. Although metrics
have been used to measure the quality of the derived rules,
previous approaches fail in deriving scalable, accurate, and
consistent knowledge. In this respect (Galárraga et al. 2013)
tackles the scalability issue when performing rule mining on
semantic data but does not in the context of evolving data.
We address “discovery of consistent knowledge from dynamic semantic data”. Given continuous knowledge, how
do we capture a minimal albeit representative set of timeevolving trends to discover accurate, consistent knowledge?
The semantics of data is captured through OWL (Web Ontology Language) ontologies, which are underpinned by Description Logics (DL) (Baader and Nutt 2003). Key contributions include: (1) We design the ﬁrst algorithm to learn
DL rules, which are strictly more expressive than DL axioms and Datalog rules. (2) By exploiting the expressiveness
of DL rules, we introduce the notions of signiﬁcative, representative association DL rules, enabling precise identiﬁcation of fundamental rules. The beneﬁts of combining learning and reasoning, validated in experiments, are: (i) logical
representation of learnt rules, (ii) classiﬁcation, and abstraction of rules, (iii) tight integration of rules in reasoning; (iv)
scalability, (v) accuracy of consistent knowledge discovery.
Next section reviews the adopted logic and rule representation together with dynamic ontology (knowledge). Then
we present inductive learning in dynamic ontologies. The
next section presents how representative rules drive consistent knowledge discovery. Finally, we report experiments
with real data from Dublin City and draw some conclusions.

Abstract
Deductive reasoning and inductive learning are the most common approaches for deriving knowledge. In real world applications when data is dynamic and incomplete, especially
those exposed by sensors, reasoning is limited by dynamics of
data while learning is biased by data incompleteness. Therefore discovering consistent knowledge from incomplete and
dynamic data is a challenging open problem. In our approach
the semantics of data is captured through ontologies to empower learning (mining) with (Description Logics) reasoning. Consistent knowledge discovery is achieved by applying generic, signiﬁcative, representative association semantic rules. The experiments have shown scalable, accurate and
consistent knowledge discovery with data from Dublin.

Introduction and Related Work
Knowledge discovery, as an area focusing upon methodologies for extracting knowledge through deduction (a priori) or from data (a posteriori), has been largely studied
in Database and Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Deductive reasoning
e.g., logic reasoning (Reiter 1980) gains logically knowledge from pre-established (certain) knowledge statements,
while inductive inference such as data mining (Agrawal,
Imielinski, and Swami 1993) or learning (Fanizzi, d’Amato,
and Esposito 2010; Völker and Niepert 2011) discovers (uncertain) knowledge by generalizing from initial information.
Data is dynamic, incomplete, especially when exposed
through sensors (Labrinidis and Jagadish 2012). Tracking
phenomena with multiple sensor readings is a challenging
problem. From trafﬁc diagnosis (Lécué 2012), systems monitoring (Song et al. 2014) to disease transmission prediction
(Sadilek, Kautz, and Silenzio 2012), all are examples of scenarios where consistent knowledge needs to be derived from
dynamic, incomplete data. Reasoning is strongly restricted
by dynamics, variance, noisiness of data, enforcing knowledge to be regularly revisited (Anicic et al. 2011). Recent
works in stream reasoning (Valle et al. 2009) handle the dynamics of semantic querying but are very limited in reasoning, and fail in recovering knowledge from data. Although
(Lécué and Pan 2013) exposed beneﬁts in combining reasoning and learning, the shortcomings are lack of scalability, over-speciﬁcation of rules, non-integration to reasoning
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

189

