Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Adaptive Gradient Method for Online AUC Maximization
1

2

Yi Ding1 , Peilin Zhao2 , Steven C.H. Hoi3 , Yew-Soon Ong1

School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore
Institute for Infocomm Research, 1 Fusionopolis Way, #21-01 Connexis, 138632, Singapore
3
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, 178902, Singapore
{ding0077,asysong}@ntu.edu.sg, zhaop@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, chhoi@smu.edu.sg

Due to its high efﬁciency and scalability in real-world applications, online AUC optimization for streaming data has
been actively studied in the research community in recent
years. The key challenge for AUC optimization in online setting is that AUC is a metric represented by the sum of pairwise losses between instances from different classes, which
makes conventional online learning algorithms unsuitable
for direct use in many real world scenarios. To address this
challenge, two core types of Online AUC Maximization
(OAM) frameworks have been proposed recently. The ﬁrst
framework is based on the idea of buffer sampling (Zhao et
al. 2011; Kar et al. 2013), which stores some randomly sampled historical examples in a buffer to represent the observed
data for calculating the pairwise loss functions. The other
framework focuses on one-pass AUC optimization (Gao et
al. 2013), where the algorithm scan through the training data
only once. The beneﬁt of one-pass AUC optimization lies
in the use of squared loss to represent the AUC loss function while providing proofs on its consistency with the AUC
measure (Gao and Zhou 2012).

Abstract
Learning for maximizing AUC performance is an important research problem in machine learning. Unlike
traditional batch learning methods for maximizing AUC
which often suffer from poor scalability, recent years
have witnessed some emerging studies that attempt
to maximize AUC by single-pass online learning approaches. Despite their encouraging results reported,
the existing online AUC maximization algorithms often
adopt simple stochastic gradient descent approaches,
which fail to exploit the geometry knowledge of the
data observed in the online learning process, and thus
could suffer from relatively slow convergence. To overcome the limitation of the existing studies, in this paper,
we propose a novel algorithm of Adaptive Online AUC
Maximization (AdaOAM), by applying an adaptive gradient method for exploiting the knowledge of historical gradients to perform more informative online learning. The new adaptive updating strategy by AdaOAM
is less sensitive to parameter settings due to its natural
effect of tuning the learning rate. In addition, the time
complexity of the new algorithm remains the same as
the previous non-adaptive algorithms. To demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, we analyze
its theoretical bound, and further evaluate its empirical performance on both public benchmark datasets and
anomaly detection datasets. The encouraging empirical
results clearly show the effectiveness and efﬁciency of
the proposed algorithm.

Although these algorithms have been shown to be capable of achieving fairly good AUC performances, they share
a common trait of employing the online (stochastic) gradient descent technique, which fails to take advantage of
the geometry property of the data observed from the online learning process, while recent studies have shown the
importance of exploiting this information for online optimization (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011). To overcome the
limitation of the existing works, we propose a novel framework of Adaptive Online AUC maximization (AdaOAM),
which considers the adaptive gradient optimization technique for exploiting the geometric property of the observed
data to accelerate online AUC maximization tasks. Speciﬁcally, the technique is motivated by a simple intuition, that is,
the frequently occurring features in online learning process
should be assigned with low learning rates while the rarely
occurring features should be given high learning rates. To
achieve this purpose, we propose the AdaOAM algorithm
by adopting the adaptive gradient updating framework proposed by (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011) to control the
learning rates for different features. We theoretically prove
that the regret bound of the proposed algorithm is better
than those of the existing non-adaptive algorithms. We also
empirically compared the proposed algorithm with several

Introduction
AUC (Area Under ROC curve) (Hanley and McNeil 1982)
is an important measure for characterizing machine learning performances in many real-world applications, such as
ranking, and anomaly detection tasks, especially when misclassiﬁcation costs are unknown. In general, AUC measures
the probability for a randomly drawn positive instance to
have a higher decision value than a randomly sample negative instance. Many efforts have been devoted recently to
developing efﬁcient AUC optimization algorithms for both
batch and online learning tasks (Cortes and Mohri 2003;
Calders and Jaroszewicz 2007; Joachims 2005; Rudin and
Schapire 2009; Zhao et al. 2011; Gao et al. 2013).
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2568

