Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Compute Less to Get More:
Using ORC to Improve Sparse Filtering
Sergio Guadarrama

Johannes Lederer

EECS Department
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
sergio.guadarrama@berkeley.edu

Department of Statistical Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
johanneslederer@cornell.edu
Abstract

• we show that Sparse Filtering can strongly benefit from
early stopping;

Sparse Filtering is a popular feature learning algorithm
for image classification pipelines. In this paper, we connect the performance of Sparse Filtering with spectral
properties of the corresponding feature matrices. This
connection provides new insights into Sparse Filtering;
in particular, it suggests early stopping of Sparse Filtering. We therefore introduce the Optimal Roundness
Criterion (ORC), a novel stopping criterion for Sparse
Filtering. We show that this stopping criterion is related with pre-processing procedures such as Statistical
Whitening and demonstrate that it can make image classification with Sparse Filtering considerably faster and
more accurate.

• we show that the performance of Sparse Filtering is correlated with spectral properties of feature matrices on tests
sets;
• we introduce the Optimal Roundness Criterion (ORC), a
stopping criterion for Sparse Filtering based on the above
correlation, and demonstrate that the ORC can considerably improve image classification.

Feature Learning for Image Classification
Feature learning algorithms often consist of two steps: In a
first step, a dictionary is learned, and in a second step, the
samples are encoded based on this dictionary. A typical dictionary learning step for image classification is sketched in
Figure 1: First, random patches (samples) are extracted from
the training images. These patches are then pre-processed
using, for example, Statistical Whitening or Contrast Normalization. Finally, an unsupervised learning algorithm is
applied to learn a dictionary from the pre-processed patches.
Once a dictionary is learnt, several further steps need to
be applied to finally train an image classifier, see, for example, (Coates and Ng 2011; Coates, Ng, and Lee 2011;
Jia, Huang, and Darrell 2012; Le 2013). Our pipeline is
similar to the one in (Coates and Ng 2011): We extract
square patches comprising 9 × 9 pixels, pre-process them
with Contrast Normalization1 and/or Statistical Whitening,
and finally pass them to Random Patches or Sparse Filtering.
(Note that our outcomes differ slightly from those in (Coates
and Ng 2011) because we use square patches comprising
9 × 9 pixels instead of 6 × 6 pixels.) Subsequently, we apply
soft-thresholding for encoding, 4×4 spatial max pooling for
extracting features from the training data images, and finally
L2 SVM classification (cf. (Coates and Ng 2011)).
Numerous examples show that feature learning can considerably improve classification. Therefore, insight in the
underlying principles of feature learning algorithms such as
Statistical Whitening and Sparse Filtering is of great interest.

Introduction
Standard ways to improve image classification are to collect
more samples or to change the representation and the processing of the data. In practice, the number of samples is typically limited, so that the second approach becomes relevant.
An important tool for this second approach are feature learning algorithms, which aim at easing the classification task
by transforming the data. Recently proposed deep learning
methods intend to jointly learn learn a feature transformation and the classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). In this work, however, we focus on unsupervised
feature learning, especially on Sparse Filtering, because of
their simplicity and scalability.
Feature learning algorithms for image classification
pipelines typically consists of three steps: pre-processing,
(un)supervised dictionary learning, and encoding. An abundance of procedures is available for each of these steps, but
for accurate image classification, we need procedures that
are effective and interact beneficially with each other (Agarwal and Triggs 2006; Coates and Ng 2011; Coates, Ng,
and Lee 2011; Jia, Huang, and Darrell 2012; Le 2013;
LeCun, Huang, and Bottou 2004). Therefore, a profound understanding of these procedures is crucial to ensure accurate
results and efficient computations.
In this paper, we study the performance of Sparse Filtering (Ngiam et al. 2011) for image classification. Our main
contributions are:

1
Contrast normalization consists of subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation of the pixel values.

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3797

