Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Variable-Deletion Backdoors to Planning∗
Martin Kronegger,1 Sebastian Ordyniak,2 Andreas Pfandler1,3
1

Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria
2
Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
3
University of Siegen, Siegen, Germany
kronegger@dbai.tuwien.ac.at sordyniak@gmail.com pfandler@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

k only. Such an fpt-algorithm can be considered efficient as
long as the value of the parameter is sufficiently small.
Using these techniques a variety of tractable fragments
in form of fpt-algorithms has been revealed for planning (Downey, Fellows, and Stege 1999; Bäckström et al.
2012; Bäckström et al. 2013; Kronegger, Pfandler, and Pichler 2013; Kronegger, Ordyniak, and Pfandler 2014). In the
last years the so-called backdoor approach has become a valuable tool to obtain fpt-algorithms, e.g., for SAT (Nishimura,
Ragde, and Szeider 2004; Gaspers et al. 2013; Gaspers and
Szeider 2013), QBFs (Samer and Szeider 2009), ASP (Fichte
and Szeider 2011), Argumentation (Dvorák, Ordyniak, and
Szeider 2012), and also for SAS+ planning (Kronegger, Ordyniak, and Pfandler 2014). Recently, backdoors were used
to construct parameterized reductions for problems that are
harder than NP (Fichte and Szeider 2013; Pfandler, Rümmele,
and Szeider 2013).
In the backdoor approach, the aim is to find a robust fptalgorithm that also performs well on instances that are not
part of the considered tractable base class, but are sufficiently
close to this class. This leads to an algorithm which is applicable to a larger set of instances (when compared to algorithms
for the tractable base class). Usually, the performance of such
an algorithm scales with the distance to the tractable base
class. Solving a problem with the backdoor approach consists of two phases. First, we have to find a backdoor of small
size (detection phase), which can afterwards, in the second
phase, be used as additional information to guide the decision algorithm for the original problem (evaluation phase). A
challenging task is to find suitable notions of backdoors and
algorithms building upon these notions such that both phases
can be solved efficiently, i.e., by an fpt-algorithm. For planning, it turned out that backdoors cannot be defined in such
a direct way as it is possible for SAT and related problems.
This is because a suitable notion is needed to describe the
underlying structure of the planning instance.
In the work of Kronegger, Ordyniak, and Pfandler (2014)
the first two backdoors for planning were introduced. These
backdoors measure the number of variables/actions that have
to be deleted such that the underlying causal graph decomposes into weakly connected components of small size. Such
instances of constant component size are known to be efficiently solvable (Chen and Giménez 2010). For the notion
of action-deletion backdoors several fpt-algorithms were ob-

Abstract
Backdoors are a powerful tool to obtain efficient algorithms for hard problems. Recently, two new notions
of backdoors to planning were introduced. However,
for one of the new notions (i.e., variable-deletion) only
hardness results are known so far. In this work we improve the situation by defining a new type of variabledeletion backdoors based on the extended causal graph
of a planning instance. For this notion of backdoors several fixed-parameter tractable algorithms are identified.
Furthermore, we explore the capabilities of polynomial
time preprocessing, i.e., we check whether there exists
a polynomial kernel. Our results also show the close
connection between planning and verification problems
such as Vector Addition System with States (VASS).

1

Introduction

Classical planning has been an intensively studied field of AI
for decades. Until today, planning remains a challenging task
due to its high computational complexity. Even propositional
STRIPS planning with unbounded plan length is PSPACEcomplete. This hardness has led to an intensive study of
tractable fragments such as in the work by Bylander (1994)
and by Bäckström and Nebel (1995).
The framework of parameterized complexity (Downey and
Fellows 1999) has been successfully used to find tractable
fragments for problems in AI and beyond. For more details
see, e.g., the survey of Gottlob and Szeider (2008). The basic
idea of a parameterized complexity analysis is to find parameters capturing the computational hardness in a way such that
the combinatorial explosion can be confined to these parameters. Thus, the runtime is measured not only in terms of the
input size n but also with respect to one or several parameters
k of the instance. The class FPT (fixed-parameter tractable)
contains all problems that can be solved by an algorithm in
time f (k) · nO(1) , where n denotes the size of the instance
and f (k) is a computable function depending on parameter
∗
Supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF): P25518-N23,
the German Research Foundation (DFG): ER 738/2-1, and by the
Employment of Newly Graduated Doctors of Science for Scientific
Excellence (CZ.1.07/2.3.00/30.0009).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3305

