Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Power System Restoration With Transient Stability
Hassan Hijazi and Terrence W.K. Mak and Pascal Van Hentenryck
NICTA and Australian National University
7 London Circuit, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia
{Hassan.Hijazi,Terrence.Mak,Pascal.Vanhentenryck}@nicta.com.au

Abstract

about the power system transient states over a short period
of time (e.g., a few seconds) after the line closing.
In this work, we focus on capturing the dynamics of generator rotor angles as a measure of transient stability related
to switching operations in transmission networks. Our contributions are based on a few key ideas:

We address the problem of power system restoration after a
significant blackout. Prior work focus on optimization methods for finding high-quality restoration plans. Optimal solutions consist in a sequence of grid repairs and corresponding
steady states. However, such approaches lack formal guarantees on the transient stability of restoration actions, a key
property to avoid additional grid damage and cascading failures. In this paper, we show how to integrate transient stability in the optimization procedure by capturing the rotor dynamics of power generators. Our approach reasons about the
differential equations describing the dynamics and their underlying transient states. The key contribution lies in modeling and solving optimization problems that return stable
generators dispatch minimizing the difference with respect to
steady states solutions. Computational efficiency is increased
using preprocessing procedures along with traditional reduction techniques. Experimental results on existing benchmarks
confirm the feasibility of the new approach.

1. We use rotor angle stability, a traditional metric to assess the transient stability of a system, and the classical
model of generator dynamics based on the Swing equations (Kundur, Balu, and Lauby 1994).
2. We capture transient states through a discretization of the
dynamics model, including a nonlinear formulation of the
power flow equations on these transient states.
3. For each restoration step, we define an optimization
model that finds a transient-stable generator dispatch minimizing the difference with respect to the steady state solution. This ensures that the size of the blackouts increase
as little as possible while ensuring transient stability.

Introduction

More generally, this paper can be viewed as a novel, hierarchical approach to the optimization of complex hybrid dynamic systems. Given a static version of the models, the key
idea relies in adjusting optimal steady-state solutions taking into account the system dynamics. The overall computational tractability is thus improved.

Power system restoration is a key ingredient in defining the
self-healing property of the future smart grid. Restoration
plans are generated automatically using smart optimization
procedures, reducing the cost and the inconvenience caused
by blackouts. A restoration plan consists in a set of repair
actions, such as connecting or disconnecting a line. The primary objective is to isolate faulty equipments while maximizing the percentage of load recovery. The problem has
a time dimension related to the ordering of the repair actions. This ordering has a direct influence on the load recovery over time. It is, for instance, natural to favor early load
recoveries. This captures the essence behind the Restoration Ordering Problem which is at the core of this paper. Traditionally, this problem is addressed with simplifying assumptions, e.g., ignoring ramping rates of generators
but, most importantly, disregarding transient stability during
line switching. Incorporating operational limits on transient
states is computationally challenging, as they are defined using partial differential equations (PDEs). Existing discrete
optimization tools cannot deal with such non-algebraic expressions. In our context, this refers to the ability to reason

Related Work
Our work is closely related to the transient-stable optimal power flow problem, which was first proposed by Gan
et al. (Gan, Thomas, and Zimmerman 2000). The problem was later extended to multi-contingency settings in
(Yuan, Kubokawa, and Sasaki 2003). Both approaches utilize the swing equation to reason on transient stability. Our
work is also related to techniques improving stability during
transmission loop closures in normal operating conditions,
e.g., techniques on reducing rotor shaft impacts and standing phase angles (Martins et al. 2008; Ye and Liu 2013;
Ketabi, Ranjbar, and Feuillet 2002; Hazarika and Sinha
1999).
To the best of our knowledge, this work represents the
first attempt to incorporate transient stability into full power
restoration schemes and to optimize generator dispatches
and load pickups as additional degrees of freedom.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

658

