Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Shift-Pessimistic Active Learning Using Robust Bias-Aware Prediction
Anqi Liu

Lev Reyzin

Brian D. Ziebart

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
aliu33@uic.edu

Department of Mathematics,
Statistics, and Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
lreyzin@math.uic.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
bziebart@uic.edu

(a) Optimistic active leaner (b) Pessimistic active learner

Abstract
Existing approaches to active learning are generally optimistic about their certainty with respect to data shift
between labeled and unlabeled data. They assume that
unknown datapoint labels follow the inductive biases
of the active learner. As a result, the most useful datapoint labels—ones that refute current inductive biases—
are rarely solicited. We propose a shift-pessimistic approach to active learning that assumes the worst-case
about the unknown conditional label distribution. This
closely aligns model uncertainty with generalization
error, enabling more useful label solicitation. We investigate the theoretical benefits of this approach and
demonstrate its empirical advantages on probabilistic
binary classification tasks.

Figure 1: A binary prediction task with + and * classes.
Probabilistic predictions ranging from dark red (+) to dark
blue (*) are shown after 10 examples solicited (white circles) from active learning using: (a) a standard optimistic
approach—uncertainty sampling (Lewis and Gale 1994)
with logistic regression; and (b) uncertainty sampling using our more pessimistic robust bias-aware (RBA) active
learner. The optimistic active learner exhaustively explores
a false decision boundary and extrapolates its predictions to
other portions of the input space, incurring large prediction
loss. The shift-active learner avoids being misled, and provides predictions with significantly smaller loss.

Introduction
Obtaining large amounts of labeled data is prohibitively expensive for many learning tasks. Producing each label could
require an invasive medical test and expensive expert knowledge, for example. Active learning (Settles 2012) aims to alleviate this burden by soliciting labels from datapoints that
reduce prediction error (loss) by the greatest amount. This
has the potential to significantly improve data-efficiency beyond what is possible with randomly provided labels (Angluin 1988). However, data produced from an active learner
violates the independent and identically distributed (IID)
data property broadly assumed by supervised machine learning techniques (Sugiyama and Kawanabe 2012). This poses
serious pitfalls for active learning methods both in theory
and in practice that have not yet been resolved.
Existing active learning methods are generally optimistic
about their own uncertainty with respect to the sample bias
in the labeled data, which is often an intentional byproduct
of the active learner’s label solicitation strategy. They employ an underlying supervised machine learning model and
assume that all unlabeled datapoints’ labels are distributed
according to the model’s (often strong) inductive biases.
This approach has theoretical justification in IID settings
where the inductive biases are shaped by increasing amounts
of representative data. However, the potential of improved
data-efficiency benefits from active learning is only realized

by biasing label solicitation towards non-representative data
that is the most informative (Settles 2012). Unfortunately,
the combination of optimistic extrapolation based on IID
assumptions and intentionally non-IID data collection often
leads not only to inefficient learning, but also to extreme inaccuracies. Even advocates of popular active learning methods suggest that “random sampling ... may be more advisable than taking one’s chances on active learning with an
inappropriate learning model” (Settles 2012).
The perils of optimistic active learning extend far beyond
the more benign risks of model misspecification. For example, a logistic regression model fits the synthetic dataset
of Figure 1 in its entirety with fairly small average prediction loss. However, the optimistic active learner solicits a
sequence of labels that does not uncover this appropriately
fit model, as shown in Figure 1a. This is primarily because it
solicits labels for examples that would be the most useful if
its current inductive biases were correct. After obtaining an
initial ‘+’-class label and a noisy second ‘*’-class label from

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2764

