Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Distributing Coalition Value Calculations to Coalition Members
Luke Riley, Katie Atkinson, Paul E. Dunne and Terry R. Payne
Department of Computer Science
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK
{L.J.Riley, K.M.Atkinson, P.E.Dunne, T.R.Payne}@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract

requires the agents to calculate the utility value of each coalition, which can be computationally complex as the number
of coalitions that can form given a population of n agents
is 2n − 1. Furthermore, the complexity of calculating an individual coalition’s value can vary, and potentially be exponential (Sandholm and Lesser 1997). Thus, even if each
agent only calculates the value of those coalitions that it can
n
potentially form (i.e. 22 ), then this can still result in a significant overlap of calculations, such that this redundancy can
n
−1
converge to 100%, as limn→∞ n22 (n−1)
= 0.
Various studies have explored how to distribute coalition
value calculations amongst agents, to reduce the computation cost for each agent, and possibly reduce the overall
computation time (Shehory and Kraus 1995; 1996; 1998;
Rahwan and Jennings 2007; Vinyals et al. 2012). Furthermore, as the agents themselves can potentially determine the
value of the coalitions in which they participate, this eliminates the need for a trusted central authority/independent
third-party responsible for determining the value calculations. However, existing approaches are not necessarily efficient: some only guarantee that every coalition value will
be calculated at least once, potentially resulting in redundant calculations (Shehory and Kraus 1995; 1996; 1998);
while others distribute the calculations unequally amongst
the agents (Vinyals et al. 2012). The approach given in (Rahwan and Jennings 2007) does not suffer from these deficiencies but allocates some coalitions to agents that do not appear in them, which can be undesirable in adversarial environments where deception may occur.
We present a novel algorithm for distributing coalition
value calculations, named the Distributed Coalition Generation (DCG) algorithm, that addresses these limitations by allocating all coalitions to agents that appear in them and balancing the computational load approximately evenly (wrt.
share size and number of operations) across the agents. This
process is completed without inter-agent communication in
a way that eliminates redundant coalition value calculations.
Furthermore, the DCG algorithm can be combined with
other approaches to complete the coalition formation process. For example, if agents want to find a core/-core stable solution (Osbourne and Rubinstein 1994), then DCG
can be used as input to algorithms, such as (Cesco 1998;
Wu 1977), that determine such solutions.
In this paper, the distributed coalition value calculation

Within characteristic function games, agents have the option
of joining one of many different coalitions, based on the utility value of each candidate coalition. However, determining
this utility value can be computationally complex since the
number of coalitions increases exponentially with the number
of agents available. Various approaches have been proposed
that mediate this problem by distributing the computational
load so that each agent calculates only a subset of coalition
values. However, current approaches are either highly inefficient due to redundant calculations, or make the benevolence assumption (i.e. are not suitable for adversarial environments). We introduce DCG, a novel algorithm that distributes
the calculations of coalition utility values across a community of agents, such that: (i) no inter-agent communication
is required; (ii) the coalition value calculations are (approximately) equally partitioned into shares, one for each agent;
(iii) the utility value is calculated only once for each coalition, thus redundant calculations are eliminated; (iv) there is
an equal number of operations for agents with equal sized
shares; and (v) an agent is only allocated those coalitions in
which it is a potential member. The DCG algorithm is presented and illustrated by means of an example. We formally
prove that our approach allocates all of the coalitions to the
agents, and that each coalition is assigned once and only once.

1

Introduction

Coalition formation is the process by which a number of
agents partition themselves into temporary teams (i.e. coalitions), where each coalition collaborates to achieve mutually beneficial results. Coalition formation is a well studied research area in multi-agent systems and has a wide
range of potential applications, including: electronic auctions/market places; communication networks; the smart
grid; grid computing; distributed vehicle routing; sensor
networks; multi-agent planning; and computational trust
(Chalkiadakis, Elkind, and Wooldridge 2011).
Coalition formation can be divided into a three stage process (Sandholm et al. 1999): (1) calculating the utility value
of each possible coalition; (2) finding a satisfiable set of
coalitions; and (3) dividing the utility values of the coalitions into a stable distribution (where no agent can object
to its assigned payoff). The first stage of coalition formation
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2117

