Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Crowdsourcing Complex Workflows under Budget Constraints
Long Tran-Thanh

Trung Dong Huynh

Avi Rosenfeld

University of Southampton, UK
ltt08r@ecs.soton.ac.uk

University of Southampton, UK
tdh@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Jerusalem College of Technology, Israel
rosenfa@jct.ac.il

Sarvapali D. Ramchurn

Nicholas R. Jennings

University of Southampton, UK
sdr@ecs.soton.ac.uk

University of Southampton, UK
nrj@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Abstract

Major organisations are increasingly reliant on an online
workforce to carry out computationally hard tasks (e.g., transcribing text, writing reviews, designing logos, or tagging
images). Using online crowdsourcing platforms, these organisations are able to leverage millions of workers from
around the world to carry out small units of work called
micro-tasks in return for a small monetary reward (Bernstein
et al. 2010; Lin, Mausam, and Weld 2012; Little et al. 2009;
Ramchurn et al. 2013). By so doing, they are able to scale
their workforce at will and minimise their costs.
When allocating tasks to a large online ‘crowd’, however, organisations face a number of challenges (Ho and
Wortman-Vaughan 2012; Tran-Thanh et al. 2012; 2013).
First, given that workers may come from different countries (e.g., China, India, UK, US) and have different skills,
the quality of their work may vary significantly. For example, native English speakers are likely to perform better at
correcting spelling mistakes or graduate graphic designers
may do a better job at drawing a logo compared to a nonexpert. Second, in many cases, it is not clear what determines whether the task is completed correctly or not (i.e., it
is either too costly to determine or there is no ground truth),
particularly when workers may perform the same task differently. Third, workers at differenet economic background
may perform tasks to different quality levels depending on
the rewards offered. Fourth, tasks may not be easily broken down into micro-tasks that can be independently com-

pleted by individual workers. This requires multiple complex workflows to be interleaved to complete the interdependent micro-tasks (e.g., the correction of spelling mistakes in
a piece of text can be broken down into multiple workflows
involving finding and fixing the mistakes or text can be summarised by deleting words or sentences, and writing new
ones (Bernstein et al. 2010)). In general, these challenges
point to the fact that crowdsourcing, even in the case of the
simplest tasks, is error-prone and potentially costly.
While Kamar, Hacker, and Horvitz (2012), Dai et al.
(2013), Karger, Oh, and Shah (2011), Simpson et al. (2011)
propose using probabilistic techniques and redundancy (i.e.,
different workers are asked to perform the same task until
consensus is achieved on the outcome) to deal with inaccuracies and minimise the costs incurred, they assume that
individual tasks are independent from each other and can
be arbitrarily allocated to the crowd (see next section for
more details). Hence these solutions cannot be readily applied to problems involving inter-dependent micro-tasks. Instead, Bernstein et al.; Lin, Mausam, and Weld; Ramchurn
et al. propose workflows to allocate interdependent microtasks in multiple phases, where each task performance phase
generates new micro-tasks for the next phase. For example,
in Bernstein et al. (2010) (and later extended by (Little et
al. 2009; Lin, Mausam, and Weld 2012; Ramchurn et al.
2013)), a Find-Fix-Verify (FFV) workflow is used to correct
and shorten text by passing ‘Finds’ of mistakes in sentences
by a set of workers to another set of workers who ‘Fix’ these
mistakes. In addition, another set of workers ‘Verify’ these
mistakes (more details are given in the next section). In such
a workflow, however, given that new tasks are created in
some phases by the crowd, the cost of the exercise may grow
beyond control.1 To date, most approaches set limits on the
number of tasks to be completed in each phase in an ad hoc
fashion, and by so doing, trade off any guarantees of accuracy. In contrast, Tran-Thanh et al. proposed the BudgetFix
mechanism to allocate a budget across multiple phases of a
workflow and this was shown to cost less than and generate
better results than (Bernstein et al. 2010). However, BudgetFix assumes prior knowledge of the difficulty of each task,
sets arbitrary parameters to constrain the number of tasks for
each phase of a workflow, and only considers how the budget
is split across each phase of one workflow at a time. Thus,

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In the FFV workflow, for each Find, there are multiple possible
Fixes and each Fix requires a number of possible verifications.

We consider the problem of task allocation in crowdsourcing systems with multiple complex workflows, each of which
consists of a set of inter-dependent micro-tasks. We propose
Budgeteer, an algorithm to solve this problem under a budget constraint. In particular, our algorithm first calculates an
efficient way to allocate budget to each workflow. It then determines the number of inter-dependent micro-tasks and the
price to pay for each task within each workflow, given the corresponding budget constraints. We empirically evaluate it on
a well-known crowdsourcing-based text correction workflow
using Amazon Mechanical Turk, and show that Budgeteer
can achieve similar levels of accuracy to current benchmarks,
but is on average 45% cheaper.

Introduction

1298

