Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Algorithm Selection via Ranking
Richard J. Oentaryo, Stephanus Daniel Handoko, and Hoong Chuin Lau
Living Analytics Research Centre, School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University, Singapore 178902
{roentaryo, dhandoko, hclau}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

lem (Rice 1976): Which solver(s) should be executed to minimize some performance objective (e.g., expected runtime)?
A popular answer is to evaluate the performance of each candidate solver on a representative set of problem instances,
and then use only the solver that yields the best performance.
We refer this as the single-best (SB) strategy. Unfortunately,
this is not necessarily the best way, as different solvers are
often complementary. That is, the SB strategy would ignore
solvers that are not competitive on average but nonetheless
give good performance on specific instances.
On the other hand, an ideal solution to the algorithm selection problems is to have an oracle that knows which solvers
will perform the best on each problem instance. The oracle
surely would give better results than the SB strategy, serving
as the theoretical upper bound of the solvers’ performance.
Unfortunately, such perfect oracle is not available for SAT
(or any other hard) problems, as it is hardly possible to know
a solver’s performance on a new instance exactly without actually executing it. This motivates the development of algorithm selection methods that serve as heuristic approximations of the oracle. A prime example is the empirical hardness model (Leyton-Brown, Nudelman, and Shoham 2002;
Nudelman et al. 2004) adopted by SATZilla, an algorithm
selection method that has won several annual SAT competitions (Xu et al. 2008; 2012).
Recently, it has been shown that we can exploit the complementarity of the solvers by combining them into an algorithm portfolio (Huberman, Lukose, and Hogg 1997; Gomes
and Selman 2001). Such portfolio may include methods that
pick a single solver for each problem instance (Guerri and
Milano 2004; Xu et al. 2008), methods that makes online decisions to switch between solvers (Carchrae and Beck 2005;
Samulowitz and Memisevic 2007), and methods that execute
multiple solvers independently per instance, either in parallel, sequentially, or partly sequential/parallel (Gomes and
Selman 2001; Gagliolo and Schmidhuber 2006; Streeter and
Smith 2008; Kadioglu et al. 2011). A common trait among
these methods is that they employ regression or classification methods to build an efficient predictor of a solver’s performance for each problem instance, given the instance’s
features and solver’s performance history (O’Mahony et al.
2008; Xu et al. 2012; Malitsky et al. 2013).
While showing successes to some extent, the contemporary regression- or classification-based algorithm selec-

The abundance of algorithms developed to solve different problems has given rise to an important research
question: How do we choose the best algorithm for a
given problem? Known as algorithm selection, this issue has been prevailing in many domains, as no single
algorithm can perform best on all problem instances.
Traditional algorithm selection and portfolio construction methods typically treat the problem as a classification or regression task. In this paper, we present a new
approach that provides a more natural treatment of algorithm selection and portfolio construction as a ranking
task. Accordingly, we develop a Ranking-Based Algorithm Selection (RAS) method, which employs a simple polynomial model to capture the ranking of different solvers for different problem instances. We devise
an efficient iterative algorithm that can gracefully optimize the polynomial coefficients by minimizing a ranking loss function, which is derived from a sound probabilistic formulation of the ranking problem. Experiments on the SAT 2012 competition dataset show that
our approach yields competitive performance to that of
more sophisticated algorithm selection methods.

Introduction
Over the years, a myriad of algorithms and heuristics have
been developed to solve various problems and tasks. This
brings about an important research question: How do we determine which algorithm is the best suited for a given problem? This issue has been pivotal in many problem domains,
such as machine learning, constraint satisfaction, and combinatorial optimization. One of the most widely studied problems related to this issue is the propositional satisfiability
problem (SAT) (Cook 1971), and a plethora of algorithms
(i.e., solvers) have been devised to solve the SAT problem
instances. Such solvers offer a wider range of practical use,
as many problems in artifical intellgence and computer science can be naturally mapped into SAT tasks.
It is often the case, however, that one solver performs better at tackling some problem instances from a given class,
but is substantially worse on other instances. Practitioners
are thus faced with a challenging algorithm selection probCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1826

