Constrained NMF-Based Multi-View Clustering on Unmapped Data
Xianchao Zhang, Linlin Zong, Xinyue Liu, Hong Yu
School of Software Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116620, China
xczhang@dlut.edu.cn, zonglinlin324@gmail.com, xyliu@dlut.edu.cn, hongyu@dlut.edu.cn

indexing the news, since they may regard different news as
important ones.
Recently, (Eaton, desJardins, and Jacob 2012) proposed a
constrained multi-view clustering algorithm that deal with
incompletely mapped data with the help of intra-view constraints. This algorithm propagates constraints in each view
to those instances that can be mapped to the other views. Nevertheless, partial mapping is still necessary in this work. And
the more partial mapping provided, the better the algorithm
performs.
In this paper, based on the fact that a small number of
constraints could be easily obtained in many real applications
(Kulis et al. 2009) (Lu and Peng 2013), we propose a constrained multi-view clustering algorithm for unmapped data
in the framework of NMF (Nonnegative Matrix Factorization)
based clustering. We use inter-view constraints (Lu and Peng
2013) to establish the connections between different views.
We deﬁne the disagreement between each pair of views by the
fact that the indicator vectors of two instances from different
views should be similar if they belong to the same cluster and
dissimilar otherwise. We use the disagreement between the
views to guide the factorization of the matrices. The overall
objective of our algorithm is to minimize the loss function of
NMF in each view as well as the disagreement between each
pair of views. Experimental results show that, with a small
number of constraints, the proposed CMVNMF (Constrained
Multi-View clustering based on NMF) algorithm gets good
performance on unmapped data, and outperforms existing
algorithms on partially mapped data and completely mapped
data.

Abstract
Existing multi-view clustering algorithms require that
the data is completely or partially mapped between each
pair of views. However, this requirement could not be satisﬁed in most practical settings. In this paper, we tackle
the problem of multi-view clustering for unmapped data
in the framework of NMF based clustering. With the
help of inter-view constraints, we deﬁne the disagreement between each pair of views by the fact that the
indicator vectors of two instances from two different
views should be similar if they belong to the same cluster and dissimilar otherwise. The overall objective of our
algorithm is to minimize the loss function of NMF in
each view as well as the disagreement between each pair
of views. Experimental results show that, with a small
number of constraints, the proposed algorithm gets good
performance on unmapped data, and outperforms existing algorithms on partially mapped data and completely
mapped data.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering gains increasing attention in the past
decade (Bickel and Scheffer 2004) (Kumar and III 2011)
(Kumar, Rai, and III 2011) (Liu et al. 2013) (Blaschko and
Lampert 2008) (Chaudhuri et al. 2009) (Tzortzis and Likas
2012). Most existing multi-view clustering algorithms require that the data is completely mapped, i.e., every object
has representations in all the views, representations from different views representing a same object are exactly known,
and the representations of the same object have the same
index in different views. However, this requirement could
not be satisﬁed in most practical settings. Since data from
different views are usually collected, processed, and stored
independently, it is hard to ensure the complete mapping. For
example, a same news maybe reported by many reporters
from different views, thus a period’s news could be clustered
from multiple views. However, a news may not be reported
by all the concerned news agencies, and the same news may
be named with different titles and reported in different ways
(even in different languages), thus it will need much effort to
identify which reports from different agencies represent the
same news. Also, the news agencies have no consistency in

NMF and Clustering
NMF (Lee and Seung 2001) aims to factorize a matrix into
two or more non-negative matrices whose product approximates to the original matrix. It emphasizes the non-negativity
d×n
of the factor matrices. Let X = [x1 , . . . , xn ] ∈ R+
be
the original matrix, each data point xi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) is ddimensional. The basic form of NMF tries to optimize the
following problem:
min X − U V T 2F
U,V

s.t.

U ≥ 0, V ≥ 0

d×K
n×K
where U ∈ R+
, V ∈ R+
, .F is the Frobenius norm.
Obviously, the objective function is not convex to both U

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3174

