Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Model-Based Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments
Using Real-Time Constrained Optimization
Olov Andersson, Fredrik Heintz and Patrick Doherty
{olov.a.andersson, fredrik.heintz, patrick.doherty}@liu.se
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linköping University, SE-58183
Linköping, Sweden
Abstract

has been renewed interest in model-based reinforcement
learning like R-MAX (Brafman and Tennenholtz 2003)
where the agent also learns models of the environment. Most
of this work is on discrete models, but (Deisenroth, Rasmussen, and Peters 2009) proposes a solution using Gaussian process models. Another line of research is batch RL
algorithms like Least Squares Policy Iteration (Lagoudakis
and Parr 2003) and Fitted Q-Iteration (Ernst, Geurts, and
Wehenkel 2005) that can be bootstrapped with manually collected data. Unless one can find a clever low-dimensional
representation of the task all of these still have problems
scaling up to higher dimensional problems.
Since learning a policy or value function for highdimensional continuous domains is challenging, policy
search approaches has recently seen more use in continuous robotics problems, e.g. (Bagnell and Schneider 2001;
Ng et al. 2004; Peters and Schaal 2006; Kober and Peters
2011). These rely on an expert finding a reduced parametric representation of the policy that is then optimized by
evaluating it directly on the robot. Since optimizing policy
parameters with a robot in the loop is very time consuming this only works for representations with a small number of parameters or where a simulator is available. Policy
search and Gaussian process model-based learning has also
been combined in (Deisenroth and Rasmussen 2011) which
exploits closed form solutions to the expected reward over
time. This allows using policy search with more parameters
but requires that the state distribution is well approximated
by a Gaussian and imposes restrictions on the reward function.
In this paper we instead explore addressing the original
challenges of robotics directly by letting the agent maximize
the long term utility of its actions in real-time using learned
models of the environment. Trajectory optimization has previously been used in the RL community by e.g. (Abbeel,
Coates, and Ng 2010) where demonstrated aerobatic trajectories were tracked using application-specific parametric
models. Our work differs from earlier work by learning nonparametric models and considering constrained state spaces
which are common in robotics. Sparse Gaussian process
models allow the agent to learn from a reasonable number
of interactions while being computationally efficient. We
sidestep the policy representation problem by iteratively replanning from the current state in real-time, and we can take

Reinforcement learning for robot control tasks in continuous
environments is a challenging problem due to the dimensionality of the state and action spaces, time and resource costs
for learning with a real robot as well as constraints imposed
for its safe operation. In this paper we propose a modelbased reinforcement learning approach for continuous environments with constraints. The approach combines modelbased reinforcement learning with recent advances in approximate optimal control. This results in a bounded-rationality
agent that makes decisions in real-time by efficiently solving
a sequence of constrained optimization problems on learned
sparse Gaussian process models. Such a combination has
several advantages. No high-dimensional policy needs to be
computed or stored while the learning problem often reduces
to a set of lower-dimensional models of the dynamics. In addition, hard constraints can easily be included and objectives
can also be changed in real-time to allow for multiple or dynamic tasks. The efficacy of the approach is demonstrated on
both an extended cart pole domain and a challenging quadcopter navigation task using real data.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning holds great promise for robotics. By
modeling the robot as a reward maximizing agent that plans
ahead one can express a utility function that captures the
objective of the task and let the agent figure out the optimal
sequence of actions by learning from interactions with the
environment.
There are however a number of difficulties with scaling
up reinforcement learning methods to real-world robotics
problems. The state and action spaces are continuous and
often high-dimensional. At the same time operating a real
robot is both time and resource intensive, requiring an agent
to be able to learn in these environments from a reasonable
number of interactions. In addition many tasks in robotics
have failure modes that have real costs associated with them.
Here the classical approach of considering them terminal
states with large negative rewards and letting the agent learn
by trial and error is simply not feasible.
To overcome these obstacles a number of improvements
have been suggested. To improve sample efficiency there
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2497

