Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multimedia Data for the Visually Impaired
Niket Tandon

Shekhar Sharma

Tanima Makkad

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
ntandon@mpi-inf.mpg.de

PQRS Research
pqrs-research.org
shekhar.sharmaa@gmail.com

PQRS Research
pqrs-research.org
tanima.vit@gmail.com

Model

Abstract

Our task is to measure the amount of accessible information
content in a video, i.e. the amount of information encoded
in the audio. An accessible video can be approximately encoded as an audio i.e. the visual content of an accessible
video carries little or no information. Typical examples of
accessible videos include speeches, news recitation, lecture
videos. Intuitively, there is little visual activity i.e. visual
changes across frames in accessible videos.
We classify a video as accessible or not accessible based
on the visual differences across neighboring frames. Textual
metadata of the video like title and description provide cues
to the accessibility of a video because inaccessible videos
usually consist of keywords related to activities (e.g. a game)
while accessible videos consist of keywords like speech, lecture, news. Therefore, we need a joint model that leverages
both visual and textual cues.
Model Overview: We propose a joint model to leverage
cues provided by both textual and non-textual (visual) features. Our model will have two distinct views of a video: a)
text and b) video based features that are capable of classification (accessible or inaccessible) independently also (see
Fig.1) . A combination of the two views leads to richer information for the model. Further, we have a scarcity of the
expensive training data (c.f. §Experiments). Therefore, our
goal is to use minimal supervision and increase prediction
accuracy. We describe the two views next, and then propose
the joint model over these two views.

The Web contains a large amount of information in the
form of videos that remains inaccessible to the visually impaired people. We identify a class of videos whose information content can be approximately encoded as an audio,
thereby increasing the amount of accessible videos. We propose a model to automatically identify such videos. Our
model jointly relies on the textual metadata and visual content of the video. We use this model to re-rank Youtube video
search results based on accessibility of the video. We present
preliminary results by conducting a user study with visually
impaired people to measure the effectiveness of our system.

Introduction
For defining video accessibility, Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/) are commonly used given the easy rendering of audio description within videos and the availability of annotation tools
(Champin et al. 2010). However, this involves two problems: First, assuming presence of audio description for the
videos is unrealistic. Second, approaches that automatically
generate audio description (Kobayashi et al. 2010) wrongly
assume any video as a candidate to their approach. For instance, a video showing a robot machine in response to the
query : “Artificial Intelligence” is of little use to the visually
impaired user even with audio description.
This paper addresses the unexplored problem of finding
videos that can be meaningful for the visually impaired
users. We propose an accessibility measure for videos based
on how important audio content is to a video.
We make use of relative changes in the frames depicting
actions or events (Liu, Zhang, and Qi 2003) in a video. Small
relative changes over a larger duration (e.g. in a speech) imply the importance of audio content in comparison to video
content. We present a model to solve this problem.
The contributions of this paper are: (a) Currently videos
without audio description are unusable by visually impaired
users. Our approach overcomes this limitation to some extent by defining accessibility with a new paradigm of visual
information contained in a video. (b) We propose a model to
measure visual information in videos.

Figure 1: System architecture
Textual features: We identify discriminative function
words that appear exclusively with accessible videos and inaccessible videos respectively. We construct a vector of binary features over the metadata of a video like title, description, tags and if available, comments and video category.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4210

