Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Retweet Behavior Prediction Using Hierarchical Dirichlet Process
Qi Zhang, Yeyun Gong, Ya Guo, Xuanjing Huang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
825 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, P.R.China
{qz, 12110240006, 13210240002, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

Due to the increasing requirements of predicting retweet
behaviors in recent years, the task of how to model retweet
behaviors has received considerable attention. Various methods have been proposed from different perspectives, including social influence (Liu et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2013),
textual features (Naveed et al. 2011), social features (Zaman
et al. 2010; Petrovic, Osborne, and Lavrenko 2011; Luo
et al. 2013), history information (Feng and Wang 2013),
visual features (Can, Oktay, and Manmatha 2013), and combinations of different features (Suh et al. 2010). There are
also a variety of works studying different models to achieve
the task, including Matchbox (Stern, Herbrich, and Graepel
2009; Zaman et al. 2010), multiple additive regressiontrees (MART) (Wu et al. 2008), maximum entropy classifier (Artzi, Pantel, and Gamon 2012), autoregressivemoving-average (ARMA) (Luo, Wang, and Wu 2012),
factor graph model (Yang et al. 2010), conditional random
fields (Peng et al. 2011) et al.
Through analyzing retweet microblogs, we find that even
though several microblogs have the same content posted
or retweeted by several followers of a user, the user
may only retweet one of them. Who post the microblog
and other factors may also impact a user’s decision. In
this paper, we argue that whether a user will retweet a
microblog or not is based on the following three main
factors: 1) social information (e.g. who post or re-post
the microblog); 2) content information (e.g. the topics of
the microblog); 3) user properties (e.g. the interests of
the user). However, because most existing methods only
consider either structural or textual information, it is difficult
to effectively process this type of issue.
In this paper, we propose a novel model based on nonparametric statistical methods to incorporate textual, structural, and temporal information to model retweet behavior.
For analyzing the retweet phenomenon and evaluating the
proposed method, we collected a large dataset from a
real online microblog service. We crawled not only the
microblog posts itself but also the social networks of
the corresponding users. From the constructed dataset, we
observe that the retweet behavior is influenced by not
only the content itself, but also structural and temporal
information. Based on these observations, we adapted the
hierarchical Dirichlet process (HDP) (Teh et al. 2006) to
define a novel nonparametric method to model retweet

The task of predicting retweet behavior is an important and
essential step for various social network applications, such
as business intelligence, popular event prediction, and so on.
Due to the increasing requirements, in recent years, the task
has attracted extensive attentions. In this work, we propose
a novel method using non-parametric statistical models
to combine structural, textual, and temporal information
together to predict retweet behavior. To evaluate the proposed
method, we collect a large number of microblogs and their
corresponding social networks from a real microblog service.
Experimental results on the constructed dataset demonstrate
that the proposed method can achieve better performance than
state-of-the-art methods. The relative improvement of the the
proposed over the method using only textual information is
more than 38.5% in terms of F1-Score.

Introduction
Social media are rapidly growing, with thousands of millions of users participating in them every day. According to
the social media report done by Nielsen1 , U.S. audiences
spent more than 121.1B minutes in social media in a month.
Microblog services usually provide a function, retweet, for
users to re-post someone else’s microblogs. Through this
feature, users can quickly share the microblogs that they
view as valuable and important with all of their followers.
This causes content to spread from one community to
another. Moreover, because microblog services also provide applications for users to share and consume content
on mobile devices, information can rapidly spread much
faster than any other infectious method. Retweet is usually
considered to be the main essence of the viral aspect of
content spreading in social media (Rodrigues et al. 2011).
Hence, the task of predicting retweet behaviors has been
used in various social network applications such as business
intelligence (Castellanos et al. 2011; Hoffman and Fodor
2010), microblog retrieval (Chang and Kim 2012), popular
event prediction (Hong, Dan, and Davison 2011; Gupta et
al. 2012), and so on.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/reports/2012/state-of-themedia-the-social-media-report-2012.html

403

