Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Cognitive Master Teacher
Raghu Krishnapuram1, Luis A. Lastras2, **Satya Nitta1
1IBM TJ Watson Research Center, 2IBM Watson Group
krishnap@us.ibm.com, lastrasl@us.ibm.com, svn@us.ibm.com

Abstract

http://mhpdonline.com/mhpd/). CMT is relatively quite
comprehensive. For example, if there is a question on what
may be the best way to teach a particular lesson, CMT will
respond by suggesting a particular strategy, provide links
that can be explored further, and point to specific content
and best practices that may be used in the lesson plan.

The “Cognitive Master Teacher” is a result of discussions
with teachers, members of educational institutions,
government bodies and other thought leaders in the United
States who have helped us shape its the requirements. It is
conceived as a cloud-based and mobile-accessible personal
agent that is readily available for teachers to use at anytime
and assist them with various issues related to day-to-day
teaching activities as well as professional development.

Overview of the System
The high-level architecture of CMT is shown in Figure 1. It
consists of three major components, namely the Question
Answering Engine (QAE), the Concept Exploration Engine
(CEE), and the Content Repository (CR). The User
Interface links these components and enables interaction.
We now describe these components in more detail.

Introduction
The Cognitive Master Teacher (CMT) is meant to be a
personal digital assistant to teachers, and the current
version is aimed at K-12 teachers of mathematics and
English Language Arts. CMT has been designed as a
professional development (PD) tool and can answer
questions related to various issues that teachers encounter
while performing their job. Examples of topics covered are
instructional strategies, classroom management, handling
of students with special needs, common core standards,
best practices, and various teacher certification procedures.
The cognitive master teacher is being designed with
learning and usability as desired goals, and draws upon
relevant cognitive theories of learning. Of particular
relevance to us are constructivist theories, especially the
one proposed by Jerome Bruner (Smith 2002). Bruner’s
theory broadly suggests that, given enough references
around a body of information that serves as background
knowledge for the learner, they will discover new facts and
relationships themselves and these will serve to increase
their expertise. These ideas have influenced the Concept
Exploration Engine described in the next section. While
there are many online tutoring systems for K-12 students,
there are only a few systems aimed at teacher PD (e.g.

Figure 1: The high-level architecture of Cognitive Master Teacher

Question Answering Engine (QAE)
QAE uses natural language processing (NLP) to search for
relevant answers. This component of the CMT is an
extension of IBM’s Watson machine which beat the grand
champions in the game of Jeopardy! in 2011 (Ferrucci et al
2010). More specifically, it is based on the IBM offering
called Watson Engagement Advisor (WEA). WEA has

**Author to whom all correspondence should be addressed
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of
Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4278

