Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Improving Exploration in UCT Using Local Manifolds
Sriram Srinivasan

Erik Talvitie

Michael Bowling

University of Alberta
ssriram@ualberta.ca

Franklin and Marshal College
erik.talvitie@fandm.edu

University of Alberta
mbowling@cs.ualberta.ca

Abstract

different from the ones already visited. However, a full expansion of the search tree is impractical. We want to retain the strengths of Monte Carlo planning in using samples,
while still achieving efficient exploration. In this paper we
aim to exploit similarity between states, and augment UCT
with this information, to achieve efficient exploration during
planning. If the state representation does not provide a similarity metric, we learn a manifold of the state space, thus
embedding states in Euclidean space where we can compute
similarity using a distance metric. We first review some
background material in the next section, before describing
our algorithm in Section 3.

Monte Carlo planning has been proven successful in many
sequential decision-making settings, but it suffers from poor
exploration when the rewards are sparse. In this paper, we
improve exploration in UCT by generalizing across similar
states using a given distance metric. When the state space
does not have a natural distance metric, we show how we can
learn a local manifold from the transition graph of states in the
near future. to obtain a distance metric. On domains inspired
by video games, empirical evidence shows that our algorithm
is more sample efficient than UCT, particularly when rewards
are sparse.

1

2

Introduction

A useful approach to sequential decision problems involving large state spaces, is to search in the action space, by
building a search tree using samples from a model (Browne
et al. 2012). One such recently developed algorithm is UCT
(Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006). The popularity of these planning algorithms is due to the fact that the complexity of the
action selection step is independent of the size of the state
space.
However, UCT performs poorly when the rewards are
sparse, i.e., when only a small fraction of trajectories observe non-zero reward. Consider the grid world domain
shown in Figure 1(a). The agent starts at the solid square
in blue. The goal state is marked by a red X and the agent
receives a reward of +1 on reaching the goal state, leading
to episode termination. The agent has 4 actions available move UP, DOWN, LEFT and RIGHT that work as suggested
by their names. In the absence of reward from rollouts, UCT
essentially follows random behavior. For a reasonably distant goal state, a uniform random policy is unlikely to observe any reward. Figure 1(b) shows the heat map of states
visited by UCT after 100 rollouts from the start state where
each state is given by a pair (i, j), 0 ≤ i, j < 40. Due to its
random rollout policy, UCT keeps visiting states similar to
those it has already seen before. As a result, UCT needs a
large number of rollouts to see reward.
An alternative approach would be to systematically explore the state space, collecting returns from states that are

MDPs and UCT

In this work, we focus on finite, deterministic Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), defined as a tuple hS, A, T, R, γi,
where S is the finite state space, A is the finite action space,
T : S × A 7→ S is the transition function, ρ : S × A 7→ R
is the reward function; ρ(s, a) is the immediate reward obtained by taking action a from state s, and γ is the discount
factor that trades off between short-term and long-term rewards. We define a policy π : A × S 7→ [0, 1] to be
a probability distribution over actions, given a state. The
π
state-action
P∞ t value function of π is defined as Q (s, a) =
E[ t=0 γ ρ(st , at )|s0 = s, a0 = a] where at ∼ π(·, st ),
st = T (st−1 , at−1 ), t ≥ 1. An optimal policy, π ∗ ,
has action-value function Q∗ (s, a) = maxπ Qπ (s, a), s ∈
S, a ∈ A.
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithms build a
search tree with nodes corresponding to states and edges
corresponding to actions. The tree is built iteratively using the tree policy. The tree policy dictates action selection
at each level of the tree, leading to the creation of a leaf
node. Once created, a rollout (usually random actions) is
performed from the leaf node up to the end of planning horizon or episode termination. Let D denote the set of nodes
in the tree. Note that two or more nodes can share the same
state s ∈ S. Let S(d) denote the state corresponding to node
d ∈ D. Each node maintains the returns obtained by rollouts starting from that node, R(d), as well as the visit count,
n(d). The value of the node is estimated as V (d) = R(d)
n(d) .
The action value estimate is Q(d, a) = ρ(S(d), a)+γ V (d0 ),
where d0 is the child node reached by taking action a.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3386

