Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Automatic Generation of Alternative Starting Positions for
Simple Traditional Board Games
Umair Z. Ahmed

Krishnendu Chatterjee

Sumit Gulwani

IIT Kanpur
umair@iitk.ac.in

IST Austria
krishnendu.chatterjee@ist.ac.at

Microsoft Research, Redmond
sumitg@microsoft.com

Abstract

Board games help elderly people stay mentally sharp
and less likely to develop Alzheimer (Gottlieb 2003). They
also hold a great importance in today’s digital society by
strengthening family ties. They bridge the gap between
young and old. They bolster the self-esteem of children who
take great pride and pleasure when an elder spends playing
time with them.

Simple board games, like Tic-Tac-Toe and CONNECT-4,
play an important role not only in the development of mathematical and logical skills, but also in the emotional and social
development. In this paper, we address the problem of generating targeted starting positions for such games. This can
facilitate new approaches for bringing novice players to mastery, and also leads to discovery of interesting game variants.
We present an approach that generates starting states of varying hardness levels for player 1 in a two-player board game,
given rules of the board game, the desired number of steps required for player 1 to win, and the expertise levels of the two
players. Our approach leverages symbolic methods and iterative simulation to efficiently search the extremely large state
space. We present experimental results that include discovery
of states of varying hardness levels for several simple gridbased board games. The presence of such states for standard
game variants like 4 × 4 Tic-Tac-Toe opens up new games
to be played that have never been played as the default start
state is heavily biased.

1

Significance of Generating Fresh Starting States
Board games are typically played with a default start state
(e.g., empty board in case of Tic-Tac-Toe and CONNECT4). However, there are following drawbacks in starting from
the default starting state, which we use to motivate our goals.
Customizing hardness level of a start state. The default
starting state for a certain game, while being unbiased, might
not be conducive for a novice player to enjoy and master the
game. Traditional board games in particular are easy to learn
but difficult to master because these games have intertwined
mechanics and force the player to consider far too many possibilities from the standard starting configurations. Players
can achieve mastery most effectively if complex mechanics
can be simplified and learned in isolation. Csikszentmihalyi’s theory of flow (Csikszentmihalyi 1991) suggests that
we can keep the learner in a state of maximal engagement
by continually increasing difficulty to match the learner’s increasing skill. Hence, we need an approach that allows generating start states of a specified hardness level. This capability can be used to generate a progression of starting states
of increasing hardness. This is similar to how students are
taught educational concepts like addition through a progression of increasingly hard problems (Andersen, Gulwani, and
Popovic 2013).
Leveling the playing field. The starting state for commonly
played games is mostly unbiased, and hence does not offer a
fair experience for players of different skills. The flexibility
to start from other starting states that is more biased towards
the weaker player can allow for leveling the playing field and
hence a more enjoyable game. Hence, we need an approach
that takes as input the expertise levels of players and uses
that information to associate a hardness level with a state.
Generating multiple fresh start states. A fixed starting state might have a well-known conclusion. For example, both players can enforce a draw in Tic-Tac-Toe while

Introduction

Board games involve placing pieces on a pre-marked surface
or board according to a set of rules by taking turns. Some
of these grid-based two-player games like Tic-Tac-Toe and
CONNECT-4 have a relatively simple set of rules, yet, they
are decently challenging for certain age groups. Such games
have been immensely popular across centuries.
Studies show that board games can significantly improve
a child’s mathematical ability (Ramani and Siegler 2008).
Such early differences in mathematical ability persist into
secondary education (Duncan et al. 2007). Board games also
assist with emotional and social development of a child.
They instill a competitive desire to master new skills in order to win. Winning gives a boost to their self confidence.
Playing a game within a set of rules helps them to adhere
to discipline in life. They learn social etiquette; taking turns,
and being patient. Strategy is another huge component of
board games. Children learn cause and effect by observing
that decisions they make in the beginning of the game have
consequences later on.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

745

