Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Towards Optimal Solar Tracking: A Dynamic Programming Approach
Athanasios Aris Panagopoulos

Georgios Chalkiadakis

Nicholas R. Jennings

Electronics and Computer Science,
University of Southampton, UK
ap1e13@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Electronic and Computer Engineering,
Technical University of Crete, Greece
gehalk@intelligence.tuc.gr

Electronics and Computer Science,
University of Southampton, UK
nrj@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Abstract

cloud coverage). On the other hand, closed-loop controllers
take the weather conditions into account, but they usually
depend on expensive and sophisticated instruments (Lynch
and Salameh 1990). On top of that, existing closed-loop controllers typically do not take into account the energy consumption caused by the tracking itself, nor do they consider
the system’s maintenance cost; they simply greedily turn the
system towards the perceived highest irradiance values. For
a review of ST techniques see (Mousazadeh et al. 2009).
In this work we develop novel low-cost ST techniques that
can be used in both an open-loop or a closed-loop manner.
We do not make use of expensive equipment or sensors, but
the backbone of our approach is the estimation of the optimal trajectories a day before, based on weather forecasts
coming from online providers for free. To this end, we employ a recently developed web tool, RENES (Panagopoulos
et al. 2012), that predicts the power output of a PVS given
available weather forecasts (www.intelligence.tuc.gr/renes).
These predictions form the reward dynamics of a policy iteration (PI) technique we devise. The technique, Solar Tracking Policy Iteration (STPI), alternatively optimizes over action sub-spaces. Although optimizing over sub-problems in
an alternating fashion is a generally common concept elsewhere (Bezdek and Hathaway 2002), this is the first time
that such an optimization technique is proposed for MDPs.
Importantly, the method makes use of a novel tracking
system consumption model we develop (and which can be
extended to account for maintenance and other costs). The
method is appropriate for dual-axis (i.e., employing two
axes of rotation) tracking, and is shown to be much more
efficient than the, also sensor-less, chronological ST. We
also provide four additional control methods: a PI method
specialized for single-axis tracking, two near-optimal myopic methods (one specialized for single-axis and one for
dual-axis) which we detail later, and a method that enables
us to define the next-day-optimal positioning for any fixedorientation (yet re-adjustable) PVS operating within the geographical region of a given weather station. The efficiency of
the latter is higher than positioning the system according to
yearly-optimal fixed-orientation estimates, and the method
can be easily extended to define the weekly-optimal PVS orientation. Moreover, our methods are shown to improve the
power output of a PVS even when compared to closed-loop
sensor-based ST. Last but not least, all our methods come

The power output of photovoltaic systems (PVS) increases
with the use of effective and efficient solar tracking techniques. However, current techniques suffer from several
drawbacks in their tracking policy: (i) they usually do not
consider the forecasted or prevailing weather conditions; even
when they do, they (ii) rely on complex closed-loop controllers and sophisticated instruments; and (iii) typically, they
do not take the energy consumption of the trackers into account. In this paper, we propose a policy iteration method
(along with specialized variants), which is able to calculate
near-optimal trajectories for effective and efficient day-ahead
solar tracking, based on weather forecasts coming from online providers. To account for the energy needs of the tracking
system, the technique employs a novel and generic consumption model. Our simulations show that the proposed methods
can increase the power output of a PVS considerably, when
compared to standard solar tracking techniques.

Introduction
In recent decades, a large number of photovoltaic systems
(PVSs) have been integrated into the electricity grid. A
PVS’s power output depends mostly on the irradiance incident on the PV module and its operating temperature:
in general, PVSs favor lower operating temperatures and
greater levels of incident solar irradiance. In this context, solar tracking (ST) techniques can be used to orient the system
towards the greatest possible levels of incoming solar irradiance. Depending on location and season, ST can increase the
PVS power output by up to 100% (Mousazadeh et al. 2009).
The effectiveness of the ST technique used is therefore
crucial for the overall efficiency of the PVS. Now, active1
ST relies on electrical motors to move the PVS. The motors
are driven by a controller that operates in a closed-loop or
in an open-loop fashion (i.e., with or without making use of
any feedback, respectively). Typical open-loop trackers are
the chronological trackers, which follow the sun based on a
chronological model of its motion (Reda and Andreas 2004).
Although simple, they do not take into account the forecasted or prevailing weather conditions (e.g., the degree of
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Passive ST, usually based on thermal expansion effects, is less
common (Mousazadeh et al. 2009), and hence not considered here.

695

