Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Entity and Relation Embeddings for Knowledge Graph Completion
Yankai Lin1 , Zhiyuan Liu1∗ , Maosong Sun1,2 , Yang Liu3 , Xuan Zhu3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Lab for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Competence, Jiangsu, China
3
Samsung R&D Institute of China, Beijing, China

Abstract

a relation between two entities or not, but also predict the
specific type of the relation.
For this reason, traditional approach of link prediction
is not capable for knowledge graph completion. Recently,
a promising approach for the task is embedding a knowledge graph into a continuous vector space while preserving
certain information of the graph. Following this approach,
many methods have been explored, which will be introduced
in detail in Section “Related Work”.
Among these methods, TransE (Bordes et al. 2013) and
TransH (Wang et al. 2014) are simple and effective, achieving the state-of-the-art prediction performance. TransE, inspired by (Mikolov et al. 2013b), learns vector embeddings
for both entities and relationships. These vector embeddings
are set in Rk and we denote with the same letters in boldface. The basic idea behind TransE is that, the relationship
between two entities corresponds to a translation between
the embeddings of entities, that is, h + r ≈ t when (h, r, t)
holds. Since TransE has issues when modeling 1-to-N, Nto-1 and N-to-N relations, TransH is proposed to enable an
entity having different representations when involved in various relations.
Both TransE and TransH assume embeddings of entities
and relations being in the same space Rk . However, an entity may have multiple aspects, and various relations focus
on different aspects of entities. Hence, it is intuitive that
some entities are similar and thus close to each other in
the entity space, but are comparably different in some specific aspects and thus far away from each other in the corresponding relation spaces. To address this issue, we propose a
new method, which models entities and relations in distinct
spaces, i.e., entity space and multiple relation spaces (i.e.,
relation-specific entity spaces), and performs translation in
the corresponding relation space, hence named as TransR.
The basic idea of TransR is illustrated in Fig. 1. For each
triple (h, r, t), entities in the entity space are first projected
into r-relation space as hr and tr with operation Mr , and
then hr + r ≈ tr . The relation-specific projection can make
the head/tail entities that actually hold the relation (denoted
as colored circles) close with each other, and also get far
away from those that do not hold the relation (denoted as
colored triangles).
Moreover, under a specific relation, head-tail entity pairs
usually exhibit diverse patterns. It is insufficient to build

Knowledge graph completion aims to perform link prediction between entities. In this paper, we consider the
approach of knowledge graph embeddings. Recently,
models such as TransE and TransH build entity and relation embeddings by regarding a relation as translation from head entity to tail entity. We note that these
models simply put both entities and relations within
the same semantic space. In fact, an entity may have
multiple aspects and various relations may focus on
different aspects of entities, which makes a common
space insufficient for modeling. In this paper, we propose TransR to build entity and relation embeddings in
separate entity space and relation spaces. Afterwards,
we learn embeddings by first projecting entities from
entity space to corresponding relation space and then
building translations between projected entities. In experiments, we evaluate our models on three tasks including link prediction, triple classification and relational fact extraction. Experimental results show significant and consistent improvements compared to stateof-the-art baselines including TransE and TransH. The
source code of this paper can be obtained from https:
//github.com/mrlyk423/relation extraction.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs encode structured information of entities and their rich relations. Although a typical knowledge
graph may contain millions of entities and billions of relational facts, it is usually far from complete. Knowledge
graph completion aims at predicting relations between entities under supervision of the existing knowledge graph.
Knowledge graph completion can find new relational facts,
which is an important supplement to relation extraction from
plain texts.
Knowledge graph completion is similar to link prediction
in social network analysis, but more challenging for the following reasons: (1) nodes in knowledge graphs are entities
with different types and attributes; and (2) edges in knowledge graphs are relations of different types. For knowledge
graph completion, we not only determine whether there is
∗

Corresponding author: Zhiyuan Liu (liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2181

