Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

The Extendable-Triple Property:
A New CSP Tractable Class beyond BTP
Philippe Jégou and Cyril Terrioux
Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS
LSIS UMR 7296
Avenue Escadrille Normandie-Niemen
13397 Marseille Cedex 20 (France)
{philippe.jegou, cyril.terrioux}@lsis.org
Abstract

very efficient in practice on a wide range of practical problems. Although these methods are effective in practice, their
time complexity is exponential. To ensure better computation times, many studies have been developed to highlight
tractable classes, that is to say sets of instances that can be
solved in polynomial time. Unfortunately, these works have
often been of a theoretical interest only, without allowing to
improve solving capabilities in practice. So, these classes
are not in fact used in practice. This is mainly due to the fact
that these classes are often artificial in the sense that they define instances that do not appear in practice. In addition, it is
quite difficult to integrate the management of these classes
in the solvers of the state of the art. Indeed, tractable classes
are generally handled by ad hoc algorithms. A first algorithm must decide if an instance belongs to a given tractable
class and then, if so, a second algorithm solves the instance.
The implementation of these algorithms in solvers thus leads
to considerable extra cost, even if both algorithms are very
efficient (e.g. in linear time). Hence, in our opinion, in order to be exploited during the solving, the tractable classes
must be implicitly handled by classical solvers (i.e. that
these solvers are able to solve the instances of these classes
in polynomial time without any additional processing). For
example, this is the case of the BT P class (Cooper, Jeavons, and Salamon 2010) whose instances can be solved in
polynomial time by MAC without any additional processing. Such tractable classes can then be useful to explain the
good efficiency of solvers on some benchmarks.

Tractable classes constitute an important issue in Artificial
Intelligence to define new islands of tractability for reasoning or problem solving. In the area of constraint networks,
numerous tractable classes have been defined, and recently,
the Broken Triangle Property (BTP (Cooper, Jeavons, and
Salamon 2010)) has been shown as one of the most important of them, this class including several classes previously
defined. In this paper, we propose a new class called ET P
for Extendable-Triple Property, which generalizes BTP, by
including it. Combined with the verification of the StrongPath-Consistency, ET P is shown to be a new tractable class.
Moreover, this class inherits some desirable properties of
BTP including the fact that the instances of this class can
be solved thanks to usual algorithms (such as MAC or RFL)
used in most solvers. We give the theoretical material about
this new class and we present an experimental study which
shows that from a practical viewpoint, it seems more usable
in practice than BTP.

Introduction
Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs (Rossi, van Beek,
and Walsh 2006)) constitute an important formalism of Artificial Intelligence (AI) for expressing and efficiently solving
a wide range of practical problems. A constraint network (or
CSP, abusing words) consists of a set X of variables, each
of which must be assigned a value in its associated (finite)
domain, so that these assignments together satisfy a finite set
C of constraints.
Deciding whether a given CSP has a solution is an NPcomplete problem. Hence classical approaches to this problem are based on backtracking algorithms, whose worst-case
time complexity is generally in O(e.dn ) with n the number
of variables, e the number of constraints and d the size of
the largest domain. To increase their efficiency, such algorithms also rely on filtering techniques during search (among
other techniques, such as variable ordering heuristics or constraint learning). With the help of such techniques, despite
their theoretical time complexity, algorithms such as Forward Checking (Haralick and Elliot 1980), RFL (for Real
Full Look-ahead (Nadel 1988)) or MAC (for Maintaining
Arc Consistency (Sabin and Freuder 1994)) turn out to be

In this paper, we study a possible extension of BT P .
The primary motivation of this study is related to the interest of BT P , both from a theoretical viewpoint (this hybrid tractable class includes well known tractable classes
of the literature) and from a practical viewpoint (this class
has very useful properties including the possibility of being implicitly exploited by the solvers of the state of the
art). In addition, we have observed that BT P can be extended by relaxing some of the restrictions it imposes. Indeed, the tractability of the solving of the instances verifying
BTP is based on a property which appears to be very strong.
This property is induced by the conditions allowing to define BTP. So, we show that it is possible to relax this property while preserving the tractability. This leads to define
a weaker property called ETP for Extendable-Triple Property which is recognizable in polynomial time. As for BTP,

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3746

