Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Person Identification Using Anthropometric and Gait Data from Kinect Sensor
Virginia O. Andersson and Ricardo M. Araujo
PPGC - Federal University of Pelotas
Rua Gomes Carneiro, 1, Pelotas, RS, Brazil - 96010-610
vandersson@inf.ufpel.edu.br, ricardo@inf.ufpel.edu.br

Abstract

However, several limitations, including range, lighting
and occlusions degrade the accuracy of the data provided
by the device and impose significant challenges to its use in
a biometric system. Hence, while using the Kinect device
greatly simplifies the data capturing stage, it may require
improved techniques to handle these limitations.
In this paper, we provide a comparison of machine learning algorithms applied to a large data set comprised of walking subjects captured using the 2010 version of the Kinect
device, aiming at person recognition. We focus on the KNearest Neighbors algorithm that is widely used in the literature, but also provide comparisons with Multi-Layer Perceptrons and Support Vector Machines.

Uniquely identifying individuals using anthropometric and
gait data allows for passive biometric systems, where cooperation from the subjects being identified is not required. In
this paper, we report on experiments using a novel data set
composed of 140 individuals walking in front of a Microsoft
Kinect sensor. We provide a methodology to extract anthropometric and gait features from this data and show results
of applying different machine learning algorithms on subject
identification tasks. Focusing on KNN classifiers, we discuss
how accuracy varies in different settings, including number of
individuals in a gallery, types of attributes used and number
of considered neighbors. Finally, we compare the obtained
results with other results in the literature, showing that our
approach has comparable accuracy for large galleries.

Related Work
The use of body measurements aiming at subject identification can be traced back to mid-XIX century in the France
police (Harrap 1956). (Godil, Grother, and Ressler 2003)
performed an extensive analysis of the effectiveness of using
body measurements and shape for identification purposes,
using the CAESAR database, which collects accurate static
anthropometric data using markers.
The use of joint positions collected using a Kinect device appears in (Munsell et al. 2012) as part of a broader set
of features that included motion patterns; a SVM was used
for classification along with a statistical model. In (Araujo,
Graña, and Andersson 2013) body segment lengths derived
from joint positions were used exclusively to train a KNN
classifier. Both cases used only a very limited data set with
the former using 20 individuals and the latter 8.
Using human gait as a biometric feature was motivated
by evidences that individuals describe unique patterns during their gait cycles (Murray, Drought, and Kory 1964). Approaches used to extract and analyze human gait can be classified as (i) model-based, where the human gait is described
by gait theory fundamentals and is reconstructed through a
model, e.g. “stick figure”, that fits the person in every gait
sequence frame; the spatiotemporal and kinematic parameters, then, are extracted from the model during gait cycle;
and (ii) model-free, where features such as silhouette or enclosing boxes are used as attributes, without explicitly considering human gait fundamentals (Ng et al. 2011).
Recent model-based approaches include (Cunado, Nixon,
and Carter 2003), where gait analysis was restricted to the

Introduction
Biometric systems is an important application area for artificial intelligence in general and machine learning in particular. As these systems become more popular, with applications ranging from surveillance to entertainment (Wang
2012), a better handling of lower-quality data from cheaper
sensors becomes necessary.
A relatively recent trend in biometrics is performing person recognition using full-body characteristics, including
anthropometric measurements of body parts and dynamic
gait features from walking patterns. This is often performed with the use of video cameras and complex featureextraction algorithms from video footages.
The Microsoft Kinect device is a set of sensors with an
accompanying Software Development Kit (SDK) that is able
to track movements from users by using a skeleton mapping
algorithm. The first version of the device is able to track 48
skeletal points at 30 frames per second and is used in the XBox 360 video-game console as an input for a gesture-based
interface.
While this device is primarily aimed at tracking users that
are standing in the same place, it has been used to track
walking subjects in order to extract gait information (Araujo,
Graña, and Andersson 2013). This use provides a cheaper,
off-the-shelf, alternative to complex multi-part video setups.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

425

