Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Strategic Voting and Strategic Candidacy
Markus Brill and Vincent Conitzer
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
{brill,conitzer}@cs.duke.edu

Abstract

straightforward to model strategic candidacy as a two-stage
game. At the first stage, each candidate decides whether to
run in the election or not. At the second stage, each voter
casts a ballot containing a ranking of the running candidates.
When analyzing this game, an important ingredient is the assumed voter behavior. That is, what assumptions are made
about the votes in the second stage, conditional on the set of
running candidates?
Most papers on strategic candidacy assume that voters
vote truthfully, i.e., their reported ranking for any given subset of candidates corresponds to their true preferences, restricted to that subset (Dutta, Jackson, and Le Breton 2001;
Ehlers and Weymark 2003; Samejima 2005; Eraslan and
McLennan 2004; Rodrı́guez-Álvarez 2006b; 2006a; Samejima 2007; Lang, Maudet, and Polukarov 2013). However, it
is well known that this is an unrealistic assumption (Gibbard
1973; Satterthwaite 1975). It is therefore natural to account
for strategic behavior on the part of the voters as well. Thus,
in the models we consider, both candidates and voters act
strategically.
The technical problem in accounting for strategic voting
is that, generally speaking, too many voting equilibria exist
(Myerson and Weber 1993; De Sinopoli 2000). If we only
consider Nash equilibria, then any profile of votes for which
no single voter can change the outcome is an equilibrium. In
some cases, a straightforward refinement rules out many of
the equilibria. For example, in a majority election between
two candidates, it is natural to rule out the strange equilibria where some voters play the weakly dominated strategy
of voting for their less-preferred candidate. But this reasoning does not generally extend to more than two candidates.
In this paper, we focus on two settings that admit natural
equilibrium refinements.
The first setting is that of single-peaked preferences
(Black 1948). It is well known that, if the number of voters is odd, this domain restriction guarantees the existence
of a Condorcet winner (namely, the median) and admits a
strategyproof and Condorcet-consistent voting rule (namely,
the median rule) (Moulin 1980). Dutta, Jackson, and Le
Breton (2001) observed that any Condorcet-consistent rule
is candidate stable in any domain that guarantees the existence of a Condorcet winner. Lang, Maudet, and Polukarov
(2013) extended this result by showing that, in this setting,
no coalition of candidates ever has an incentive to change

Models of strategic candidacy analyze the incentives of candidates to run in an election. Most work on this topic assumes
that strategizing only takes place among candidates, whereas
voters vote truthfully. In this paper, we extend the analysis
to also include strategic behavior on the part of the voters.
(We also study cases where only candidates or only voters
are strategic.) We consider two settings in which strategic voting is well-defined and has a natural interpretation: majorityconsistent voting with single-peaked preferences and voting
by successive elimination. In the former setting, we analyze
the type of strategic behavior required in order to guarantee
desirable voting outcomes. In the latter setting, we determine
the complexity of computing the set of potential outcomes if
both candidates and voters act strategically.

1

Introduction

Voting has emerged as a topic of key interest among multiagent systems researchers, as it provides a methodology for
a group of agents with distinct preferences to reach a common decision. When analyzing voting rules, the set of candidates is usually assumed to be fixed. In a pathbreaking paper, Dutta, Jackson, and Le Breton (2001) have initiated the
study of strategic candidacy by accounting for candidates’
incentives to run in an election. They assumed that candidates have preferences over other candidates and defined a
voting rule to be candidate stable if no candidate ever has an
incentive not to run. In this model, it is assumed that every
candidate prefers himself to all other candidates. Therefore,
the winner of an election never has an incentive not to run.
Non-winning candidates, on the other hand, might be able
to alter the winner by leaving the election. Dutta, Jackson,
and Le Breton (2001) showed that, under mild conditions,
no non-dictatorial rule is candidate stable.1
This result naturally leads to the question of how voting outcomes are affected by candidates’ incentives. It is
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The notion of candidates dropping out naturally suggests that
the candidates themselves are agents. But the model can also make
sense in the context where candidates are (say) joint plans. For example, consider the setting where multiple groups bid to host a
conference, and a board eventually votes over the submitted bids.
In this context, one of the groups may well decide to drop its bid in
order to increase the chances of another, perhaps close-by, group.

819

