Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Dataless Text Classification with Descriptive LDA
Xingyuan Chen1 , Yunqing Xia2 , Peng Jin1∗ and John Carroll3
1

School of Computer Science, Leshan Normal University, Leshan 614000, China
cxyforpaper@gmail.com, jandp@pku.edu.cn
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
yqxia@tsinghua.edu.cn
3
Department of Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QJ, UK
j.a.carroll@sussex.ac.uk
Abstract

is labor-intensive. Moreover, a classifier trained on a limited
number of labeled documents in a specific domain usually
suffers from challenging problems such as overfitting (Cawley and Talbot 2010) and adaptability (Bruzzone and Marconcini 2010).
Research efforts have been made to reduce the effort required in step (2). For example, semi-supervised learning
(Nigam et al. 2000; Blum and Mitchell 1998) trains on a
small number of labeled documents and a larger number of
unlabeled documents. Weakly-supervised learning methods
(Liu et al. 2004; Hingmire and Chakraborti 2014) use either
labeled words or latent topics that can control each class to
retrieve relevant documents as initial training data. A drawback is that labeled documents are still required.
Recent research efforts have attempted to eliminate the
labor in step (2). For example, dataless text classification
(DLTC) (Chang et al. 2008) addresses the classification
problem using only category label/description as supervision. In one approach (Gabrilovich and Markovitch 2007),
a semantic similarity distance between documents is calculated based on Wikipedia. Documents are assigned category labels according to semantic distance using the nearest
neighbors algorithm. As no labeled documents are required,
human effort is saved, which makes the DLTC method very
attractive. However, a drawback of such approaches is that
they rely on a large-scale semantic knowledge base, which
does not exist for many languages or domains.
In this paper, we propose a dataless text classification
model called descriptive LDA (DescLDA), which incorporates topic modeling. In DescLDA, a describing device
(DD), is joined to the standard LDA model to infer descriptive Dirichlet priors (i.e., a topic-word matrix) from a few
documents created from descriptive words in category labels/descriptions. These priors can then influence the generation process, making the standard LDA capable of inferring
topics for text classification. Compared to existing DLTC
models (Chang et al. 2008), DescLDA does not require any
external resources, which makes DescLDA suitable for text
classification problems in open domains.
DescLDA has a number of advantages over supervised
LDA models. Firstly, DescLDA requires only category descriptions as supervision, saving the human labor of producing labeled data required by supervised LDA models. Secondly, there can be no risk of overfitting in model training

Manually labeling documents for training a text classifier is
expensive and time-consuming. Moreover, a classifier trained
on labeled documents may suffer from overfitting and adaptability problems. Dataless text classification (DLTC) has been
proposed as a solution to these problems, since it does not require labeled documents. Previous research in DLTC has used
explicit semantic analysis of Wikipedia content to measure
semantic distance between documents, which is in turn used
to classify test documents based on nearest neighbours. The
semantic-based DLTC method has a major drawback in that it
relies on a large-scale, finely-compiled semantic knowledge
base, which is difficult to obtain in many scenarios. In this
paper we propose a novel kind of model, descriptive LDA
(DescLDA), which performs DLTC with only category description words and unlabeled documents. In DescLDA, the
LDA model is assembled with a describing device to infer Dirichlet priors from prior descriptive documents created
with category description words. The Dirichlet priors are then
used by LDA to induce category-aware latent topics from unlabeled documents. Experimental results with the 20Newsgroups and RCV1 datasets show that: (1) our DLTC method
is more effective than the semantic-based DLTC baseline
method; and (2) the accuracy of our DLTC method is very
close to state-of-the-art supervised text classification methods. As neither external knowledge resources nor labeled
documents are required, our DLTC method is applicable to
a wider range of scenarios.

Introduction
A typical procedure for creating a machine learning-based
classifier is: (1) human experts define categories, which are
usually represented by category labels and sometimes also
category descriptions; (2) human experts manually assign
labels to training documents selected from the problem domain; (3) a classifier is automatically trained on the labeled
documents; and (4) the classifier is applied to unlabeled documents to predict category labels. Supervision is provided
by human experts in steps (1) and (2). In (1), the supervision
is represented by the category labels/descriptions. As the human experts understand the classification problem well, it is
not difficult for them to perform this step. In step (2), the
supervision is represented by the labeled documents, which
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2224

