Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exact Recoverability of Robust PCA via Outlier Pursuit
with Tight Recovery Bounds
Hongyang Zhang† , Zhouchen Lin†∗ , Chao Zhang†∗ , Edward Y. Chang‡
†

Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, China
‡
HTC Research, Taiwan
{hy zh, zlin}@pku.edu.cn, chzhang@cis.pku.edu.cn, edward chang@htc.com

Abstract

2000; De La Torre and Black 2003; Huber 2011), among
which Robust PCA (R-PCA) (Wright et al. 2009; Candès
et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2011; Xu, Caramanis, and Sanghavi
2012) is probably the most attractive one due to its theoretical guarantee. It has been shown (Wright et al. 2009;
Candès et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2011; Xu, Caramanis, and
Sanghavi 2012) that under mild conditions R-PCA exactly
recovers the ground-truth subspace with an overwhelming
probability. Nowadays, R-PCA has been applied to various
tasks, such as video denoising (Ji et al. 2010), background
modeling (Wright et al. 2009), subspace clustering (Zhang
et al. 2014), image alignment (Peng et al. 2010), photometric stereo (Wu et al. 2011), texture representation (Zhang et
al. 2012), and spectral clustering (Xia et al. 2014).

Subspace recovery from noisy or even corrupted data is critical for various applications in machine learning and data
analysis. To detect outliers, Robust PCA (R-PCA) via Outlier Pursuit was proposed and had found many successful applications. However, the current theoretical analysis on Outlier Pursuit only shows that it succeeds when the sparsity of
the corruption matrix is of O(n/r), where n is the number
of the samples and r is the rank of the intrinsic matrix which
may be comparable to n. Moreover,
the regularization param√
eter is suggested as 3/(7 γn), where γ is a parameter that
is not known a priori. In this paper, with incoherence condition and proposed ambiguity condition we prove that Outlier
Pursuit succeeds when the rank of the intrinsic matrix is of
O(n/ log n) and the sparsity of the corruption matrix is of
O(n). We further show that the orders of both bounds are
tight. Thus R-PCA via Outlier Pursuit is able to recover intrinsic matrix of higher rank and identify much denser corruptions than what the existing results could predict. Moreover, √
we suggest that the regularization parameter be chosen
as 1/ log n, which is definite. Our analysis waives the necessity of tuning the regularization parameter and also significantly extends the working range of the Outlier Pursuit.
Experiments on synthetic and real data verify our theories.

Related Work
R-PCA was first proposed by Wright et al. (2009) and Chandrasekaran et al. (2011). Suppose we are given a data matrix M = L0 + S0 ∈ Rm×n , where each column of M is
an observed sample vector and L0 and S0 are the intrinsic
and the corruption matrices, respectively, R-PCA recovers
the ground-truth structure of the data by decomposing M
into a low rank component L and a sparse one S. R-PCA
achieves this goal by Principal Component Pursuit, formulated as follows (please refer to Table 1 for explanation of
notations):

Introduction
It is well known that many real-world datasets, e.g., motion (Gear 1998; Yan and Pollefeys 2006; Rao et al. 2010),
face (Liu et al. 2013), and texture (Ma et al. 2007), can
be approximately characterized by low-dimensional subspaces. So recovering the intrinsic subspace that the data
distribute on is a critical step in many applications in machine learning and data analysis. There has been a lot of
work on robustly recovering the underlying subspace. Probably the most widely used one is Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Unfortunately, the standard PCA is known to be
sensitive to outliers: even a single but severe outlier may degrade the effectiveness of the model. Note that such a type of
data corruption commonly exists because of sensor failures,
uncontrolled environments, etc.
To overcome the drawback of PCA, several efforts have
been devoted to robustifying PCA (Croux and Haesbroeck

min ||L||∗ + λ||S||1 , s.t. M = L + S.
L,S

(1)

Candès et al. (2011) proved that when the locations of
nonzero entries (a.k.a. support) of S0 are uniformly distributed, the rank of L0 is no larger than ρr n(2) /(log n(1) )2 ,
and the number of nonzero entries (a.k.a. sparsity) of S0 is
less than ρs mn, Principal Component Pursuit with a regular√
ization parameter λ = 1/ n(1) exactly recovers the ground
truth matrices L0 and S0 with an overwhelming probability,
where ρr and ρs are both numerical constants.
Although Principal Component Pursuit has been applied
to many tasks, e.g., face repairing (Candès et al. 2011) and
photometric stereo (Wu et al. 2011), it breaks down when
the noises or outliers are distributed columnwise, i.e., large
errors concentrate only on a number of columns of S0 rather
than scattering uniformly across S0 . Such a situation commonly occurs, e.g., in abnormal hand writing (Xu, Caramanis, and Sanghavi 2012) and traffic anomalies data (Liu et

∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3143

