Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Extending Analogical Generalization with Near-Misses
Matthew D. McLure

Scott E. Friedman

Kenneth D. Forbus

Qualitative Reasoning Group
Northwestern University
2133 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL, 60208, USA
mclure@u.northwestern.edu

Smart Information Flow Technologies (SIFT)
Minneapolis, MN, USA
friedman@sift.net

Qualitative Reasoning Group
Northwestern University
2133 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL, 60208, USA
forbus@northwestern.edu

label near-misses; it learned one representation per concept
and thus could not handle disjunctive concepts; and it was
only tested on blocks-world scenes.
Since that time, the state of the art in knowledge
representation and analogical reasoning has improved to
the point where a more general model capable of using
near-misses can be formulated over more general
representations. This paper describes Analogical Learning
by Integrating Generalization and Near-misses (ALIGN),
which is built on Gentner’s (1983) structure-mapping
theory of analogy and similarity. Computational models of
human analogical matching, retrieval, and generalization
(summarized below) are combined and extended to yield
three important advantages: (1) ALIGN learns both
characteristic properties (i.e., descriptions generalized over
positive examples) and discriminative properties (i.e., strict
membership criteria) of categories; (2) ALIGN can learn
disjunctive categories; and (3) ALIGN automatically
identifies near-misses via analogical retrieval, so the
teacher does not need to provide them or know the
underlying knowledge representations.
We provide empirical results to support these claims,
using ALIGN to learn spatial concepts from hand-sketched
examples in a sketch understanding system. We use
sketched materials for two reasons. First, visual and spatial
information is of great importance in domains such as
science, engineering, and art, and typically involves rich,
relational representations.
Second, encoding spatial
representations automatically from raw ink reduces
tailorability, as opposed to hand-generated representations.
We start by summarizing the analogical processing
models that ALIGN uses, and the sketch understanding
system we used to automatically encode examples for the
experiments. We then describe ALIGN and two
experimental analyses: (1) ALIGN learns concepts from
sketches of everyday objects; and (2) ALIGN learns
geospatial concepts from circled examples on a strategygame map. We close with related and future work.

Abstract
Concept learning is a central problem for cognitive systems.
Generalization techniques can help organize examples by
their commonalities, but comparisons with non-examples,
near-misses, can provide discrimination. Early work on
near-misses required hand-selected examples by a teacher
who understood the learner’s internal representations. This
paper introduces Analogical Learning by Integrating
Generalization and Near-misses (ALIGN) and describes
three key advances. First, domain-general cognitive models
of analogical processes are used to handle a wider range of
examples. Second, ALIGN’s analogical generalization
process constructs multiple probabilistic representations per
concept via clustering, and hence can learn disjunctive
concepts. Finally, ALIGN uses unsupervised analogical
retrieval to find its own near-miss examples. We show that
ALIGN out-performs analogical generalization on two
perceptual data sets: (1) hand-drawn sketches; and (2)
geospatial concepts from strategy-game maps.

Introduction
Learning concepts from examples is a core capability for
cognitive systems. While many approaches learn over
feature vectors, this work involves learning from more
expressive relational representations, similar to inductive
logic programming (Muggleton and De Raedt 1994;
Cleuziou, Martin, and Vrain 2003). We focus here on
similarity-based supervised learning, where labeled
examples are available. Winston (1970) introduced the idea
of a near-miss, a negative example that is very similar to a
positive example. The small number of differences –
ideally one – simplified the learner’s search for necessary
conditions for category membership. Winston’s system
used analogical matching to compare the structured
representations of the positive and negative examples in
order to find the difference(s). Winston’s system had some
important limitations: it used a domain-specific analogical
matcher; it required the teacher to know the internal
representations of the concept; it required the teacher to
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

565

