Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Combining Ontology Class Expression Generation
with Mathematical Modeling for Ontology Learning
Jedrzej Potoniec and Agnieszka Ławrynowicz
Institute of Computing Science, Poznan University of Technology
ul. Piotrowo 2, 61-381 Poznan, Poland
e-mail: {jpotoniec,alawrynowicz}@cs.put.poznan.pl phone: +48-61-665-30-26

Abstract

to the set of generated classes to choose the optimal set of
classes for further refinement.

We present an idea of using mathematicall modelling to
guide a process of mining a set of patterns in an RDF
graph and further exploiting these patterns to build expressive OWL class hierarchies.

Related work
In (Völker and Niepert 2011), a statistical method for
schema induction is introduced, based on association rule
mining. The method works in a bottom-up manner, and is
thus hard to focus on specific parts of the ontology.
Early logical approaches are based on Inductive Logic
Programming that combines machine learning and logic programming techniques in order to learn logical theories from
examples and background knowledge. A number of proposed approaches to solve this task, are based on refinement
operators, e.g. DL-FOIL (Fanizzi, D’Amato, and Esposito
2008) or algorithms implemented in DL-Learner (Lehmann
2009). Refinement operator, a function that computes pattern specializations/generalizations, allows for specifying
constraints such as a class to start from. The drawback of
such methods is that they require positive and negative examples, where the latter ones are often not available.
Potentially, an unsupervised frequent class description
mining method could be used for ontology learning such
as Fr-ONT (Ławrynowicz and Potoniec 2011). A general
problem with using such method is that it may easily lead to
many computed classes, since the algorithm first generates
all valid class refinements and then also their permutations.

Introduction
Due to high cost of manual creation of ontologies, there
have been many methods proposed for (semi-)automatic ontology learning (Lehmann and Völker 2014). Those methods employ various structured and unstructured sources. Recently, there is an interest in ontology learning from so
called Linked Data (Bizer, Heath, and Berners-Lee 2009),
where several approaches have been proposed, generally
falling into one of two categories: logical top-down methods
(e.g. (Fanizzi, D’Amato, and Esposito 2008)) and statistical
bottom-up methods (e.g. (Völker and Niepert 2011)). The
methods from the first category work in a supervised manner
and thus they require positive and negative examples, that
are hard to obtain in the open Web context of Linked Data.
The proposed statistical methods are unsupervised, but due
to their bottom-up nature, they are hard to focus on specific
parts of the ontology and generate a lot of results that need
to be further analyzed by experts.
This paper tackles a task in OWL ontology learning from
Linked Data: the induction of a taxonomy of expressive class
descriptions i.e. a branch of an expressive ontology rooted
at a given class. On the one hand, we would like to apply
a refinement operator to systematically grow class descriptions starting from a root class to focus the method on a
particular ontology branch. On the other hand, the goal is
also to have a method working in unsupervised manner that
does not require training examples. In order to meet all of
these requirements we propose a novel approach to ontology
learning: a combination of a refinement operator based class
induction methods with mathematical modeling. We create a
mathematical model for the proposed ontology learning task
and devise a method that interleaves two steps: i) an application of a refinement operator to generate a set of candidate
classes, and ii) an application of our mathematical model

Preliminaries
To obtain set of refined patterns, we use the Fr-ONT-Qu algorithm, which purpose is to discover patterns in an RDF
graph. Every pattern is a SPARQL query1 with a single variable in its head (?x in examples below) and every other variable is connected to this variable by a chain of properties.
Fr-ONT-Qu consists of a refinement operator and a strategy
to select the best patterns for further refinement. Below a
short example to cover Fr-ONT-Qu’s most important aspects
is presented.
An input of the algorithm is a declarative bias to limit a
search space (i.e. classes and properties to use) and maximal number of iterations. Consider the declarative bias containing classes PassengerTrain, CargoTrain and
property hasEngine.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4198

http://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/

