Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Dialogue Understanding in a Logic of Action and Belief
Alfredo Gabaldon∗ and Pat Langley
Silicon Valley Campus
Carnegie Mellon University
Moffett Field, CA 94035 USA
alfredo.gabaldon@sv.cmu.edu
patrick.w.langley@gmail.com

Abstract

a specification of the dialogue understanding problem it addresses. Our specification is only an approximate description, in that we do not attempt to capture why UMBRA favors one explanation over another. The next section provides
a brief overview of this system.
After we present our formalization of dialogue understanding, we show three types of desirable properties that
follow from it. First, we demonstrate that the formal framework correctly incorporates UMBRA’s knowledge structures. Second, we clarify a relationship between two different specifications of dialogue understanding. Finally, we
reveal a property of dialogues and their explanations in terms
of common ground (Clark 1996). We close with a discussion
of related research and plans for future work.

In recent work, Langley et al. (2014) introduced UMBRA,
a system for plan and dialogue understanding. The program
applies a form of abductive inference to generate explanations incrementally from relational descriptions of observed
behavior and knowledge in the form of rules. Although UMBRA’s creators described the system architecture, knowledge,
and inferences, along with experimental studies of its operation, they did not provide a formalization of its structures or
processes. In this paper, we analyze both aspects of the architecture in terms of the Situation Calculus—a classical logic
for reasoning about dynamical systems—and give a specification of the inference task the system performs. After this,
we state some properties of this formalization that are desirable for the task of incremental dialogue understanding. We
conclude by discussing related work and describing our plans
for additional research.

A Dialogue Understanding Architecture
Langley et al. (2014) describe UMBRA, a system that incrementally processes observed activities, including dialogues,
by computing explanations using a form of abduction. One
of our goals is to develop a logical formalization of the
knowledge used in UMBRA and the understanding problem
it addresses. We make some simplifying assumptions, but
we believe our specification is close enough to be valuable
and can be extended to capture more of UMBRA’s current
functionality. Moreover, future development of UMBRA
may proceed alongside the formal specification.
UMBRA incorporates three key theoretical assumptions:
(a) that dialogue understanding relies on inference about the
mental states of participants, (b) that it is an inherently abductive task, and (c) that it proceeds incrementally, which is
both realistic and computationally tractable.
The system assumes a working memory that stores the
mental states of dialogue participants at a given moment.
These states are described in terms of beliefs and goals about
the physical world and about other agents. UMBRA uses
a declarative representation similar to predicate logic. Examples of working memory elements are belief(medic, hasinjury(p1, i1)) and goal(expert, stable(p1)). Beliefs and
goals can be nested and have two temporal arguments that
encode an interval during which a given literal holds. Additional elements express linear constraints on time points. We
omit these temporal arguments, constraints, and the reasoning needed to enforce them. Our logic uses a form of temporal ordering on events, but not one based on time points.

Introduction
Humans and other agents who engage in dialogue with others must build a model of other agents’ mental states and update their own beliefs and goals as the dialogue progresses.
This is particularly important when the purpose of communication is the joint execution of a task. We refer to this
mental ascription problem as dialogue understanding. This
problem is particularly challenging for agents who engage in
realistic dialogues, where much is left unsaid by participants
who assume substantial background knowledge and ability
to infer implicit content.
In this paper, we present a formalization of dialogue understanding in the situation calculus (McCarthy and Hayes
1969)—a logical language for representing and reasoning
about dynamic domains—extended with belief and goal
modalities. The analysis is inspired by UMBRA, a system
for plan and dialogue understanding (Langley et al. 2014;
Meadows, Langley, and Emery 2013), and it adopts the same
types of knowledge. Our formalization is novel and of independent interest, but it also contributes by providing a formal representation of UMBRA’s knowledge structures and
∗
Current affiliation: GE Global Research, One Research Circle,
Niskayuna, NY 12309
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

515

