Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Improved Local Search for Binary Matrix Factorization
Seyed Hamid Mirisaee

Eric Gaussier

Alexandre Termier

Univ. Grenoble Alps/CNRS
Grenoble, France
Hamid.Mirisaee@imag.fr

Univ. Grenoble Alps/CNRS
Grenoble, France
Eric.Gaussier@imag.fr

Univ. Rennes I/CNRS
Rennes, France∗
Alexandre.Termier@irisa.fr

up would be interesting. This is exactly the objective of the
present study for the BMF problem.
The general problem of rank K BMF takes the following form, given X ∈ {0, 1}M ×N and K ∈ N, K <<
min(M, N ):
⎧
||X − W × H||p (p = 1 or p = 2)
argmin
⎪
⎪
W,H
⎪
⎪
⎨
(1)
subject to W ∈ {0, 1}M ×K , H ∈ {0, 1}K×N
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
(optional) W × H ∈ {0, 1}M ×N

Abstract
Rank K Binary Matrix Factorization (BMF) approximates a binary matrix by the product of two binary matrices of lower rank, K, using either L1 or L2 norm. In
this paper, we ﬁrst show that the BMF with L2 norm can
be reformulated as an Unconstrained Binary Quadratic
Programming (UBQP) problem. We then review several
local search strategies that can be used to improve the
BMF solutions obtained by previously proposed methods, before introducing a new local search dedicated to
the BMF problem. We show in particular that the proposed solution is in general faster than the previously
proposed ones. We then assess its behavior on several
collections and methods and show that it signiﬁcantly
improves methods targeting the L2 norms on all the
datasets considered; for the L1 norm, the improvement
is also signiﬁcant for real, structured datasets and for the
BMF problem without the binary reconstruction constraint.

1

where ||.||p denotes either the L1 norm (p = 1) or the L2
norm (p = 2). The optional constraint is here referred to as
the binary reconstruction constraint.
In this study, we show that BMF problem can be reformulated as a UBQP problem (Beasley 1998) when the L2 norm
is considered in Eq. (1). We explore this direction and propose a new p-opt local search procedure that we prove to be
more efﬁcient for BMF than the UBQP-based approach. The
proposed p-opt can be applied to both the L1 or L2 methods. With thorough experiments on both synthetic and real
data, we demonstrate that the heuristic we propose significantly improves the quality of existing methods in a reasonable amount of time. We also show that our local search
procedure performs well when compared to other heuristic
strategies (Kanungo et al. 2002).

Introduction

Many datasets in scientiﬁc or industrial applications are high
dimensional binary matrices. This high dimensionality negatively impacts the performance of traditional data analysis algorithms. Matrix factorization is a way to compress
the data while preserving most of the characteristic patterns found inside, and has been a popular tool for dictionary learning, feature learning and subspace learning. When
the input matrix and the factors are both binary, the operation is called a Binary Matrix Factorization (BMF). BMF
has been successfully applied to many different contexts
(Zhang et al. 2010; 2007; Meedsa et al. 2006; Li 2005;
Zhang et al. 2007). When the problems considered involve
more than several thousand elements, efﬁcient strategies for
ﬁnding better solutions to the matrix factorization problem
in general, and the BMF one in particular, become interesting and challenging. Local search heuristics, as p-opt local
search, can be used to improve the solution, corresponding to a local minimum of the objective function, provided
by standard matrix factorization methods. However, such
heuristics may be slow and any method that can speed them

2

Related work

The optimization problem (1) can be relaxed as an NMF
(Lee and Seung 1999; 2000) or a SVD problem with additional binary constraints. One way to do that is to ﬁrst solve
a standard NMF or SVD problem and then to project the
solution onto the {0, 1} sub-space (Miettinen et al. 2008).
The second approach amounts to integrating the binary constraints into the objective function being minimized in NMF
(Zhang et al. 2007; 2010). However, this latter approach
does not generally yield a good approximation since increasing the coefﬁcients of the regularization terms (which imposes the binary constraint) will result in high reconstruction
error.
A simple and efﬁcient heuristics to solve problem (1) is
Proximus (Koyuturk, Grama, and Ramakrsihnan 2005). In
this approach, one iteratively solves rank 1 decompositions

∗

Work done at Univ. Grenoble Alps/CNRS, Grenoble, France
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1198

