Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Tighter Value Function Bounds for Bayesian Reinforcement Learning
Kanghoon Lee and Kee-Eung Kim
Department of Computer Science
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Daejeon 305-701, Korea
khlee@ai.kaist.ac.kr and kekim@cs.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Littman 2011) or real-time heuristic search (Fonteneau, Busoniu, and Munos 2013).
In this paper, we present a model-based BRL algorithm
that combines these two approaches. Our main contribution
is in improving the approximate model construction so that
the value function from the model is a tighter upper bound
of the Bayes-optimal value function. The same idea is used
to compute a tighter lower bound. We then integrate these
bounds into the AO* heuristic search (Nilsson 1982), where
the challenge is in computing these bounds quickly enough
inside the heuristic function so that we can benefit from our
proposed bounds. The resulting algorithm essentially performs multi-step lookahead search using the approximate
model. We provide a theoretical guarantee on the improvement in search performance achieved by improved bounds,
as well as empirical results on the improvement in standard
BRL domains.

Bayesian reinforcement learning (BRL) provides a principled framework for optimal exploration-exploitation
tradeoff in reinforcement learning. We focus on modelbased BRL, which involves a compact formulation of
the optimal tradeoff from the Bayesian perspective.
However, it still remains a computational challenge to
compute the Bayes-optimal policy. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach to compute tighter value
function bounds of the Bayes-optimal value function,
which is crucial for improving the performance of many
model-based BRL algorithms. We then present how our
bounds can be integrated into real-time AO* heuristic
search, and provide a theoretical analysis on the impact
of improved bounds on the search efficiency. We also
provide empirical results on standard BRL domains that
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

Introduction

Background and Related Work

Reinforcement learning (RL) is the problem where an agent
tries to maximize long-term rewards while acting in an unknown environment. A fundamental problem in RL is the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff since the agent has to explore the environment to gather information on how to improve long-term rewards, but always doing so leads to very
poor rewards. Model-based Bayesian RL (BRL) seeks an
optimal solution to the tradeoff from the Bayesian perspective by maintaining the posterior distribution over the models of the environment. However, obtaining the solution,
which is the Bayes-optimal policy, is known to be computationally intractable (Poupart et al. 2006).
One of the main approaches in model-based BRL is to
construct an optimistic model of the environment that is
tractable to solve while yielding an approximate Bayesoptimal policy with a probably approximately correct (PAC)
guarantee. Such an optimistic model can be obtained by
either adding bonus to rewards (Kolter and Ng 2009) or
augmenting the action space (Asmuth et al. 2009; Castro and Precup 2010; Araya-López, Thomas, and Buffet 2012). Another class of approaches is to employ a
search algorithm, such as sample-based Monte-Carlo tree
search (MCTS) (Guez, Silver, and Dayan 2012; Asmuth and

A Markov decision process (MDP) is defined as a tuple
hS, A, T, R, γi, where S is a set of states, A is a set of actions, T : S × A × S → [0, 1] is the transition function
T (s, a, s0 ) = Pr(s0 |s, a), R : S ×A×S → [Rmin , Rmax ] is
the non-negative reward function (i.e., Rmin ≥ 0), and γ is a
discount factor. A policy π : S → A specifies which action
to execute in each state. For
a policy π, its value function
P∞
is defined as V π (s) = E[ t=0 γ t R(st , π(st ), st+1 )|s0 =
s], where st is the state at time t. By solving an MDP,
we obtain an optimal policy π ∗ , with its value function
V∗ P
satisfying the Bellman optimality equation V ∗ (s) =
maxa s0 T (s, a, s0 )[R(s, a, s0 ) + γV ∗ (s0 )].
In this paper, we consider the reinforcement learning
problem where the agent acts in the environment modeled
as an MDP with unknown transition function. Representing
each unknown transition probability T (s, a, s0 ) as the parameter θs,a (s0 ), a model-based BRL method would maintain the posterior distribution over θ = {θs,a (s0 )|s, s0 ∈
S, a ∈ A} to represent the uncertainty.
We can then formulate model-based BRL as a partially
observable MDP (POMDP) planning problem (Duff 2002;
Poupart et al. 2006), where the POMDP model is defined
as a tuple hSP , AP , ZP , TP , OP , RP , γi with the following
components: the state space is defined by SP = S × Θ with
the “hybrid” state hs, θi ∈ S × Θ being made up of the envi-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3556

