Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Security Games with Protection Externalities
Jiarui Gan

Yevgeniy Vorobeychik

Bo An

School of Computer Engineering Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
The Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Vanderbilt University
Nanyang Technological University
Information Processing, ICT, CAS
Nashville, TN 37235
Singapore 639798
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
yevgeniy.vorobeychik@vanderbilt.edu
boan@ntu.edu.sg
Beijing 100190, China
ganjr@ics.ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Stackelberg security games have been widely deployed in recent years to schedule security resources. An assumption in
most existing security game models is that one security resource assigned to a target only protects that target. However, in many important real-world security scenarios, when
a resource is assigned to a target, it exhibits protection externalities: that is, it also protects other “neighbouring” targets. We investigate such Security Games with Protection
Externalities (SPEs). First, we demonstrate that computing a
strong Stackelberg equilibrium for an SPE is NP-hard, in contrast with traditional Stackelberg security games which can be
solved in polynomial time. On the positive side, we propose
a novel column generation based approach—CLASPE—to
solve SPEs. CLASPE features the following novelties: 1)
a novel mixed-integer linear programming formulation for
the slave problem; 2) an extended greedy approach with
a constant-factor approximation ratio to speed up the slave
problem; and 3) a linear-scale linear programming that efficiently calculates the upper bounds of target-defined subproblems for pruning. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates
that CLASPE enable us to scale to realistic-sized SPE problem instances.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Protection externalities in real-world scenarios: (a) visible areas of surveillance cameras in a building; (b) reaction area of
mobile security units.

target at a time, and it protects this target only. However, in
real-world scenarios security resources often effectively protect multiple targets simultaneously. For instance, surveillance cameras and radars can conduct surveillance over a
perceived range (Figure 1(a)). As another example, mobile
security units, such as policemen and patrol canines, can
keep their eyes on neighbouring targets within certain distance, and react to emergencies therein (Figure 1(b)). We
term such scenarios Security Games with Protection Externalities (SPE). Several existing security game applications
incorporate a form of protection externalities. Fang, Jiang,
and Tambe (2013) and Xu et al. (2014) study patrol path
planning for ferry ship protection, where patrollers can protect ferry ships within a protection radius. A major difference is that they assume the targets are located in a onedimensional space. In the Federal Air Marshal (FAM) allocation domain and other patrolling domains (Tsai et al.
2009; Jain et al. 2010; Shieh et al. 2012), each resource
(e.g., an air marshal) can visit multiple targets (e.g., flights)
in a schedule and a target is protected only if it is visited
by the resource. There are in fact no protection externalities
in these domains (e.g., a resource cannot protect more than
one flight at a time). Thus, even though a schedule can be
viewed as a “neighborhood” in SPEs, past computational approaches have restricted attention to non-overlapping schedules, and made other related structural assumptions (e.g.,
that a subset of a schedule is also a feasible schedule (Korzhyk, Conitzer, and Parr 2010)). In contrast, SPEs treat
neighborhoods as indivisible units, such that targets are automatically protected when resources are assigned to their
neighbouring targets.

Introduction
Stackelberg security games have been successfully used for
computing optimal allocation of security resources in adversarial and strategic scenarios (Basilico, Gatti, and Amigoni
2009; Tambe 2011; Conitzer 2012). In a Stackelberg security game, a defender allocates security resources (e.g.,
police guards, canines, or patrol units) to protect key infrastructures, such as airports, ports, and ferry ships. An attacker
first conducts surveillance and then chooses the best target to
attack. Algorithms have been designed to calculate the best
defender strategy for Stackelberg security games in various
settings, and systems applying such models have been developed and deployed in many real-world security domains
(e.g., Pita et al. 2008; Tsai et al. 2009; An et al. 2011; Pita et
al. 2011; Shieh et al. 2012; An et al. 2013a; An et al. 2013b;
Yin, An, and Jain 2014).
A common assumption in existing security game models
is that one security resource can be assigned to only one
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

914

