Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Unsupervised Cross-Domain Transfer in Policy Gradient
Reinforcement Learning via Manifold Alignment
Haitham Bou Ammar

Eric Eaton

Paul Ruvolo

Matthew E. Taylor

Univ. of Pennsylvania
haithamb@seas.upenn.edu

Univ. of Pennsylvania
eeaton@cis.upenn.edu

Olin College of Engineering
paul.ruvolo@olin.edu

Washington State Univ.
taylorm@eecs.wsu.edu

Abstract

when the source and target tasks have different state and/or
action spaces, an inter-task mapping (Taylor et al. 2007a)
that describes the relationship between the two tasks is typically needed. This paper introduces a framework for autonomously learning an inter-task mapping for cross-domain
transfer in policy gradient RL. First, we learn an inter-state
mapping (i.e., a mapping between states in two tasks) using
unsupervised manifold alignment. Manifold alignment provides a powerful and general framework that can discover
a shared latent representation to capture intrinsic relations
between different tasks, irrespective of their dimensionality. The alignment also yields an implicit inter-action mapping that is generated by mapping tracking states from the
source to the target. Given the mapping between task domains, source task trajectories are then used to initialize a
policy in the target task, signiﬁcantly improving the speed
of subsequent learning over an uninformed initialization.
This paper provides the following contributions. First, we
introduce a novel unsupervised method for learning interstate mappings using manifold alignment. Second, we show
that the discovered subspace can be used to initialize the
target policy. Third, our empirical validation conducted on
four dissimilar and dynamically chaotic task domains (e.g.,
controlling a three-link cart-pole and a quadrotor aerial vehicle) shows that our approach can a) automatically learn
an inter-state mapping across MDPs from the same domain,
b) automatically learn an inter-state mapping across MDPs
from very different domains, and c) transfer informative initial policies to achieve higher initial performance and reduce
the time needed for convergence to near-optimal behavior.

The success of applying policy gradient reinforcement
learning (RL) to difﬁcult control tasks hinges crucially
on the ability to determine a sensible initialization for
the policy. Transfer learning methods tackle this problem by reusing knowledge gleaned from solving other
related tasks. In the case of multiple task domains, these
algorithms require an inter-task mapping to facilitate
knowledge transfer across domains. However, there are
currently no general methods to learn an inter-task mapping without requiring either background knowledge
that is not typically present in RL settings, or an expensive analysis of an exponential number of inter-task
mappings in the size of the state and action spaces.
This paper introduces an autonomous framework that
uses unsupervised manifold alignment to learn intertask mappings and effectively transfer samples between
different task domains. Empirical results on diverse dynamical systems, including an application to quadrotor
control, demonstrate its effectiveness for cross-domain
transfer in the context of policy gradient RL.

Introduction
Policy gradient reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
have been applied with considerable success to solve highdimensional control problems, such as those arising in
robotic control and coordination (Peters & Schaal 2008).
These algorithms use gradient ascent to tune the parameters
of a policy to maximize its expected performance. Unfortunately, this gradient ascent procedure is prone to becoming trapped in local maxima, and thus it has been widely
recognized that initializing the policy in a sensible manner
is crucial for achieving optimal performance. For instance,
one typical strategy is to initialize the policy using human
demonstrations (Peters & Schaal 2006), which may be infeasible when the task cannot be easily solved by a human.
This paper explores a different approach: instead of initializing the policy at random (i.e., tabula rasa) or via human
demonstrations, we instead use transfer learning (TL) to initialize the policy for a new target domain based on knowledge from one or more source tasks.
In RL transfer, the source and target tasks may differ
in their formulations (Taylor & Stone 2009). In particular,

Related Work
Learning an inter-task mapping has been of major interest
in the transfer learning community because of its promise
of autonomous transfer between very different tasks (Taylor & Stone 2009). However, the majority of existing work
assumes that a) the source task and target task are similar
enough that no mapping is needed (Banerjee & Stone 2007;
Konidaris & Barto 2007), or b) an inter-task mapping is provided to the agent (Taylor et al. 2007a; Torrey et al. 2008).
The main difference between these methods and this paper is
that we are interested in learning a mapping between tasks.
There has been some recent work on learning such mappings. For example, mappings may be based on seman-

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2504

