Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Automated Construction of Visual-Linguistic Knowledge
via Concept Learning from Cartoon Videos
Jung-Woo Ha, Kyung-Min Kim, and Byoung-Tak Zhang
School of Computer Science and Engineering & Institute for Cognitive Science
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea
{jwha, kmkim, btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr

knowledge construction from multimodal data streams is
essential for achieving human-level artificial intelligence
based on lifelong learning (Muggleton 2014, Zhang 2013).
The task of vision-language learning is to automatically
build the relationships between vision and language from
multimodal sources of data. Previous works on multimodal
learning have focused on either cognitive theory or
practical applications. On the practical side, the latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) models were applied to image
annotation (Blei and Jordan 2003) and video object
detection (Zhao et al. 2013). Recently, deep learning
models were also used for image annotation (Srivastava
and Salakutdinov 2012) and descriptive sentence
generation (Kiros et al. 2014). However, they mainly
focused on automatic annotation rather than constructing
semantic knowledge at a higher level. Furthermore, the
techniques mostly have concentrated on efficient learning
from a static large-scale dataset (Ordornez et al. 2011,
Deng et al. 2009) but seldom considered the dynamic
change of the contents, i.e. concept drift. Some recent
proposals have addressed hierarchical representations (Jia
et al. 2013, Lewis and Frank 2013, Abbott et al. 2012), but
they are biased to one modality or a static database.
Here we propose a hierarchical model of automatically
constructing visual-linguistic knowledge by dynamically
learning concepts represented with vision and language
from videos, i.e., a deep concept hierarchy (DCH). DCH
consists of two or more concept layers and one layer of
multiple modalities. The concepts at the higher levels
represent more abstract concepts than at the lower layers.
The modality layer contains the populations of many
microcodes encoding the higher-order relationships among
two or more visual and textual variables (Zhang et al.
2012). Each concept layer is represented by a hypergraph
(Zhou et al. 2007). This structure coincides with the
grounded theory of the human cognition system where a
concept is grounded in the modality-specific regions
(Kiefer and Barsalou 2013). The structure enables the

Abstract
Learning mutually-grounded vision-language knowledge is
a foundational task for cognitive systems and human-level
artificial intelligence. Most of knowledge-learning
techniques are focused on single modal representations in a
static environment with a fixed set of data. Here, we explore
an ecologically more-plausible setting by using a stream of
cartoon videos to build vision-language concept hierarchies
continuously. This approach is motivated by the literature
on cognitive development in early childhood. We present
the model of deep concept hierarchy (DCH) that enables the
progressive abstraction of concept knowledge in multiple
levels. We develop a stochastic method for graph
construction, i.e. a graph Monte Carlo algorithm, to search
efficiently the huge compositional space of the visionlanguage concepts. The concept hierarchies are built
incrementally and can handle concept drift, allowing for
being deployed in lifelong learning environments. Using a
series of approximately 200 episodes of educational cartoon
videos we demonstrate the emergence and evolution of the
concept hierarchies as the video stories unfold. We also
present the application of the deep concept hierarchies for
context-dependent translation between vision and language,
i.e. the transcription of a visual scene into text and the
generation of visual imagery from text.

Introduction
Recent explosion of data enhances the importance of
automatic knowledge acquisition and representation from
big data. Linguistically-oriented representation formalisms
such as semantic networks (Steyvers and Tenenbaum 2005)
and WordNet (Fellbaum 2010) are popular and extremely
useful. However, mutually-grounded vision-language
concepts are more foundational for cognitive systems that
work in perception-action cycles. Existing text-oriented
representations are inefficient for learning multimodal
concepts from large-scale data, such as videos. Continuous
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

522

