Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Value-Directed Compression of Large-Scale Assignment Problems
Tyler Lu and Craig Boutilier
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{tl,cebly}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

large-scale distributed computation. These have made it possible to accurately predict the impact of decisions on specific
individuals. In marketing, for instance, transaction, survey,
behavioral/usage and social media data allow marketers to
predict behavior, value, and responses (e.g., to messaging or
pricing) at the level of individual customers rather broad customer “segments.” Online data collection may soon enable
similar user-level predictions of behavior and satisfaction in
traffic routing, education planning, political and public policy, and other areas.
While such granular predictive modeling enables better
decisions in principle, in practice it often makes the corresponding optimization problems more difficult, since one
can distinguish any individual from any other w.r.t some
prediction. Modeling the impact of decisions on individuals, rather than larger population “segments,” dramatically
increases the number of decision variables in optimization
formulations. Since such (generalized) assignment problems
are often most naturally formulated as mathematical programs (e.g., linear (LP) or mixed integer (MIP) programs),
this can induce significant computational bottlenecks, rendering problems virtually unsolvable at the individual level.
At the same time, optimization over predefined, statistical
segments can waste the value of detailed predictive models.
In this work, we develop a compression technique for
LP-based assignment problems over large populations that
addresses this challenge. Dynamic cell abstraction (DCA)
is a dynamic segmentation technique that creates a small
set of user segments (or cells) based on predictive models
and optimization objectives. Our segmentations have a very
small number of cells, rendering optimization tractable—
indeed, able to support real-time optimization. At the same
time, these cells are provably optimal; i.e., all users in a cell
would be treated the same even if we had the computational
power to optimally “personalize” decisions without segmentation. The method works by iteratively refining cells, solving intermediate LPs, until a (near) optimal cell set is constructed. DCA uses variable aggregation (Zipkin 1980) to
model cells, and a form of column generation (CG), a classic technique for tackling LPs and MIPs with large numbers
of variables (Lübbecke and Desrosiers 2005), to evaluate the
addition of new cells. Specifically, we modify CG using a
method introduced by Walsh et al. (2010) in the context
of online advertising to score the introduction of multiple

Data-driven analytics—in areas ranging from consumer marketing to public policy—often allow behavior prediction at
the level of individuals rather than population segments, offering the opportunity to improve decisions that impact large
populations. Modeling such (generalized) assignment problems as linear programs, we propose a general value-directed
compression technique for solving such problems at scale.
We dynamically segment the population into cells using a
form of column generation, constructing groups of individuals who can provably be treated identically in the optimal
solution. This compression allows problems, unsolvable using standard LP techniques, to be solved effectively. Indeed,
once a compressed LP is constructed, problems can solved in
milliseconds. We provide a theoretical analysis of the methods, outline the distributed implementation of the requisite
data processing, and show how a single compressed LP can
be used to solve multiple variants of the original LP nearoptimally in real-time (e.g., to support scenario analysis). We
also show how the method can be leveraged in integer programming models. Experimental results on marketing contact optimization and political legislature problems validate
the performance of our technique.

Introduction
A variety of business and policy decisions can be formulated as generalizations of assignment problems, in which
the treatment of different individuals in some target population is optimized subject to constraints on the resources
used to implement these decisions. In marketing and advertising, a business with multiple campaigns to deploy in a
target market must decide which customers to target with
which campaigns to maximize business objectives, subject
to constraints on campaign budgets, contact limits, etc. In
planning public infrastructure (e.g., health-care facilities),
one might strive to maximize societal satisfaction by determining which facilities to develop—and the individuals
who have access to specific facilities—subject to budget
and other feasibility constraints. This perspective applies to
many decisions that span large populations.
The ability to make high quality decisions in such settings
has improved considerably in recent years with the availability of rich data sources, advances in machine learning, and
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1182

