Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Collaborative Topic Ranking:
Leveraging Item Meta-Data for Sparsity Reduction
Weilong Yao∗ 1,3 , Jing He2 , Hua Wang2 , Yanchun Zhang2,3 , Jie Cao4
2

1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Centre for Applied Informatics, College of Engineering & Science, Victoria University, Australia
3
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
4
Nanjing University of Finance and Economics, Nanjing, China
yaoweilong12@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{Jing.He,Hua.Wang,Yanchun.Zhang}@vu.edu.au, tcaojie690929@163.com

Abstract

ods is to learn user factors and item factors for modeling user preferences and item characteristics, respectively.
Point-wise methods assume that observed feedback denotes
“like” and unobserved feedback denotes “dislike”, and propose to train a recommendation model by approximating
the absolute rating scores (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008;
Wang and Blei 2011), while pair-wise methods assume that
a user prefers an observed item to an unobserved item, and
convert the problem to a pair-wise ranking problem (Rendle
et al. 2009; Takács and Tikk 2012). Empirically, the latter assumption of pair-wise preferences over two items yields better recommendation accuracy than the point-wise assumption (Lee et al. 2014).

Pair-wise ranking methods have been widely used in
recommender systems to deal with implicit feedback.
They attempt to discriminate between a handful of observed items and the large set of unobserved items.
In these approaches, however, user preferences and
item characteristics cannot be estimated reliably due to
overfitting given highly sparse data. To alleviate this
problem, in this paper, we propose a novel hierarchical Bayesian framework which incorporates “bag-ofwords” type meta-data on items into pair-wise ranking
models for one-class collaborative filtering. The main
idea of our method lies in extending the pair-wise ranking with a probabilistic topic modeling. Instead of regularizing item factors through a zero-mean Gaussian
prior, our method introduces item-specific topic proportions as priors for item factors. As a by-product, interpretable latent factors for users and items may help explain recommendations in some applications. We conduct an experimental study on a real and publicly available dataset, and the results show that our algorithm is
effective in providing accurate recommendation and interpreting user factors and item factors.

However, the data sparsity problem has become a major
bottleneck for pair-wise ranking methods. In real world scenarios, a user typically interacts with a limited number of
items out of possibly thousands or millions of items, which
leads to extremely sparse user implicit feedback. These latent factors based methods are too flexible and are very
likely to suffer from overfitting given sparse data, even for
small dimensionality of latent factors. That is, the amount of
information for learning user factors and item factors is far
from enough.

Introduction

In many practical situations, though, we have more information than the simple implicit feedback. Typically the item
in a recommender system is equipped with “bag-of-words”
type meta-data. Please note that “word” in this context is a
general term used to denote elements like phrases, tags and
movie actors in the applications of article recommendation,
tag-based picture recommendation, and movie recommendation, respectively. The meta-data is highly informative in
terms of identifying item characteristics to differentiate the
item from others. This is especially crucial for addressing
the OCCF problem, as we are mostly interested in distinguishing those items which are of potential interest to users
from others. For example, given a user who likes “machine
learning” articles and two articles j1 and j2 , we would recommend him/her the article j1 rather than j2 if we have the
prior knowledge that j1 is about “machine learning” while j2
is not. Thus, it is natural to consider item meta-data for alleviating data sparsity. Nevertheless, existing pair-wise ranking approaches fail to provide a natural way to consider such

Recommender systems, as a subclass of information filtering systems, attempt to model user preferences by analysing
user feedback. Explicit user feedback, e.g., numeric rating has been well studied in the literature (Koren 2008;
Rendle 2010). In most applications, however, the collected
data of user behaviors, e.g., assigning tags (Pan and Chen
2013b), purchasing products (Rendle et al. 2009) and watching videos (Rendle and Freudenthaler 2014), are usually implicit. Collaborative Filtering (CF) with implicit feedback is
referred as One-Class Collaborative Filtering (OCCF) (Pan
et al. 2008).
Existing approaches to OCCF can be classified into two
categories: (1) point-wise preferences methods and (2) pairwise preferences methods. The main idea of these meth∗
This work was done when the first author was visiting Victoria
University, Australia.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

374

