Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Stochastic Local Search for Satisfiability Modulo Theories
Andreas Fröhlich and Armin Biere

Christoph M. Wintersteiger and Youssef Hamadi

Johannes Kepler University

Microsoft Research

Abstract

Most approaches for solving this kind of formulas rely
on translating the input formula into SAT (dubbed ‘bitblasting’) and then handing it to a SAT solver, most often
of the conflict driven clause learning (CDCL) kind. In this
paper, we present a novel stochastic local search (SLS) algorithm to solve bit-vector formulas directly on the theory
level. SLS is a heuristic method which has always played an
important role in AI and is successfully applied to many different problems in various areas, e.g., see (Hoos and Stützle
2005). Today, SLS is not a usual ingredient in SMT solvers.
We intend to close this gap by providing an SLS algorithm
(specialized for the theory of bit-vectors), which is, for the
most part, easy to adapt for other theories. Besides avoiding the blowup in size that often comes with bit-blasting,
applying SLS techniques on the bit-vector level has several advantages. For example, structural information, i.e.,
word-level information, is used to guide the search directly.
In contrast, a CDCL SAT solver operating on the propositional representation is not aware of this information. Nevertheless, it is possible to profit from techniques used in
SAT solving also in SLS on the SMT representation. We
show how several techniques that are common in SLS SAT
solvers are successfully lifted to the SMT level. In many
cases of practical applications (Yuan, Pixley, and Aziz 2006;
Godefroid, Levin, and Molnar 2008; Naveh et al. 2007), input formulas are actually expected to be satisfiable, making
them well-suited for SLS algorithms. The idea of integrating SLS solvers with other solvers has been explored before,
either by employing an SLS solver on the Boolean skeleton
of a formula (Griggio et al. 2011), or by explicit incorporation of high-level constraints, either learned automatically,
or provided by the user (Naveh 2004). Apart from this,
model-driven techniques (though, not local search based)
exist for arithmetic theories (de Moura and Jovanovic 2013).

Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) is essential for many
practical applications, e.g., in hard- and software verification,
and increasingly also in other scientific areas like computational biology. A large number of applications in these areas
benefit from bit-precise reasoning over finite-domain variables. Current approaches in this area translate a formula over
bit-vectors to an equisatisfiable propositional formula, which
is then given to a SAT solver. In this paper, we present a novel
stochastic local search (SLS) algorithm to solve SMT problems, especially those in the theory of bit-vectors, directly
on the theory level. We explain how several successful techniques used in modern SLS solvers for SAT can be lifted
to the SMT level. Experimental results show that our approach can compete with state-of-the-art bit-vector solvers on
many practical instances and, sometimes, outperform existing
solvers. This offers interesting possibilities in combining our
approach with existing techniques, and, moreover, new insights into the importance of exploiting problem structure in
SLS solvers for SAT. Our approach is modular and, therefore,
extensible to support other theories, potentially allowing SLS
to become part of the more general SMT framework.

1

Introduction

Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) represents the decision problem for logical formulas with respect to certain
background theories. It combines the problem of Boolean satisfiability (SAT) with other areas, e.g., the theories of integers, real numbers, lists, arrays, and bit-vectors,
and has many different applications, predominantly in hardand software verification (De Moura and Bjørner 2009;
Barrett et al. 2009; Yuan, Pixley, and Aziz 2006; Godefroid,
Levin, and Molnar 2008; Naveh et al. 2007). While most
of the methods presented in this paper are generally applicable, we focus on the theory of bit-vectors (quantifier-free and
fixed-size),which enjoys decidability, but pays the high price
of being NE XP T IME-complete, as (Kovásznai, Fröhlich,
and Biere 2012) have shown. Examples of state-of-theart SMT solvers with support for bit-precise reasoning are
Boolector (Brummayer and Biere 2009), MathSAT (Bruttomesso et al. 2008), and Z3 (De Moura and Bjørner 2008).

Our experimental results show that the SLS approach we
present is competitive with state-of-the-art bit-vector solvers
on many practical instances and that it frequently outperforms existing SMT solvers based on bit-blasting. While
we found that bit-blasting solvers are still faster overall, this
offers an interesting line of research combining SLS with
existing techniques, with the goal of improving the stateof-the-art for SMT solvers. Although having undergone
years of developement, existing SLS solvers for SAT turn
out to perform worse than our approach, sometimes by or-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1136

