Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Never-Ending Learning
T. Mitchell∗ , W. Cohen∗ , E. Hruschka†¶ , P. Talukdar‡¶ , J. Betteridge∗ , A. Carlson§¶ , B. Dalvi∗ ,
M. Gardner∗ , B. Kisiel∗ , J. Krishnamurthy∗ , N. Lao§¶ , K. Mazaitis∗ , T. Mohamed¶ ,
N. Nakashole∗ , E. Platanios∗ , A. Ritter¶ , M. Samadi∗ , B. Settles∗∗¶ , R. Wang¶ ,
D. Wijaya∗ , A. Gupta∗ ,X. Chen∗ , A. Saparov∗ , M. Greaves††¶ , J. Welling‡‡
tom.mitchell@cs.cmu.edu
task in isolation, usually from human labeled training examples of inputs and outputs of that function. In spam ﬁltering,
for instance, training examples consist of speciﬁc emails and
spam or not-spam labels for each. This style of learning
is often called supervised function approximation, because
the abstract learning problem is to approximate some unknown function f : X → Y (e.g., the spam ﬁlter) given a
training set of input/output pairs {xi , yi } of that function.
Other machine learning paradigms exist as well (e.g., unsupervised clustering, topic modeling) but these paradigms
also typically acquire only a single function or data model
from a single dataset.
In contrast to these paradigms for learning single functions from well organized data sets over short time-frames,
humans learn many different functions (i.e., different types
of knowledge) over years of accumulated diverse experience, using extensive background knowledge learned from
earlier experiences to guide subsequent learning.
The thesis of this paper is that we will never truly understand machine or human learning until we can build computer programs that, like people,

Abstract
Whereas people learn many different types of knowledge
from diverse experiences over many years, most current machine learning systems acquire just a single function or data
model from just a single data set. We propose a never-ending
learning paradigm for machine learning, to better reﬂect
the more ambitious and encompassing type of learning performed by humans. As a case study, we describe the NeverEnding Language Learner (NELL), which achieves some of
the desired properties of a never-ending learner, and we discuss lessons learned. NELL has been learning to read the
web 24 hours/day since January 2010, and so far has acquired
a knowledge base with over 80 million conﬁdence-weighted
beliefs (e.g., servedWith(tea, biscuits)), while learning continually to improve its reading competence over time. NELL
has also learned to reason over its knowledge base to infer
new beliefs from old ones, and is now beginning to extend its
ontology by synthesizing new relational predicates. NELL
can be tracked online at http://rtw.ml.cmu.edu, and followed
on Twitter at @CMUNELL.

Introduction

• learn many different types of knowledge or functions,

Machine learning is a highly successful branch of AI, and
machine learning software is now widely used for tasks from
spam ﬁltering, to speech recognition, to credit card fraud
detection, to face recognition. Despite this success, the ways
in which computers learn today remain surprisingly narrow
when compared to human learning. This paper explores an
alternative paradigm for machine learning that more closely
models the diversity, competence and cumulative nature of
human learning. We call this alternative paradigm neverending learning.
To illustrate, note that in each of the above examples the
computer learns only a single function to perform a single

• from years of diverse, mostly self-supervised experience,
• in a staged curricular fashion, where previously learned
knowledge enables learning further types of knowledge,
• where self-reﬂection and the ability to formulate new representations and new learning tasks enable the learner to
avoid stagnation and performance plateaus.
We refer to this learning paradigm as “never-ending learning.” The contributions of this paper are to (1) deﬁne more
precisely the never-ending learning paradigm, (2) present as
a case study a computer program called the Never-Ending
Language Learner (NELL) which implements several of
these capabilities, and which has been learning to read the
web 24 hours/day for over four years, and (3) identify from
NELL’s strengths and weaknesses a number of key design
features important to any never-ending learning system.

∗

Carnegie Mellon University, USA
University of São Carlos, Brazil
‡
Indian Institute of Science, India
§
Google Inc., USA
¶
Research carried out while at Carnegie Mellon University

Ohio State University, USA
∗∗
Duolingo, USA
††
Alpine Data Labs, USA
‡‡
Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, USA
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

Related Work
Previous research has considered the problem of designing machine learning agents that persist over long periods of time (e.g., life long learning (Thrun and Mitchell

2302

