Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Transaction Costs-Aware Portfolio Optimization
via Fast Löwner-John Ellipsoid Approximation
Weiwei Shen† and Jun Wang‡
‡

†
GE Global Research Center, Niskayuna, NY, USA
Institute of Data Science and Technology, Alibaba Group, Seattle, WA, USA
weiwei.shen@ge.com, j.wang@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

investment periods. Thus, researchers often recast it to a dynamic program. However, the associated dynamic program
with continuous decision and state spaces is still difficult
as its computational costs increase exponentially with the
number of involved assets, namely the curse of dimensionality (Cai and Judd 2014; Rust 2008). Therefore, most of the
relevant studies focus on simple settings with only one or
two risky assets. Representative methods include solving the
associated Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) partial differential equation to achieve optimal solutions, which generally
fails to scale up to higher dimensions (Davis and Norman
1990; Magill and Constantinides 1976; Shreve and Soner
1994; Muthuraman and Kumar 2006).

Merton’s portfolio optimization problem in the presence of transaction costs for multiple assets has been an
important and challenging problem in both theory and
practice. Most existing work suffers from curse of dimensionality and encounters with the difficulty of generalization. In this paper, we develop an approximate
dynamic programing method of synergistically combining the Löwner-John ellipsoid approximation with
conventional value function iteration to quantify the
associated optimal trading policy. Through constructing Löwner-John ellipsoids to parameterize the optimal
policy and taking Euclidean projections onto the constructed ellipsoids to implement the trading policy, the
proposed algorithm has cut computational costs up to
a factor of five hundred and meanwhile achieved nearoptimal risk-adjusted returns across both synthetic and
real-world market datasets.

To numerically solve this type of dynamic programming
problems, one can appeal to value function iteration (VFI)
or policy parameterization (Powell 2007; Rust 2008). However, in a high-dimensional space, conventional VFI becomes intractable and suffers from error amplification in
iteration. Although the policy parameterization consumes
cheaper computing power, it falls short on accuracy due to
the complexity of policy structures in high dimensions.

Introduction
Dynamic portfolio choice problems have taken on increasing importance in finance industry such as mutual funds, endorsements and private wealth management (Brandt 2010).
The seminal work of Merton (Merton 1969) shows that
investors who wish to maximize the utility of their final
wealth should always hold a constant fraction of total wealth
on each asset. However, implementing such a strategy requires rebalancing continually as assets prices fluctuate,
and therefore will lead to high or even infinite transaction
costs. Since then researchers have tried to address this issue by solving Merton’s portfolio problem in the presence
of transaction costs. Thereinto, the proportional transaction
costs model, as a suitable model for brokerage commissions and bid-ask spread costs, typifies the common situation for normal investors (Brandt 2010; Cvitanic 2001;
Davis and Norman 1990).
Portfolio optimization with proportional transaction costs
is naturally modeled as a multistage stochastic program. But
the stochastic program framework limits the size of solvable
problems due to the exponential growth of scenarios with

Realizing the limitations of the existing work, in this
paper we propose an approximate dynamic programming
(ADP) method to tackle the multi-asset portfolio optimization problems with proportional transaction costs in a discrete time and finite horizon setting. Through synergistically
combining the VFI framework with policy parameterization,
the proposed ADP method enjoys complementary advantages of low approximation errors from VFI and high computational efficiency from policy parameterization. Briefly,
the components from VFI pave the way for effectively parameterizing a complex policy in a high-dimensional space;
the components from policy parameterization provide a
pathway to efficiently evaluating the strategy and bypassing
the issue of error amplification. In particular, by adopting the
Löwner-John ellipsoid approximation to the optimal policy,
we are able to address the conundrum of parameterizing a
complex policy through depicting its geometric shape and
location in a high-dimensional state space. Once the parameterized policy is available, the determination of rebalancing
is simply conducted as an Euclidean projection process onto
the estimated ellipsoids. Hence, the computational costs are

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1854

