Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Will You “Reconsume” the Near Past? Fast Prediction
on Short-Term Reconsumption Behaviors ∗
Jun Chen, Chaokun Wang and Jianmin Wang
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P.R. China.
chenjun14@mails.thu.edu.cn, {chaokun, jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

strategies would be used by systems, e.g., web revisitation
or novel web exploration, recommendation from the past or
from the unobserved. The “whether” problem can be considered as a switch that opens the doors of two disjoint problems and narrows the problem domains therein.
The prediction on whether or not a user will reconsume
at a specific time is of broad interest. In recommendation
tasks (Bobadilla et al. 2013), the prediction results help
recommender systems understand whether the novel unobserved items or the already consumed items are more appropriate to be recommended at a specific time. In web browsers, the prediction results suggest whether or not the visited
web pages should be cached for later revisitation (Adar, Teevan, and Dumais 2008). In commercial business, the prediction results enable restaurants and supermarkets to identify
potential revisited customers who are further delivered with
coupons (Han, Back, and Barrett 2009). Furthermore, inside mobile phones, the prediction could also help the system
decide whether or not the pre-launching of that application
is necessary out of the considerations for efficiency and user
friendliness (Xia and Lam 2012).
Similar to the taxonomy of web revisitations by Adar et
al. (Adar, Teevan, and Dumais 2008), the general reconsumption behaviors of human can also be classified into
the short-term reconsumptions (fast group), the mediumterm reconsumptions (medium group) and the long-term reconsumptions (slow group). In this paper, we mainly focus on the study of the Short-Term REConsumption behaviors, abbr. STREC behaviors (i.e., reconsume the near
past). The dynamics of STREC behaviors make it more difficult and important to study compared with the long-term
and the medium-term reconsumption behaviors. The prediction of people’s STREC behaviors is nontrivial and is
confronted with a number of challenges: First, STREC behaviors are more prone to change with time compared with
long-term reconsumption behaviors, which makes it more
difficult to model the dynamics. Second, STREC behaviors
are seemingly random and they are likely to be influenced
by multiple factors like users, items and user-item interactions. Third, people may have different STREC behavior preferences in different domains, and it is difficult to extract
general domain-independent patterns to represent people’s
STREC behaviors.
In this paper, we studied people’s STREC behaviors in a

The short-term reconsumption behaviors, i.e. “reconsume” the near past, account for a large proportion of
people’s activities every day and everywhere. In this paper, we firstly derived four generic features which influence people’s short-term reconsumption behaviors.
These features were extracted with respect to different roles in the process of reconsumption behaviors, i.e.
users, items and interactions. Then, we brought forward
two fast algorithms with the linear and the quadratic kernels to predict whether a user will perform a short-term
reconsumption at a specific time given the context. The
experimental results show that our proposed algorithms
are more accurate in the prediction tasks compared with
the baselines. Meanwhile, the time complexity of online
prediction of our algorithms is O(1), which enables fast
prediction in real-world scenarios. The prediction contributes to more intelligent decision-making, e.g. potential revisited customer identification, personalized recommendation, and information re-finding.

Introduction
People’s reconsumption behaviors exist everywhere and
happen every day. We loop our favourite songs while searching for the newly released music tracks from our favourite
artists. We eat regularly at our favourite restaurants while experiencing fresh tastes at the new restaurants recommended
by our friends. People’s consumptions of items, e.g., songs,
restaurants and web pages, consist of both novelty-seeking
behaviors and reconsumption behaviors which are alternated
now and then (Anderson et al. 2014). Thus, an interesting
question is: Are these seemingly random behaviors, especially the reconsumption behaviors predictable?
(Anderson et al. 2014) proposed a method to predict what
will most likely be reconsumed given the premise that the
user is surely about to perform a reconsumption. However,
this assumption leaves the more fundamental problem blank,
i.e. whether or not a user will reconsume at a specific time.
Answering the “whether” question is no inferior than answering the “what” question. If whether a user will reconsume could be predicted, then different data processing
∗

Corresponding author: Chaokun Wang.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23

