Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Manipulablity of Random Serial Dictatorship
in Sequential Matching with Dynamic Preferences
Hadi Hosseini

Kate Larson

Robin Cohen

Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
h5hossei@uwaterloo.ca

Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
klarson@uwaterloo.ca

Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
rcohen@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

Since an agent’s preferences can change, it may be the
case that a ti b while b t+1
a. Let P(M ) or P dei
note the class of all strict linear preferences over M where
|P| = m!. Agent i’s preference at time t is denoted by
ti ∈ P, thus, t = (t1 , . . . , tn ) ∈ P n denotes the preference profile of agents at time t. We write t−i to denote
(t1 , . . . , ti−1 , ti+1 , . . . , tn ), and thus t = (ti , t−i ).
A matching, µt : N → M , is a mapping from agents to
objects, where µt (i) ∈ M is agent i’s assignment at time
t. We let µ̄t denote a probability distribution over the set
of possible (deterministic) matchings at time t . That is,
µ̄t ∈ ∆(M).
We consider a discrete-time sequential matching process
as a sequence of matchings prescribed by a matching mechanism. Given a preference profile t ∈ P n , a matching mechanism π(µ| t ) returns the probability of applying matching
µ. Thus, the probability of agent
P i being allocated alternative
x at time t is pti (x |t ) = µ∈M:µ(i)=x π(µ |t ), where
P
t
t
i∈N pi (x|  ) = 1. The definition of a matching mechanism, π, incorporates randomized or deterministic matching
mechanisms.
To evaluate a given matching mechanism π with ordinal
preferences, we look at the expected probabilities of being
allocated particular alternatives in the sequence of random
matchings. More concretely, let o` be any alternative ranked
in position `. Given t , the expected probability that agent i
receives alternatives with rankings as good as ` under matching mechanism π is defined recursively as

We consider the problem of repeatedly matching a set of alternatives to a set of agents in the absence of monetary transfer.
We propose a generic framework for evaluating sequential
matching mechanisms with dynamic preferences, and show
that unlike single-shot settings, the random serial dictatorship
mechanism is manipulable.

Introduction
Consider the problem of assigning a set of indivisible objects to a set of agents, each having a private preference ordering over the objects. In various real-life applications the
use of monetary transfer is prohibited: assigning dormitory
rooms or college courses to students, teaching load among
faculty, residents to hospitals, scarce medical resources and
organs to patients, etc. (Sönmez and Ünver 2010a; 2010b;
Dickerson, Procaccia, and Sandholm 2012). Despite a recent focus on designing mechanisms for problems with nontransferable utilities, little has been done on strategic behavior of agents in repeated assignment problems. Real-life applications are often situated in a temporal context with other
decisions and stochastic events: assigning members to subcommittees each year, students to housing each year, etc.
In static settings, randomization is key in restoring strategyproofness and fairness in matching problems (Budish et
al. 2013). The random serial dictatorship (RSD) is a randomized ordinal mechanism that is strategyproof, fair (in terms
of equal treatment of equals), and ex post efficient (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez 1998).
In this paper, we study matching problems in which a sequence of decisions must be made for agents whose preferences may change over time. Through our proposed generic
framework for evaluating dynamic mechanisms, we investigate the incentive properties of the RSD mechanism in repeated assignment problems, and formally prove that RSD
is susceptible to manipulation under dynamic preferences.

Wiπ (t , o` ) =

`
o
X

pti (x| t ) ×

(1)

x=o1

X

X

π(µ| t )P (t+1 | t , µ)Wiπ (t+1 , o` )

µ∈M t+1 ∈P n

where P (t+1 | t , µt ) is the underlying transition kernel
(as common knowledge) which denotes the probability that
agents will transition to a state where they have joint preference t+1 after matching µt in a state with preference t .

The Model

Properties We are interested in analyzing the truthful
properties of matching mechanisms in sequential matching problems. Inspired by the work of (Bogomolnaia and
Moulin 2001), we define the required properties for analyzing random matchings in sequential settings based on the
notion of first order stochastic dominance.

Consider a set of agents N = {1, . . . , n}, and a set of alternatives M = {1, . . . , m}, where n ≥ m. Each agent has
a strict preference over alternatives at time t, i.e. a ti b.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4168

