Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Surpassing Human-Level Face Verification
Performance on LFW with GaussianFace
Chaochao Lu

Xiaoou Tang

Department of Information Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{lc013, xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

benchmark for face verification. The dataset provides a large
set of relatively unconstrained face images with complex
variations in pose, lighting, expression, race, ethnicity, age,
gender, clothing, hairstyles, and other parameters. Not surprisingly, LFW has proven difficult for automatic face verification methods (Huang et al. 2007; Kumar et al. 2009;
Lu, Zhao, and Tang 2013; Simonyan et al. 2013; Sun, Wang,
and Tang 2013; Taigman et al. 2014). Although there has
been significant work (Cao et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2013;
Sun, Wang, and Tang 2013; 2014; Taigman et al. 2014;
Lu and Tang 2014) on LFW and the accuracy rate has been
improved from 60.02% (Turk and Pentland 1991) to 97.35%
(Taigman et al. 2014) since LFW is established in 2007,
these studies have not closed the gap to human-level performance (Kumar et al. 2009) in face verification.
We motivate this paper by highlighting two weaknesses
as follows:
1) Most existing face verification methods assume that the
training data and the test data are drawn from the same feature space and follow the same distribution. When the distribution changes, these methods may suffer a large performance drop (Wright and Hua 2009). However, many practical scenarios involve cross-domain data drawn from different facial appearance distributions. Learning a model solely
on a single source data often leads to overfitting due to
dataset bias (Torralba and Efros 2011). Moreover, it is difficult to collect sufficient and necessary training data to rebuild the model in new scenarios, for highly accurate face
verification specific to the target domain. In such cases, it
becomes critical to exploit more data from multiple sourcedomains to improve the generalization of face verification
methods in the target-domain.
2) Modern face verification methods are mainly divided
into two categories: extracting low-level features (Lowe
2004; Ahonen, Hadid, and Pietikainen 2006; Cao et al.
2010), and building classification models (Sun, Wang, and
Tang 2013; Chen et al. 2012; Moghaddam, Jebara, and Pentland 2000; Turk and Pentland 1991; Li et al. 2005). Although these existing methods have made great progress in
face verification, most of them are less flexible when dealing with complex data distributions. For the methods in the
first category, for example, low-level features such as SIFT
(Lowe 2004), LBP (Ahonen, Hadid, and Pietikainen 2006),
and Gabor (Liu and Wechsler 2002) are handcrafted. Even

Face verification remains a challenging problem in very
complex conditions with large variations such as pose,
illumination, expression, and occlusions. This problem
is exacerbated when we rely unrealistically on a single training data source, which is often insufficient to
cover the intrinsically complex face variations. This paper proposes a principled multi-task learning approach
based on Discriminative Gaussian Process Latent Variable Model (DGPLVM), named GaussianFace, for face
verification. In contrast to relying unrealistically on a
single training data source, our model exploits additional data from multiple source-domains to improve
the generalization performance of face verification in
an unknown target-domain. Importantly, our model can
adapt automatically to complex data distributions, and
therefore can well capture complex face variations inherent in multiple sources. To enhance discriminative
power, we introduced a more efficient equivalent form
of Kernel Fisher Discriminant Analysis to DGPLVM.
To speed up the process of inference and prediction, we
exploited the low rank approximation method. Extensive experiments demonstrated the effectiveness of the
proposed model in learning from diverse data sources
and generalizing to unseen domains. Specifically, the
accuracy of our algorithm achieved an impressive accuracy rate of 98.52% on the well-known and challenging
Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) benchmark. For the
first time, the human-level performance in face verification (97.53%) on LFW is surpassed.

Introduction
Face verification, which is the task of determining whether
a pair of face images are from the same person, has been an
active research topic in computer vision (Kumar et al. 2009;
Simonyan et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2013; Cao et al. 2013). It
has many important applications, including surveillance, access control, image retrieval, and automatic log-on for personal computers or mobile devices. However, various visual
complications deteriorate the performance of face verification, as shown by numerous studies on real-world face images from the wild (Huang et al. 2007). The Labeled Faces
in the Wild (LFW) dataset is well known as a challenging
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3811

