Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Global Policy Construction in Modular Reinforcement Learning
Ruohan Zhang and Zhao Song and Dana H. Ballard
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Stop D9500, Austin Texas 78712-1757 USA
{zharu,zhaos}@utexas.edu dana@cs.utexas.edu

We propose a modular reinforcement learning algorithm which decomposes a Markov decision process
into independent modules. Each module is trained using Sarsa(λ). We introduce three algorithms for forming
global policy from modules policies, and demonstrate
our results using a 2D grid world.

module policies are π1 , · · · , πn . The problem is to form
a global policy π that maximizes global, longterm reward
based on module policies. We assume action space A is
shared among modules. More specifically, for a given global
state s, and module states s1 , · · · , sn , each module selects
its own optimal action a1 , · · · , an according to π1 , · · · , πn .
Our task is to determine global action a∗ for global state s.

Introduction

Our Approach

Reinforcement learning suffers from the curse of dimensionality problem. Such problem limits plain reinforcement
learning algorithms to domains with small state space. Several approaches have been proposed to address this problem, including linear function approximation (Boyan and
Moore 1995), hierarchical reinforcement learning based on
temporal abstraction (Dietterich 1998), and modular reinforcement learning (Doya et al. 2002; Humphrys 1996;
Sprague and Ballard 2003).
Modular reinforcement learning (MRL) utilizes divideand-conquer strategy. It first divides task into smaller, manageable subtasks (modules). Each module will learn its own
policy using reinforcement learning, then module policies
are combined to construct a global policy. MRL approaches
are different in decomposition techniques and global policy construction strategies. In general, an centralized arbitrator is responsible for constructing global policy, and
such problem can introduce additional learning tasks. For
example, arbitrator can use weighted outcome of module policies to determine global policy (Humphrys 1996;
Sprague and Ballard 2003), and weights are learned by their
W-learning algorithm. In this paper we introduce an efficient method that circumvents additional learning problem
and form global policy from module policies.

We construct global policy based on weighted outcomes of
module policies. The critical question is to determine the
weight for all module instances. A simple observation is
made about Q values: for a module at a given state, the variance of Q values across all actions, indicates how indifferent the module is about its action selection. Large variance
indicates that choosing different actions lead to very different expected reward. Let Wi (si ) denote the weight of module i at state si . We choose Wi (si ) = σ(Qi (si , a)), where
σ(Qi (si , a)) is standard deviation of Q values across actions. Then we design three different algorithms for global
policy forming:

Abstract

• Module aggregation algorithm maximizes collective
∗
utility of all modules. Hence we choose
P action a =
arg maxa Q(s, a), where Q(s, a) =
i Qi (si , a). The
idea of this algorithm is originated from (Russell and Zimdars 2003) and (Sprague and Ballard 2003).
• Module selection algorithm maximizes utility of the
module with highest weight. Select module i∗ =
arg maxi Wi (si ), and choose action a∗ = ai .
• Module voting algorithm uses a heuristic similar to
shareholder voting, we let each module to vote for its optimal action, instead of one-module-one-vote, the vote is
weighted. Let K(sP
i , a) be vote count for global action a,
then K(si , a) = i Wi (si ) for all module i whose optimal action ai = a. This is saying that each module i
put Wi (si ) votes on its optimal action ai . Global action
is selected as the action with highest number of votes,
a∗ = arg maxa K(si , a).

Problem Definition
Reinforcement learning problem is often modeled
by a Markov decision process (MDP), which is defined as a tuple hS, A, T, R, γi (Sutton and Barto
1998), we first decompose it into n module MDPs
hS1 , A, T1 , R1 , γ1 i, · · · , hSn , A, Tn , Rn , γn i. Suppose each
module is trained using reinforcement learning and learned

Experiments
Our test domain is a navigation task in a 2D grid world of
size 9 × 9 , as shown in Figure 1(a). Our agent starts at

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4226

