Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Uniform Interpolation and
Forgetting for ALC Ontologies with ABoxes
Patrick Koopmann and Renate A. Schmidt
School of Computer Science, The University of Manchester,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom

Abstract

Ontology Reuse. Often, only a subset of the vocabulary of
an existing ontology is relevant for a particular application.
Uniform interpolants can be used to extract small subsets
of existing ontologies to reuse them in specialized contexts.
Ontology Analysis. By computing a restricted view that
uses only a limited set of symbols of interest, hidden relations between concepts and individuals are made explicit
(Konev, Walther, and Wolter 2009). Logical Difference.
Applying changes to an ontology can lead to undesired new
entailments regarding already defined concepts. The new
entailments in the common signature of two ontologies are
referred to as logical difference (Konev, Walther, and Wolter
2008). The logical difference can easily be computed by
checking for entailment of the axioms of the respective uniform interpolants (Ludwig and Konev 2014). Information
Hiding. In applications where ontologies are accessed by
multiple users, it is critical that confidential information is
sufficiently protected (Grau 2010). This can be solved by
sharing a uniform interpolant of the original ontology, where
confidential concepts and relations have been eliminated.
Given its importance for all these applications, uniform
interpolation has recently gained a lot of attention in the literature. First methods for simpler description logics such
as DL-Lite (Wang et al. 2010) and EL (Konev, Walther,
and Wolter 2009; Lutz, Seylan, and Wolter 2012; Nikitina
and Rudolph 2014), as well as for more expressive ones
such as ALC (Wang et al. 2014; Ludwig and Konev 2014;
Koopmann and Schmidt 2013c), ALCH (Koopmann and
Schmidt 2013a) and even SHQ (Koopmann and Schmidt
2014a) have been devised. However, none of the methods
for the more expressive description logics works without
limitations if ABoxes are involved.
Especially for privacy and information hiding applications, we believe support for ABoxes is important if uniform
interpolation is to be used effectively. In a lot of cases, confidential information will be stored as facts in ABoxes or
databases used in connection with ontologies. For instance,
Grau (2010) mentions shared patient data records, for which
hiding information is indispensable in order to preserve the
privacy of the patients. So far no method is able to deal with
these situations properly, if the data are to be shared.
The first method for uniform interpolation in ALC, presented in Wang et al. (2009), already considers ontologies
with ABoxes. This method is based on computing the dis-

Uniform interpolation and the dual task of forgetting restrict
the ontology to a specified subset of concept and role names.
This makes them useful tools for ontology analysis, ontology evolution and information hiding. Most previous research focused on uniform interpolation of TBoxes. However, especially for applications in privacy and information
hiding, it is essential that uniform interpolation methods can
deal with ABoxes as well. We present the first method that
can compute uniform interpolants of any ALC ontology with
ABoxes. ABoxes bring their own challenges when computing uniform interpolants, possibly requiring disjunctive statements or nominals in the resulting ABox. Our method can
compute representations of uniform interpolants in ALCO.
An evaluation on realistic ontologies shows that these uniform interpolants can be practically computed, and can often
even be presented in pure ALC.

Introduction
Ontologies are knowledge bases that are used in diverse applications ranging from medicine, bio-informatics and software development to the semantic web. They are used to define and store conceptual information about a domain of interest, and are usually represented using a description logic.
Often, an ontology consists of a TBox and an ABox. The
TBox, containing terminological information, defines concepts and relations. The ABox, containing factual information, uses these defined concepts and relations to make assertions about individuals.
Uniform interpolation allows for information that is irrelevant for a new context, or that should be hidden from certain users, to be removed from an ontology. This is done by
restricting the set of concept and relation symbols that occur
in the ontology, preserving all entailments of the original
ontology that are expressible in the restricted signature. An
alternative view of uniform interpolation is forgetting. The
aim of forgetting is to eliminate a set of concept and role
symbols from an ontology in such a way that all entailments
in the remaining signature are preserved.
Uniform interpolation has numerous applications, of
which we give some examples; more examples can be found
in Lutz and Wolter (2011) and Ludwig and Konev (2014).
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

175

