Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Ontology Module Extraction via Datalog Reasoning
Ana Armas Romero, Mark Kaminski,
Bernardo Cuenca Grau and Ian Horrocks
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK

model of M into a model of T by (re-)interpreting only the
symbols outside Σ; such an M preserves all second-order
entailments of T w.r.t. Σ (Konev et al. 2013). A weaker and
more flexible notion is deductive inseparability, which requires only that T and M entail the same Σ-formulas in
a given query language. Unfortunately, the decision problems associated with module extraction are invariably of
high complexity, and often undecidable. For model inseparability, checking whether M is a Σ-module in T is undecidable even if T is restricted to be in the description logic
(DL) EL, for which standard reasoning is tractable. For deductive inseparability, the problem is typically decidable for
lightweight DLs and “reasonable” query languages, albeit
of high worst-case complexity; e.g., the problem is already
E XP T IME-hard for EL if we consider concept inclusions as
the query language (Lutz and Wolter 2010). Practical algorithms that ensure minimality of the extracted modules are
known only for acyclic ELI (Konev et al. 2013) and DLLite (Kontchakov, Wolter, and Zakharyaschev 2010).
Practical module extraction techniques are typically based
on sound approximations: they ensure that the extracted
fragment M is a module (i.e., inseparable from T w.r.t.
Σ), but they give no minimality guarantee. The most popular such techniques are based on a family of polynomially
checkable conditions called syntactic locality (Cuenca Grau
et al. 2007; 2008; Sattler, Schneider, and Zakharyaschev
2009); in particular, ⊥-locality and >⊥∗ -locality. Each
locality-based module M enjoys a number of desirable
properties for applications: (i) it is model inseparable from
T ; (ii) it is depleting, in the sense that T \ M is inseparable from the empty ontology w.r.t. Σ; (iii) it contains all
justifications (a.k.a. explanations) in T of every Σ-formula
entailed by T ; and (iv) last but not least, it can be computed
efficiently, even for very expressive ontology languages.
Locality-based techniques are easy to implement, and surprisingly effective in practice. Their main drawback is that
the extracted modules can be rather large, which limits their
usefulness in some applications (Del Vescovo et al. 2013).
One way to address this issue is to develop techniques that
more closely approximate minimal modules while still preserving properties (i)–(iii). Efforts in this direction have confirmed that locality-based modules can be far from optimal in practice (Gatens, Konev, and Wolter 2014); however, these techniques apply only to rather restricted ontol-

Abstract
Module extraction—the task of computing a (preferably
small) fragment M of an ontology T that preserves entailments over a signature Σ—has found many applications in
recent years. Extracting modules of minimal size is, however, computationally hard, and often algorithmically infeasible. Thus, practical techniques are based on approximations,
where M provably captures the relevant entailments, but is
not guaranteed to be minimal. Existing approximations, however, ensure that M preserves all second-order entailments of
T w.r.t. Σ, which is stronger than is required in many applications, and may lead to large modules in practice. In this paper
we propose a novel approach in which module extraction is
reduced to a reasoning problem in datalog. Our approach not
only generalises existing approximations in an elegant way,
but it can also be tailored to preserve only specific kinds of
entailments, which allows us to extract significantly smaller
modules. An evaluation on widely-used ontologies has shown
very encouraging results.

1

Introduction

Module extraction is the task of computing, given an ontology T and a signature of interest Σ, a (preferably small)
subset M of T (a module) that preserves all relevant entailments in T over the set of symbols Σ. Such an M is indistinguishable from T w.r.t. Σ, and T can be safely replaced
with M in applications of T that use only the symbols in Σ.
Module extraction has received a great deal of attention in recent years (Stuckenschmidt, Parent, and Spaccapietra 2009; Cuenca Grau et al. 2008; Seidenberg and Rector 2006; Kontchakov, Wolter, and Zakharyaschev 2010;
Gatens, Konev, and Wolter 2014; Del Vescovo et al. 2011;
Nortje, Britz, and Meyer 2013), and modules have found
a wide range of applications, including ontology reuse
(Cuenca Grau et al. 2008; Jiménez-Ruiz et al. 2008), matching (Jiménez-Ruiz and Cuenca Grau 2011), debugging (Suntisrivaraporn et al. 2008; Ludwig 2014) and classification
(Armas Romero, Cuenca Grau, and Horrocks 2012; Tsarkov
and Palmisano 2012; Cuenca Grau et al. 2010).
The preservation of relevant entailments is formalised via
inseparability relations. The strongest notion is model inseparability, which requires that it must be possible to turn any
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1410

