Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

V-MIN: Efficient Reinforcement Learning
through Demonstrations and Relaxed Reward Demands
David Martı́nez and Guillem Alenyà and Carme Torras
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial (CSIC-UPC)
C/ Llorens i Artigas 4-6. 08028 Barcelona, Spain
{dmartinez,galenya,torras}@iri.upc.edu

V-MIN introduces a new parameter Vmin in R-MAX that
defines the minimum expected value to be achieved. When
this Vmin value cannot be reached, active demonstrations are
requested as in REX-D, until a policy that guarantees such
value is obtained. For example, if the reward is based on the
time spent, Vmin can be the time limit to complete the task.
The claims for this simple but powerful algorithm are:

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a common paradigm for
learning tasks in robotics. However, a lot of exploration
is usually required, making RL too slow for high-level
tasks. We present V-MIN, an algorithm that integrates
teacher demonstrations with RL to learn complex tasks
faster. The algorithm combines active demonstration
requests and autonomous exploration to find policies
yielding rewards higher than a given threshold Vmin .
This threshold sets the degree of quality with which the
robot is expected to complete the task, thus allowing
the user to either opt for very good policies that require
many learning experiences, or to be more permissive
with sub-optimal policies that are easier to learn. The
threshold can also be increased online to force the system to improve its policies until the desired behavior
is obtained. Furthermore, the algorithm generalizes previously learned knowledge, adapting well to changes.
The performance of V-MIN has been validated through
experimentation, including domains from the international planning competition. Our approach achieves the
desired behavior where previous algorithms failed.

1

• V-MIN is a more general approach in that it is able to
tackle domains where policies may yield different values depending on the quality of the plans, while REX-D
focuses on domains with just one possible goal value.
V-MIN allows to choose the quality of the desired policies, spending just the required amount of time to learn
policies that satisfy such quality requirements. Therefore,
worse but easier policies can be learned when there are
tight time constraints, while better policies can be learned
when speed is not a very important issue.
• The Vmin value can be changed online to ease the use of
V-MIN, not requiring to set a proper Vmin in advance. The
teacher can slowly increment it until the desired behavior
is obtained. Thus in-depth knowledge of the system is not
required to use it, and the adaptation to new tasks with
different value requirements becomes easier.

Introduction

A very important challenge in robotics is the ability to perform new unknown tasks and adapt to changes. Learning has
become a crucial procedure to get such versatility. However,
learning high-level tasks with robots can be very time consuming, and complex tasks may prove intractable for most
learning methods. We present V-MIN, a novel algorithm that
learns new tasks from scratch, adapts quickly to unexpected
changes, and can be tuned online to require the best policies
or be more permissive and accept sub-optimal policies.
V-MIN is based on the RL algorithms R-MAX (Brafman
and Tennenholtz 2003) and REX-D (Martı́nez et al. 2014).
R-MAX obtains near-optimal policies with a polynomial
number of samples in Markov Decision Processes (MDP).
It follows the principle of “optimism under uncertainty” to
encourage active exploration until good policies are learned.
REX-D, which is based on E 3 (Kearns and Singh 2002),
issues demonstration requests whenever it gets to a known
state for which it cannot obtain a plan to reach the goal.

• It can adapt to changes and new tasks, reusing all its previously learned knowledge. Moreover, teacher demonstrations permit learning new actions as required.
The paper is organized as follows. First the related work
and background needed are introduced. Afterwards, in Sec.
4 the V-MIN algorithm is presented. Finally, Sec. 5 shows a
set of experiments measuring the system performance.

2

Related Work

We are focusing on robotics tasks in which actions take
long to execute and the decision maker has long periods
of time to process little input data. Model-based RL has
been applied successfully to such high-level tasks (Kober
and Peters 2012) A more compact representation of the
model is obtained with relational RL approaches (Diuk, Cohen, and Littman 2008; Rodrigues, Gérard, and Rouveirol
2011), leading to improved results in domains containing
several objects of the same type. Lang, Toussaint, and Kersting (2010) proposed the REX algorithm, that introduces

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2857

