Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Efficient Top-k Shortest-Path Distance Queries on
Large Networks by Pruned Landmark Labeling
Takuya Akiba† , Takanori Hayashi† , Nozomi Nori‡ , Yoichi Iwata† and Yuichi Yoshida§k
†The University of Tokyo, 113-0033, Tokyo, Japan ‡Kyoto University, 606-8501, Kyoto, Japan
§National Institute of Informatics, 101-8430, Tokyo, Japan
kPreferred Infrastructure, Inc., 113-0033, Tokyo, Japan
{t.akiba,thayashi,y.iwata}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp, nozomi@ml.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, yyoshida@nii.ac.jp
Abstract
We propose an indexing scheme for top-k shortestpath distance queries on graphs, which is useful in a
wide range of important applications such as networkaware searches and link prediction. While many efficient methods for answering standard (top-1) distance
queries have been developed, none of these methods
are directly extensible to top-k distance queries. We
develop a new framework for top-k distance queries
based on 2-hop cover and then present an efficient indexing algorithm based on the recently proposed pruned
landmark labeling scheme. The scalability, efficiency
and robustness of our method is demonstrated in extensive experimental results. Moreover, we demonstrate
the usefulness of top-k distance queries by applying
them to link prediction, the most fundamental graph
problem in the AI and Web communities.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Examples of connection between two vertices.
Table 1: Distances and top-k distances between the two
black vertices in Figure 1.
Graph
(Top-1) Distance
Top-k Distances
(a)
(b)
(c)

Introduction
The shortest-path distance between vertices in a network
is a fundamental concept in graph theory and is widely
applied in the AI and Web communities. For example,
because the distances between vertices indicate the relevance among the vertices, they can identify other users
or contents that best match a user’s intent in sociallysensitive searches (Vieira et al. 2007; Yahia et al. 2008;
Maniu and Cautis 2013). In context-aware searches, they
are used to assign higher ranks to web pages more related
to the currently visited web page (Ukkonen et al. 2008;
Potamias et al. 2009).
However, there is a fundamental drawback of basing relevance on distance alone. Specifically, distances should be
integers and the diameters of real-world networks are typically small (Watts and Strogatz 1998). Such small diameter
greatly reduce the number of possible distances and preclude
the full use of the underlying structure.
This problem is clearly depicted in Figure 1. In each graph
in the figure, the distance between the pair of black vertices
is four. Hence, based on distance alone, the black pairs in
all three graphs have the same similarity. However, the pair
in graph (c) seems more tightly connected than the pairs in

4
4
4

[4, 6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8, . . . ]
[4, 4, 4, 6, 6, 6, 6, . . . ]
[4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, . . . ]

graphs (a) and (b), since this pair is connected by a greater
number of shortest paths.
This intuitive concept can be naturally implemented by
adopting the top-k shortest paths and top-k distances (formally defined later). Table 1 presents the top-k distances between the pair of black vertices in each graph of Figure 1.
Although the pairs in each graph are separated by the same
distance, their top-k distances markedly vary, providing a
potential means of distinguishing these three graph structures.
However, determining the top-k distances between vertices is computationally expensive. The naive approach is
to apply a variant of Dijkstra’s algorithm that visits the
same vertex k times. This approach consumes O((n + m)k)
and O((n log n + m)k) time on unweighted and weighted
graphs, respectively, where n and m are the numbers of vertices and edges, respectively. In the above-mentioned applications, the top-k distances must be interactively computed
for many vertex pairs on large social and web graphs, requiring a much faster algorithm. Eppstein (Eppstein 1998) improved the time complexity to O(n+m+k) and O(n log n+
m+k) on unweighted and weighted graphs respectively, but
his algorithm remains prohibitively slow.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

