Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Jointly Modeling Deep Video and Compositional Text to Bridge Vision and
Language in a Uniﬁed Framework
Ran Xu

Caiming Xiong

Wei Chen

Jason J. Corso

Dept. of Computer Science
SUNY at Buffalo
rxu2@buffalo.edu

Department of Statistics
UCLA
caimingxiong@ucla.edu

Department of Computer Science
SUNY at Buffalo
wchen23@buffalo.edu

Department of EECS
University of Michagan
jjcorso@eecs.umich.edu

Abstract
Recently, joint video-language modeling has been attracting
more and more attention. However, most existing approaches
focus on exploring the language model upon on a ﬁxed visual model. In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed framework
that jointly models video and the corresponding text sentences. The framework consists of three parts: a compositional semantics language model, a deep video model and a
joint embedding model. In our language model, we propose a
dependency-tree structure model that embeds sentence into a
continuous vector space, which preserves visually grounded
meanings and word order. In the visual model, we leverage
deep neural networks to capture essential semantic information from videos. In the joint embedding model, we minimize
the distance of the outputs of the deep video model and compositional language model in the joint space, and update these
two models jointly. Based on these three parts, our system
is able to accomplish three tasks: 1) natural language generation, and 2) video retrieval and 3) language retrieval. In
the experiments, the results show our approach outperforms
SVM, CRF and CCA baselines in predicting Subject-VerbObject triplet and natural sentence generation, and is better
than CCA in video retrieval and language retrieval tasks.

Figure 1: Illustration of three important tasks, the upper box shows
natural language generation, middle box shows video retrieval and
bottom box shows language retrieval. The red box indicates the
ground truth result.

Introduction
More than 100,000 hours of videos are uploaded to YouTube
everyday, and more than 100,000 new videos are added
and shared in Facebook everyday. Most of those videos are
paired with natural language descriptions, some of which are
as simple as tags or as detailed as paragraphs. Those descriptions provide us with the possibility of joint video and human language understanding and thus support many promising applications, e.g. turning the surveillance video from last
night into a page of incident report, teaching robots to recognize certain objects with human language, or recommending YouTube viewers more interesting video clips leveraging
both text and video content analysis.
In such applications, there are three essential tasks, i.e.
video retrieval (Song, Yang, and Huang 2011), language retrieval (Das, Srihari, and Corso 2013) and ultimately, natural
language generation (NLG) from novel videos (Barbu et al.
2012; Das et al. 2013; Rohrbach et al. 2013; Gupta et al.

2009; Krishnamoorthy et al. 2013; Guadarrama et al. 2013;
Thomason et al. 2014), as depicted in Fig. 1. All these problems have been pushed forward in the artiﬁcial intelligence,
multimedia, computer vision, natural language processing
and machine learning communities.
Along the way towards these tasks, researchers have spent
decades of efforts in video content understanding, including action classiﬁcation (Wang et al. 2011; Sadanand and
Corso 2012; Karpathy et al. 2014), detection (Tian, Sukthankar, and Shah 2013; Zhang, Zhu, and Derpanis 2013)
and tagging (Yao et al. 2013; Moxley, Mei, and Manjunath
2010). We believe it is meaningful to push one step further
and generate sentences for video because it is more natural
to human perception and encodes spatio-temporal relationships and richer details from videos.
In transducing videos into sentences, a line of work has
investigated marrying state-of-the-art computer vision (Li et

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2346

