Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Nyström Approximation for Sparse Kernel Methods:
Theoretical Analysis and Empirical Evaluation
Zenglin Xu
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Big Data Research Center
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
zenglin@gmail.com

Rong Jin

Bin Shen

Shenghuo Zhu

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Eng.
Michigan State University

Dept. of Computer Science
Purdue University

Alibaba Group

Abstract

dense matrices. Recent research (Zhang, Tsang, and Kwok
2008; Farahat, Ghodsi, and Kamel 2011; Talwalkar and
Rostamizadeh 2010; Kumar, Mohri, and Talwalkar 2012;
Mackey, Talwalkar, and Jordan 2011; Gittens and Mahoney
2013) on the Nyström method have shown that the approximation error can be theoretically bounded. Jin et al. (2013)
further shows that the
√ approximation error bound can be improved from O(n/ m) to O(n/mp−1 ) (where n denotes
the number of instances and m denotes the number of dimensions) when the eigenvalues of the kernel matrix satisfy
a p-power law distribution.

Nyström approximation is an effective approach to accelerate the computation of kernel matrices in many kernel methods. In this paper, we consider the Nyström approximation
for sparse kernel methods. Instead of relying on the low-rank
assumption of the original kernels, which sometimes does
not hold in some applications, we take advantage of the restricted eigenvalue condition, which has been proved to be robust for sparse kernel methods. Based on the restricted eigenvalue condition, we have provided not only the approximation bound for the original kernel matrix but also the recovery
bound for the sparse solutions of sparse kernel regression. In
addition to the theoretical analysis, we also demonstrate the
good performance of the Nyström approximation for sparse
kernel regression on real world data sets.

In this paper, we focus on finding the approximation
bound of the Nyström method for sparse kernel methods.
Although previous studies have demonstrated the good approximation bounds of the Nyström method for kernel methods, most of which are based on the assumption of the low
rank of kernels (Jin et al. 2013). While if kernels are not
low rank, Nyström approximations can usually lead to suboptimal performances. To alleviate the strong assumption in
the seeking of the approximation bounds, we take a more
general assumption that the design matrix K ensuring the restricted isometric property (Koltchinskii 2011). In particular,
the new assumption obeys the restricted eigenvalue condition (Koltchinskii 2011; Bickel, Ritov, and Tsybakov 2009),
which has been shown to be more general than several
other similar assumptions used in sparsity literature (Candes and Tao 2007; Donoho, Elad, and Temlyakov 2006;
Zhang and Huang 2008). Based on the restricted eigenvalue
condition, we have provided error bounds for kernel approximation and recovery rate in sparse kernel regression. Thus
we can accurately recover the sparse solution even with a
modest number of random samples. It is important to note
that the expected risk of the learning function will be small
by exploiting the generalization error bound for data dependent hypothesis space (Shi, Feng, and Zhou 2011). To further evaluate the performance of the Nyström method for
sparse kernel regression, we conduct experiments on both
synthetic data and real-world data sets. Experimental results
have indicated the huge acceleration of the Nyström method
on training time while maintaining the same level of prediction errors.

Introduction
Kernel methods (Schölkopf and Smola 2002; Xu et al. 2009)
have received a lot of attention in recent studies of machine
learning. These methods project data into high-dimensional
or even infinite-dimensional spaces via kernel mapping
functions. Despite the strong generalization ability induced
by kernel methods, they usually suffer from the high computation complexity of calculating the kernel matrix (also
called Gram matrix). Although low-rank decomposition
techniques(e.g., Cholesky Decomposition (Fine and Scheinberg 2002; Bach and Jordan 2005)), and truncating methods(e.g., Kernel Tapering (Shen, Xu, and Allebach 2014;
Furrer, Genton, and Nychka 2006)) can accelerate the calculation of the kernel matrix, they still need to compute the
kernel matrix.
An effective approach to avoid the computation cost of
computing the entire kernel matrix is to approximate the
kernel matrix by the Nyström method (Williams and Seeger
2001), which provides low-rank approximation to the kernel matrix by sampling from its columns. The Nyström
method has been proven useful in a number of applications,
such as image processing (Fowlkes et al. 2004; Wang et
al. 2009), which typically involve computations with large
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3115

