Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Instance-Driven Ontology Evolution in DL-Lite
Zhe Wang and Kewen Wang and Zhiqiang Zhuang
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Australia

Guilin Qi
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
Abstract

ing (Lehmann and Hitzler 2010), where terminological relations are learnt from example data provided by domain
experts. The development of biomedicine ontologies is described as an evolution process (Pesquita and Couto 2012)—
as new knowledge is discovered daily, the initial ontology
needs to be enriched with or refined by the new knowledge continuously. Hence, automated learning and incremental revision techniques can largely benefit the ontology engineering. Several ontology learning approaches
have been proposed in the literature and effective learning tools have been developed (Lehmann and Hitzler 2010;
Ma and Distel 2013). An obvious requirement in ontology
learning is that the learnt ontology must be consistent with
the example data. However, when new data instances become available, it is possible that the new data contradicts
some previously learnt axioms, which indicates that mistakes were made in previous learning processes. Thus, a
challenge is how to revise the existing ontology according
to the new data. In DLs, it amounts to the question of how
to effectively revise a TBox w.r.t. an ABox.

The development and maintenance of large and complex ontologies are often time-consuming and error-prone. Thus, automated ontology learning and evolution have attracted intensive research interest. In data-centric applications where
ontologies are designed from the data or automatically learnt
from it, when new data instances are added that contradict
the ontology, it is often desirable to incrementally revise the
ontology according to the added data. In description logics,
this problem can be intuitively formulated as the operation
of TBox contraction, i.e., rational elimination of certain axioms from the logical consequences of a TBox, and it is w.r.t.
an ABox. In this paper we introduce a model-theoretic approach to such a contraction problem by using an alternative
semantic characterisation of DL-Lite TBoxes. We show that
entailment checking (without necessarily first computing the
contraction result) is in coNP, which does not shift the corresponding complexity in propositional logic, and the problem
is tractable when the size of the new data is bounded.

Introduction

TBox debugging (Kalyanpur et al. 2006; Schlobach et
al. 2007) and interactive revision approaches (Nikitina,
Rudolph, and Glimm 2012) can pinpoint the problematic axioms, and most of TBox repair approaches seek
to eliminate a minimal number of axioms to restore consistency. Similar syntax-based approaches were adopted
in revision (Haase and Stojanovic 2005; Qi et al. 2008;
Ribeiro and Wassermann 2009). However, most syntaxbased approaches to TBox change lack of a suitable semantic justification, which is partially reflected in their inability of preserving implicit knowledge. For example, given
T = {Bird v CanFly, Mammal v ¬CanFly}, the revision of T by A = {CanFly(bat), Mammal(bat)} using
syntax-based approaches in (Haase and Stojanovic 2005;
Ribeiro and Wassermann 2009) will discard implicit information Bird v ¬Mammal, though it is not involved in the
contradiction. To resolve this issue, some more recent works
(Horridge, Parsia, and Sattler 2008; Calvanese et al. 2010;
Cuenca Grau et al. 2012) advocate to apply syntax-based
TBox change on the deductive closure cl(T ) of the initial
TBox T instead of T itself. However, there may not exist
a unique optimal solution to such change (Calvanese et al.
2010), since often multiple minimal sets of axioms in T (or
cl(T )) exist that are responsible for the inconsistency.

With the Web Ontology Language (OWL) and its latest
version OWL 2 being standardised by the WWW Consortium (W3C), a large number of professional and comprehensive ontologies have been developed for data modelling
and access. Existing large ontologies like NCI (Hartel et
al. 2005) are mostly hand-crafted by human experts. The
development and maintenance of such large ontologies are
often time-consuming and error-prone. Recently, automated
ontology learning (Baader et al. 2007; Lehmann and Hitzler 2010; Konev, Lutz, and Wolter 2013) and evolution
(Qi and Yang 2008; Qi et al. 2008; Ribeiro and Wassermann 2009; Qi and Du 2009; Wang, Wang, and Topor 2010;
Zheleznyakov et al. 2010; Cuenca Grau et al. 2012; Qi et al.
2014) have attracted intensive interest.
Although it is often conceived that ontologies, once established, are more stable and reliable than data, it is shown
in (Pesquita and Couto 2012) that automated ontology enrichment and refinement are desired in applications such
as biomedical ontologies, which are constant evolving due
to new understandings of the domain. One typical approach to the automation of the process is ontology learnCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1656

