Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Online Boosting Algorithms for
Anytime Transfer and Multitask Learning
Boyu Wang and Joelle Pineau
School of Computer Science
McGill University, Montreal, Canada
boyu.wang@mail.mcgill.ca, jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca

where data from either the source or target domains arrives
sequentially, and one wishes to achieve good performance
even with only a few examples. Our work is primarily motivated by the goal of developing effective patient-speciﬁc
seizure detection algorithms for individuals with epilepsy.
In this setting, when we encounter a new patient, we may
only have a few recorded seizures from this target patient,
yet we wish to achieve good detection accuracy by leveraging annotated seizures from a library of source patients. As
we get more and more seizures from the target patient, we
would expect the accuracy of the patient-speciﬁc classiﬁer
to improve and rely less on the source patients. This is the
online transfer learning setting we consider in this paper.

Abstract
The related problems of transfer learning and multitask
learning have attracted signiﬁcant attention, generating
a rich literature of models and algorithms. Yet most existing approaches are studied in an ofﬂine fashion, implicitly assuming that data from different domains are
given as a batch. Such an assumption is not valid in
many real-world applications where data samples arrive
sequentially, and one wants a good learner even from
few examples. The goal of our work is to provide sound
extensions to existing transfer and multitask learning
algorithms such that they can be used in an anytime
setting. More speciﬁcally, we propose two novel online boosting algorithms, one for transfer learning and
one for multitask learning, both designed to leverage
the knowledge of instances in other domains. The experimental results show state-of-the-art empirical performance on standard benchmarks, and we present results of using our methods for effectively detecting new
seizures in patients with epilepsy from very few previous samples.

A different yet related scenario, which is also of interest,
is the following: imagine we have seizure recordings from a
large group of patients, and want to produce patient-speciﬁc
seizure detectors in a multitask setting. Yet we are unable to
apply traditional methods, which use all the data at once, due
to memory issues from the size of the dataset. Here again,
having an anytime solution to the multitask problem may be
very beneﬁcial.

Introduction

To tackle these problems, we propose two new anytime boosting-based learning algorithms, one for transfer
learning and one for multitask learning. Our work is inspired by results on online boosting algorithms (Oza 2001;
Oza and Russell 2001). The main technical challenge is how
to generalize the existing online boosting algorithm to appropriately deal with instances from different domains/tasks.
We ﬁrst develop an online version of TrAdaBoost (Dai et al.
2007). There idea here is that at each time step, the base
learner receive a sample either from source domain or target
domain. The ﬁltering mechanism of TrAdaBoost can automatically select the samples that can be reused to beneﬁt
the online learning process in target domain. We present the
algorithm and discuss its convergence properties, and and
evaluate empirical performance on benchmark datasets.

Transfer learning has been extensively studied over the last
two decades (Pan and Yang 2010). By leveraging knowledge from different but related domains (source domains)
and then applying it to the domain we are currently interested in (target domain), the learning performance can be
improved. This is especially beneﬁcial when the training
samples in the target domain are limited while sufﬁcient
knowledge of related source domains are available. Multitask learning is a closely related framework where the goal is
to simultaneously learn multiple related tasks, assuming that
some common knowledge can be shared across the tasks. In
some sense, multitask learning can be viewed as a symmetric transfer learning problem where the source domain and
target domain are considered equally and are jointly learned.
Most existing transfer learning and multitask algorithms
apply primarily in batch mode (Dai et al. 2007; Eaton and
desJardins 2011; Caruana 1997; Argyriou, Evgeniou, and
Pontil 2007), where data from all tasks (source and target)
is made available at once. However there are many domains

As a second contribution, we present an online multitask
boosting algorithm that extends previous work by (Eaton
and desJardins 2011). Our framework exploits task relatedness by symmetrically generalizing transfer boosting algorithm. We apply the proposed algorithm to a standard benchmark as well as to a complex seizure detection task.

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3038

