Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Syntax-Independent Approach to Forgetting in Disjunctive Logic Programs
James P. Delgrande

Kewen Wang

School of Computing Science
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, B.C. V5A 1S6
Canada
jim@cs.sfu.ca

School of Information and Communication Technology
Griffith University,
Brisbane, QLD 4111
Australia
k.wang@griffith.edu.au

is, forgetting is given by φ[p/>] ∨ φ[p/⊥]. (Lin and Reiter 1994) investigated the theory of forgetting for first order logic and its application in reasoning about action. Forgetting has been applied in various settings, among them
resolving conflicts (Eiter and Wang 2008; Zhang and Foo
1997), and ontology comparison and reuse (Kontchakov,
Wolter, and Zakharyaschev 2008; Konev et al. 2013).
In recent years, answer set programming (ASP) (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988; Baral 2003; Gebser et al. 2012)
has become prominent as a knowledge representation language within the logic programming paradigm. However,
given the nonmonotonic foundation of ASP, the Boole definition for forgetting does not extend readily to logic programs. In the past few years, several approaches have been
proposed for forgetting in ASP (Eiter and Wang 2006; 2008;
Wang, Sattar, and Su 2005; Zhang, Foo, and Wang 2005;
Zhang and Foo 2006). These approaches are generally
syntactic, and the result of forgetting may differ between
programs that are strongly equivalent.1 For example, in
(Zhang, Foo, and Wang 2005; Zhang and Foo 2006) forgetting is defined in terms of program transformations, and
is not based on answer set semantics or SE models. A
semantic theory of forgetting for normal logic programs
under answer set semantics is introduced in (Wang, Sattar, and Su 2005), in which a sound and complete algorithm is developed based on a series of program transformations; this theory is further developed and extended
to disjunctive logic programs in (Eiter and Wang 2006;
2008). However, this theory of forgetting is defined in terms
of answer sets rather than SE models, and so again is not
syntax-independent.
In order to use forgetting in its full generality, for dealing with relevance or predicate hiding, or in composing, decomposing, and reusing answer set programs, it is desirable
for a definition to be given in terms of the logical content
of a program, that is in terms of SE models. For example, the reuse of knowledge bases requires that when a subprogram Q in a large program P is substituted with an equivalent program Q0 , the resulting program should be equivalent to P . This is not the case where equivalence is defined
in terms of preserving answer sets, due to the nonmonotonic character of ASP. As a result, two definitions of for-

Abstract
In this paper, we present an approach to forgetting in disjunctive logic programs, where forgetting an atom from a program amounts to a reduction in the signature of that program.
Notably, the approach is syntax-independent, so that if two
programs are strongly equivalent, then the result of forgetting a given atom in each program is also strongly equivalent.
Our central definition of forgetting is abstract: forgetting an
atom from program P is characterised by the set of those SE
consequences of P that do not mention the atom to be forgotten. We provide an equivalent, syntactic, characterization
in which forgetting an atom p is given by those rules in the
program that do not mention p, together with rules obtained
by a single inference step from those rules that do mention
p. Forgetting is shown to have appropriate properties; in particular, answer sets are preserved in forgetting an atom. As
well, forgetting an atom via the syntactic characterization results in a modest (at worst quadratic) blowup in the program
size. Finally, we provide a prototype implementation of this
approach to forgetting.

Introduction
Forgetting is an operation for eliminating variables from a
knowledge base (Lin and Reiter 1994; Lang, Liberatore, and
Marquis 2003). It constitutes a reduction in an agent’s language or, more accurately, the agent’s signature. It has also
been studied under different names, such as variable elimination, uniform interpolation and relevance (Subramanian,
Greiner, and Pearl 1997). Forgetting has various possible
applications in a reasoning system. For example, in query
answering, if one can determine what is relevant to a query,
then forgetting the irrelevant part of a knowledge base may
yield a more efficient operation. Forgetting may also provide a formal account and justification of predicate hiding,
for example for privacy issues. As well, forgetting may be
useful in summarising a knowledge base, reusing part of a
knowledge base or clarifying relations between predicates.
The best-known definition of forgetting is with respect to
classical propositional logic, and is due to George Boole
(Boole 1854). To forget an atom p from a formula φ in
propositional logic, one disjoins the result of uniformly substituting > for p in φ with the result of substituting ⊥; that
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1482

See the next section for definitions.

