Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Tractability of Planning with Loops
Siddharth Srivastava1 Shlomo Zilberstein2 Abhishek Gupta1 Pieter Abbeel1 Stuart Russell1
1

2

Computer Science Division, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003

Abstract
We create a unified framework for analyzing and synthesizing plans with loops for solving problems with nondeterministic numeric effects and a limited form of partial observability. Three different action models—with deterministic, qualitative non-deterministic and Boolean nondeterministic semantics—are handled using a single abstract
representation. We establish the conditions under which the
correctness and termination of solutions, represented as abstract policies, can be verified. We also examine the feasibility
of learning abstract policies from examples. We demonstrate
our techniques on several planning problems and show that
they apply to challenging real-world tasks such as doing the
laundry with a PR2 robot. These results resolve a number of
open questions about planning with loops and facilitate the
development of new algorithms and applications.

1

Figure 1: PR2 robot doing the laundry using our planning approach for addressing partial observability and non-determinism.

cannot be determined precisely. Doing the laundry thus represents a challenging planning problem involving partial observability, non-determinism, and unknown quantities of objects. Yet, humans typically consider this task simple enough
to be boring. Intuitively, they construct cyclic plans with
strong guarantees of correctness and termination: they know
that the solution must involve iterations of placing clothes
in the basket, carrying the basket to the laundry room, transferring clothes to the washer and so on. Such plans are compact, broadly applicable (regardless of the number of clothes
in the initial heap) and surprisingly efficient at dealing with
partial observability and non-determinism.
We examine the feasibility of planning with loops in popular formulations of planning with different action semantics (deterministic or non-deterministic), criteria for correctness (strong cyclic or terminating), and classes of solutions (memoryless or finite-memory abstract policies). We
also provide an effective approach for computing plans with
loops by learning from examples. First, we characterize precisely different frameworks for planning using action models with deterministic and non-deterministic effects (Sec. 2).
We focus on actions that have numeric effects on a set of
counter variables. This captures the fundamental aspects of
planning with loops, as the counter variables can represent
the cardinalities of sets characterized by different properties (Boolean planning problems are a special case with 0/1
counters). Second, we prove novel results categorizing the
types of plans with loops that are necessary for expressing
solutions based on the properties of the planning framework
(Sec. 3). Third, we show that for most of the planning frameworks it is possible to construct plans with loops by learning from examples (Sec. 3.3). Finally we demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm for learning from examples on
problems from the literature and show that it allows the PR2

Introduction

The inclusion of loops in plans is crucial for several reasons.
First, loops allow compact plans to repeat a sequence of actions, many times, for example in order to produce a sufficient quantity of a certain material. Second, loops facilitate
the creation of plans that handle partial observability or nondeterministic actions—both of which introduce uncertainty
about the number of times certain actions must be repeated
to meet desired conditions. Finally, loops can help increase
the applicability conditions of a plan, making it more general
and more useful. The utility of loops has motivated a range
of planning paradigms with different guarantees of termination and correctness (Cimatti et al. 2003; Levesque 2005;
Srivastava, Immerman, and Zilberstein 2008; Bonet, Palacios, and Geffner 2009; Hu and Levesque 2010; Hu and Giacomo 2011).
Consider for example a household robot that needs to do
the laundry. Its actions include picking up clothes from a table and a basket; placing clothes in the basket or the washer;
picking up the basket and placing it at a location in the laundry room; opening and closing the washer door and moving
from the laundry room to the washer room. A state-of-the-art
robot with advanced sensors and actuators, such as the PR2,
has to use a broad “pinch” grasp with its grippers to pick up
the clothes from a heap. The exact number of clothes in the
heap and the number that may be picked up with each grasp
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3393

