Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Incentive Networks∗
Yuezhou Lv

Thomas Moscibroda

Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
lvyz11@tsinghua.edu.cn

Microsoft Research & Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
moscitho@microsoft.com

Abstract

expresses how much a participant is willing to contribute
given a certain reward (e.g., a participant i may be willing
to work for Ci = 6 hours for a reward of Ri = $100). The
function g1 depends on the task, the individual person, and
circumstances, but it is generally considered to be concave
given the law of diminishing returns. Using this system of
equations, we P
can in principle compute the total amount of
reward T R = i Ri that needs to be paid to the participants
in
P order to achieve a total amount of contribution T C =
i Ci .
In this paper, we study a change to the above basic economic system and investigate to what extent directed altruism (Leider et al. 2009)—i.e., the motivational state whose
aim is to increase another person’s or friend’s welfare—can
be leveraged in order to increase the system’s efficiency.
Specifically, we consider Incentive Networks, a simple and
natural incentive mechanism in which a participant’s reward
not only depends on his own contribution (as in the basic
system above), but also in part on the contributions of his
social friends. To make this concrete, consider the following
examples of Incentive Network-based economic systems:
• Jobs with hourly wages–each worker is paid some money
for each hour of his own work, plus an additional amount
for each hour of his designated friends’ work.
• Membership rewards–a coffee shop offers loyalty membership rewards to a customer, whenever this customer
consumes a cup of coffee, as well as whenever one of his
designated friends consumes a cup of coffee.
In analogy to the basic economic system above, we can
model an Incentive Network-based economic system using
a system of equations. Assume each participant i has a set
of designated friends Ni :
X
Ri = α(Ci + µ
Cj ),

In a basic economic system, each participant receives
a (financial) reward according to his own contribution
to the system. In this work, we study an alternative approach – Incentive Networks – in which a participant’s
reward depends not only on his own contribution; but
also in part on the contributions made by his social
contacts or friends. We show that the key parameter
effecting the efficiency of such an Incentive Networkbased economic system depends on the participant’s degree of directed altruism. Directed altruism is the extent to which someone is willing to work if his work
results in a payment to his friend, rather than to himself. Specifically, we characterize the condition under
which an Incentive Network-based economy is more efficient than the basic ”pay-for-your-contribution” economy. We quantify by how much incentive networks can
reduce the total reward that needs to be paid to the
participants in order to achieve a certain overall contribution. Finally, we study the impact of the network
topology and various exogenous parameters on the efficiency of incentive networks. Our results suggest that
in many practical settings, Incentive Network-based reward systems or compensation structures could be more
efficient than the ubiquitous ’pay-for-your-contribution’
schemes.

1

Introduction

Consider the following basic economic system: There are n
participants each of which can make a contribution Ci towards a global task; and is rewarded for doing so with some
reward payment Ri . Assuming that a participant’s reward
is linear in her contribution (examples are plentiful, including hourly wages, club membership-rewards such as buy10-get-1-free, etc.), the resulting economic relation for every
participant i can be described as
Ri = αCi , Ci = g1 (Ri ).
Here, α is the “salary-factor”, which maps a certain amount
of contribution to a certain reward; and g1 is a function that

j∈Ni

Ci

= g1 (Rii ) + g2 (Rj1 i , Rj2 i , ..., Rjdi i ).

In this system, the pair (α, µ) describes the specific incentive mechanism that can be chosen by the system designer.
Specifically, µ determines how much reward is paid for a
participant’s own contribution relative to the contributions
of his friends j ∈ Ni , and α is the “salary-factor”. The key
is the new function g2 , which captures how directed altruism impacts a participant’s motivation to contribute. In other

∗

This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research Program of China Grant 2011CBA00300, 2011CBA00301,
the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61033001,
61361136003.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1270

