Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Effect of Spatial Pooler Initialization on Column Activity in
Hierarchical Temporal Memory
Mackenzie Leake

Liyu Xia

Kamil Rocki

Wayne Imaino

Scripps College
Claremont, CA
mleake8625@scrippscollege.edu

University of Chicago
Chicago, IL
jimmyxia@uchicago.edu

IBM Research
San Jose, CA
kmrocki@us.ibm.com

IBM Research
San Jose, CA
wayne1@us.ibm.com

Abstract

We consider inputs to be either overlapping or nonoverlapping. We use “overlapping” to describe inputs whose
binary representations share at least one on-bit and “nonoverlapping” to describe inputs whose binary representations share no on-bits. Here we study the specific initial conditions for parameters to pool overlapping inputs into similar sets of active columns and non-overlapping inputs into
dissimilar sets of active columns.

In the Hierarchical Temporal Memory (HTM) paradigm
the effect of overlap between inputs on the activation
of columns in the spatial pooler is studied. Numerical
results suggest that similar inputs are represented by
similar sets of columns and dissimilar inputs are represented by dissimilar sets of columns. It is shown that
the spatial pooler produces these results under certain
conditions for the connectivity and proximal thresholds
at initialization. Qualitative arguments about the learning dynamics of the spatial pooler are then discussed.

Formulation / Notation
We use the notation below to describe the status and behavior of the spatial pooler. In our formulation synaptic activity
for columns is stored in a permanence matrix, P . Each row
of P is a vector of permanence values associated with a certain column in the spatial pooler. For example, the value at
Pij denotes the strength of the connection between the i-th
column and the j-th bit of the binary input vector. Another
matrix called the connectivity matrix is a binary version of
P . This connectivity matrix denoted by C can be described
by C = P > τC , where τC is the synaptic threshold. This
notation indicates entry Cij is set to 1 if Pij > τC and 0
otherwise. We use Cj , the j-th row of C, to denote the connectivity of the j-th column in the spatial pooler.
If we consider the spatial pooler to be a function that maps
input vectors to SDR’s, the function can be formally characterized as the following:

Introduction
Inspired by the importance of time-dependent behavior and
prediction in the brain, Hierarchical Temporal Memory
(HTM) (Hawkins, Ahmad, and Dubinsky 2011), a machine
learning paradigm, enables real-time learning of sequences
and demonstrates predictive capabilities. Prior works have
explored the use of HTM for pattern recognition (Maltoni 2011), speech-based learning tasks (van Doremalen and
Boves 2008), and stock trading (Gabrielsson, Konig, and Johansson 2013). However, the mathematics of HTM has not
yet been studied widely.
As outlined in the HTM white paper (Hawkins, Ahmad,
and Dubinsky 2011), the spatial pooler, the first phase of
HTM, demonstrates efficient dimensionality reduction and
adaptation. The spatial pooler comprises a set of columns,
analogous to biological cortical columns, the fundamental
units of computation in the neocortex (Mountcastle 1997).
Each column has a set of synapses. Each synapse has an associated permanence value, the magnitude of which decides
whether the synapse is connected.
The spatial pooler is responsible for converting each input into an internal representation called a sparse distributed
representation (SDR), which is a set of columns that are activated by the input vector. In order to group similar inputs
and distinguish between differing inputs, the spatial pooler
should exhibit the following behavior: similar inputs map
to similar SDR’s, and dissimilar inputs map to dissimilar
SDR’s. The quality of these SDR’s is critical to the later predictive and temporal HTM phases, which predict and recognize sequences of SDR’s.

ov = Cx
c = ov > τo
where x is the input vector, ov is the vector of overlap scores
between the input x and C, and τo is the proximal threshold.
Here c is the SDR of x, and the proximal threshold, τo , determines whether there is sufficient overlap between an input
x and a particular column Cj to activate Cj .

Initialization
From our numerical experiments we find the initialization
of parameters influences the learning dynamics of the spatial pooler once inputs are introduced. Therefore, it is useful to find potential restrictions on the parameters upon
initialization so that certain intended behavior is achieved.
One intended behavior of the spatial pooler is to map nonoverlapping inputs to distinct columns. Using probabilistic

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4176

