Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Agnostic System Identification
for Monte Carlo Planning
Erik Talvitie
Mathematics and Computer Science
Franklin & Marshall College
erik.talvitie@fandm.edu

Abstract

bution of states visited by the current policy. This ensures
that the model will be accurate both in states that the expert
would enter and in states that the generated plans would enter. Ross and Bagnell derive agnostic guarantees for DAgger
that, roughly, promise that it will generate a policy that is
nearly as good as the plan one would obtain from the most
accurate model in the class.
There are, of course, many MBRL algorithms that could,
in principle, be applied in the agnostic setting, though relatively few provide performance guarantees in that case.
Schoknecht (2002), Parr et al. (2008), and Sutton et al.
(2008) all point out the equivalence between the optimal
value function in an approximate linear model and an approximate linear value function learned without a model.
This observation sheds light on what solution will be yielded
by linear models in the agnostic setting, but offers no performance guarantees regarding that solution. Sorg, Lewis, and
Singh (2010) and Joseph et al. (2013) both address the agnostic setting by adapting model parameters to directly improve agent performance (rather than model accuracy) via
policy gradient algorithms. As such they inherit the strengths
and weaknesses of gradient approaches – guaranteed convergence, but to a locally optimal model parameterization.
In contrast to the above approaches, DAgger is able to
provide general and strong agnostic performance guarantees. However, though the performance bound is agnostic
to the model class, the tightness of the bound relies upon the
assumption that the planner is near optimal. Furthermore, a
near-optimal plan must be computed at every iteration of the
algorithm. In sufficiently complex problems, obtaining even
a single near-optimal plan is typically infeasible.
This paper considers the interaction between the DAgger algorithm and Monte Carlo planning, a popular family
of methods that can offer good performance with computational complexity that is independent of the size of the state
space. This paper will focus on the simple one-ply Monte
Carlo planning algorithm, which has its roots in the work
of Tesauro and Galperin (1996). At every step the one-ply
Monte Carlo algorithm estimates the quality of each action
by averaging the returns of several sample rollouts that begin with the action and follow some rollout policy πr thereafter. We will see that, when coupled with this planner, the
DAgger algorithm can fail dramatically. While the model
is trained to be accurate in states the expert and the execu-

While model-based reinforcement learning is often
studied under the assumption that a fully accurate model
is contained within the model class, this is rarely true in
practice. When the model class may be fundamentally
limited, it can be difficult to obtain theoretical guarantees. Under some conditions the DAgger algorithm
promises a policy nearly as good as the plan obtained
from the most accurate model in the class, but only if the
planning algorithm is near-optimal, which is also rarely
the case in complex problems. This paper explores the
interaction between DAgger and Monte Carlo planning,
specifically showing that DAgger may perform poorly
when coupled with a sub-optimal planner. A novel variation of DAgger specifically for use with Monte Carlo
planning is derived and is shown to behave far better in
some cases where DAgger fails.

1

Introduction

Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) approaches
can typically be understood to consist of two main components: system identification (learning a model from observations) and planning (obtaining a policy from the learned
model). While these two problems have been extensively
studied separately, combining them raises additional challenges for both. This is especially true in the agnostic setting, where it is not assumed that a perfect model exists in
the model class. When the model is assumed to be inaccurate, it can be difficult to draw firm connections between its
properties and the quality of plans it generates. That said, it
is critical to study MBRL in the agnostic setting – perfect
models will rarely, if ever, be obtainable in complex, highdimensional problems of genuine interest.
Ross and Bagnell (2012) point out that the common
“textbook” framework for system identification (e.g. Ljung,
1999), in which a single batch of data is used to train a
model which is then used to obtain a policy, can fail catastrophically when the plan enters states that the training set
did not adequately cover. They introduce the DAgger (Data
Aggregator) algorithm, which iteratively generates training
sets containing states from a mixture of a given “exploration” distribution (supplied by an expert) and the distriCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2986

