Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Scaling-Up Inference in Markov Logic
Deepak Venugopal
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
dxv021000@utdallas.edu

Introduction

portance sampling approach called SampleSearch (Gogate
and Dechter 2011), to jump across regions/clusters in
the sampling-space that are fractured due to deterministic dependencies. Specifically, SampleSearch leverages SAT
solvers to sample the clusters while Gibbs sampling samples
within the clusters.
Our second approach, which is presented in (Venugopal
and Gogate 2013a), combines blocking and collapsing, two
widely used methods to improve the convergence of Gibbs
sampling, especially when the variables in the target distribution have logical dependencies and/or correlations. It
turns out that combining blocking and collapsing optimally
and tractably is a hard problem due to the complex interplay
between them. We formulated this as an optimization problem and showed that a solution to the optimization problem
yields an adaptive sampler that is superior in terms of accuracy and convergence to existing approaches.

Markov logic networks (Domingos and Lowd 2009)
(MLNs) combine the power of first-order logic and probabilistic graphical models and as a result are ideally suited
for solving large, complex problems in application domains
(e.g., NLP, computer vision, the Web, etc.) that have both
rich relational structure and large amount of uncertainty.
However, inference in these rich, relational representations
is quite challenging. Specifically, MLNs are defined as a set
of weighted first-order logic formulas and given a set of constants that represent objects in the domain of interest, they
represent a large Markov network which have a potential for
each grounding of each first-order formula. For example, the
simple formula ∀x, y, z Friends(x, y) ∧ LivesIn(y, z) ⇒
Safe(x, z) which says that if you have several friends in a
neighborhood z, you feel safe in the neighborhood z, yields
ten million formulas assuming that there are 1000 people
in the domain and 10 neighborhoods. Although inference
techniques for Markov networks (graphical models) have
come a long way and are able to tackle much larger problems than ever before, several inference tasks for complex
real-world MLNs are currently out of reach of even the
most advanced techniques. The aim of this thesis is to advance the state-of-the-art in MLN inference (Kok et al. 2006;
Niu et al. 2011), enabling it to solve much harder and more
complex tasks than is possible today. To this end, I will develop techniques that exploit logical structures and symmetries that are either explicitly or implicitly encoded in the
MLN representation and demonstrate their usefulness by using them to solve hard real-world problems in the field of
natural language understanding.

Lifted Inference
Propositional inference algorithms treat MLNs as a regular
graphical model, i.e., they work on the completely ground
MLN, forgetting that it has relational structure. In contrast,
lifted inference algorithms (Poole 2003; de Salvo Braz 2007;
Gogate and Domingos 2011) exploit symmetries in the relational representation and are far more scalable. In our
prior work, we lifted two widely used sampling algorithms,
Blocked Gibbs sampling (Jensen, Kjaerulff, and Kong 1995)
and importance sampling to the first-order level.
Lifted Blocked Gibbs (LBG) (Venugopal and Gogate
2012) blocks first-order atoms such that exact lifted inference within each block is tractable given all other blocks.
In contrast to blocking over propositional variables, it turns
out that increasing the block size over first-order atoms in
some cases allows us to exploit more symmetries, reducing
the complexity of Gibbs sampling. LBG works on a firstorder Gibbs cluster graph where each cluster/block passes a
lifted message (sufficient statistics) to its neighbors. Lifted
samples are generated by performing exact inference within
a cluster incorporating the messages from its neighbors. Our
evaluation demonstrated that LBG is far superior to propositional approaches in terms of scalability and convergence.
In lifted importance sampling (Gogate, Jha, and Venugopal 2012), we draw lifted samples from a proposal distribution instead of sampling individual groundings. We

Progress to Date
Effective Sampling in Relational Models
MLNs typically contain large number of logical dependencies. In the presence of such dependencies, popular sampling
algorithms such as Gibbs sampling and importance sampling do not converge (or converge very slowly). We proposed two approaches to address this problem.
Our first approach called GiSS (Venugopal and Gogate
2013b) combines Gibbs sampling with an advanced imCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4259

