Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Voting Rules As Error-Correcting Codes
Ariel D. Procaccia

Nisarg Shah

Yair Zick

Carnegie Mellon University
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
nkshah@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
yairzick@cmu.edu

Abstract

gaining steam in the last decade (Conitzer and Sandholm
2005; Conitzer et al. 2009; Elkind et al. 2010; Xia et
al. 2010; Xia and Conitzer 2011; Lu and Boutilier 2011; Procaccia et al. 2012; Azari Soufiani et al. 2012; 2013; 2014;
Mao et al. 2013; Caragiannis et al. 2013; 2014).
Despite its conceptual appeal, a major shortcoming of the
MLE approach is that the MLE voting rule is specific to a
noise model, and that noise model — even if it exists for
a given setting — may be difficult to pin down (Mao, Procaccia, and Chen 2013). Caragiannis et al. (2013; 2014) have
addressed this problem by relaxing the MLE constraint: they
only ask that the probability of the voting rule returning the
ground truth go to one as the number of votes goes to infinity. This allows them to design voting rules that elicit the
ground truth in a wide range of noise models; however, they
may potentially require an infinite amount of information.

We present the first model of optimal voting under adversarial noise. From this viewpoint, voting rules are seen as errorcorrecting codes: their goal is to correct errors in the input
rankings and recover a ranking that is close to the ground
truth. We derive worst-case bounds on the relation between
the average accuracy of the input votes, and the accuracy of
the output ranking. Empirical results from real data show that
our approach produces significantly more accurate rankings
than alternative approaches.

Introduction
Social choice theory develops and analyzes methods for aggregating the opinions of individuals into a collective decision. The prevalent approach is motivated by situations in
which opinions are subjective, such as political elections,
and focuses on the design of voting rules that satisfy normative properties (Arrow 1951).
An alternative approach, which was proposed by the marquis de Condorcet in the 18th Century, had confounded
scholars for centuries (due to Condorcet’s ambiguous writing) until it was finally elucidated by Young (1988). The
underlying assumption is that the alternatives can be objectively compared according to their true quality. In particular,
it is typically assumed that there is a ground truth ranking
of the alternatives. Votes can be seen as noisy estimates of
the ground truth, drawn from a specific noise model. For example, Condorcet proposed a noise model where — roughly
speaking — each voter (hereinafter, agent) compares every
pair of alternatives, and orders them correctly (according to
the ground truth) with probability p > 1/2; today an equivalent model is attributed to Mallows (1957). Here, it is natural
to employ a voting rule that always returns a ranking that is
most likely to coincide with the ground truth, that is, the voting rule should be a maximum likelihood estimator (MLE).
Although Condorcet could have hardly foreseen this, his
MLE approach is eminently applicable to crowdsourcing
and human computation systems, which often employ voting
to aggregate noisy estimates; EteRNA (Lee et al. 2014) is a
wonderful example, as explained by Procaccia et al. (2012).
Consequently, the study of voting rules as MLEs has been

Our approach. In this paper, we propose a fundamentally
different approach to aggregating noisy votes. We assume
the noise to be adversarial instead of probabilistic, and wish
to design voting rules that do well under worst-case assumptions. From this viewpoint, our approach is closely related to
the extensive literature on error-correcting codes. One can
think of the votes as a repetition code: each vote is a transmitted noisy version of a “message” (the ground truth). How
many errors can be corrected using this “code”?
In more detail, let d be a distance metric on the space
of rankings. As an example, the well-known Kendall tau
(KT) distance between two rankings measures the number
of pairs of alternatives on which the two rankings disagree.
Suppose that we receive n votes over the set of alternatives
{a, b, c, d}, for an even n, and we know that the average
KT distance between the votes and the ground truth is at
most 1/2. Can we always recover the ground truth? No: in
the worst-case, exactly n/2 agents swap the two highestranked alternatives and the rest report the ground truth. In
this case, we observe two distinct rankings (each n/2 times)
that only disagree on the order of the top two alternatives.
Both rankings have an average distance of 1/2 from the input votes, making it impossible to determine which of them
is the ground truth.
Let us, therefore, cast a larger net. Inspired by list decoding of error-correcting codes (see, e.g., Guruswami 2005),
our main research question is:

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1000

