Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Mechanism Learning with Mechanism Induced Data
Tie-Yan Liu

Wei Chen

Tao Qin

Microsoft Research
tyliu@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
wche@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
taoqin@microsoft.com

Abstract

interact with each other governed by a complicated (and possible evolving) mechanism. On one hand, because of human
nature, these agents behave strategically to be better off, and
thus generate huge data that are dependent of the mechanism. On the other hand, their behaviors are far from fully
rational due to their constrained capability and limited information access. As a result, neither conventional machine
learning nor game theory can model these applications very
well and provide us the right tool to effectively optimize
their mechanisms. We simply need to develop new frameworks and theory for this purpose. This is exactly the motivation of our paper.

Machine learning and game theory are two important
directions of AI. The former usually assumes data is independent of the models to be learned; the latter usually
assumes agents are fully rational. In many modern Internet applications, like sponsored search and crowdsourcing, the two basic assumptions are violated and new
challenges are posed to both machine learning and game
theory. To better model and study such applications,
we need to go beyond conventional machine learning
and game theory (mechanism design), and adopt a new
approach called mechanism learning with mechanism
induced data. Specifically, we propose to learn a behavior model from data to describe how “real” agents
play the complicated game, instead of making the fullrationality assumption. Then we propose to optimize
the mechanism by using the learned behavior models
to predict the future behaviors of agents in response to
the new mechanism. Because the above process couples
mechanism learning and behavior learning in a loop,
new algorithms and theories are needed to perform the
task and guarantee the asymptotical performance. As
shown in this paper, there are many interesting research
topics along this direction, many of which are still open
problems, waiting for researchers in our community to
deeply investigate.

1

1.1

Motivating Applications

As mentioned above, many Internet applications including
sponsored search, crowdsourcing, and app store can be regarded as dynamic systems that involve multi-party interactions. Users arrive at the system with their particular needs;
agents (who compete or collaborate with each other) provide products or services that could potentially satisfy users’
needs; and the platform employs a complicated mechanism
(e.g., an auction) to match agents with users and extract revenue from this procedure. Afterwards, the platform may provide agents with certain signals as their performance indicator (which we usually call Key Performance Indicators, or
KPIs for short). In order to be better off during this economic
process, self-interested agents may strategically adjust their
behaviors (e.g., strategically reveal the information about
their services or products) in response to the mechanism (or
more accurately to the signals they receive from the platform
since the mechanism is usually invisible to them). Specifically, in a sponsored search, platform, users, and agents correspond to the search engine, search users, and advertisers
respectively; in crowdsourcing, platform, users, and agents
correspond to crowdsourcing platform (e.g., Amazon Mechanical Turk), employers, and workers respectively; and
in app stores, platform, users and agents correspond to app
store, app users, and app developers respectively.
Driven by the crowd of strategic agents and the power of
the Internet, the abovementioned applications exhibit their
large scale, fast pace, and high dynamics. In such situations,
while agents are actively adjusting their behaviors to be better off, they could never perform in a perfectly rational manner due to limited information access and constrained ca-

Introduction

Machine learning and game theory are two important
branches of AI. Both directions have been well developed in
the past decades. Machine learning mainly focuses on learning models from data, based on the assumption that data
are generated independent of the model, and game theory
mainly focuses on equilibrium analysis and mechanism design, usually based on the assumption that strategic agents
have fully rational behaviors.
In this Internet era, new applications like sponsored
search, crowdsourcing, and app store create brand new monetization channels for companies, and also change the daily
life of every individual. In these applications, a huge number of human agents (e.g., advertisers in sponsored search,
workers in crowdsourcing, and app developers in app store)
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4037

