Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Analysis of Equilibria in Iterative Voting Schemes
Zinovi Rabinovich

Svetlana Obraztsova

Independent Researcher
Jerusalem, Israel
zr@zinovi.net

National Technical University of Athens, Greece
Tel-Aviv University, Israel
svetlana.obraztsova@gmail.com

Omer Levs

Evangelos Markakis

Jeffrey S. Rosenschein

Hebrew University of Jerusalem Athens University of Economics & Business Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Israel
Greece
Israel
jeff@cs.huji.ac.i
markakis@gmail.com
omerl@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract

that has focused on the complexity of manipulation, as a potential barrier to the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem. In a different direction, and given the impossibility of having strategyproof voting rules, another body of research has emerged
on game-theoretic analysis of voting, initiated by Farquharson (1969). Viewing voters as strategic agents, it is then natural to examine the Nash equilibria (NE) of the underlying
voting games, as a potential solution concept for preference
aggregation scenarios.
However, Nash equilibria in this context, and without any
further refinement, end up being a poor tool to predict voting behaviour. For example, even if all voters rank the same
candidate last, it is still a Nash equilibrium (in most common
voting rules) that all voters vote for this disliked candidate.
More generally, there can be a very large number of equilibria in most voting games, and many of them are irrelevant
to the effective analysis of the voting rule. Several methods
have been proposed to handle this multitude of equilibria,
and in this work, we focus on the following three:

Following recent studies of iterative voting and its effects
on plurality vote outcomes, we provide characterisations and
complexity results for three models of iterative voting under
the plurality rule. Our focus is on providing a better understanding regarding the set of equilibria attainable by iterative
voting processes. We start with the basic model of plurality
voting. We first establish some useful properties of equilibria,
reachable by iterative voting, which enable us to show that
deciding whether a given profile is an iteratively reachable
equilibrium is NP-complete. We then proceed to combine iterative voting with the concept of truth bias, a model where
voters prefer to be truthful when they cannot affect the outcome. We fully characterise the set of attainable truth-biased
equilibria, and show that it is possible to determine all such
equilibria in polynomial time. Finally, we also examine the
model of lazy voters, in which a voter may choose to abstain
from the election. We establish convergence of the iterative
process, albeit not necessarily to a Nash equilibrium. As in
the case with truth bias, we also provide a polynomial time
algorithm to find all the attainable equilibria.

1

• Iterative voting: Instead of examining all Nash equilibria, one can consider only equilibria that are “reachable” from certain initial voting profiles; that is, we can
study sequences of improvement moves, where during
each move one of the players who is dissatisfied with the
current result can change its vote to achieve a better outcome. This process is reminiscent of a group of friends
trying to find a movie that they would all like to see,
or a restaurant they would all want to go to; dissatisfied
with the current result, they change their declared preference seeking to modify the outcome (see, e.g., Meir et
al. 2010). Several online services, such as Doodle, enable
this kind of iterative preference aggregation.

Introduction

There are many aspects to coordination in multiagent systems that have engaged researchers in recent years, including questions related to the aggregation of multiple agents’
preferences into a single system-wide choice. Researchers
looking at group decision-making have explored the properties of voting schemes, which provide well-founded preference aggregation techniques; at times, voting can also provide intuitive and efficient prescriptive algorithms for resolving disagreements among participants.
Alas, as the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem (Gibbard
1973; Satterthwaite 1975) famously states, voting rules are
susceptible to manipulation. Given this negative result, there
has been a solid body of research over the last two decades

• Truth bias: Another approach for filtering out equilibria
is to add a small utility gain for voters who vote truthfully. This extra “bonus” should be small enough so that
agents would still prefer to manipulate the election in
cases where they can affect the outcome for their own

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1007

