Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Prajna: Towards Recognizing Whatever You Want
From Images without Image Labeling
Xian-Sheng Hua, Jin Li
Microsoft Research, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052, USA
{xshua; jinl}@microsoft.com



Abstract

tures, 2) designing powerful learning methods, and 3) identifying massive training data. Representative image features
are essential for describing and separating different entities.
Learning methods, including modelling and learning, are
critical for abstracting intrinsic patterns from the data. Training data generation is to ensure that the data contains sufficient representative variations to represent the different visual patterns. While considerable efforts have been put on the
first two, much less has been devoted to the third one.
Currently, the usual approaches to generating training data
are still based on manual labeling, though progress has been
made to obtain the candidate training data from automated
and large scale sources, such as search engines and/or social
media portals. For example, click log from search engines
has been shown as an efficient way to generate training data
(Hua et al. 2013). However, the diversity and coverage are
still concerns as most users typically only click attractive and
representative images. Also, the entities of the clicked data
may have limited overlap with the entities that a user is interested in. This paper will systematically study the problem
of automatically generating training data from massive and
noisy Internet data, and culminate with an end-to-end system
that is capable of building automatic image recognition system for any given set of entities without image labeling. The
primary challenges we have conquered include:

With the advances in distributed computation, machine learning and deep neural networks, we enter into an era that it is
possible to build a real world image recognition system. There
are three essential components to build a real-world image
recognition system: 1) creating representative features, 2) designing powerful learning approaches, and 3) identifying
massive training data. While extensive researches have been
done on the first two aspects, much less attention has been
paid on the third. In this paper, we present an end-to-end Web
knowledge discovery system, Prajna. Starting from an arbitrary set of entities as inputs, Prajna automatically crawls images from multiple sources, identifies images that have reliably labeled, trains models and build a recognition system that
is capable of recognizing any new images of the entity set.
Due to the high cost of manual data labeling, leveraging the
massive yet noisy data on the Internet is a natural idea, but the
practical engineering aspect is highly challenging. Prajna focuses on separating reliable training data from extensive noisy
data, which is a key to the capability of extending an image
recognition system to support arbitrary entities. In this paper,
we will analyze the intrinsic characteristics of Internet image
data, and find ways to mine accurate and informative information from those data to build a training set, which is then
used to train image recognition models. Prajna is capable of
automatically building an image recognition system for those
entities as long as we can collect sufficient number of images
of the entities on the Web.

Introduction
Building a system that can recognize what, who, and where
from arbitrary images has motivated researchers in computer
vision, multimedia and machine learning areas for decades.
Significant progress has been made in recently years based
on big multimedia data processing and deep neural networks
techniques (Krizhevsky et al. 2012; Weston et al. 2013).
However, how to generalize the system to enable recognizing a wider range of entities remains a challenge.
The three primary factors towards a real-world image
recognition system are: 1) creating representative image fea-

Separating relevant and informative data from noises:
The search results from social media portals are in general
very noisy. For example, images returned for query “Eiffel
Tower” will contains not only photos of the landmark, but
also large number of images that were taken on Eiffel Tower
as well inside Eiffel Tower, and close-up photos of people.
The search results returned by search engines typically has
less noises in the top of the result list (say, on the first page),
but it may contain all types of images such as clipart images,
and more and more noises will appear as we approach the
end of the list. How to filter out all those noises without manual effort is a big challenge.

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Effectively leveraging the massive amount of data: It is
easy to obtain massive amount of image data on the Internet
as long as they are exposed to search engines or social media

137

