Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Speech Adaptation in Extended Ambient Intelligence Environments
Bonnie J. Dorr, Lucian Galescu, Ian Perera, Kristy Hollingshead-Seitz,
David Atkinson, Micah Clark, William Clancey, Yorick Wilks
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, 15 SE Osceola Avenue, Ocala, FL
{bdorr, lgalescu, iperera, khollingshead, datkinson, mclark, wclancey, ywilks}@ihmc.us

Eric Fosler-Lussier

The Ohio State University, 2015 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH
fosler@cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract

about a particular medicine, to reserve a place in the
emergency room, or to request home delivery of
prescription medication. Taking into account locationspecific information, personalized address books, and
calendar entries, the same formulas are employed for each
individual who uses a given application.
However, this notion of “ambient intelligence” ignores
the degree to which individuals differ from each other and
change over time. What would the world be like if each
individual were equipped with their own personal agent,
designed to follow and adapt to that individual over long
periods of time? Over a lifetime of co-activity, this agent
would learn the user’s needs, preferences, and capabilities,
and would adapt accordingly. More importantly, the agent
would accommodate changes in the user’s needs,
preferences, and capabilities over time. We refer to this
notion of ambient intelligence as Extended Ambient
Intelligence (EAI) below.
A major challenge in the development of EAI-based
human-machine
interaction
(e.g.,
Smart
Home
environments designed for clients with neurological
disorders) is the tradeoff between the degree of
intrusiveness and presence of empathy, in addition to the
impact of this tradeoff on conversational engagement
(Page, 2006). When clients are under (human) observation
in a hospital setting, there are frequent, intrusive
interactions, yielding an environment that is less conducive
to engagement and that deprives patients of perceived
personal autonomy. Such an environment is associated
with increased rates of mental illness and depression in
older patients (Boyle, 2005). Interactions with lower levels
of intrusion (e.g., remote telemedicine in the form of twoway video, email, and smart phones) may be lacking in
empathy and, moreover, adaptation to clients’ needs and
capabilities can be lost without daily, personalized
interactions. Thus, simulating empathy-based modeling of

This Blue Sky presentation focuses on a major shift toward
a notion of “ambient intelligence” that transcends general
applications targeted at the general population. The focus is
on highly personalized agents that accommodate individual
differences and changes over time. This notion of Extended
Ambient Intelligence (EAI) concerns adaptation to a
person’s preferences and experiences, as well as changing
capabilities, most notably in an environment where
conversational engagement is central. An important step in
moving this research forward is the accommodation of
different degrees of cognitive capability (including speech
processing) that may vary over time for a given user—
whether through improvement or through deterioration. We
suggest that the application of divergence detection to
speech patterns may enable adaptation to a speaker’s
increasing or decreasing level of speech impairment over
time. Taking an adaptive approach toward technology
development in this arena may be a first step toward
empowering those with special needs so that they may live
with a high quality of life. It also represents an important
step toward a notion of ambient intelligence that is
personalized beyond what can be achieved by massproduced, one-size-fits-all software currently in use on
mobile devices.

Introduction
A major shift has been underway toward an investigation
of a notion of “ambient intelligence” that transcends the
“Future Mobile Revolution.” The term “ambient
intelligence” has generally been associated with
applications that have a broad user base, as artificial
intelligence “finds its way to more aspects of human life
every day” (Kar, 2013). Within this paradigm, one need
no more than his/her smartphone to provide information
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4027

