Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

High-Performance Distributed ML at Scale
through Parameter Server Consistency Models
Wei Dai, Abhimanu Kumar, Jinliang Wei, Qirong Ho*, Garth Gibson and Eric P. Xing
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
*Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
twdai,abhimank,jinlianw,garth,epxing@cs.cmu.edu, hoqirong@gmail.com

Abstract

using their local data. One of the primary challenges in
data parallelism is designing software systems to share the
ML model across a cluster of commodity machines, in a
manner that is theoretically well-justified, empirically highperformance, and easy-to-program all at the same time —
and a highly promising solution is the titular ”Parameter
Server” (PS) paradigm, which ML practitioners have been
turning to in recent years (Ahmed et al. 2012; Ho et al. 2013;
Cipar et al. 2013; Cui et al. 2014; Li et al. 2014).
Many general-purpose Parameter Server (PS) systems (Ho et al. 2013; Cipar et al. 2013; Cui et al. 2014)
provide a Distributed Shared Memory (DSM) solution to the
issue of Big Data in ML computation. DSM allows ML programmers to treat the entire cluster as a single memory pool,
where every machine can read/write to any model parameter
via a simple programming interface; this greatly facilitates
the implementation of distributed ML programs, because
programmers may treat a cluster like a “supercomputer” that
can run thousands of computational threads, without worrying about low-level communication between machines. It
should be noted that not all PS systems provide a DSM interface; some espouse an arguably less-convenient push/pull
interface that requires users to explicitly decide which parts
of the ML model need to be communicated (Li et al. 2014),
in exchange for potentially more aggressive efficiency gains.
A major motivation behind the parameter server architecture is the opportunities it offers — without forcing users
to use complicated distributed programming tools — to
explore various relaxed consistency models for controlled
asynchronous parallel execution of machine learning programs, in an effort to improve overall system efficiency.
Central to the legitimacy of employing such inconsistent
models — which in theory would cause erroneous outcomes — is the iterative-convergent nature of ML programs, which presents unique opportunities and challenges
that do not manifest in traditional database applications.
One of the most interesting opportunities is that iterativeconvergent ML programs exhibit limited error-tolerance in
the parameter states, a point that is confirmed by the theoretical and empirical success of stochastic subsampling
(e.g. minibatch methods) or randomized algorithms, which
are prominently represented in the large-scale ML literature (Ahmed et al. 2012; Ho et al. 2013; Gemulla et al. 2011;
Kumar et al. 2014). The key challenge is to determine why

As Machine Learning (ML) applications embrace
greater data size and model complexity, practitioners turn to distributed clusters to satisfy the increased
computational and memory demands. Effective use of
clusters for ML programs requires considerable expertise in writing distributed code, but existing highlyabstracted frameworks like Hadoop that pose low barriers to distributed-programming have not, in practice,
matched the performance seen in highly specialized and
advanced ML implementations. The recent Parameter
Server (PS) paradigm is a middle ground between these
extremes, allowing easy conversion of single-machine
parallel ML programs into distributed ones, while maintaining high throughput through relaxed “consistency
models” that allow asynchronous (and, hence, inconsistent) parameter reads. However, due to insufficient theoretical study, it is not clear which of these consistency
models can really ensure correct ML algorithm output; at the same time, there remain many theoreticallymotivated but undiscovered opportunities to maximize
computational throughput. Inspired by this challenge,
we study both the theoretical guarantees and empirical
behavior of iterative-convergent ML algorithms in existing PS consistency models. We then use the gleaned
insights to improve a consistency model using an “eager” PS communication mechanism, and implement it
as a new PS system that enables ML programs to reach
their solution more quickly.

Introduction
The surging data volumes generated by internet activity and
scientific research (Dean et al. 2012) put tremendous pressure on Machine Learning (ML) methods to scale beyond
the computation and memory limit of a single machine.
With very large data sizes (Big Data), a single machine
would require too much time to process complex ML models (Ahmed et al. 2012; Ho et al. 2013; Cipar et al. 2013;
Cui et al. 2014; Li et al. 2014), and this motivates or even
necessitates distributed-parallel computation over a cluster of machines. A popular approach is data parallelism,
in which the data is partitioned and distributed across different machines, which then train the (shared) ML model
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

79

