Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning to Hash on Structured Data
Qifan Wang, Luo Si and Bin Shen
Computer Science Department, Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907, US
wang868@purdue.edu, lsi@purdue.edu, bshen@purdue.edu

Abstract
Hashing techniques have been widely applied for large scale
similarity search problems due to the computational and
memory efficiency. However, most existing hashing methods assume data examples are independently and identically
distributed. But there often exists various additional dependency/structure information between data examples in many
real world applications. Ignoring this structure information
may limit the performance of existing hashing algorithms.
This paper explores the research problem of learning to Hash
on Structured Data (HSD) and formulates a novel framework
that considers additional structure information. In particular,
the hashing function is learned in a unified learning framework by simultaneously ensuring the structural consistency
and preserving the similarities between data examples. An
iterative gradient descent algorithm is designed as the optimization procedure. Furthermore, we improve the effectiveness of hashing function through orthogonal transformation
by minimizing the quantization error. Experimental results on
two datasets clearly demonstrate the advantages of the proposed method over several state-of-the-art hashing methods.

Figure 1: Data examples with structure information. (a)
Webpages link to each other. (b) Images share semantic labels.
available data examples and the query and selecting data examples within small Hamming distances, which can be calculated using efficient bitwise operator XOR.
Hashing methods generate promising results by successfully addressing the storage and search efficiency challenges. However, most existing hashing methods assume
that data examples are independently and identically distributed. But in many applications, the dependencies between data examples naturally exist and if incorporated in
models, they can potentially improve the hashing code performance significantly. For example, many webpages have
hyperlinks pointing to other related webpages (see Fig.1(a)).
The contents of these linked webpages are usually relevant,
which present similar topics. The hyperlinks among webpages provide important structure knowledge. Another example is that similar images often share semantic labels (see
Fig.1(b)). The more labels two images have in common,
the more similar the images are. The shared semantic labels
among images offer valuable information in binary codes
learning. These structure information have been utilized in
clustering (Shen and Si 2010) and classification (Zhang et
al. 2011) problems, and proven to be helpful knowledge.
Therefore, it is important to design hashing method that preserve the structure information among data examples in the
learned Hamming space.
This paper proposes a novel approach of learning to Hash
on Structured Data (HSD) that incorporates the structure
information associated with data. The hashing function is

Introduction
With the explosive growth of the Internet, a huge amount of
data has been generated, which indicates that efficient similarity search becomes more important. Traditional similarity search methods are difficult to be directly used for large
scale applications since linear scan between query example and all candidates in the database is impractical. Moreover, the similarity between data examples is usually conducted in high dimensional space. Recently, hashing methods (Wang, Zhang, and Si 2013b; Rastegari et al. 2013;
Bergamo, Torresani, and Fitzgibbon 2011; Liu et al. 2011;
2012b; Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009; Wang et al. 2014b;
2014a) are proposed to address the similarity search problem within large scale data. These hashing methods design
compact binary code in a low-dimensional space for each
data example so that similar examples are mapped to similar
binary codes. In the retrieval process, these hashing methods
first transform each query example into its corresponding binary code. Then similarity search can be simply conducted
by calculating the Hamming distances between the codes of
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3066

