Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Factored Symmetries for Merge-and-Shrink Abstractions
Silvan Sievers and Martin Wehrle and Malte Helmert
University of Basel, Switzerland
{silvan.sievers,martin.wehrle,malte.helmert}@unibas.ch

Alexander Shleyfman

Michael Katz

Technion, Haifa, Israel
alesh@tx.technion.ac.il

IBM Haifa Research Lab, Israel
katzm@il.ibm.com

Abstract

to be distinguished and (ideally) only considers one representative of each class.
In this paper, we study the concept of symmetries in the
context of merge-and-shrink abstractions. We propose factored symmetries for families of abstract transition systems
and identify classes of such symmetries for which symmetry
reduction on individual abstractions results in perfect mergeand-shrink heuristics. In addition, we investigate and discuss the relationship of local symmetries to the concept of
bisimulation and label reduction. Finally, we devise merging
strategies maximizing the application of symmetry reduction. Our empirical evaluation within the Fast Downward
planning system shows the potential of our approach.

Merge-and-shrink heuristics crucially rely on effective reduction techniques, such as bisimulation-based shrinking,
to avoid the combinatorial explosion of abstractions. We
propose the concept of factored symmetries for merge-andshrink abstractions based on the established concept of symmetry reduction for state-space search. We investigate under
which conditions factored symmetry reduction yields perfect
heuristics and discuss the relationship to bisimulation. We
also devise practical merging strategies based on this concept
and experimentally validate their utility.

Introduction
Heuristic search is a state-of-the-art approach for optimally
solving classical planning problems, and various admissible
heuristics have been proposed for this purpose. Merge-andshrink heuristics (Dräger, Finkbeiner, and Podelski 2009;
Helmert, Haslum, and Hoffmann 2007; Helmert et al. 2014)
are a general class of abstraction-based heuristics. Their
main drawback is the costly precomputation phase, which
is often a limiting factor for their practical applicability.
To limit the size of intermediate abstractions, shrinking
strategies are applied during the merge-and-shrink computation. State-of-the-art shrinking strategies are based on (exact or approximate) bisimulation (Nissim, Hoffmann, and
Helmert 2011). Exact bisimulation can reduce the size of intermediate abstractions without losing precision. A further
technique to reduce the size of intermediate abstractions is
label reduction (Sievers, Wehrle, and Helmert 2014), which
unifies transition labels with equivalent behavior.
Complementary to heuristics like merge-and-shrink, state
space pruning techniques have recently found increasing attention for improving the scalability of optimal search-based
planning algorithms. Pruning techniques tackle the state
explosion problem by reducing the branching factor of the
given planning task. A prominent example is symmetry reduction, which was originally proposed for computer-aided
verification and has recently seen much interest for planning
(Ip and Dill 1996; Pochter, Zohar, and Rosenschein 2011;
Domshlak, Katz, and Shleyfman 2012). Symmetry reduction identifies classes of “symmetric” states that do not need

Background
We introduce planning tasks, transition systems, merge-andshrink heuristics, and bisimulations.

Planning
We consider planning tasks in the SAS+ formalism
(Bäckström and Nebel 1995) extended with action costs.
A planning task is a 4-tuple Π = hV, O, s0 , s? i, where V
is a finite set of state variables, each with a finite domain
dom(v). A partial state s is a variable assignment over a
subset of V, denoted by vars(s). For a partial state s and
variable v ∈ vars(s), we write s[v] for the value assigned to
v in s. A partial state s is a state if vars(s) = V. The set O
is a finite set of operators, each with a precondition pre(o),
which is a partial state, an effect eff (o), also a partial state,
and a non-negative cost cost(o) ∈ R+
0 . The state s0 is the
initial state, and s? is a partial state called the goal.
A partial state complies with another partial state if they
agree on all variables for which both are defined. An operator o is applicable in state s if it complies with pre(o). The
result of applying o in s is the state s0 which complies with
eff (o) and satisfies s0 [v] = s[v] for all v ∈
/ vars(eff (o)).
A transition system is a 5-tuple Θ = hS, L, T, s0 , S? i
where S is a finite set of states, L is a finite set of (transition) labels, where each label ` ∈ L has an associated cost
cost(`) ∈ R+
0 , T ⊆ S × L × S is a set of labeled transitions, s0 ∈ S is the initial state, and S? ⊆ S is the set
o
of goal states. We write s −
→
s0 ∈ Θ as a shorthand for
0
hs, o, s i ∈ T . A plan π = h`1 , . . . , `n i for Θ is a path from

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3378

