Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Question/Answer Matching for CQA System via
Combining Lexical and Sequential Information
Yikang Shen] , Wenge Rong†‡ , Zhiwei Sun† , Yuanxin Ouyang†‡ , Zhang Xiong†‡
]

†

Sino-French Engineer School, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
‡
Research Institute of Beihang University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518057, China
{yikang.shen, w.rong, sunzhiwei, oyyx, xiongz}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

systems and is often referred as question starvation (Li and
King 2010). Several efforts have been made to reduce the
number of unanswered questions and one method has been
attached much importance in the community, namely how to
proactively seek knowledge from historical question/answer
pairs.
Normally CQA sites have accumulated large archives of
historical questions and associated answers. Retrieving relevant historical question/answer pairs which best match a
user’s new question or search query is an essential component of a CQA service. Additionally, when a user asks a new
question in CQA service and good matches can be located,
the lag time incurred by having to wait for a person to respond can be avoided, thus improving user satisfaction.
Question/answer pair retrieval has three major methods:
1) finding historical questions which are similar to the target
question. For example, Carmel et al. tried to rank historical questions using both inter-question and question-answer
similarity to respond to a newly posed question (Carmel,
Shtalhaim, and Soffer 2000) (Figueroa and Neumann 2014);
2) identifying the most relevant answers to the target question within a collection of answers. A representative application was proposed by Surdeanu et al. (Surdeanu, Ciaramita, and Zaragoza 2008), who combine translation and
similarity features to recommend historical answers by relevance to a given question, though it focuses only on how to
questions; 3) combining question similarity and answer relevance. Shtok et al. proposed a two stage approach (Shtok
et al. 2012), in the first stage historical questions similar to
the new question are identified and ranked so as to produce
a single resolved question candidate, in the second stage the
best answer to the top candidate question is evaluated in order to verify whether it meets the underlying needs of the
new question.
In this paper, we mainly focus on identifying the most
relevant answers from a collection of answers by calculating
the matching probability between the question q and each
candidate answer d. The candidate answers are then ranked
by their probability. Intuitively, many bag-of-words based
models can be applied to solve this kind of problem, including vector space model (VSM) (Jeon, Croft, and Lee 2005a;
2005b; Duan et al. 2008), language model (LM) (Jeon,
Croft, and Lee 2005b; Duan et al. 2008), and Okapi model
(Okapi) (Jeon, Croft, and Lee 2005b). These early ap-

Community-based Question Answering (CQA) has become
popular in knowledge sharing sites since it allows users to
get answers to complex, detailed, and personal questions directly from other users. Large archives of historical questions
and associated answers have been accumulated. Retrieving
relevant historical answers that best match a question is an
essential component of a CQA service. Most state of the art
approaches are based on bag-of-words models, which have
been proven successful in a range of text matching tasks, but
are insufficient for capturing the important word sequence information in short text matching. In this paper, a new architecture is proposed to more effectively model the complicated
matching relations between questions and answers. It utilises
a similarity matrix which contains both lexical and sequential
information. Afterwards the information is put into a deep
architecture to find potentially suitable answers. The experimental study shows its potential in improving matching accuracy of question and answer.

Introduction
Community-based Question Answering (CQA) systems are
Internet services which enable users to ask questions and receive answers. By using CQA systems, users can ask questions via sentences rather than issuing queries in the form of
keywords to a Web search engine. CQA is proven success
for knowledge sharing since it is easier for users to express
their real information needs in natural language (Bilotti et
al. 2010). Furthermore, using CQA is also easier to get answers to a personal nature, extremely specific questions, and
even open-ended questions as in these cases it is difficult for
a search engine to directly provide such complex and heterogeneous information (Chua and Banerjee 2013). CQA sites
have become a kind of popular forum for people to seek
information and share knowledge. Examples of such CQA
sites include Yahoo! Answers and Baidu Zhidao.
Though CQA has shown its promising applicability, there
still exists several challenges among which a notable one
is the unanswered question rate. It is frequently observed
that in spite of active participation in CQA sites, a significant portion of questions remain unanswered (Dror, Maarek,
and Szpektor 2013). This phenomenon widely exists in CQA
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

275

