Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Exploiting the Structure of Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems
Ferdinando Fioretto
Dept. of Computer Science
Dept. of Mathematics & Computer Science
New Mexico State University, NM 88001, USA
University of Udine, UD 33100, IT
ffiorett@cs.nmsu.edu

Introduction

ized techniques to solve agent sub-problems, that can be
solved independently from that of other agents, and to use a
global DCOP algorithm to coordinate the agents. The use of
centralized solutions within each agent, allows us to speed
up several DCOP algorithms by up to several orders of
magnitude, while the knowledge acquired from the DCOP
model allows us to reduce the algorithms communication
requirements, when compared to existing pre-processing
techniques—which ignore the structural information dictated by the model. These results validate our hypothesis that
one can exploit the information encoded in the DCOP model
through the use of centralized solutions.

In the proposed thesis, we study Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs), which are problems where
several agents coordinate with each other to optimize a
global cost function. The use of DCOPs has gained momentum, due to their capability of addressing complex and
naturally distributed problems. A majority of the work in
DCOP addresses the resolution problem by detaching the
model from the resolution process, where they assume that
each agent controls exclusively one variable of the problem (Burke et al. 2006). This assumption often is not reflected in the model specifications, and may lead to inefficient communication requirements. Another limitation of
current DCOP resolution methods is their inability to capitalize on the presence of structural information, which may
allow incoherent/unnecessary data to reticulate among the
agents (Yokoo 2001).
The purpose of the proposed dissertation is to study how
to adapt and integrate insights gained from centralized solving techniques in order to enhance DCOP performance and
scalability, enabling their use for the resolution of real-world
complex problems. To do so, we hypothesize that one can
exploit the DCOP structure in both problem modeling and
problem resolution phases.

Exploiting Structure from Problem Solving
A number of multi-agent systems require agents to run
on battery-powered devices and communicate over wireless
networks. This imposes constraints on the number and size
of individual messages exchanged among agents (Wahbi et
al. 2014). Inference-based DCOP algorithms (Petcu et al.
2005), can be effective in solving such problems. They use
techniques from dynamic programming to propagate aggregate information among agents, and while their requirements on the number of messages is linear in the number
of agents, their messages have a size that is exponential in
the size of the treewidth, which can be up to the number of
agents −1. Several works from the DCOP community have
recognized the use of hard constraints to reduce the size
of the search space and/or reduce the message size. However, they are limited in exploiting relational information
expressed in form of tables and/or associated to the form
of domain consistency.
We have contributed to this body of research by introducing a type of consistency, called Branch Consistency (Fioretto et al. 2014b), that applies to paths in pseudotrees. The effect of enforcing Branch Consistency is the ability to actively exploit hard constraints (either explicitly provided in the problem specification or implicitly described in
constraints cost tables) to prune the search space and to reduce the size of the messages exchanged among agents. We
show that such form of consistency enforces a more effective
pruning than those based on domain-consistency, leading
enhanced efficiency and scalability. These results validate
our hypothesis that centralized reasoning can be adapted to
exploit the structure of DCOPs during problem solving.

Progress to Date
Exploiting Structure from Problem Modeling
Modeling many real-world problems as DCOPs often require each agent to own a large number of variables. However, most DCOP resolution approaches assume that each
agent can handle only a single variable of the problem. As
such, researchers have proposed a number of pre-processing
techniques to reformulate DCOPs with multi-variable agents
into DCOPs with single-variable agents (Yokoo 2001; Burke
et al. 2006). Unfortunately, these techniques do not scale
with the size of the problem due to their inefficient communication requirements. Therefore, in our work submitted
to AAAI 2015, we proposed a new pre-processing framework, that defines a clear separation between the distributed
DCOP resolution and the centralized agent sub-problem resolution. This separation allows the use of efficient centralCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4233

