Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Envy-Free Cake-Cutting in Two Dimensions
Erel Segal-Halevi, Avinatan Hassidim, Yonatan Aumann
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan
Israel 5290002

Abstract

be a much harder task. The first protocol for three agents, involving ten steps and five cuts, was discovered by Selfridge
and Conway (Brams and Taylor 1996). The construction of
a protocol for envy-free division among four or more agents
was a long-standing open problem, resolved only in 1995
with the publication of the Brams-Taylor protocol (Brams
and Taylor 1995).
Interestingly, in all this research, spanning over half a century, little attention has been given to the case of dividing a
two-dimensional good.
Indeed, almost all work on cake cutting explicitly assumes
that the cake is a one-dimensional interval, and the allotted
pieces are either sub-intervals, or a (possibly unbounded)
collection thereof. This is usually justified by the reasoning that higher dimensional settings can always be projected
onto one dimension, and hence, fairness in one-dimension
implies fairness in higher dimensions. However, projecting
back from the one dimension, the resulting two-dimensional
plots are thin rectangular slivers, of little use in most practical applications; it is hard to build a house on a 10 × 1, 000
meter plot even though its area is a full hectare, and a thin
0.1-inch wide advertisement space would ill-serve most advertises, regardless of its height. Thus, in most applications,
the geometric shape of the allotted piece is of prime importance.
Hence, we argue that when dividing a two-dimensional
resource, one must also require that allotted plots be of “usable” shape, e.g. a square. Equivalently, one can allow arbitrary plots but note that the utility of any such plot is determined by the most valuable square therein. These two formulations are equivalent and we use them interchangeably
throughout the paper.
Once allotted plots must be of a specific shape(s), it may
no longer be possible to allocate the entire land; a square
cannot be divided into two squares. Thus, we must assume
free disposal, meaning that the protocol need not allocate
the entire “cake”. Once free disposal is permitted, however, envy-freeness can trivially be obtained by simply giving nothing to all agents, which is clearly not a solution of
interest. Thus, our goal is to obtain an envy-free division
that also guarantees some minimum utility to each agent.
Specifically, we seek an envy-free division that guarantees
that each agent’s piece is worth at least an α-fraction of the
value of the entire cake, according to the agents subjective

We consider the problem of fair division of a two dimensional heterogeneous good among several agents. Applications include division of land as well as ad space in print
and electronic media. Classical cake cutting protocols either
consider a one-dimensional resource, or allocate each agent
several disconnected pieces. In practice, however, the two
dimensional shape of the allotted piece is of crucial importance in many applications, e.g., squares or bounded aspectratio rectangles are most useful for building houses as well
as advertisements. We thus introduce and study the problem
of envy-free two-dimensional division wherein the utility of
the agents depends on the geometric shape of the allocated
pieces (as well as the location and size). In addition to envyfreeness, we require that the fraction allocated to each agent
be at least a certain constant that depends only on the shape
of the cake and the number of agents. We focus on the case
where the allotted pieces must be square and the cakes are either squares or the unbounded plane. We provide algorithms
for the problem for settings with two and three agents.

1

Introduction

Fair division (often termed cake-cutting) is an active field
of research and application in mathematics, economics, and
recently also in AI. The basic setting considers a heterogeneous good, e.g. land, that must be divided among several
agents. The agents may have different preferences over the
possible pieces/sub-sets of the good, e.g. one agent prefers
the forest while the other prefers the sea shore, and the goal
is to divide the good among the agents in a way that deemed
“fair”. Fairness can be defined in several ways, but, proportionality and envy-freeness are the most commonly used.
Proportionality means that each agent gets at least its “fairshare” of the good, i.e. with n agents, the piece allotted to
each agent is worth at least 1/n of the value of the entire
good - according to agent’s subjective valuations. Envyfreeness means that no agent would prefer getting a piece
allotted to another agent. The existence of proportional divisions was already proved in the initial work of (Steinhaus
1948), and the existence of envy-free divisions was established by (Stromquist 1980). This latter proof is existential
in nature. Constructing such envy-free divisions turns out to
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1021

