Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Acronym Disambiguation Using Word Embedding
Chao Li1*, Lei Ji2, Jun Yan2
1 Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China, 2

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
oahcil.dlut@gmail.com, leiji@microsoft.com, junyan@microsoft.com

Abstract

In general domain, instead of using the domain-specific
knowledge-bases like UMLS, many works tend to consider
representing the disambiguating context using syntactic
features or bag-of-words (HaCohen-Kerner, Kass and
Peretz 2008). Additionally, topic model is also introduced
(Zhang et al. 2011).
In this paper, we propose two word embedding based
models to address this problem. Word embedding
(Mikolov et al. 2013) is an unsupervised learning of word
representation. It aims to map a word into a multidimensional space vector with the semantic information, so that
similar words will have high similarity in the embedding
space even if the string similarity is low.
This paper makes the following contributions:
• Introducing word embedding to address the acronym disambiguation problem
• Proposing two word embedding based models based
on (Mikolov et al. 2013)

According to the website AcronymFinder.com which is one
of the world's largest and most comprehensive dictionaries
of acronyms, an average of 37 new human-edited acronym
definitions are added every day. There are 379,918 acronyms with 4,766,899 definitions on that site up to now, and
each acronym has 12.5 definitions on average. It is a very
important research topic to identify what exactly an acronym means in a given context for document comprehension
as well as for document retrieval. In this paper, we propose
two word embedding based models for acronym disambiguation. Word embedding is to represent words in a continuous and multidimensional vector space, so that it is easy to
calculate the semantic similarity between words by calculating the vector distance. We evaluate the models on MSH
Dataset and ScienceWISE Dataset, and both models outperform the state-of-art methods on accuracy. The experimental
results show that word embedding helps to improve acronym disambiguation.

Introduction
Models

Ambiguous acronyms in the documents are difficult for
readers to understand the meanings. For example, the acronym CMU refers to universities including Carnegie Mellon
University and Central Michigan University. When talking
about employment rate of CMU, it is difficult to know what
the exact meaning of CMU is without the expansion. So it
is important to disambiguate these acronyms.
Acronym disambiguation is a subset of the more general
problem of Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD), which is
to decide the sense of words in context. Many works have
been proposed to address this problem in clinical and biomedical domain (Pakhomov, Pedersen and Chute 2005;
McInnes et al. 2011) using Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) (Bodenreider 2004), which is a knowledgebase providing semantic information and ontological relationships that can serve as features for machine learning.

TF-IDF Based Embedding (TBE)
TBE is based on the assumption that the accurate expansion is highly concerned with the topic of the given context,
and the topic can be represented by top TF-IDF words. TFIDF weight is commonly used correlated with Vector
Space Model (VSM) to represent a word in a vector space.
Motivated by this, we use top TF-IDF words’ embeddings
to represent the topic information of the given context.
Based on (Mikolov et al. 2013), we add an output layer
in the architecture. For an acronym A, the embedding of
TBE(A) is calculated as:
TBE(A) =∑𝑘 ∑𝑛𝑖=1 𝑇𝐹‐ 𝐼𝐷𝐹(𝑤(𝑖), 𝑘) ∗ 𝑒(𝑤(𝑖)),
(1)
where 𝑘 stands for every document containing A (in test
data there is only one for we do not know the exact meaning of the acronym), 𝑤 contains words in the context in
decreasing order of TF-IDF weights and 𝑒 contains the
embeddings of all the words in training data trained by
(Mikolov et al. 2013). 𝑇𝐹‐ 𝐼𝐷𝐹(𝑤(𝑖), 𝑘) is the TF-IDF

*This work was done during Chao Li’s internship in Microsoft Research.
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4178

