Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Logic for Reasoning About Game Strategies
Dongmo Zhang

Michael Thielscher

The University of Western Sydney
Australia
d.zhang@uws.edu.au

The University of New South Wales
Australia
mit@cse.unsw.edu.au

Abstract

them were developed based on Alternating-time Temporal
Logic (ATL) (Alur et al. 2002; van der Hoek et al. 2005;
Chatterjee et al. 2010; Walther et al. 2007). However, these
logics “tend to have existential quantifiers saying that ‘players have a strategy’ for achieving some purpose, while descriptions of these strategies themselves are not part of the
logical language” (van Benthem 2008). In fact, reasoning
about strategic abilities of players is different from reasoning about strategies themselves. The former takes a global
view of a group of players and does not consider how individual players generate strategies.
In this paper we introduce a modal logic for representing
and reasoning about game strategies. We extend the game
description language with three modalities for representing
and reasoning about actions and game strategies. We establish an axiomatic system for the logic and prove its soundness and completeness using variable forgetting technique.
We demonstrate how to the logic can be used for creating
strategies and verifying properties of strategies.
The paper is arranged as follows. The 2nd section introduces the model we use for describing a game. The 3rd -5th
sections present the syntax, semantics and axiomatic system
of the logic, followed by a sketch of completeness proof. The
last few sections demonstrate how to use the logic for strategy representation and reasoning before conclude the work.

This paper introduces a modal logic for reasoning about game
strategies. The logic is based on a variant of the well-known
game description language for describing game rules and further extends it with two modalities for reasoning about actions and strategies. We develop an axiomatic system and
prove its soundness and completeness with respect to a specific semantics based on the state transition model of games.
Interestingly, the completeness proof makes use of forgetting
techniques that have been widely used in the KR&R literature. We demonstrate how general game-playing systems can
apply the logic to develop game strategies.

Introduction
General Game Playing is concerned with replicating the
ability of humans to learn to play new games solely by being given the rules. The most challenging task of a general game-playing system is to generate strategies for game
playing. Several approaches have been developed in general game playing, including automatically generated heuristics (Clune 2007; Schiffel and Thielscher 2007), symbolic search (Kissmann and Edelkamp 2008), and Monte
Carlo-based search (Finnsson and Björnsson 2008); for an
overview, see (Genesereth and Björnsson 2013; Genesereth
and Thielscher 2014). However, for most games these approaches are too general to be as effective as a simple gamespecific strategy. The great challenge is how to automatically generate specific strategies for specific games based on
a players’ understanding of the game rules. Ideally, a player
should be able to think logically about game strategies based
on the provided logical descriptions of the game rules.
As a quasi-standard in general game playing, game
rules are specified in the Game Description Language
(GDL) (Genesereth et al. 2005). The language is a fragment
of first-order logic, which is essentially propositional but
expressive enough for describing any finite combinatorial
games with complete information. GDL has been designed
solely for describing game rules but not for describing game
strategies, nor for reasoning about game strategies.
There exist a number of logical frameworks proposed
for reasoning about strategic abilities of players. Most of

State Transition Model for Games
All the games we consider in this paper are assumed to be
played in a multi-agent environment. We use N to represent
the set of agents. We assume that each agent in N can perform a finite but non-empty number of actions. Let Ai be the
set of actions agent i P N can perform. We assume that actions are different if they are performed by different agents
even though they may have same pre-conditions and postconditions. Formally, we call pN, Aq a multi-agent frame
where
• N is a non-empty, finite set of agents;
Ť
• A “ iPN Ai , where Ai is a non-empty, finite set of actions for player i P N and Ai X A j “ H if i , j.
Most strategic games we play in the real-world, such as
board games, are finite and asynchronous. These games can
be easily specified with the state transition model.

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1671

