Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Convex Formulation for Spectral Shrunk Clustering
Xiaojun Chang1 , Feiping Nie2,3 , Zhigang Ma4 , Yi Yang1 and Xiaofang Zhou5
1

2

Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney, Australia.
Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Shaanxi, China.
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, USA.
4
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, USA.
5
School of Information Technology & Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Australia.
cxj273@gmail.com,feipingnie@gmail.com,kevinma@cs.cmu.edu,yiyang@cs.cmu.edu,zxf@itee.uq.edu.au.
Abstract

tance/similarity measurements may be inaccurate on highdimensional data, which tends to limit the clustering performance. As suggested by some researchers, many highdimensional data may exhibit dense grouping in a lowdimensional subspace (Nie et al. 2009). Hence, researchers
have proposed to first project the original data into a lowdimensional subspace via some dimensionality reduction
techniques and then cluster the computed low-dimensional
embedding for high-dimensional data clustering. For instance, a popular approach is to use Principle component
analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensionality of the original data followed by Kmeans for clustering (PcaKm) (Xu
and Wunsch 2005). Ding et al. present a clustering algorithm based on Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) method
(Ding and Li 2007). Ye et al propose discriminative Kmeans (DisKmeans) clustering which unifies the iterative
procedure of dimensionality reduction and K-means clustering into a trace maximization problem (Ye, Zhao, and Wu
2007).
Another genre of clustering, i.e., spectral clustering (Shi
and Malik 2000) integrates dimensionality reduction into its
clustering process. The basic idea of spectral clustering is to
find a clustering assignment of the data points by adopting
the spectrum of similarity matrix that leverages the nonlinear manifold structure of original data. Spectral clustering
has been shown to be easy to implement and oftentimes it
outperforms traditional clustering methods because of its capacity of mining intrinsic geometric structures, which facilitates partitioning data with more complicated structures. The
benefit of utilizing manifold information has been demonstrated in many applications, such as image segmentation
and web mining. Due to the advantage of spectral clustering,
different variants of spectral clustering algorithms have been
proposed these years (Li et al. 2015). For example, local
learning-based clustering (LLC) (Wu and Schlkopf 2006)
utilizes a kernel regression model for label prediction based
on the assumption that the class label of a data point can be
determined by its neighbors. Self-tuning SC (Zelnik-Manor
and Perona 2004) is able to tune parameters automatically in
an unsupervised scenario. Normalized cuts is capable of balancing the volume of clusters for the usage of data density
information (Shi and Malik 2000).
Spectral clustering is essentially a two-stage approach,
i.e., manifold learning based in the original high-

Spectral clustering is a fundamental technique in the
field of data mining and information processing. Most
existing spectral clustering algorithms integrate dimensionality reduction into the clustering process assisted
by manifold learning in the original space. However,
the manifold in reduced-dimensional subspace is likely
to exhibit altered properties in contrast with the original space. Thus, applying manifold information obtained from the original space to the clustering process
in a low-dimensional subspace is prone to inferior performance. Aiming to address this issue, we propose a
novel convex algorithm that mines the manifold structure in the low-dimensional subspace. In addition, our
unified learning process makes the manifold learning
particularly tailored for the clustering. Compared with
other related methods, the proposed algorithm results in
more structured clustering result. To validate the efficacy of the proposed algorithm, we perform extensive
experiments on several benchmark datasets in comparison with some state-of-the-art clustering approaches.
The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
algorithm has quite promising clustering performance.

Introduction
Clustering has been widely used in many real-world applications (Jain and Dubes 1988; Wang, Nie, and Huang
2014). The objective of clustering is to cluster the original data points into various clusters, so that data points
within the same cluster are dense while those in different clusters are far away from each other (Filippone et
al. 2008). Researchers have proposed a variety of clustering algorithms, such as K-means clustering and mixture
models (Wang et al. 2014; Nie, Wang, and Huang 2014;
Nie et al. 2011b), etc.
The existing clustering algorithms, however, mostly work
well when the samples’ dimensionality is low. When partitioning high-dimensional data, the performance of these
algorithms is not guaranteed. For example, K-means clustering iteratively assigns each data point to the cluster with
the closest center based on specific distance/similarity measurement and updates the center of each cluster. But the disCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2532

