Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Distributed Multiplicative Weights Methods for DCOP
Daisuke Hatano

Yuichi Yoshida

National Institute of Informatics
JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project
hatano@nii.ac.jp

National Institute of Informatics, and
Preferred Infrastructure, Inc.
yyoshida@nii.ac.jp

Abstract

be used in machine learning, optimization, and game theory (see (Arora, Hazan, and Kale 2012; Schapire 2003) for
surveys).
The first method, called DMW-LP (distributed multiplicative weights method for solving linear programming) utilizes linear programming (LP for short) relaxations. In this
method, the agents cooperatively solve the LP relaxation of
the given DCOP instance, and round the obtained LP solution to integer values. Though LPs are convex optimization
problems and they are known to be solvable using the multiplicative weights method, we need to modify the algorithm
so that it runs in a distributed manner. We prove that our
method converges to an optimal LP solution. As DMW-LP
computes the LP value, we can use this value as a lower
bound on the (integer) optimal value.
The second method, called DMW-Game (distributed multiplicative weights method for solving games) plays a costminimization game to solve DCOP. In this game, each player
associated with a variable keeps providing probability distributions over its domain, and tries to minimize the regret,
which is the average additional cost incurred by the probability distributions against the strategy of outputting a best
single value all the time. We can make the regret of each
agent arbitrarily small by utilizing the multiplicative weights
method. Finally, we round the obtained probability distributions to integer values. We prove that our method converges
to a certain kind of equilibrium, called a coarse correlated
equilibrium.
We empirically compare our methods with previous stateof-the-art methods. We demonstrate that our methods are
scalable, and that DMW-Game outperforms other methods
in terms of solution quality and efficiency.

We introduce a new framework for solving distributed constraint optimization problems that extend the domain of each
variable into a simplex. We propose two methods for searching the extended domain for good assignments. The first one
relaxes the problem using linear programming, finds the optimum LP solution, and rounds it to an assignment. The second one plays a cost-minimization game, finds a certain kind
of equilibrium, and rounds it to an assignment. Both methods
are realized by performing the multiplicative weights method
in a distributed manner. We experimentally demonstrate that
our methods have good scalability, and in particular, the second method outperforms existing algorithms in terms of solution quality and efficiency.

Introduction
In the wake of the computational sustainability project, the
importance of distributed cooperative problem solving to
deal with enormous sizes such as a smart grid is rapidly increasing in AI communities. The distributed constraint optimization problem (DCOP for short) is arguably the most
studied problem in this setting, where the goal is to find an
assignment that minimizes the total sum of costs incurred
by (local) cost functions. Since it takes a prohibitively long
time to exactly solve DCOP, we need to resort to incomplete algorithms, and a plethora of incomplete algorithms
have been proposed in the literature, such as local search
based algorithms (Maheswaran, Pearce, and Tambe 2004;
Zhang et al. 2005), inference based algorithms (Farinelli
et al. 2008), graph based algorithms (Bowring et al. 2008;
Kiekintveld et al. 2010), divide-and-coordinate based algorithms (Vinyals, Rodriguez-Aguilar, and Cerquides 2010;
Hatano and Hirayama 2013), and sampling based algorithms
(Ottens, Dimitrakakis, and Faltings 2012; Nguyen, Yeoh,
and Lau 2013).
In this paper, we present a novel approach for DCOP,
in which the finite domain of a variable is extended to
the d-dimensional simplex, where d is the size of the domain. We propose two methods that search the extended domain for good assignments, both based on the multiplicative weights method, which is a versatile algorithm that can

Preliminaries
For a positive integer t, [t] denotes the set {1, 2, . . . , t}.
We use bold symbols to denote vectors. Let 4k be the kdimensional simplex, i.e., 4k = {(x1 , . . . , xk ) | x1 + · · · +
xk = 1}. Let Nk denote the interior of 4k . For two vectors
x and y, hx, yi denotes their inner product. For a probability distribution P over a domain D, a ∼ P means that we
sample a value a ∈ D from the distribution P.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2074

