Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Hedonic Coalition Formation in Networks
Martin Hoefer

Daniel Vaz

Lisa Wagner

Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik
Saarland University
Saarbrücken, Germany
mhoefer@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik
Saarland University
Saarbrücken, Germany
ramosvaz@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Dept. of Computer Science
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany
lwagner@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract

any other colleagues instantaneously. Instead, agents have
to learn and get to know about each other before they can
engage in a joint project. For systems with computational
agents, locality can also be a necessity since agents might
be physically or computationally incapable of exploring all
opportunities for coalition formation. Naturally, locality can
have a severe impact on various aspects of coalition formation, and many of the interesting consequences are not wellunderstood from a formal point of view.
In this paper, we incorporate the aspect of limited visibility into hedonic games and study the impact of coalition
discovery on dynamic formation processes. Our model is
similar to recent graph-based models for locality in stable
matching. In locally stable matching (Arcaute and Vassilvitskii 2009) a set V of agents strives to match into pairs.
Agents are nodes of an underlying network N = (V, L) with
permanent links L. These links express permanent visibility
that grounds in, e.g., spatial closeness, family or co-worker
relations, etc., and they are unaffected by coalition formation. In addition, the current matching introduces temporary
links into the network. Pairs of agents become accessible if
their distance in the current network is low, and they might
deviate if this is compatible with their preferences. After
deviation the set of temporary links changes. In this way,
agents are subject to changing opportunities for partnerships
during the dynamics.
We model locality issues in coalition formation beyond
pairs and analyze a natural extension of the matching model
outlined above. In addition to the network N = (V, L)
of permanent links, for each existing coalition we insert a
clique of temporary links into the network, i.e., within a
coalition each pair of agents becomes connected and they
stay connected for as long as the coalition exists. If a coalition is abandoned, the agents lose the temporary connections provided through the common coalition (unless they
are contained in L). To discover and form a new coalition,
agents have to re-organize using the current network of permanent and temporary contacts. Depending on the application, it might not be necessary for every agent to be in contact with every other agent of the new coalition beforehand
(consider, e.g., the formation of a program committee for a
scientific conference). In fact, a single agent being in contact
with all others, or short pairwise distances, or even just connectivity within the group might be enough. Hence, given

Coalition formation is a fundamental problem in the organization of many multi-agent systems. In large populations,
the formation of coalitions is often restricted by structural
visibility and locality constraints under which agents can reorganize. We capture and study this aspect using a novel
network-based model for dynamic locality within the popular framework of hedonic coalition formation games. We
analyze the effects of network-based visibility and structure
on the convergence of coalition formation processes to stable states. Our main result is a tight characterization of the
structures based on which dynamic coalition formation can
stabilize quickly. Maybe surprisingly, polynomial-time convergence can be achieved if and only if coalition formation is
based on complete or star graphs.

Introduction
Coalition formation is an essential process for exploiting
synergies in multi-agent systems. A natural and versatile
model for studying formal aspects of coalition formation are
hedonic games (Dreze and Greenberg 1980). In these games
the outcome of strategic interaction is a coalition structure,
i.e., a partition of the agent set. A central feature of hedonic games is that the payoff for each agent is solely determined by the set of agents in his coalition, regardless of
which other coalitions may or may not be present. Hedonic
games capture many of the challenges of coalition formation, and various aspects of different stability concepts have
been studied in recent years (see e.g., the works of Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez (2001), Bogomolnaia and Jackson
(2002), Aziz, Brandt, and Seedig (2011), Aziz, Brandt, and
Harrenstein (2014)).
In the standard model of hedonic games, there is no a priori restriction on the coalitions that the agents can form (except agent preference). However, in many large-scale systems, the formation of coalitions is often restricted by additional structural visibility and locality constraints under
which agents can (re-)organize. As an example, consider scientific publishing as a coalition formation process, where researchers group themselves into teams working on projects
and papers. Here knowledge and visibility is a fundamental
challenge – one would not expect researchers to group with
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

929

