Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On Information Coverage for Location
Category Based Point-of-Interest Recommendation
Xuefeng Chen,1 Yifeng Zeng,2 Gao Cong,3 Shengchao Qin,2 Yanping Xiang,1 Yuanshun Dai1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
{cxflovechina, xiangyanping, uestcdaiys}@gmail.com
2
School of Computing, Teesside University, UK, {Y.Zeng, S.Qin}@tees.ac.uk
3
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, gaocong@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

visited by the previous users. However, users are often interested to be recommended with a set of heterogeneous POIs
that can cover the different types (e.g., food, sports, etc) of
locations in the targeted city.

Point-of-interest (POI) recommendation becomes a valuable
service in location-based social networks. Based on the norm
that similar users are likely to have similar preference of
POIs, the current recommendation techniques mainly focus
on users’ preference to provide accurate recommendation results. This tends to generate a list of homogeneous POIs that
are clustered into a narrow band of location categories (like
food, museum, etc.) in a city. However, users are more interested to taste a wide range of flavors that are exposed in
a global set of location categories in the city. In this paper,
we formulate a new POI recommendation problem, namely
top-K location category based POI recommendation, by introducing information coverage to encode the location categories of POIs in a city. The problem is NP-hard. We develop
a greedy algorithm and further optimization to solve this challenging problem. The experimental results on two real-world
datasets demonstrate the utility of new POI recommendations
and the superior performance of the proposed algorithms.

Figure 1: A place with eight POIs (∆). Each POI is denoted
by one tuple in which the number scores its relevance to a
user and the term describes its location category.
Considering the example of eight potential POIs in Fig. 1,
the top-3 POIs, {P1 , P2 , P3 }, are highly scored as they are
the most relevant to the user’s historical check-ins. However, the resulting recommendation is rather monotonic and
concentrates only on mall in a new place. In contrast, the
POIs, {P3 , P4 , P7 }, would be a better recommendation list
as they achieve high relevance scores and simultaneously
provide more flavor of the city, including mall, restaurant
and museum, to users. For instance, tourists would like to
enjoy shopping while browsing through museums or historical monuments around the city. The recommendation needs
to consider a wide range of location categories that provide global features of the city. Note that LBSNs, such as
Foursquare, categorize locations in a city and personalize
the POI search. Hence improving information coverage on
different categories is to exploit valuable information in LBSNs thereby providing a better POI recommendation.
As recognized in Foursquare, most of locations in a city
can be categorized into different types such as mall, Austrian
restaurant, coffee shop and so on 1 , and these categories represent different characteristics of the city. Users would like
to explore new types of locations that have not been visited
by them. In Fig. 2, we confirm this observation in two real-

Introduction
The increasing popularity of location-based social networks (LBSNs), e.g., Foursquare, GyPSii and Loopt, encourages more and more users to share their experience
for point-of-interest (POI) in a cyber world (Zheng 2011;
Zheng et al. 2010a). When users visit a POI such as store,
museum, etc., they post their physical locations, comments
and tips that compose a set of check-in data in the registered
LBSNs. The quick aggregation of data naturally generates
valuable service of POI recommendation that instructs users
on exploring new places.
Most of the existing work on POI recommendation discovers users’ preference implicitly through relating similar
users on previous check-in activities in LBSNs (Konstas,
Stathopoulos, and Jose 2009; Ye et al. 2011b; Ye, Liu, and
Lee 2012; Yuan et al. 2013), and offers a list of POIs to users.
Due to the limited budget (like time, money, etc.), users may
visit K POIs that are ranked in terms of their relevance to
users’ preference in the recommendation. The recommendation, called conventional top-K POIs in this paper, tends to
generate a set of homogeneous POIs (e.g., all about restaurant), which are often similar to the majority of the POIs
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

37

https://developer.foursquare.com/categorytree

