Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

On a Competitive Secretary Problem
Anna Karlin and Eric Lei
karlin@cs.washington.edu
elei@andrew.cmu.edu

n totally ordered applicants. The relative ranks of the applicants are initially unknown to the employers. The applicants
arrive one by one in a random order and at the moment they
arrive all the employers learn their rank relative to all applicants that have arrived earlier. As each applicant arrives,
any number of the employers may choose to make her an
offer. Again these decisions are irrevocable; there is no possibility of making her an offer later. Since the employers are
totally ranked, an applicant that receives multiple offers will
accept the offer from the highest ranked employer among
those making her an offer. We assume that each employer
wants to hire only one person, so once he has successfully
hired, he will make no further offers.
We consider two possible objectives for the employers.
The first is when each employer is trying to maximize the
probability of hiring the very best applicant. In Section 4, we
use dynamic programming to find a subgame-perfect Nash
equilibrium for this game. A set of strategies is a subgameperfect Nash equilibrium if (a) it is a Nash equilibrium—that
is, each employer’s strategy is a best-response to the strategies used by the other employers (note that the applicants’
strategies are trivial: they simply accept the best offer they
receive)—and (b) it remains a Nash equilibrium with respect
to each subgame, the game that remains after m applicants
have arrived, for each m.
Consider, for example, the case where k = 2, in which
exactly two employers, say I and II, are competing for the
best candidate. The strategy of employer I, the top-ranked
employer, is simple: he just runs the standard secretary algorithm, since offers made by employer II would always be
rejected in favor of offers from employer I. Employer II, on
the other hand, must take employer I’s strategy into account.
It turns out that the best (subgame-perfect) response for employer II in the limit is to wait until an e−3/2 fraction of
the candidates have been interviewed, and then make offers
to any candidate better than the best seen so far, until employer II successfully hires someone. (Employer II’s first
offer might be to the same person employer I makes an offer to, so II might end up making 2 offers.) Also, just as the
top employer has probability e−1 of success (the same as the
fraction of candidates he interviews before considering any
offer), the probability that II successfully hires the best applicant is in fact e−3/2 . More generally, the lower the rank
of the employer, the earlier they will start making offers and,

Abstract
Consider a scenario in which there are multiple employers
competing to hire the best possible employee. How does the
competition between the employers affect their hiring strategies or their ability to hire one of the best possible candidates?
In this paper, we address this question by studying a generalization of the classical secretary problem from optimal stopping theory: a set of ranked employers compete to hire from
the same random stream of employees, and each employer
wishes to hire the best candidate in the bunch. We show how
to derive subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium strategies in this
game and analyze the impact the competition has on the quality of the hires as a function of the rank of the employer. We
present numerical results from simulations of these strategies.

1

Introduction

The secretary problem (Ferguson 2012; Freeman 1983) is
a classical problem in optimal stopping theory, and can be
formulated as follows: An employer wishes to hire a single employee out of a pool of n totally ordered candidates.
The applicants are interviewed in a random order. Immediately after each interview, an irrevocable hiring decision is
made. The decision is made knowing only how that candidate compares to all candidates that have been interviewed
up to that point, but not how he compares to future candidates. Moreover, an applicant that has been rejected cannot
be later hired. It is well known that if the goal of the employer is to maximize the probability of hiring the very best
of the n candidates, then her optimal strategy is to wait until
she has seen roughly an e−1 fraction of the applicants, and
then hire the first one better than the best she has seen so far.
In this paper, we consider a version of this problem in
a competitive setting. Consider, for example, multiple top
computer science departments all considering the same set
of faculty candidates, and competing to hire them. This
changes the problem from one of decision theory to one of
game theory, and raises the following questions: What are
the optimal strategies of the employers in equilibrium? How
well do the employers and applicants do in the presence of
this competition?
We explore these questions in the context of the following
stylized model: There are k totally ordered employers and
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

944

