Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Cooperating with Unknown Teammates in Complex Domains:
A Robot Soccer Case Study of Ad Hoc Teamwork
Samuel Barrett ∗

Peter Stone

Kiva Systems
North Reading, MA 01864 USA
basamuel@kivasystems.com

Dept. of Computer Science
The Univ. of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712 USA
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

ing effective actions for cooperating with a variety of teammates in complex domains. An additional contribution of
this paper is the empirical evaluation of this algorithm in the
RoboCup 2D simulation domain. The RoboCup 2D simulation league is a complex, multiagent domain in which teams
of agents coordinate their actions in order to compete against
other intelligent teams. The complexity arising from the dynamics of the domain and the opposing players makes this
domain ideal for testing the scalability of our approach.
To quickly adapt to new teammates in complex scenarios, it is imperative to use knowledge learned about previous
teammates. This paper introduces PLASTIC–Policy, which
learns policies of how to cooperate with previous teammates
and then reuses this knowledge to cooperate with new teammates. Learning these policies is treated as a reinforcement
learning problem, where the inputs are features derived from
the world state and the actions are soccer moves such as
passing or dribbling. Then, PLASTIC–Policy observes the
current teammates’ behaviors to select which of these policies will lead to the best performance for the team.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 situates this research in the literature, and then Section 3 describes the problem of ad hoc teamwork in more
depth as well as presenting the background information.
Section 4 introduces PLASTIC–Policy, the method used to
tackle this problem. Section 5 presents the domain used in
our empirical tests, and the results of these tests are given in
Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes.

Many scenarios require that robots work together as a team
in order to effectively accomplish their tasks. However, precoordinating these teams may not always be possible given
the growing number of companies and research labs creating
these robots. Therefore, it is desirable for robots to be able
to reason about ad hoc teamwork and adapt to new teammates on the fly. Past research on ad hoc teamwork has focused on relatively simple domains, but this paper demonstrates that agents can reason about ad hoc teamwork in complex scenarios. To handle these complex scenarios, we introduce a new algorithm, PLASTIC–Policy, that builds on an
existing ad hoc teamwork approach. Specifically, PLASTIC–
Policy learns policies to cooperate with past teammates and
reuses these policies to quickly adapt to new teammates. This
approach is tested in the 2D simulation soccer league of
RoboCup using the half field offense task.

1

Introduction

As the presence of robots grows, so does their need to cooperate with one another. Usually, multiagent research focuses on the case where all of the robots have been given
shared coordination protocols before they encounter each
other (Grosz and Kraus 1996b; Tambe 1997; Horling et al.
1999). However, given the growing number of research laboratories and companies creating new robots, these robots
may not all share a common coordination protocol. Therefore, it is desirable for these robots to be capable of learning and adapting to new teammates. This area of research is
called ad hoc teamwork and focuses on the scenario in which
the developers only design a single agent or small subset of
agents that need to adapt to a variety of teammates (Stone et
al. 2010).
Previous research into ad hoc teamwork has established a
number of theoretical and empirical methods for handling
unknown teammates, but these analyses largely focus on
simple scenarios that may not be representative of the real
problems that robots may encounter in ad hoc teams. This
paper addresses this gap. The main contribution is the introduction of an algorithm (PLASTIC–Policy) for select-

2

Related Work

Multiagent teamwork is a well studied area of research. Previous research into multiagent teams has largely focused on
creating shared protocols for coordination and communication which will enable the team to cooperate effectively. For
example, the STEAM (Tambe 1997) framework has agents
build a partial hierarchy of joint actions. In this framework,
agents monitor the progress of their plans and adapt their
plans as conditions change while selectively using communication in order to stay coordinated. Alternatively, the Generalized Partial Global Planning (GPGP) (Decker and Lesser
1995) framework considers a library of coordination mechanisms from which to choose. Decker and Lesser argue that
different coordination mechanisms are better suited to certain tasks and that a library of coordination mechanisms is

∗
This work was performed while Samuel was a graduate student
at the University of Texas at Austin.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2010

