Inferring Same-as Facts from Linked Data:
An Iterative Import-by-Query Approach
Mustafa Al-Bakri,1,2 Manuel Atencia,1,2,3 Steffen Lalande,4 and Marie-Christine Rousset1,2,5
1

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, LIG, 38000, Grenoble, France
2
CNRS, LIG, 38000, Grenoble, France
3
Inria, 38330, Montbonnot-Saint-Martin, France
4
Institut National de l’Audiovisuel, 94366, Bry-sur-Marne, France
5
Institut Universitaire de France, 75005, Paris, France
Mustafa.Al-Bakri@imag.fr, Manuel.Atencia@inria.fr, slalande@ina.fr, Marie-Christine.Rousset@imag.fr

of tailored querying of the Linked Data cloud to import data as speciﬁc as possible to infer owl:sameAs and
owl:differentFrom facts. It is an extension of the well-known
query-subquery algorithm for answering Datalog queries
over deductive databases. Experiments conducted on a realworld dataset have demonstrated the feasibility of this approach and its usefulness in practice for data linkage and
disambiguation.
Section 2 illustrates our approach by example, while Section 3 positions it w.r.t. existing work. In Section 4 the problem that we consider is formally stated. Our import-by-query
algorithm is described in Section 5. Then Section 6 reports
on experimental results, and Section 7 concludes the paper.

Abstract
In this paper we model the problem of data linkage in
Linked Data as a reasoning problem on possibly decentralized data. We describe a novel import-by-query algorithm that alternates steps of sub-query rewriting and
of tailored querying the Linked Data cloud in order to
import data as speciﬁc as possible for inferring or contradicting given target same-as facts. Experiments conducted on a real-world dataset have demonstrated the
feasibility of this approach and its usefulness in practice for data linkage and disambiguation.

1

Introduction

Linked Data promotes exposing, sharing and connecting
data and knowledge in the Semantic Web (Bizer, Heath, and
Berners-Lee 2009). Data linkage is a crucial task in Linked
Data. In particular, it is very important to correctly decide
whether two URIs refer to the same real-world entity. Most
existing approaches are based on numerical methods that return weighted owl:sameAs links, among which those with
higher weights are likely (but not guaranteed) to be correct.
In contrast, like a few other works (Saı̈s, Pernelle, and
Rousset 2009; Hogan et al. 2012), we propose a rule-based
approach equipped with full reasoning to infer all certain
same-as facts that are logically entailed from a given set
of domain constraints and facts. Our main contribution is
a novel algorithm, called Import-by-Query, that enables the
scalable deployment of such an approach in the decentralized setting of Linked Data. The main challenge is to identify the data, possibly distributed over several datasets, useful for inferring owl:sameAs and owl:differentFrom facts of
interest. Compared to the approach reported in (Hogan et al.
2012), relying on a global import obtained by a breadth-ﬁrst
crawl of the Linked Data cloud, we perform a selective import while guaranteeing completeness for the inference of
the targeted owl:sameAs and owl:differentFrom facts.
For doing so, the import-by-query algorithm that we
have designed alternates steps of sub-query rewriting and

2

Illustrative Scenario

We describe here a simpliﬁed scenario inspired by the task
of disambiguation of named entities in a large real-world
RDF documentary catalog produced by the French National
Audiovisual Institute (INA), and that we have used in our
experiments (Section 6).
Figure 1 shows an extract of the INA vocabulary and a
sample of RDF triples from the INA dataset.1 Any person
entity is an instance of the class ina:PhysicalPerson, which
has two subclasses: ina:Person and ina:VideoPerson. The
class ina:Person is used for representing French personalities
while ina:VideoPerson is used for identifying person entities
that play a role in a video. INA experts want to disambiguate
individuals within ina:Person, and link these individuals to
the ones of ina:VideoPerson.
Three homonymous persons are described in Figure 1, all
named “Jacques Martin”: ina:per1, ina:per2 and ina:per3. It
is unknown if these entities represent the same or different
persons, but some additional information is given: ina:per1
is known to be the presenter of a program recorded in the
video ina:vid1 whose title is “Le Petit Rapporteur”, whereas
ina:per2 and ina:per3 have dates of birth “1933-06-22” and
“1921-09-25”, respectively.

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We have slightly modiﬁed the INA vocabulary (e.g. translating
French terms into English terms) for the sake of readability.

9

