Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Tackling Mental Health by Integrating Unobtrusive Multimodal Sensing
Dawei Zhou, Jiebo Luo, Vincent Silenzio, Yun Zhou, Jile Hu, Glenn Currier, and Henry Kautz
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
demographics, and are not particularly designed for those
in the early stages of developing mental health problems.
In the meantime, effective intervention for mental health
has been severely limited by the availability of resources in
healthcare professionals and treatments. Advances in computer vision and machine learning, coupled with the widespread use of the Internet and adoption of social media, are
opening doors for a new and effective approach to tackling
mental health using physically noninvasive, low-cost, and
pervasive multimodal sensors already ubiquitous in people’s daily lives.

Abstract
Mental illness is becoming a major plague in modern societies and poses challenges to the capacity of current public
health systems worldwide. With the widespread adoption of
social media and mobile devices, and rapid advances in artificial intelligence, a unique opportunity arises for tackling
mental health problems. In this study, we investigate how
users’ online social activities and physiological signals detected through ubiquitous sensors can be utilized in realistic
scenarios for monitoring their mental health states. First, we
extract a suite of multimodal time-series signals using modern computer vision and signal processing techniques, from
recruited participants while they are immersed in online social media that elicit emotions and emotion transitions.
Next, we use machine learning techniques to build a model
that establishes the connection between mental states and
the extracted multimodal signals. Finally, we validate the effectiveness of our approach using two groups of recruited
subjects.

Introduction
Mental health is a significant problem on the rise with reports of anxiety, stress, depression, suicide, and violence
(Crown 2011). A large survey from BRFSS (Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System) (CDC, 2008, 2011,
2012) found that an astonishing 46% met criteria established by the American Psychiatric Association (APA) for
having had at least one mental illness within four broad
categories at some time in their lives. The categories were
anxiety disorders, mood disorders (including major depression and bipolar disorders, impulse-control disorders, and
substance use disorders (including alcohol and drug
abuse)). Mental illness has been and remains a major cause
of disability, dysfunction, and even violence and crime.
Tackling mental health on a large scale is a major challenge in terms of resources. Traditional methods of monitoring mental health are expensive, intrusive, and often
geared toward serious mental disorders. More importantly,
these methods do not scale to a large population of varying

Figure 1. The proposed framework for multimodal monitoring.

We propose to combine the analysis of a subject's social
media stream and image signals from a close-up video of
the subject captured by today’s mobile devices to construct
a continuous, multifaceted view of the subject's mental
health (Figure 1). We will employ both computer vision
and data mining techniques to produce a real-time assessment of mental health based on the constructed finegrained signals at the individual subject level. This study
makes several contributions, including
1) Extracting fine-grained psycho-behavioral signals that
reflect the mental state of the subject from imagery unobtrusively captured by the webcams built in most mobile devices (laptops, tablets, and smartphones). We
develop robust computer vision algorithms to monitor
real-time psycho-behavioral signals including the heart
rate, eye blink rate, pupil variations, head movements,
and facial expressions of the users.

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1401

