Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Convergent Plans for Large-Scale Evacuations
Caroline Even1 and Victor Pillac1 and Pascal Van Hentenryck1,2
1

2

National ICT Australia (NICTA), Melbourne, Australia
Australian National University (ANU), Canberra, Australia

Abstract

optimum. The resulting plan essentially becomes a selfevacuation, where each individual makes their own decisions about whether and when to evacuate, using their preferred route and transportation mode. Self-evacuations increase the risk of congestion, since a large fraction of evacuees may choose the same evacuation routes or routes that
cross or diverge at intersections.
This paper focuses on controlled evacuations in which
authorities give evacuation orders to people under threat.
Controlled evacuations ensure that each residential zone is
assigned a specific route and time to evacuate, leading to
the most effective utilization of the road network. These
approaches significantly improve the quality of evacuation
plans, evacuating more people over a given horizon or decreasing the overall evacuation time. However, specifying
an evacuation route for each residential area is not sufficient
to control an evacuation fully: Two evacuation routes can
merge, possibly share a few road segments, and then diverge, leaving evacuees with a choice at the fork. Evidence
collected during evacuations demonstrates that drivers hesitate when approaching a fork (Townsend 2006), leading to
additional congestion.
To address this limitation, this paper introduces the concept of convergent evacuation plans, which assigns an evacuation route to each residential zone and ensures that all
evacuation routes converge to the safe zones. Convergent
evacuation plans can be fully controlled and remove a key
source of congestion by ensuring that drivers never face a
choice between two onwards evacuation routes. Optimal
convergent plans can be obtained by a MIP model using a
time-indexed flow formulation. Unfortunately, this model
cannot tackle realistic-scale evacuations. To remedy this
issue, the paper proposes a two-stage approach that separates the choice of evacuation routes from the scheduling
of the evacuation. More precisely, the first stage is a tree
design problem that selects a set of convergent routes and
produces an upper bound on the number of people who can
reach safety over a time horizon. The second stage is a flow
scheduling problem that determines how to evacuate the residential zones optimally given the evacuation routes produced in the first stage. Experimental results on a real case
study demonstrate the benefits of the two-stage approach. In
particular:

Evacuation planning is a critical aspect of disaster preparedness and response to minimize the number of people exposed to a threat. Controlled evacuations aim at
managing the flow of evacuees as efficiently as possible and have been shown to produce significant benefits compared to self-evacuations. However, existing
approaches do not capture the delays introduced by diverging and crossing evacuation routes, although evidence from actual evacuations highlights that these can
lead to significant congestion. This paper introduces the
concept of convergent evacuation plans to tackle this issue. It presents a MIP model to obtain optimal convergent evacuation plans which, unfortunately, does not
scale to realistic instances. The paper then proposes a
two-stage approach that separates the route design and
the evacuation scheduling. Experimental results on a
real case study show that the two-stage approach produces better primal bounds than the MIP model and is
two orders of magnitude faster; It also produces dual
bounds stronger than the linear relaxation of the MIP
model. Finally, simulations of the evacuation demonstrate that convergent evacuation plans outperform existing approaches for realistic driver behaviors.

Introduction
Planning large-scale evacuations is central to the preparedness and response to many disasters including industrial hazards, floods, bushfires, hurricanes, and tsunamis. It ensures
the safety of populations at threat by giving evacuees clear
instructions on how to reach a set of safe zones. Evacuation planning is computationally challenging as it needs to
account for the disaster, traffic network, residential zones
and their population, and human behavior, among others.
Given a threat or a set of threat scenarios, an evacuation
plan must ideally produce two outputs: (1) a traffic management plan, including detailed evacuation routes and management points, and (2) an evacuation schedule, specifying
when residential zones should evacuate. Most automated
approaches to evacuation planning only address these factors partially and assume that individuals will decide their
routes, destinations, and times for departure to reach a global
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• The tree design problem provides dual bounds that are

1121

