Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

FutureMatch: Combining Human Value Judgments and Machine Learning to
Match in Dynamic Environments
John P. Dickerson

Tuomas Sandholm

Carnegie Mellon University
dickerson@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

The preferred treatment for kidney failure is transplantation. However, the demand for donor kidneys is far greater
than supply. In the US alone, the waiting list for a kidney transplant had 101,956 patients as of November 18,
2014 (UNOS). Demand is increasing: for example, 36,395
people were added to the US national waiting list in 2013,
while only 16,461 left it due to receiving a kidney.
Patients can receive a transplant organ from either a deceased or living donor. Roughly two thirds of transplanted
kidneys are sourced from cadavers, while one third come
from willing and healthy living donors. Patients who are fortunate enough to find a willing living donor must still contend with compatibility issues like blood type, tissue type,
and other medical or logistical factors (as we discuss later in
the paper). If a willing would-be donor is incompatible with
a patient, the kidney cannot be transplanted.
Kidney exchange is a recent innovation that allows patients to swap willing but incompatible donors. Figure 1
shows a graphical representation of a small pool consisting of three patient-donor pairs, where an arrow from pair
i to pair j means the patient at j is compatible with the
donor at i. Also shown is an altruistic donor; such donors
do not come with paired patients and are willing to donate
a kidney without asking for one in return. The basic kidney exchange problem is then to recommend an optimal—
according to some social welfare function—set of disjoint
cycles and altruist-initiated chains in the graph.

Abstract
The preferred treatment for kidney failure is a transplant;
however, demand for donor kidneys far outstrips supply. Kidney exchange, an innovation where willing but incompatible
patient-donor pairs can exchange organs—via barter cycles
and altruist-initiated chains—provides a life-saving alternative. Typically, fielded exchanges act myopically, considering only the current pool of pairs when planning the cycles
and chains. Yet kidney exchange is inherently dynamic, with
participants arriving and departing. Also, many planned exchange transplants do not go to surgery due to various failures. So, it is important to consider the future when matching.
Motivated by our experience running the computational side
of a large nationwide kidney exchange, we present F UTURE M ATCH, a framework for learning to match in a general dynamic model. F UTURE M ATCH takes as input a high-level
objective (e.g., “maximize graft survival of transplants over
time”) decided on by experts, then automatically (i) learns
based on data how to make this objective concrete and (ii)
learns the “means” to accomplish this goal—a task, in our
experience, that humans handle poorly. It uses data from all
live kidney transplants in the US since 1987 to learn the quality of each possible match; it then learns the potentials of
elements of the current input graph offline (e.g., potentials
of pairs based on features such as donor and patient blood
types), translates these to weights, and performs a computationally feasible batch matching that incorporates dynamic,
failure-aware considerations through the weights.
We validate F UTURE M ATCH on real fielded exchange data.
It results in higher values of the objective. Furthermore, even
under economically inefficient objectives that enforce equity,
it yields better solutions for the efficient objective (which does
not incorporate equity) than traditional myopic matching that
uses the efficiency objective.

a

di

dk

pi

pk

dj
pj

Figure 1: Tiny example kidney exchange pool with three
patient-donor pairs and one altruistic donor.

Introduction

Our Contributions

Chronic kidney disease is a life-threatening health issue that
affects millions of people worldwide; its societal burden is
likened to that of diabetes (Neuen et al. 2013). Damage from
kidney disease can cause irreparable loss of organ function
and, eventually, kidney failure. Such failure requires either
continual dialysis or an organ transplant to sustain life.

Fielded kidney exchange algorithms match patients and
donors myopically, considering only the current state of
the pool when deciding on a matching. However, kidney
exchange is inherently dynamic, with patient-donor pairs
and altruists arriving and departing the pool over time.
Intuitively, the matching algorithm should take distributional information about the future into account when deciding what action to take now. Indeed, recent research

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

622

