Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Local Context Sparse Coding
Seungyeon Kim∗ and Joonseok Lee∗ and Guy Lebanon† and Haesun Park∗
∗

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
†
Amazon, Seattle, WA, USA
{seungyeon.kim, jlee716}@gatech.edu, glebanon@gmail.com, hpark@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract

their positions and it uses sparse coding to compress the parameter space.
Document models such as the n-gram and LOWBOW
suffer from intrinsic sparsity, an inevitable consequence of
capturing dependencies in sequences over a large vocabulary. The larger the dependency range, the harder it is to estimate the dependencies due to increased estimation variance.
Specifically, the number of possible combinations of n consecutive words grows exponentially, making the number of
observations for each combination extremely sparse, eventually causing not only computational difficulties but also a
high estimation error. As a result, in many cases where data
is limited, n-gram models with low n perform better than
n-gram models with high values of n.
Neural probabilistic language models such as Bengio et
al. (2006) are an attempt to handle this issue. They capture
long term relations over a large vocabulary by using a parametric model that compresses the parameter space. Since
the model estimates a compressed parameter vector rather
than the exponentially growing n-gram counts, it is an effective way of capturing word dependencies that n-gram models cannot. On the other hand, probabilistic topic models
such as Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003) and matrix decomposition models (Deerwester et al. 1990; Lee and Seung 1999;
Zhu and Xing 2011) estimate a compressed representation
of the vocabulary, usually termed latent space or topics. Unlike the neural language model, these models are usually
based on the bag-of-words representation or bigram features
(Wallach 2006), limiting their potential to capture sequential
word dependencies (though some recent extensions generalize topic models to sequential models - see Section 2).
By efficiently estimating sparse and compact representations of local dependencies, our model extends the work of
Lebanon, Mao, and Dillon (2007) and Zhu and Xing (2011).
We first define the notion of a local context, which is a conditional word probability given the word’s location in the
document. Similar to Lebanon, Mao, and Dillon (2007), we
use a smoothing kernel to estimate the local context. Each
kernel bandwidth examines a unique range of local resolutions. As noted earlier, because of the huge number of local
contexts in our model, we apply a sparse-coding formulation
to compress the space.
Our model has several benefits. First, by introducing rich
local dependencies, it can generate highly discriminating

The n-gram model has been widely used to capture the
local ordering of words, yet its exploding feature space
often causes an estimation issue. This paper presents local context sparse coding (LCSC), a non-probabilistic
topic model that effectively handles large feature spaces
using sparse coding. In addition, it introduces a new
concept of locality, local contexts, which provides a representation that can generate locally coherent topics and
document representations. Our model efficiently finds
topics and representations by applying greedy coordinate descent updates. The model is useful for discovering local topics and the semantic flow of a document, as
well as constructing predictive models.

1

Introduction

Learning a representation that reflects word locality is important in a wide variety of text processing applications
such as text categorization, information retrieval, or language model generation. The n-gram model, for example,
is popular because of its simplicity and efficiency, which interprets a document as a collection of word sub-sequences.
Specifically, it models a word given the previous n − 1
words: p(wi |wi−1 , . . . , wi−n+1 ). The larger n is, the longer
the contexts that the model can capture. A related approach is to model a symmetric window around a word
p(wi |wi+1 , wi−1 , wi+2 , wi−2 , . . .), as is done for example
by Mikolov et al. (2013).
Lebanon, Mao, and Dillon (2007) extended local dependencies by applying different weights at each position of a
document and summing up the word presence near a particular location. Specifically, that approach, named “locally
weighted bag-of-words” (LOWBOW), uses a smoothing
kernel to generate a smooth curve in the probability simplex
that represents the temporal progression of the document.
LOWBOW allows examining much longer-range dependencies than n-gram models, and it also allows tying word patterns to specific document locations. The bandwidth of the
smoothing kernel captures the tradeoff between estimation
bias and estimation variance. Our approach extends their
work, but is different as it decouples local probabilities from
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2260

