Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Bayesian Networks Specified Using Propositional and
Relational Constructs: Combined, Data, and Domain Complexity
Fabio Gagliardi Cozman and Denis Deratani Mauá
Escola Politécnica, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil

Abstract

In our study of complexity induced by relational languages, we distinguish three concepts. We have complexity with no bounds on specification, evidence, domain: the
combined complexity. We then have complexity where specification is bounded: the data complexity. Finally, we have
complexity with specification and evidence bounded: the domain complexity. These concepts are directly related to dqeliftability and liftability (Jaeger and Van den Broeck 2012).
We show that interesting conclusions can be obtained by
looking at data complexity; in particular we present a probabilistic variant of the description logic DL-Lite with polynomial inference when conditioning on binary relations (departing from non-polynomial behavior expected in general
with such evidence (Jaeger and Van den Broeck 2012)).
The paper is organized as follows. We first review some
concepts; then, as a warm-up discussion to fix notation and
basic ideas, we introduce our framework in the propositional
case. We then move to relational languages; we first examine
combined complexity, then data and domain complexity.

We examine the inferential complexity of Bayesian networks specified through logical constructs. We first consider simple propositional languages, and then move to
relational languages. We examine both the combined
complexity of inference (as network size and evidence
size are not bounded) and the data complexity of inference (where network size is bounded); we also examine
the connection to liftability through domain complexity. Combined and data complexity of several inference
problems are presented, ranging from polynomial to exponential classes.

Introduction
A Bayesian network over categorical variables is often specified through a set of conditional probability distributions
that induce a directed acyclic graph (Pearl 1988). Once distributions are specified, an inference can be computed; that
is, the probability of a variable given fixed values for other
variables can be calculated. The complexity of such inferences is affected by the topology of the induced graph
(Kwisthout, Bodlaender, and Van der Gaag 2010).
We can contemplate many ways to specify conditional
probabilities that go beyond flat conditional probability tables. There are indeed many specification languages in the
literature. In this paper we wish to study the complexity of
inferences not as dependent on graph topology, but rather
as dependent on the underlying specification language. We
note that the relationship between expressivity and inferential complexity has been studied in depth for logical languages, but existing results do not exhaust the parallel study
for Bayesian networks.
In this paper we propose a simple strategy to relate expressivity and inferential complexity in Bayesian networks
with binary variables. We consider a syntax where each variable X is either associated with a probability, or logically
equivalent to a formula (our syntax is clearly inspired by existing specification schemes (Poole 1993; Sato and Kameya
2001)). Our specification framework allows us to move from
sub-Boolean languages to relational ones, and to obtain languages whose inferential complexity ranges from FP to
#EXP-complete problems.

Basic Concepts
A Bayesian network consists of a directed acyclic graph
where each node is a variable Vi (and we denote by pa(Vi )
the parents of Vi ), and where each random variable Vi is
associated with a conditional probability distribution with
probability values P(Vi = vi |pa(Vi ) = πi ), where vi and
πi denote respectively the values of Vi and of pa(Vi ). We
assume throughout that each specified probability value is
a nonnegative rational. We only consider finite objects in
this paper; there are no measurability concerns, and every
function can be taken as a random variable, hence we simply use the term “variable” to refer to a random variable
(the latter are clearly different from the logical variables
we employ later). The set of variables (nodes) is denoted
by V. A Markov condition then implies that the joint distribution
for all variables factorizes such that P(V = v) =
Qn
P(V
i = vi |pa(Vi ) = πi ), where vi and πi are induced
i=1
by v. We refer to an event {Vi = vi } as an assignment.
A conditional probability table explicitly contains all probability values for a conditional distribution (that is, each
P(Vi = vi |pa(Vi ) = πi )). If a Bayesian network is specified
through conditional probability tables, we say the network
is extensively specified.
A language is simply a set of well-formed formulas.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3519

