Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Burst Time Prediction in Cascades
Senzhang Wang? , Zhao Yan? , Xia Hu† , Philip S. Yu‡ , Zhoujun Li?
?

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment,
Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
†
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
‡
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA
{szwang, yanzhao, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn, psyu@uic.edu, xia.hu@asu.edu

Abstract

hoo! Finance reported that, Didier Sornette, a former physicist has developed a statistical model with the help of social
media data to predict when a financial bubble will burst (Pinsen 2012). As said in the report: “ the Sornette model is now
predicting a stock market crash as early as next year.”
Existing related works on cascades prediction mainly focus on predicting their future volume, ranging from the
future popularity prediction (Szabo and Huberman 2008;
Hong, Dan, and Davison 2011) to the aggregate size prediction (Petrovic, Osborne, and Lavrenko 2011; Cheng et
al. 2014). Recently, some efforts have also been devoted
to modeling the burst patterns and using the burst patterns
to cluster the cascades(Crane and Sornette 2008; Yang and
Leskovec 2011; Matsubara et al. 2012). Another related area
is burst detection (Kleinberg 2002; Zhu and Shasha 2003;
Parikh and Sundaresan 2008). Burst detection focuses on
detecting instead of predicting the burst. How to predict the
burst time of cascades still remains an open problem.
Predicting the burst time of the cascades is a non-trivial
task due to the following two major challenges. First, existing prediction approaches cannot be directly applied to predict burst time due to the “quick rise-and-fall” pattern of the
bursts. For example, traditionally, regression is widely used
for predicting and forecasting (Mill 1990; Li et al. 2011)
by learning relationships among features based on historical data. With the “quick rise-and-fall” property (Matsubara
et al. 2012) of bursts in cascades, the correlation between
historical data and future data becomes difficult to be captured by regression-based methods. This motivates us to investigate: are there any other knowledge could be helpful
and how to model them? The second challenge is the significantly distinct life spans of different cascades. The vast
difference in magnitude and time span of the cascades makes
extracting comparable features difficult, and results in building predictive models challenging. For example, given two
cascades with the time spans of 10 days and 10 hours respectively, it is more meaningful to predict the formal one on the
daily basis and the latter one on the hourly basis. Therefore,
instead of simply modeling all the cascades in the original
time scale without distinguishing their diverse time spans, a
more general and time-independent model is necessary.
In this paper, we propose to formulate the burst time prediction task as a classification problem by time window
based transformation. Instead of predicting the exact occur-

Studying the bursty nature of cascades in social media is
practically important in many applications such as product sales prediction, disaster relief, and stock market
prediction. Although the cascade volume prediction has
been extensively studied, how to predict when a burst
will come remains an open problem. It is challenging to
predict the time of the burst due to the “quick rise and
fall” pattern and the diverse time spans of the cascades.
To this end, this paper proposes a classification based
approach for burst time prediction by utilizing and modeling rich knowledge in information diffusion. Particularly, we first propose a time window based approach to
predict in which time window the burst will appear. This
paves the way to transform the time prediction task to
a classification problem. To address the challenge that
the original time series data of the cascade popularity
only are not sufficient for predicting cascades with diverse magnitudes and time spans, we explore rich information diffusion related knowledge and model them in
a scale-independent manner. Extensive experiments on
a Sina Weibo reposting dataset demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed approach in accurately
predicting the burst time of posts.

Introduction
Burst, defined as “a brief period of intensive activity followed by long period of nothingness” (Barabási 2011), is a
common phenomenon in human activities. The bursty nature
of human behavior is observed and studied extensively in
many domains, such as electronic communication (Barabási
2005), library visiting (Vazquez et al. 2006), stock trading
(Zhu and Shasha 2003), as well as cascades spreading in social media (Matsubara et al. 2012).
With the bursty nature of the cascades and the challenge of information overload in social media, an interesting problem arises: Can we predict the burst time during
cascade spreading? Predicting the burst time of cascades is
of outstanding interest for many applications in various domains, such as product sales prediction (Gruhl et al. 2005;
Chen et al. 2013), disaster relief (Sakaki, Okazaki, and Matsuo 2010), and stock market prediction (Pinsen 2012). YaCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

325

