Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Using Description Logics for
RDF Constraint Checking and Closed-World Recognition
Peter F. Patel-Schneider
Nuance Communications
1198 East Arques Avenue, Sunnyvale, California, U. S A.
pfpschneider@gmail.com

Abstract

2014), identify RDF validation more with recognition, similar to determining whether an individual belongs to a Description Logic (Baader et al. 2010) description. For example one might define shape that requires a name and an address and then ask which individuals satisfy the shape’s constraint. Here, in contrast to the previous situation, the validation is divorced from any type information in the data.
Again, however, there is the requirement that explicit information is needed to match the shape—a particular name
must be provided, not just information that there must be
one.
As shown in this paper, Description Logics can be used
to provide the necessary framework for both checking constraints and providing closed-world recognition facilities,
and thus cover most of what SPIN and ShEx provide.
Why then are there claims (Ryman, Hors, and Speicher
2013; Fokoue and Ryman 2013) that OWL (Motik, PatelSchneider, and Parsia 2012)—the Semantic Web Description Logic—is inadequate for these purposes? There are
several aspects of the standard view of Description Logics that might not be consonant with constraints and the
kind of recognition that might be desired. However, Description Logic syntax and semantics, and their instantiation in
OWL, can serve as the basis for RDF constraint checking
and closed-world recognition. The only change required is
to consider a closed-world variation of the Description Logic
semantics. Then the development of RDF constraint checking and closed-world recognition is easy.

RDF and Description Logics work in an open-world setting
where absence of information is not information about absence. Nevertheless, Description Logic axioms can be interpreted in a closed-world setting and in this setting they
can be used for both constraint checking and closed-world
recognition against information sources. When the information sources are expressed in well-behaved RDF or RDFS
(i.e., RDF graphs interpreted in the RDF or RDFS semantics) this constraint checking and closed-world recognition is
simple to describe. Further this constraint checking can be
implemented as SPARQL querying and thus effectively performed.

There has recently been considerable attention paid to
the problem of validating RDF (Cyganiak, Wood, and Lanthaler 2014) or RDFS information. There are several commercial systems that provide facilities for RDF validation,
including TopQuadrant’s SPIN (TopQuadrant 2011) and
Clark&Parsia’s Stardog ICV (Pérez-Urbina, Sirin, and Clark
2012; Clark&Parsia 2014). There are several proposals for
specifying the desired form of RDF information, such as Resource Shapes (Ryman 2014). In 2013 W3C held an RDF
Validation Workshop (W3C 2013) to gauge interest in the
area, and W3C has started a new working group on RDF
validation (W3C 2014).
Just what, however, is RDF validation?
Some accounts and systems (such as Stardog ICV) identify RDF validation with satisfying integrity constraints,
similar to checking database integrity constraints. In this account, there are conditions (constraints) placed on instances
of classes, such as requiring that every person has a name
and an address, both strings. The defining characteristic here
is that explicit information is needed to satisfy the integrity
constraint. To pass the constraint that a person has a name it
is necessary to provide a particular string for the name of the
person, and not just state that the person has some unknown
name.
Other accounts and proposals, such as OSLC Resource
Shapes (Ryman, Hors, and Speicher 2013) (used by the
Open Services for Lifecycle Collaboration community) and
ShEx (Prud’hommeaux 2014; Solbrig and Prud’hommeaux

The Basic Idea
Closed-World Recognition
Let’s first look at recognition. In recognition we want to determine whether a particular node in an RDF graph matches
some criteria. For example, John in the RDF graph1
ex:John foaf:name "John"ˆˆxsd:string .
(1)
ex:John foaf:phone "+19085551212"ˆˆxsd:string .
ex:John exo:friend ex:Bill .
ex:John exo:friend ex:Willy .

matches the ShEx shape
1

Turtle (Prud’hommeaux and Carothers 2014) will be used for
writing RDF graphs throughout this paper. Prefix and base statements will generally be omitted.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

247

