Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Visually Interpreting Names as Demographic Attributes
by Exploiting Click-Through Data
†‡

Yan-Ying Chen, † Yin-Hsi Kuo, † Chun-Che Wu, † Winston H. Hsu
†National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
‡FX Palo Alto Laboratory, Inc., California, USA
{yanying,kuonini,kenwu0721}@gmail.com, whsu@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Name of an identity is strongly influenced by his/her
cultural background such as gender and ethnicity, both
vital attributes for user profiling, attribute-based retrieval, etc. Typically, the associations between names
and attributes (e.g., people named “Amy” are mostly females) are annotated manually or provided by the census data of governments. We propose to associate a
name and its likely demographic attributes by exploiting
click-throughs between name queries and images with
automatically detected facial attributes. This is the first
work attempting to translate an abstract name to demographic attributes in visual-data-driven manner, and it is
adaptive to incremental data, more countries and even
unseen names (the names out of click-through data)
without additional manual labels. In the experiments,
the automatic name-attribute associations can help gender inference with competitive accuracy by using manual labeling. It also benefits profiling social media users
and keyword-based face image retrieval, especially for
contributing 12% relative improvement of accuracy in
adapting to unseen names.

Figure 1: We aim at associating a human name such as “Amy
Liu” with its likely visual attributes by exploiting clickthroughs in web image search logs under a novel visualdata-driven manner without intensive labeling efforts and
adaptive to unseen names.

and ethnicity attributes discussed in this paper. As shown in
Figure 11 , given a person named “Amy Liu,” the person is
likely an Asian female. Name makes the first impression
of a person because naming conventions are strongly influenced by culture, e.g., first name and gender, last name
and location of origin. Typically, the associations between
names and the two attributes are available by referring to demographics maintained by governments (Burger et al. 2012;
Mislove et al. 2012) and manually labeling attributes based
on profile photos of sampled social media users (Liu, Zamal,
and Ruths 2013). The former is limited in regional census
data and not general to more countries. The latter has major
concerns in time and cost when it adapts to large-scale data.
Different from the traditional manners, we propose to
associate name and attribute by exploiting click-throughs
between text queries and face images in web search logs,
where the names are extracted from queries and the attributes are detected from face images automatically. In this
paper, a click-through means when one of the URLs returned
by a text query has been clicked to view a web image it di-

Introduction
Human attributes (gender, age, ethnicity, etc.) are vital to
semantically characterize a person or demographics of a
community. This nature makes it valuable for marketing
(Aaker 1997), personalization (Cheng et al. 2011), surveillance system (Vaquero et al. 2009), face image search (Kumar, Belhumeur, and Nayar 2008), social computing (Liu,
Zamal, and Ruths 2012) and more human-centric research.
The preliminary studies have achieved convincing results in
attribute prediction of a person by analyzing his/her tweets
(Burger et al. 2012), face images (Cheng et al. 2011) and
user names (Mislove et al. 2012); however, in general circumstances people may hide most attribute contexts because
of privacy issues.
Since users tend to keep their online profiles private (Dey,
Jelveh, and Ross 2012), name is the most reachable piece
of personal information among these contexts. The problem we address is – given a name, associating and predicting its likely demographic attributes, particularly, the gender

1
The face images presented in this paper are under Creative
Commons Licenses.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

44

