Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

LARS: A Logic-Based Framework for Analyzing Reasoning over Streams∗
Harald Beck and Minh Dao-Tran and Thomas Eiter and Michael Fink
Institute of Information Systems, Vienna University of Technology
Favoritenstraße 9-11, A-1040 Vienna, Austria
{beck,dao,eiter,fink}@kr.tuwien.ac.at

Beethoven Sq. (b)

Abstract

`1

The recent rise of smart applications has drawn interest to
logical reasoning over data streams. Different query languages and stream processing/reasoning engines were proposed. However, due to a lack of theoretical foundations,
the expressivity and semantics of these diverse approaches
were only informally discussed. Towards clear specifications
and means for analytic study, a formal framework is needed
to characterize their semantics in precise terms. We present
LARS, a Logic-based framework for Analyzing Reasoning
over Streams, i.e., a rule-based formalism with a novel window operator providing a flexible mechanism to represent
views on streaming data. We establish complexity results for
central reasoning tasks and show how the prominent Continuous Query Language (CQL) can be captured. Moreover, the
relation between LARS and ETALIS, a system for complex
event processing is discussed. We thus demonstrate the capability of LARS to serve as the desired formal foundation
for expressing and analyzing different semantic approaches
to stream processing/reasoning and engines.

Gulda Lane (g)
(a)

Webern Park (w)
Mozart C.
(m)

`2
Haydn St. (h)

Strauß Ave. (s)

`3

tram(a1 , b)

tram(a3 , h)

36

40

waiting
time

(b)

t
43

44

Figure 1: (a) Transportation map (b) Timeline (minutes)
Example 1 To monitor a city’s public transportation, the
city traffic center has a static background data set for the assignment of trams to lines of the form line(Id , L), where Id
is the tram and L the line identifier. The planned travelling
time (duration Z) between stops X and Y with line L is
stored by rows plan(L, X, Y, Z). Facts of the form old (Id )
classify old trams which are inconvenient for travelling
with baby strollers. Moreover, sensor data tram(Id , X)
and jam(X) report the appearance of tram Id and traffic
jams at stop X, respectively. Based on this, reports on the
traffic status and suggested updates for travel routes shall be
provided in real time.
Consider Bob travelling with his baby on line `3 (Fig. 1a).
He is currently at Haydn Street (h) and wants to go to Strauß
Avenue (s), so he has different options to change trams at
Mozart Circus (m). Thus, he wants to know (i) the expected arrival time of the next tram that (ii) is convenient for
the stroller. Fig. 1b depicts arrival times, e.g., tram(a1 , b)
at t = 36 represents that tram a1 arrived at stop Beethoven
Square at minute 36. Furthermore, consider the following
background data tables, which specify the planned travel
time between stops (plan), the association between lines and
their trams (line) and which trams are old and thus not suitable for strollers (old ).

Introduction
The emergence of sensors, networks, and mobile devices has
generated a trend towards pushing rather than pulling of data
in information processing. In stream processing (Babu and
Widom 2001), studied by the database community, input tuples dynamically arrive at systems in form of possibly infinite streams. To deal with unboundedness of data, the systems typically apply window operators to obtain snapshots
of recent data. The user runs continuous queries on the latter that are triggered either periodically or by events, e.g.,
by the arrival of new input. A prominent stream processing
language is the Continuous Query Language (CQL) (Arasu,
Babu, and Widom 2006), which has an SQL-like syntax and
a clear operational semantics.
Recently, the rise of smart applications such as smart
cities, smart home, smart grid, etc., has raised interest in
the topic of stream reasoning (Della Valle et al. 2009), i.e.,
logical reasoning on streaming data. Consider the following
example.

plan = {(`1 , b, m, 8), (`2 , g, m, 7), (`3 , h, m, 3), . . .}
line = {(a1 , `1 ), (a2 , `2 ), (a3 , `3 ), . . .} old = {(a1 ), . . .}

∗

This research has been supported by the Austrian Science
Fund (FWF) projects P24090 and P26471.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Based on this input stream and the static background data,
we expect the following reports (i) and (ii):

1431

