Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Stochastic Model for Detecting Heterogeneous
Link Communities in Complex Networks
Dongxiao He1, Dayou Liu2*, Di Jin1, Weixiong Zhang3,4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China, 2College of Computer Science and Technology,
Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China, 3Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO
63130, USA, 4Institute for Systems Biology, Jianghan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430056, China
hedongxiao@tju.edu.cn, liudy@jlu.edu.cn, jindi@tju.edu.cn, weixiong.zhang@wustl.edu

many different approaches have been proposed to uncover
network community structures, as reviewed in (Fortunato
2010; Xie, Kelley, and Szymanski 2013).
Although previous research on community detection has
been mainly focusing on finding communities of nodes,
several recent works considered finding communities of
links (Ahn, Bagrow, and Lehmann 2010; Evans and Lambiotte 2009; Evans and Lambiotte 2010; Kim and Jeong
2011; Pan et al. 2011; He et al. 2012). In many real networks, link communities are often more informative and
intuitive than node communities, because links usually
have unique identities, while nodes typically have multiple
roles. In a social network, for instance, most individuals
belong to multiple communities such as families, friends,
and co-workers, while the link between two individuals
often exists for a dominant reason which may represent
family ties, friendship, or professional relationships. Furthermore, multiple links connecting to a node may belong
to distinct link communities, so that the node can be assigned to multiple communities of links. Accordingly,
overlapping communities of nodes, another attractive topic
in community detection (Palla et al. 2005), could be detected as a natural byproduct of link communities.
Thanks to the good performance and sound theoretical
basis, stochastic models constitute a promising technique
for identifying modular properties of networks, and thus
have been actively researched (Newman 2012). However,
most of them focused on the detection of node communities (Wang et al. 2011; Psorakis et al. 2011; Zhang and
Yeung 2012; Ren et al. 2009; Shen, Cheng, and Guo 2011;
Karrer and Newman 2011; Zhang, Wang, and Ahn 2013),
with only one exception for detecting link communities
(Ball, Karrer, and Newman 2011). However, like most
stochastic models, Ball’s model requires the number of
communities to be given and is computationally inefficient,
so that its applicability is limited, particularly for largescale networks. More importantly, it fails to describe heterogeneous distributions of community sizes of real networks, providing distorted resulting link communities.

Abstract
Discovery of communities in networks is a fundamental data analysis problem. Most of the existing approaches have
focused on discovering communities of nodes, while recent
studies have shown great advantages and utilities of the
knowledge of communities of links. Stochastic models provides a promising class of techniques for the identification
of modular structures, but most stochastic models mainly
focus on the detection of node communities rather than link
communities. We propose a stochastic model, which not only describes the structure of link communities, but also considers the heterogeneous distribution of community sizes, a
property which is often ignored by other models. We then
learn the model parameters using a method of maximum likelihood based on an expectation-maximization algorithm.
To deal with large complex real networks, we extend the
method by a strategy of iterative bipartition. The extended
method is not only efficient, but is also able to determine the
number of communities for a given network. We test our
approach on both synthetic benchmarks and real-world networks including an application to a large biological network,
and also compare it with two existing methods. The results
demonstrate the superior performance of our approach over
the competing methods for detecting link communities.

1. Introduction
Many complex systems in the real world exist in the form
of networks, such as social networks, biological networks,
and the Internet, which are collectively referred to as complex networks. One of the main problems in the study of
complex networks is the detection of community structures
(Girvan and Newman 2002), which has drawn a great deal
of interest. Although no common definition has been
agreed upon, a community within a network is usually considered as a group of nodes that are densely connected with
respect to the rest of the network. In the past few years,
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author

130

