Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Every Team Deserves a Second Chance: Identifying When
Things Go Wrong (Student Abstract Version)
Vaishnavh Nagarajan1 , Leandro Soriano Marcolino2 , Milind Tambe2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600036, India, +91-44-22574350
http://www.cse.iitm.ac.in/∼vaish/
vaish@cse.iitm.ac.in
2
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA
{sorianom,tambe}@usc.edu
Abstract

agents vote for an action at each world state, and the team
takes the action decided by plurality voting (ties are broken
randomly). The team obtains a final reward r upon completing all world states. We assume two possible final rewards:
“success” (1) or “failure” (0). We define the prediction problem as follows: without using any knowledge of the domain,
identify the final reward that will be received by a team. This
prediction must be executable at any world state, allowing an
operator to take remedy procedures in time.
We now explain our algorithm. The main idea is to learn
a prediction function, given the frequencies of agreements
of all possible agent subsets over the chosen actions. Let
P(T) = {T0 , T1 , . . .} be the power set of the set of agents,
ai be the action chosen in world state mj and Hj ⊆ T be
the subset of agents that agreed on ai in that world state.
Consider the feature vector ~x = (x0 , x1 , . . .) computed at
world state mj , where each dimension (feature) has a oneto-one mapping with P(T). We define xi as the proportion
of times that the chosen action was agreed upon by the subP||M ||−1 I(Hk =Ti )
set of agents Ti . That is, xi = k=0j
||Mj || , where
I is the indicator function and Mj ⊆ M is the set of world
states from m0 to the current world state mj .
Hence, given a set X̃, where for each feature vector x~t ∈
X̃ we have the associated reward rt , we can estimate a function, fˆ, that returns an estimated reward r̂ (0 ≤ r̂ ≤ 1)
given an input ~x. We classify estimated rewards above 0.5 as
“success”, and below 0.5 as “failure”. In order to learn the
classification model, we use the features at the final world
state. We also study a variant, that uses only information
about the number of agents that agreed (see appendix at
teamcore.usc.edu/people/sorianom/aaai15-ap.pdf).
We use classification by logistic regression, which models
1
~ are learned given X̃ and
(α and β
fˆ as fˆ(~x) =
~T ~
x)
1+e−(α+β
the associated rewards). We eliminate two features: ∅, as an
action is chosen only if at least one agent voted for it, and T
(all agents agree), since the features are linearly dependent.

We show that without using any domain knowledge, we
can predict the final performance of a team of voting
agents, at any step towards solving a complex problem.

Introduction
It is well known that aggregating the opinions of different
agents can lead to a great performance when solving complex problems (Marcolino et al. 2014). However, a team will
not always be successful. It is fundamental, therefore, to be
able to quickly assess the performance of teams, so that an
operator can take actions to recover the situation in time.
Raines, Tambe, and Marsella (2000) present a method to
analyze the performance of a team. However, it only works
offline and needs domain knowledge. Other methods are tailored for robot-soccer (Ramos and Ayanegui 2008) and focus on identifying opponent tactics (Mirchevska et al. 2014).
In this paper, we show a novel method to predict the final
performance (success or failure) of a team of voting agents
without using any domain knowledge. Hence, our method
can be easily applied in a great variety of scenarios. Moreover, our approach can be quickly applied online at any
step of the problem-solving process, allowing an operator
to identify when the team is failing. We present experimental results in the Computer Go domain, where we predict
the performance of three different teams: a diverse, a uniform, and an intermediate team (with respect to diversity).
We show that we can predict win/loss of Go games with
around 73% accuracy for the diverse and intermediate team,
and 64% for the uniform team. We also study the predictions
at every turn of the games, and compare with an analysis performed by using an in-depth search. Our method agrees with
the analysis, from around the middle of the games, more
than 60% of the time for all teams, but is significantly faster.

Prediction Method
We consider scenarios where agents vote at every step of
a complex problem, in order to take common decisions towards problem-solving. Hence, let T be a set of agents ti ,
A a set of actions aj and M a set of world states mk . The

Results
We test our prediction method in the Computer Go domain.
We use 4 different Go software: Fuego 1.1, GnuGo 3.8,
Pachi 9.01, MoGo 4, and two variants of Fuego (Fuego∆
and FuegoΘ), in a total of 6 different agents. As shown in

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4184

