Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Pathway Graphical Lasso
Maxim Grechkin

Maryam Fazel

University of Washington
Seattle, WA
grechkin@uw.edu

University of Washington
Seattle, WA
mfazel@uw.edu

Daniela Witten

Su-In Lee

University of Washington
Seattle, WA
dwitten@uw.edu

University of Washington
Seattle, WA
suinlee@uw.edu

Abstract

algorithms for learning the structure of GGMs lack scalability and interpretability, which limits their utility when there
is a large number of variables. Most learning algorithms
perform O(p3 ) computations per iteration, where p denotes
the number of variables; consequently they are impractical
when p exceeds tens of thousands. Furthermore, a network
based on a large number of variables can be difficult to interpret due to the presence of a large number of connections
between the variables.

Graphical models provide a rich framework for summarizing
the dependencies among variables. The graphical lasso approach attempts to learn the structure of a Gaussian graphical
model (GGM) by maximizing the log likelihood of the data,
subject to an l1 penalty on the elements of the inverse covariance matrix. Most algorithms for solving the graphical
lasso problem do not scale to a very large number of variables. Furthermore, the learned network structure is hard
to interpret. To overcome these challenges, we propose a
novel GGM structure learning method that exploits the fact
that for many real-world problems we have prior knowledge
that certain edges are unlikely to be present. For example,
in gene regulatory networks, a pair of genes that does not
participate together in any of the cellular processes, typically
referred to as pathways, is less likely to be connected. In
computer vision applications in which each variable corresponds to a pixel, each variable is likely to be connected to
the nearby variables. In this paper, we propose the pathway
graphical lasso, which learns the structure of a GGM subject to pathway-based constraints. In order to solve this problem, we decompose the network into smaller parts, and use a
message-passing algorithm in order to communicate among
the subnetworks. Our algorithm has orders of magnitude improvement in run time compared to the state-of-the-art optimization methods for the graphical lasso problem that were
modified to handle pathway-based constraints.

1

To resolve these challenges, we propose the pathway
graphical lasso (PathGLasso) framework, which consists of
the incorporation of pathway-based constraints and an efficient learning algorithm. We assume that we are given a set
of pathways a priori, and that each pathway contains a (possibly overlapping) subset of the variables. We assume that a
pair of variables can be connected to each other only if they
co-occur in at least one pathway. Figure 1 illustrates a simple example network of 8 variables: {x1 , x2 , x3 } in Pathway 1, {x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 , x6 } in Pathway 2 and {x6 , x7 , x8 }
in Pathway 3. By incorporating the pathway constraints, we
can effectively reduce the search space of network structures
by excluding nonsensical edges.
Pathway constraints have the potential to improve structure learning of GGMs in several applications. In the context
of gene regulatory networks, one can make use of pathway
databases such as Reactome (Croft et al. 2011) that specify sets of genes that are likely work together. Making use
of such pathways in learning the network can yield results
that are more meaningful and interpretable. In computational neuroscience, when learning an interaction network of
brain activation from fMRI data, we can use our prior knowledge that nearby brain regions are likely to interact with each
other (Felleman and Van Essen 1991). In computer vision, in
which each pixel in an image corresponds to a variable in a
network, one can generate overlapping pathways by grouping nearby pixels; this has been shown to be an effective
prior in several applications (Honorio et al. 2009). For example, Figure 2 compares network estimates of the true 2D
lattice network for the unconstrained graphical lasso model
and the pathway constrained graphical lasso model (2) when

Introduction

Gaussian graphical models (GGMs) provide a compact representation of the statistical dependencies among variables.
Learning the structure of GGMs from data that contain the
measurements on a set of variables across samples has significantly facilitated data-driven discovery in a diverse set
of scientific fields. For example, biologists can gain insights into how thousands of genes interact with each other
in various disease processes by learning the GGM structure
from gene expression data that measure the mRNA expression levels of genes across hundreds of patients. Existing
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2617

