Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Limitations of Front-to-End Bidirectional Heuristic Search
Joseph K Barker and Richard E Korf
{jbarker,korf}@cs.ucla.edu
4732 Boelter Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095

Abstract

exist cursory discussions of similar explanations, we are unaware of a previous thorough treatment in the literature.
In our experiments, we examine the four-peg Towers Of
Hanoi problem with arbitrary start and goal states, where we
find that bidirectional brute-force search outperforms unidirectional heuristic search. We also find that, contrary to a
common belief, bidirectional heuristic searches with strong
heuristics tend to find optimal solutions late in search.
We consider only domains with unit and additive g costs,
which are most domains commonly studied in the literature.

We present an intuitive explanation for the limited effectiveness of front-to-end bidirectional heuristic search, supported
with extensive evidence from many commonly-studied domains. While previous work has proved the limitations of specific algorithms, we show that any front-to-end bidirectional
heuristic search algorithm will likely be dominated by unidirectional heuristic search or bidirectional brute-force search.
We also demonstrate a pathological case where bidirectional
heuristic search is the dominant algorithm, so a stronger claim
cannot be made. Finally, we show that on the four-peg Towers Of Hanoi with arbitrary start and goal states, bidirectional brute-force search outperforms unidirectional heuristic
search using pattern-database heuristics.

1

2
2.1

Background

Front-To-End Bidirectional Search

A bidirectional search does simultaneous forward and reverse searches. The reverse search is done from the goal to
the start, using the reverse of the standard operators. In a
problem space without invertible operators, the reverse operators for a state s are those which generate s when applied to some other state. Both search directions have a frontier of the deepest nodes generated so far. In an algorithm
like depth-first iterative deepening (Korf 1985) this frontier may not be explicitly represented. Any time the frontiers intersect—meaning the same node has been generated
in both directions—a path has been found from the start to
the goal. The first path found is not necessarily the cheapest,
so search continues until a solution is proven optimal.
Both directions of search can be explored using a heuristic. The earliest bidirectional heuristic search algorithm is
BHPA (Pohl 1971), which does A* searches in both directions. When the frontiers intersect, a solution is found and
search continues until a solution has been proven optimal.
Search can stop under two conditions: either the minimum f
cost in either frontier, or the sum of the minimum g costs
of both frontiers, is at least the cost of the best solution
found so far. In the first case, if all nodes on one frontier have f cost at least that of the cost of the current best
solution, then—assuming an admissible heuristic—any additional paths found through those nodes cannot be lower
than the current best solution cost (Kaindl and Kainz 1997).
The second case is inherited from Djikstra’s algorithm: g
cost cannot decrease with depth and any additional solutions
must pass through a node on each frontier, so their cost must
be at least the sum of the minimum g costs on both frontiers.

Introduction

Bidirectional search is a well-known algorithm schema
for pathfinding problems. Two searches are simultaneously
done forward from the start state and backward from the
goal. A solution is found when the two search frontiers intersect, although more search may be required to prove optimality. Bidirectional brute-force search can be an effective
search technique. In a unidirectional brute-force search of a
space with unit edge costs, branching factor b, and a solution depth d, the number of nodes generated is O(bd ). In a
bidirectional search that meets at the midpoint at depth d/2,
however, the number of nodes generated is only O(bd/2 ).
A refinement is to guide search with a heuristic. In a frontto-end search, the heuristic is used to estimate cost to only
the start or goal state. The earliest such algorithm is the Bidirectional Heuristic Path Algorithm (BHPA) (Pohl 1971),
Other variants include BS* (Kwa 1989). Despite initiallypromising results, these algorithms are not widely used.
We present an explanation for why front-to-end bidirectional heuristic search is generally ineffective. However, we
also give a counterexample of a graph where bidirectional
heuristic search does outperform both unidirectional heuristic and bidirectional brute-force search, and so there is no
general proof of its ineffectiveness. Our theory gives a strong
intuition for why the technique is usually not helpful, despite
such pathological cases, and is supported by extensive evidence from many well-studied search domains. While there
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1086

