Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Automatic Topic Discovery for Multi-object Tracking
Wenhan Luo

Björn Stenger

Xiaowei Zhao

Tae-Kyun Kim

Imperial College London

Toshiba Research Europe

Imperial College London

Imperial College London

Abstract

the case of a single missing detection, resulting in fragmentation in some sequential approaches (Luo and Kim 2013;
Luo et al. 2014). Appearance variation of objects may lead
to fragmentation or ID switches as a result of inappropriate
similarity measures. Physical constraints are rarely modeled
explicitly, the work in (Milan, Schindler, and Roth 2013)
being one exception. Uniqueness constraints model the fact
that (a) at most one object per frame can be associated with
each trajectory, and (b) no more than one trajectory can be
assigned to the same detected object.
In this paper we propose an alternative approach to temporal data association by clustering detection instances,
where each cluster corresponds to a unique object. We introduce a text-document analogy, where an object corresponds to a semantic topic within a video sequence. A semantic topic can be defined as co-occurring words – we use
a bag-of-superpixel representation for objects, encoding appearance and spatial information. An object is thus tracked
as a new topic that evolves over time and fades away.
We employ a Dirichlet Process Mixture Model (DPMM)
to dynamically cluster detection responses into sets of objects (Ahmed and Xing 2008). The merit of applying a
DPMM is that the number of semantic topics is learned automatically. Furthermore, it is naturally feasible to model dynamics in the clustering procedure for semantic topic discovery based on the DPMM.
In a standard DPMM, when we consider the assignment
of a given instance, the prior of which cluster the instance
should belong to only depends on the number of existing instances in the cluster. However, in our problem, we also take
the temporal distances between clusters and the given instance into consideration. Therefore, instead of treating the
whole video as a single document, we divide it into sequential epochs in order to model the dynamics of prior knowledge and appearance variation of objects during clustering.
In terms of constraints, by adopting clustering, the exclusivity constraint of one trajectory per object is handled naturally by the assignment of each detection to only one cluster.
To deal with the other constraint, we introduce the so called
cannot-link constraint, which prohibits two detections in the
same frame being assigned to one trajectory.
To summarize, the contributions of automatic topic discovery for multi-object tracking are (1) multi-object tracking
is cast as dynamic and sequential clustering by the applica-

This paper proposes a new approach to multi-object
tracking by semantic topic discovery. We dynamically
cluster frame-by-frame detections and treat objects as
topics, allowing the application of the Dirichlet Process
Mixture Model (DPMM). The tracking problem is cast
as a topic-discovery task where the video sequence is
treated analogously to a document. This formulation addresses tracking issues such as object exclusivity constraints as well as cannot-link constraints which are integrated without the need for heuristic thresholds. The
video is temporally segmented into epochs to model the
dynamics of word (superpixel) co-occurrences and to
model the temporal damping effect. In experiments on
public data sets we demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Multi-object tracking is a mid-level computer vision task,
which is employed in applications such as action recognition or automatic video summarization. The task is to
link a number of given detection hypotheses into trajectories corresponding to different objects in a video. There has
been significant progress in multi-object tracking (Zhang,
Li, and Nevatia 2008; Pellegrini et al. 2009; Xing, Ai,
and Lao 2009; Pirsiavash, Ramanan, and Fowlkes 2011;
Milan, Schindler, and Roth 2013; Luo et al. 2014; LealTaixé et al. 2014), however, issues like tracking management, appearance variations and occlusions remain challenging. Traditionally, the multi-object tracking task is cast
as a data association problem in which detection hypotheses are grouped into trajectories. Standard methods, such as
the Hungarian algorithm, can be readily applied, however
several practical considerations remain: Temporal gaps between observations may lead to disconnected trajectories of
the same object (Zhang, Li, and Nevatia 2008; Pirsiavash,
Ramanan, and Fowlkes 2011). Determining the maximum
allowable gap is difficult: low values will cause more fragmentation while higher values lead to more incorrect associations (ID switches). Handling track initialization and termination (also known as tracking management) is often based
on heuristics. An existing trajectory may be terminated in
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3820

