Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Conventional Machine Learning for Social Choice
John A. Doucette, Kate Larson, and Robin Cohen
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, Canada
{j3doucet,klarson,rcohen}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

concept of ranked ballots. Ranked ballot voting systems require voters to specify not only their favourite alternative,
but a linear ordering over all the alternatives. This format
allows many nice properties to be satisfied. For example,
with this extra information, one can select “compromise” alternatives, or avoid picking polarizing alternatives that are
the first choice of one portion of the electorate, but the last
choice of everyone else. However, this extra information
comes at a price: voters must be able (and willing) to express their complete preferences.
In some domains, even though the extra ranking information could allow for a better outcome, voters may be unable
to provide it. For instance, in multi-agent resource allocation, we might prefer compromise solutions, under the assumption that these will be less unequal than solutions which
are the absolute favourites of individual voters. However, in
multi-agent resource allocation problems, the set of possible allocations is usually combinatorially large. Most voters
(humans or agents) would have difficulty expressing a linear
ordering over such a large set. Similarly, certain voting rules
have extremely desirable properties for national elections,
and are able to operate efficiently, but require voters to rank
hundreds of alternatives to work effectively (e.g. Skowron
et al. 2013). Finally, in domains like committee meetings
where votes are public, voters may not wish to supply complete information. Telling one of your colleagues that their
pet proposal is your least preferred alternative may have
greater political impact than merely abstaining.
Domains like the above examples have spurred considerable work on deciding elections without complete preference
information. The simplest, and perhaps oldest, technique
is just to treat missing information as abstentions. For instance, the popular Single Transferable Vote scheme (Tideman 1995) (notably used in Australian national elections) is
often applied to incomplete ballots. If a voter only specifies
their top three preferences, and all three are eliminated during runoffs, then the voter is treated as abstaining from the
remainder of the election.
This approach is elegant in its simplicity, but leaves something to be desired in its implications. Voters who fail to
complete their ballots are, in many cases, not so much ambivalent about the alternatives they omit as uninformed, or
else unwilling to reveal their opinions. Rare indeed is the
case where a person truly has no preferences at all regarding

Deciding the outcome of an election when voters have provided only partial orderings over their preferences requires
voting rules that accommodate missing data. While existing techniques, including considerable recent work, address
missingness through circumvention, we propose the novel application of conventional machine learning techniques to predict the missing components of ballots via latent patterns in
the information that voters are able to provide. We show that
suitable predictive features can be extracted from the data,
and demonstrate the high performance of our new framework
on the ballots from many real world elections, including comparisons with existing techniques for voting with partial orderings. Our technique offers a new and interesting conceptualization of the problem, with stronger connections to machine learning than conventional social choice techniques.

Introduction
Sometimes, as in national elections, hiring committees, and
resource allocation problems, a group of agents (human or
computational) will need reach common agreement on a
course of action. This is often best accomplished by taking a vote, in which the agents (voters) express their preferences about which action to take in some common format.
A voting rule is then applied to aggregate the preferences in
some way, producing an outcome. For example, in an American Presidential election, voters cast a ballot indicating their
most preferred choice, and the ballots are aggregated to produce a sum total of the ballots cast for each candidate (and
then further aggregated to produce the electoral college tallies), and the outcome action is that the candidate with the
most votes will be asked to serve as President for the next
four years. There are many applications of voting within
artificial intelligence, including multiagent resource allocation (voting on which resources to assign to which agents);
combing ensembles in machine learning; and coordination
strategies for multiagent systems in general.
Although voting is, in general, a desirable way to handle group decision making, some voting systems may yield
better outcomes than others, and consequently, there exist a
great many possible voting rules. Most of these rules (including all those considered in this work) are based on the
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

858

