Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multi–Objective Reinforcement Learning
with Continuous Pareto Frontier Approximation
Matteo Pirotta and Simone Parisi and Marcello Restelli

Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano,
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133, Milan, Italy
matteo.pirotta@polimi.it, simone.parisi@mail.polimi.it, marcello.restelli@polimi.it

2011): single policy and multiple policy. Although, the majority of MORL approaches belong to former category, in
this paper, we focus on latter approaches. Multiple-policy
approaches aim at learning a set of policies in order to approximate the Pareto frontier. When the number d of decision variables (i.e., policy parameters) is greater than or
equal to the number q of objectives, the local Pareto–optimal
solutions form a (q −1)–dimensional manifold (Harada et al.
2007). The superiority of multiple–policy methods resides in
their ability to represent the Pareto–optimal manifold, allowing a posteriori selection of the solution, through a graphical
representation of the frontier that can give a better insight
into the relationships among the objectives, and encapsulate
all the trade-offs among the multiple objectives. Since the
exact derivation of the Pareto frontier is generally impractical in real-world problems, the goal is to compute an approximation of the Pareto frontier that includes solutions that are
accurate, evenly distributed, and covering a range similar
to the one of the actual front (Zitzler et al. 2003). Among
multiple–policy algorithms it is possible to identify two
classes: value–based (Lizotte, Bowling, and Murphy 2012;
Castelletti, Pianosi, and Restelli 2013) and gradient approaches (Shelton 2001; Parisi et al. 2014). While value–
based approaches suffer from curse of dimensionality and
have difficulties with continuous action spaces, gradient–
based techniques lack of guarantees about the uniformity of
the coverage of the Pareto frontier.
In this paper, we propose a novel gradient–based MORL
approach named Policy Manifold Gradient Algorithm
(PMGA) that generates a continuous approximation of the
local Pareto–optimal solution manifold in the policy space.
We exploit a parametric function to generate a manifold in
the policy parameter space, which maps to the objective
space through the expected return function. The goal is to
find the parameters that induce a frontier as close as possible to the Pareto one. Exploiting this approximation it is
possible to generate an arbitrarily dense representation of
the Pareto frontier. The main contributions of this paper are:
the derivation of the gradient approach in the general case –
i.e., independent from the metric used to measure the quality
of the current solution– , how to estimate such gradient from
sample trajectories, a discussion of frontier quality measures
that can be effectively integrated in the proposed gradient
approach, and an empirical evaluation of its performance in

Abstract
This paper is about learning a continuous approximation of
the Pareto frontier in Multi–Objective Markov Decision Problems (MOMDPs). We propose a policy–based approach that
exploits gradient information to generate solutions close to
the Pareto ones. Differently from previous policy–gradient
multi–objective algorithms, where n optimization routines
are used to have n solutions, our approach performs a single
gradient–ascent run that at each step generates an improved
continuous approximation of the Pareto frontier. The idea is
to exploit a gradient–based approach to optimize the parameters of a function that defines a manifold in the policy parameter space so that the corresponding image in the objective
space gets as close as possible to the Pareto frontier. Besides
deriving how to compute and estimate such gradient, we will
also discuss the non–trivial issue of defining a metric to assess the quality of the candidate Pareto frontiers. Finally, the
properties of the proposed approach are empirically evaluated
on two interesting MOMDPs.

Introduction
Many real-world control problems (e.g., economic systems,
water resource problems, robotic systems, just to mention a
few) are characterized by the presence of multiple, conflicting objectives. Such problems are often modeled as MultiObjective Markov Decision Processes (MOMDPs), where
the concept of optimality typical of MDPs is replaced by
the one of Pareto optimality, i.e., a set of policies providing a compromise among the different objectives. In
the last decades, Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and
Barto 1998) has established as an effective and theoreticallygrounded framework that allows to solve single-objective
MDPs whenever either no (or little) prior knowledge is
available about system dynamics, or the dimensionality of
the system to be controlled is too high for classical optimal control methods. Despite the successful developments
in RL theory and a high demand for multi-objective control applications, Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning
(MORL) (Roijers et al. 2013) is still a relatively young and
unexplored research topic.
MORL approaches can be divided into two main categories,
based on the number of policies they learn (Vamplew et al.
Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2928

