Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Representing Aggregators in Relational Probabilistic Models
David Buchman∗

David Poole†

Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
davidbuc@cs.ubc.ca

Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
poole@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract

means that the new variable depends probabilistically on
variables in the model, but adding the new variable has no
effect on the original distribution if it is not observed.
Adding dependent variables is straightforward in the context of directed models, where the newly added dependent
variable is called a “leaf.” In fact, a directed model can be
described as the result of iteratively adding dependent variables. However, we may want to add a dependent variable
to an undirected model. This can be done by adding a factor
connecting the new variable and the variables it depends on;
however, model constraints (such as a maximal factor size)
may prevent adding such a factor.
One scenario for adding variables to preexisting models as
dependent variables, is the addition of (probabilistic or deterministic) summary variables. Another scenario is causality. Adding a variable representing an “effect” should not
change the distribution of its “causes.”
Other reasons for adding dependent variables may be that
retraining the model with the additional variables may be
computationally expensive, human-resource expensive (the
model may have been built using expert knowledge), or outright impossible (for example, due to privacy concerns, we
might not have access to individual health records, but only
to probabilistic models based on them).
Dependent variables also have computational advantages
during inference: unobserved dependent variables can be iteratively removed, in the reverse order to the order they were
added. This is true even in undirected models, when some
variables can be characterized as “dependent.”
Recently, there is growing interest in probabilistic models for the relational setting. Relational probabilistic models
(Getoor and Taskar 2007; De Raedt et al. 2008) extend probabilistic graphical models to include the notions of individuals, logical variables, and relations. These can be used for
probabilistic modeling of relational structures. These models can be directed, typically building on Bayesian networks,
or undirected, typically building on Markov networks.
Here we consider undirected models (Taskar, Abbeel, and
Koller 2002; Richardson and Domingos 2006; Domingos et
al. 2008), and use MLNs as the prototypical undirected relational probabilistic models, as these are general enough to
include other models as special cases. We present significant
negative results on the possibility to add dependent variables
to these models.

We consider the problem of, given a probabilistic model
on a set of random variables, how to add a new variable
that depends on the other variables, without changing
the original distribution. In particular, we consider relational models (such as Markov logic networks (MLNs)),
where we cannot directly define conditional probabilities. In relational models, there may be an unbounded
number of parents in the grounding, and conditional distributions need to be defined in terms of aggregators.
The question we ask is whether and when it is possible
to represent conditional probabilities at all in various
relational models. Some aggregators have been shown
to be representable by MLNs, by adding auxiliary variables; however it was unknown whether they could be
defined without auxiliary variables. For other aggregators, it was not known whether they can be represented
by MLNs at all. We obtained surprisingly strong negative results on the capability of flexible undirected relational models such as MLNs to represent aggregators
without affecting the original model’s distribution. We
provide a map of what aspects of the models, including the use of auxiliary variables and quantifiers, result
in the ability to represent various aggregators. In addition, we provide proof techniques which can be used to
facilitate future theoretic results on relational models,
and demonstrate them on relational logistic regression
(RLR).

1

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) (Pearl 1988; Koller
and Friedman 2009), which are perhaps better called factored joint probability models, have found various applications in Computer Science and other sciences. PGMs may
be described as a collection of nonnegative functions called
“factors” operating on subsets of the variables. The joint distribution is then defined as the normalized product of the
factors. PGMs are commonly classified as either directed or
undirected graphical models.
One may wish to extend a given PGM by adding new dependent variables. Adding a dependent variable to a model
∗

www.cs.ubc.ca/∼davidbuc
www.cs.ubc.ca/∼poole
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3489

