Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Active Learning for Informative Projection Retrieval
Madalina Fiterau

Artur Dubrawski

mfiterau@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh PA 15213

awd@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh PA 15213

eigenvalues and performing L2 regularization on them. In
their setup, unlike here, the allowed number of features is increased as more samples become available. The method of
(Raghavan, Madani, and Jones 2006) directly incorporates
human feedback in the feature selection procedure through
feature weighting, while (Rashidi and Cook 2011) introduce
a method that reduces the effort needed for labeling by selecting, at each iteration, all samples matching a rule.

Abstract
We introduce an active learning framework designed to
train classification models which use informative projections. Our approach works with the obtained lowdimensional models in finding unlabeled data for annotation by experts. The advantage of our approach is that
the labeling effort is expended mainly on samples which
benefit models from the considered hypothesis class.
This results in an improved learning rate over standard
selection criteria for data from the clinical domain.

Active Informative Projection Recovery
Given a dataset {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )} ∈ {X ×{0, 1}}n , a
RIPR model contains a set Π of subspaces of X , where each
subspace is a group of up to d features. A classifier τi from
the hypothesis space T is trained on each projection πi . The
model also contains a selection function g which matches a
point x ∈ X to the projection/discriminator pair with which
this point will be classified. The dimensionality d of the subspaces on which the classifiers in the ensemble are trained
depends on the application. Typically d ≤ 3 because of the
requirement that human users must understand the classification process. The notation π(x) refers to the projection of
the point x onto the subspace π while τ (π(x)) represents the
predicted label for x. The RIPR model class is:

Introduction
Many applications of decision support systems require that
their users comprehend the labeling suggestions. We have
recently developed a method, called Regression for Informative Projection Retrieval (RIPR) (Fiterau and Dubrawski
2012), which learns compact models consisting of informative low-dimensional axis-aligned projections. The RIPR
models reveal predictive structure in data, provided that it
exists. We introduce an approach which recovers informative projections in the more challenging active learning setting. Our innovation is the ActiveRIPR framework, which
enables active selection of yet unlabeled data which specifically targets the construction of accurate RIPR models.
Our framework selects samples to be labeled based on
the relevant dimensions of the current classification model,
trained on previously annotated data. The labeling effort is
thus shifted to labeling samples that specifically benefit the
low-dimensional models of our chosen hypothesis class. We
enhance standard active selection criteria using the information encapsulated by the trained model. Thus, high accuracy
is achieved faster than with standard sampling techniques,
reducing the annotation effort exerted by domain experts.
An added benefit is that the informative projections highlight structure that experts should be aware of and are available during labeling in addition to the full-featured data.
Despite the popularity of active learning, there is little
research in the direction of using it for feature selection.
Relevant contributions include (Bilgic 2012), introducing a
methods which performs PCA on the data during the query
selection process, selecting the features with the largest

M = {Π = {π; π ∈ Π, |π| ≤ d},
τ = {τ ; τi ∈ T , τi : πi (X ) → Y
g ∈ {f : X → {1 . . . |Π|}} } .

∀i = 1 . . . |Π|},
(1)

Active learning iteratively selects samples for labeling until the model meets some accuracy criteria. Assume that,
at iteration k, the samples X`k are labeled as Y`k and the
samples Xuk are available for labeling. Also let the RIPR
model built so far be M k , with its components Πk , τk and
g k . The problem of selecting samples for informative projection recovery is reduced to finding a scoring function
s : M × X → R, used to select the next sample to be
labeled:
xk+1 = arg min s(M k , x)
k
x∈Xu

The expected error of a model M k = {Πk , τk , g k } is
Err (M k ) = Ex∈X [I(τgkk (x) (πgkk (x) (x)) 6= y)]
We use the notation Msk to refer to a model obtained after
k iterations of labeling, using the scoring function s. The

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4158

