Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Bayesian Maximum Margin Principal Component Analysis
Changying Du1,2 , Shandian Zhe3 , Fuzhen Zhuang1 , Yuan Qi3 , Qing He1 , Zhongzhi Shi1
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{ducy, zhuangfz, heq, shizz}@ics.ict.ac.cn, {alanqi, szhe}@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract

models, and optimizes the conditional likelihood of observation pairs via a convex formulation.
Apart from supervised PCA, there also exist many other
supervised dimensionality reduction (SDR) methods. The
support vector decomposition machine (SVDM) (Pereira
and Gordon 2006) uses Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) to find the low dimensional space, while training
linear classification models with hinge loss in that space.
Later, a more efficient approach based on generalized linear models was proposed in (Rish et al. 2008), which uses
a closed-form EM-style procedure to optimize the weighted
linear combination of the conditional likelihoods on features
and labels. In (Chen et al. 2012), a large-margin harmonium
model (MMH) based on latent Markov network was proposed for multi-view data analysis. Recently, Zhu et al. proposed a infinite latent SVM (iLSVM) (Zhu, Chen, and Xing
2014) based on the Indian buffet process (IBP) (Ghahramani
and Griffiths 2005), which can infer the most appropriate
number of features. However, MMH and iLSVM have to
solve many SVM subproblems during their inference procedure, thus tend to be inefficient for large data.
In this paper, we propose a data augmentation based
Bayesian posterior regularization approach to combine maxmargin learning with PPCA. Unlike MMH and iLSVM,
which are both under the maximum entropy discrimination
(Jaakkola, Meila, and Jebara 1999) framework, and cannot infer the penalty parameter of max-margin models in
a Bayesian style, our method is based on the data augmentation idea for max-margin learning (Polson and Scott
2011), which allows us to automatically infer the weight
and penalty parameter while finding the most appropriate
PCA subspace simultaneously under the Bayesian framework. Our approach also differs from SVDM, which imposes strict constraints to keep the L2-norm of its model
weights always smaller than 1. Finally, compared with maximum likelihood based methods, our Bayesian model has
many inherent advantages, e.g., suppressing unnecessary
principal components with the automatic relevance determination (Neal 1995; Tipping 2001) prior, and avoiding overfitting to small training set by model averaging, etc.
We apply our general framework to the max-margin classification problem in latent PCA space. To allow our model
to scale to large data sets, we develop a fast mean-field variational inference algorithm to approximate the posterior. Ex-

Supervised dimensionality reduction has shown great
advantages in finding predictive subspaces. Previous
methods rarely consider the popular maximum margin principle and are prone to overfitting to usually
small training data, especially for those under the maximum likelihood framework. In this paper, we present
a posterior-regularized Bayesian approach to combine
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) with the maxmargin learning. Based on the data augmentation idea
for max-margin learning and the probabilistic interpretation of PCA, our method can automatically infer the
weight and penalty parameter of max-margin learning
machine, while finding the most appropriate PCA subspace simultaneously under the Bayesian framework.
We develop a fast mean-field variational inference algorithm to approximate the posterior. Experimental results
on various classification tasks show that our method
outperforms a number of competitors.

Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) has been widely used
for dimensionality reduction and data analysis. It aims to
extract dominant patterns underlying the data, and to represent it as a set of new orthogonal variables called principal
components. Due to its restrictive linear algebra based unsupervised formulation, there have been many efforts to extend this fundamental technique to more general scenarios.
Among these work, the probabilistic PCA (PPCA) (Tipping
and Bishop 1999) is a prominent example, which allows us
to integrate PCA as a bottom layer module into more powerful hierarchical Bayesian frameworks.
Meanwhile, extending PCA with supervised information
is another promising direction since this can help to learn
more discriminative features for classification and regression analysis. The supervised PPCA model (Yu et al. 2006)
extends PPCA by assuming that the Gaussian features and
labels are generated independently from a latent low dimensional space through linear transformations. A more general
exponential family supervised PCA model proposed in (Guo
2009) assumes each data and label pair is generated from a
common latent variable via conditional exponential family
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2582

