Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Expressing Arbitrary Reward Functions as Potential-Based Advice
Anna Harutyunyan

Sam Devlin

Peter Vrancx

Ann Nowé

Vrije Universiteit Brussel
aharutyu@vub.ac.be

University of York
sam.devlin@york.ac.uk

Vrije Universiteit Brussel
pvrancx@vub.ac.be

Vrije Universiteit Brussel
anowe@vub.ac.be

Abstract

“distracted”, and instead learn to ride in a loop and collect
the positive reward forever. This issue of positive reward cycles is addressed by Ng, Harada, and Russell (1999), where
they devise their potential-based reward shaping (PBRS)
framework, which constrains the shaping reward to have the
form of a difference of a potential function of the transitioning states. In fact, they prove a stronger claim that such a
form is necessary1 for leaving the original task unchanged.
This elegant and implementable framework led to an explosion of reward shaping research and proved to be extremely effective (Asmuth, Littman, and Zinkov 2008), (Devlin, Kudenko, and Grzes 2011), (Brys et al. 2014), (Snel
and Whiteson 2014). Wiewiora, Cottrell, and Elkan (2003)
extended PBRS to state-action advice potentials, and Devlin
and Kudenko (2012) recently generalized PBRS to handle
dynamic potentials, allowing potential functions to change
online whilst the agent is learning.
Additive reward functions from early RS research, while
dangerous to policy preservation, were able to convey behavioral knowledge (e.g. expert instructions) directly. Potential functions require an additional abstraction, and restrict the form of the additional effective reward, but provide
crucial theoretical guarantees. We seek to bridge this gap between the available behavioral knowledge and the effective
potential-based rewards.
This paper gives a novel way to specify the effective
shaping rewards, directly through an arbitrary reward function, while implicitly maintaining the grounding in potentials, necessary for policy invariance. For this, we first extend Wiewiora’s advice framework to dynamic advice potentials. We then propose to in parallel learn a secondary
value function w.r.t. a variant of our arbitrary reward function, and use its successive estimates as our dynamic advice potentials. We show that the effective shaping rewards
then reflect the input reward function in expectation. Empirically, we first demonstrate our method to avoid the issue
of positive reward cycles on a grid-world task, when given
the same behavior knowledge that trapped the bicyclist from
(Randløv and Alstrøm 1998). We then show an application,
where our dynamic (PB) value-function advice outperforms
other reward-shaping methods that encode the same knowledge, as well as a shaping w.r.t. a different popular heuristic.

Effectively incorporating external advice is an important
problem in reinforcement learning, especially as it moves
into the real world. Potential-based reward shaping is a way
to provide the agent with a specific form of additional reward, with the guarantee of policy invariance. In this work we
give a novel way to incorporate an arbitrary reward function
with the same guarantee, by implicitly translating it into the
specific form of dynamic advice potentials, which are maintained as an auxiliary value function learnt at the same time.
We show that advice provided in this way captures the input
reward function in expectation, and demonstrate its efficacy
empirically.

Introduction
The term shaping in experimental psychology (dating at
least as far back as (Skinner 1938)) refers to the idea of
rewarding all behavior leading to the desired behavior, instead of waiting for the subject to exhibit it autonomously
(which, for complex tasks, may take prohibitively long). For
example, Skinner discovered that, in order to train a rat to
push a lever, any movement in the direction of the lever
had to be rewarded. Reinforcement learning (RL) is a framework, where an agent learns from interaction with the environment, typically in a tabula rasa manner, guaranteed to
learn the desired behavior eventually. As with Skinner’s rat,
the RL agent may take a very long time to stumble upon
the target lever, if the only reinforcement (or reward) it receives is after that fact, and shaping is used to speed up the
learning process by providing additional rewards. Shaping
in RL has been linked to reward functions from very early
on; Mataric (1994) interpreted shaping as designing a more
complex reward function, Dorigo and Colombetti (1997)
used shaping on a real robot to translate expert instructions
into reward for the agent, as it executed a task, and Randløv
and Alstrøm (1998) proposed learning a hierarchy of RL signals in an attempt to separate the extra reinforcement function from the base task. It is in the same paper that they uncover the issue of modifying the reward signals in an unconstrained way: when teaching an agent to ride a bicycle, and
encouraging progress towards the goal, the agent would get
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2652

Given no knowledge of the MDP dynamics.

