Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Multivariate Conditional Anomaly Detection
and Its Clinical Application
Charmgil Hong and Milos Hauskrecht
Computer Science Department
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

Abstract

multi-dimensional learning methods. Then, (2) we apply the
model to estimate an anomaly score that measures how unlikely a care pattern for the patient is. Below we further describe each of these phases.

This paper overviews the background, goals, past
achievements and future directions of our research that
aims to build a multivariate conditional anomaly detection framework for the clinical application.

Multi-dimensional Modeling of Clinical Data
Multi-dimensional classification (MDC) (Zhang and Zhou
2013) has received much attention in recent years, due to its
wide applications. For example, an image can be annotated
with multiple tags (Boutell et al. 2004); and a patient may
be diagnosed with multiple diseases (Pestian et al. 2007).
We formulate the modeling of EHRs in the MDC framework by assuming each patient is associated with d discretevalued class variables that represent patient care patterns.
The objective is to learn a function that assigns to each patient, represented by its feature vector x = {x1 , ..., xm },
the most probable assignment of the clinical actions y =
{y1 , ..., yd }. One approach to this task is to model the conditional joint distribution P (Y|X). Assuming the 0-1 loss
function, the optimal classifier h∗ assigns to an instance the
maximum a posteriori (MAP) assignment of class variables:

Background and Goals
We humans are prone to error. Despite startling advances
in medicine, the occurrence of medical errors remains a
persistent and critical problem. Although various computeraided monitoring devices support medical practices to prevent errors, because those tools are primarily knowledgebased built by clinical experts, they are expensive and their
clinical coverage is incomplete.
We develop a new detection framework that identifies statistically anomalous patient care patterns based on past clinical information stored in an electronic health record (EHR)
systems. Our hypothesis is that the detection of anomalies
in patient care patterns corresponds to identifying cases that
need medical attention for reconsideration. Typical anomaly
detection methods, however, simply attempt to identify unusual data instances that do not conform with the majority of
examples in the dataset, and are not suitable in the clinical
context. This is because clinical decisions on patient care are
strongly based on the condition of the patient (Hauskrecht et
al. 2013). In addition, patient care generally consists of multiple clinical actions which often show correlations between
the individual actions (e.g., a set of medications that are usually ordered together). However, such correlations have not
been vigorously exploited in the context of anomaly detection. Our framework aims to improve the anomaly detection
performance by identifying multivariate conditional anomalies where we are interested in the patterns exhibit dependencies among individual clinical actions conditioned on the
patient condition.

h∗ (x) = arg max P (Y = y|X = x)

(1)

y

= arg max P (Y1 = y1 , ..., Yd = yd |X = x)

(2)

y1 ,...,yd

A challenge in modeling P (Y|X) is that the number of
all possible class assignments is exponential in d. One may
tackle the issue by assuming all class variables are conditionally independent of each other and learn d models for
each class variable separately (Boutell et al. 2004). However,
this approach often fails because it does not take advantage
of the multivariate dependencies among the class variables,
which is the key to facilitate the learning of MDC.
Our goal in the first phase is therefore to develop efficient
multi-dimensional patient care models and methods that
overcome the above mentioned difficulties. We start from the
decomposition assumption has been introduced with Classifier Chains (Read et al. 2009). The method directly models
the class posterior distribution P (Y|X) by decomposing the
relations among class variables using the chain rule:

Approaches
Our approach to identify multivariate conditional anomalies consists of the following two phases: (1) We first
build a predictive probabilistic model from EHRs using the

P (Y1 , ..., Yd |X) =

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

d
Y
i=1

4239

P (Yi |X, Y1 , ..., Yi−1 ),

(3)

