Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Pattern Decomposition with Complex Combinatorial Constraints:
Application to Materials Discovery
Stefano Ermon

Ronan Le Bras

Santosh K. Suram, John M. Gregoire

Computer Science Department
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
lebras@cs.cornell.edu

Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis
California Institute of Technology
{sksuram, gregoire}@caltech.edu

Carla P. Gomes, Bart Selman

Robert B. van Dover

Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
{gomes,selman}@cs.cornell.edu

Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Cornell University
rbv2@cornell.edu

Abstract

(Haber et al. 2014). Long-term solutions to several sustainability issues in energy and transportation are likely to come
from break-through innovations in materials (White 2012),
and computer science can play a role and provide support to
accelerate new materials discovery (Le Bras et al. 2011).
To accelerate the discovery of new materials, materials
scientists have developed high-throughput experimental procedures to create composition-spread libraries of new materials, a process that can be intuitively understood as generating an enormous number of compounds in a single experiment by mixing different amounts of a small number of
basic elements (Takeuchi, van Dover, and Koinuma 2002).
The promising libraries are then characterized using X-ray
diffraction to determine the underlying crystal structure and
composition. Specifically, a set of X-ray diffraction signals
are sampled at n different material compositions, each one
corresponding to a different mixture of some basic elements.
A key problem in materials discovery is called the phase
map identification problem, defined as finding k  n basic
phases (basis functions that change gradually with composition, in terms of structure and intensity), such that all the n
X-ray measurements can be explained as a mixture of the k
basic phases. The decomposition is subject to physical constraints that govern the underlying crystallographic process.
The phase map identification is effectively a source separation or spectral unmixing problem (Berry et al. 2007)
where the sources are the k non-negative, basic x-ray diffraction signals and each observation is a non-negative combination of these k sources. Therefore, a standard approach from the literature is non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) (Long et al. 2009). Nevertheless, this approach
overlooks the physical constraints from the crystal formation. For example, it does not guarantee connectivity of the
“phase regions” in the phase map, nor can it handle basis
patterns that are slightly changing (“shifting”) as the crystal lattice constants change. Recent development (Kusne et
al. 2014), while not enforcing these constraints per se, have
shown to be resilient to peak shifting for example. To obtain physically meaningful decompositions, researchers (Le
Bras et al. 2011; Ermon et al. 2012) have looked at constraint

Identifying important components or factors in large
amounts of noisy data is a key problem in machine
learning and data mining. Motivated by a pattern decomposition problem in materials discovery, aimed at
discovering new materials for renewable energy, e.g. for
fuel and solar cells, we introduce CombiFD, a framework for factor based pattern decomposition that allows
the incorporation of a-priori knowledge as constraints,
including complex combinatorial constraints. In addition, we propose a new pattern decomposition algorithm, called AMIQO, based on solving a sequence of
(mixed-integer) quadratic programs. Our approach considerably outperforms the state of the art on the materials discovery problem, scaling to larger datasets and
recovering more precise and physically meaningful decompositions. We also show the effectiveness of our approach for enforcing background knowledge on other
application domains.

Introduction
In recent years, we have seen an enormous growth in data
generation rates in many fields of science (Halevy, Norvig,
and Pereira 2009). For instance, in combinatorial materials discovery, scientists search for new materials with desirable properties by obtaining measurements on hundreds
of samples in a single batch experiment using a composition spread technique (Ginley et al. 2005; Narasimhan,
Mallapragada, and Porter 2007). Providing computational
tools for automatically analyzing and for determining the
structure of the materials formed in a composition spread
is an important and exciting direction in the emerging field
of Computational Sustainability (Gomes 2009). For example, this approach has been successfully applied to speed
up the discovery of new materials with improved catalytic
activity for fuel cell applications (Gregoire et al. 2010;
van Dover, Schneemeyer, and Fleming 1998) and of oxygen
evolution catalysts with applications to solar fuel generation
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

636

