Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Automatically Creating a Large
Number of New Bilingual Dictionaries
Khang Nhut Lam and Feras Al Tarouti and Jugal Kalita
Computer Science Department
University of Colorado, USA
{klam2, faltarou, jkalita}@uccs.edu

Abstract

Karbi-English dictionary and an English-Vietnamese dictionary, but we can not find a Karbi-Vietnamese3 dictionary.
The question we address in this paper is the following:
Given a language, especially a resource-poor language, with
only one available dictionary translating from that language
to a resource-rich language, can we construct several good
dictionaries translating from the original language to many
other languages using publicly available resources such as
bilingual dictionaries, MTs and Wordnets? We call a dictionary good if each entry in it is of high quality and we have
the largest number of entries possible. We must note that
these two objectives conflict: Frequently if an algorithm produces a large number of entries, there is a high probability
that the entries are of low quality. Restating our goal, with
only one input dictionary translating from a source language
to a language which is a language with an available Wordnet
linked to the Princeton Wordnet (PWN) (Fellbaum 1998),
we create a number of good bilingual dictionaries from that
source language to all other languages supported by an MT
with different levels of accuracy and sophistication.
Our contribution in this work is our reliance on the existence of just one bilingual dictionary between a low-resource
language and a resource-rich language, viz., eng. This strict
constraint on the number of input bilingual dictionaries can
be met by even many endangered languages. We consciously
decided not to depend on additional bilingual dictionaries or
external corpora because such languages usually do not have
such resources. The simplicity of our algorithms along with
low-resource requirements are our main strengths.

This paper proposes approaches to automatically create
a large number of new bilingual dictionaries for lowresource languages, especially resource-poor and endangered languages, from a single input bilingual dictionary. Our algorithms produce translations of words
in a source language to plentiful target languages using available Wordnets and a machine translator (MT).
Since our approaches rely on just one input dictionary,
available Wordnets and an MT, they are applicable to
any bilingual dictionary as long as one of the two languages is English or has a Wordnet linked to the Princeton Wordnet. Starting with 5 available bilingual dictionaries, we create 48 new bilingual dictionaries. Of
these, 30 pairs of languages are not supported by the
popular MTs: Google1 and Bing2 .

Introduction
Bilingual dictionaries play a major role in applications such
as machine translation, information retrieval, cross lingual
document, automatic disambiguation of word sense, computing similarities among documents and increasing translation accuracy (Knight and Luk 1994). Bilingual dictionaries are also useful to general readers, who may need help
in translating documents in a given language to their native
language or to a language in which they are familiar. Such
dictionaries may also be important from an intelligence perspective, especially when they deal with smaller languages
from sensitive areas of the world. Creating new bilingual
dictionaries is also a purely intellectual and scholarly endeavor important to the humanities and other scholars.
The powerful online MTs developed by Google and Bing
provide pairwise translations for 80 and 50 languages, respectively. These machines provide translators for single
words and phrases also. In spite of so much information
for some “privileged” language pairs, there are many languages for which we are lucky to find a single bilingual dictionary online or in print. For example, we can find an online

Related work
Let A, B and C be three distinct human languages. Given two
input dictionaries Dict(A, B) consisting of entries (ai , bk )
and Dict(B,C) containing entries (bk , cj ), a naı̈ve method to
create a new bilingual dictionary Dict(A,C) may use B as
a pivot: If a word ai is translated into a word bk , and the
word bk is translated into a word cj , this straightforward approach concludes that the word cj is a translation of the word
ai , and adds the entry (ai , cj ) into the dictionary Dict(A,C).
However, if the word bk has more than one sense, being a

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://translate.google.com/
2
http://www.bing.com/translator

3

The ISO 693-3 codes of Arabic, Assamese, Dimasa, English,
Karbi and Vietnamese are arb, asm, dis, eng, ajz and vie, respectively.

2174

