Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Detecting and Tracking Concept Class Drift
and Emergence in Non-Stationary Fast Data Streams
Brandon S. Parker and Latifur Khan
University of Texas at Dallas
2601 North Floyd Road
Richardson, TX 75083-0688 U.S.A.
{brandon.parker, lkhan}@utdallas.edu
Abstract

change within a non-stationary stream can be categorized as
concept drift, feature evolution, and concept evolution.

As the proliferation of constant data feeds increases
from social media, embedded sensors, and other
sources, the capability to provide predictive concept
labels to these data streams will become ever more
important and lucrative. However, the dynamic, nonstationary nature, and effectively infinite length of data
streams pose additional challenges for stream data mining algorithms. The sparse quantity of training data also
limits the use of algorithms that are heavily dependent
on supervised training. To address all these issues, we
propose an incremental semi-supervised method that
provides general concept class label predictions, but it
also tracks concept clusters within the feature space using an innovative new online clustering algorithm. Each
concept cluster contains an embedded stream classifier,
creating a diverse ensemble for data instance classification within the generative model used for detecting
emerging concepts in the stream. Unlike other recent
novel class detection methods, our method goes beyond
detecting, and continues to differentiate and track the
emerging concepts. We show the effectiveness of our
method on several synthetic and real world data sets,
and we compare the results against other leading baseline methods.

Figure 1: Three main challenges of dynamic data stream
drift with two examples of each
Since the approach developed in this research effort encompasses both stream clustering and ensemble classifier
creation, it has several similarities to various sub-areas of
stream mining research. None of the other methods, however, adequately address all the stream mining issues as our
approach, an algorithm named SluiceBox.
Among the key contributions of this research, the algorithmic method described herein provides:
• a new approach to novel class detection that extends beyond mere detection into also subspace locating and concept tracking,
• a new emergent class detection and tracking method that
is easily combined with advancing classification methods, as demonstrated using Leveraging Bagging (Bifet,
Holmes, and Pfahringer 2010), and
• a new online clustering methodology that combines dynamic cluster quantity with subspace optimization.
In the next section, we explore some important prior work
relevant to our approach and problem domain. The third section then describes our classifier and clustering design in
greater detail followed by a section providing experimental
results demonstrating the comparative capabilities of three
variations of the SluiceBox algorithm compared with two
baseline methods. The paper then concludes with a section
discussing future work.

Introduction
While the data mining disciplines of classification and clustering are well studied for static data, only within the last
two decades has data stream mining both been of academic
interest and need due to the recent explosion of data stream
availability through social media feeds, cloud services, and
Big Data concepts. Not only has the volume of data grown
tremendously, but the very nature of data has been revolutionized with ideas of soft ontologies and schemaless data
streams and stores. These alterations in our fundamental
view of data pose a challenge to the tradition view of data
mining and the existing traditional data mining algorithms.
One of the well known problems in stream mining is concept drift. However, a lesser explored issue is the emergence
of entirely new concept classes within the stream, called
novel classes. Figure 1 depicts some fundamental drift issues present in data streams. The primary contributions to
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2908

