Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning Predictable and Discriminative
Attributes for Visual Recognition
Yuchen Guo and Guiguang Ding and Xiaoming Jin and Jianmin Wang
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com, {dinggg,xmjin,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn,

Abstract

Dissimilar

Tomato

Utilizing attributes for visual recognition has attracted
increasingly interest because attributes can effectively
bridge the semantic gap between low-level visual features and high-level semantic labels. In this paper, we
propose a novel method for learning predictable and
discriminative attributes. Specifically, we require the
learned attributes can be reliably predicted from visual
features, and discover the inherent discriminative structure of data. In addition, we propose to exploit the intracategory locality of data to overcome the intra-category
variance in visual data. We conduct extensive experiments on Animals with Attributes (AwA) and Caltech256 datasets, and the results demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Dissimilar

Similar
Similar

Figure 1: All images are in ”Potato” category, from Caltech256 dataset. Images of the same category may have different attributes because of the large intra-category variance.

Based on how the latent attributes are learned, we can
summarize recent methods into category-based methods
and sample-based methods. The category-based methods
learn attributes by considering the relationship between categories, like in (Yu et al. 2013). They aims to design attributes
for each category such that large category-separability can
be achieved. Though high discriminability can be achieved,
they still suffer from low predictability. On the contrary,
sample-based methods, such as in (Rastegari, Farhadi, and
Forsyth 2012), mainly focus on constructing effective models between samples and attributes such that the learned attributes can be reliably predicted. Although they also incorporate some criteria into the learning function to improve the
discriminability, such as small intra-category distance and
large inter-category distance, the discriminability is guaranteed just in an indirect way. Consequently, the learned attributes aren’t discriminative enough. Actually, the learned
attributes should be predictable and discriminative simultaneously such that accurate visual recognition from visual
features to categories can be achieved with attributes as intermediary. However, we can see sample-based methods and
category-based methods ignore either of them respectively.
Moreover, existing methods require images of the same
category to have similar or identical attributes. However,
this requirement is too strict for real-world dataset such that
recognition performance can be severely affected. Actually,
there is large intra-category variance in real-world dataset.
As illustrated in Figure 1, we can observe that some images
of the same category seem very dissimilar. Therefore, it’s not

Introduction
Attributes, which reflect the properties shared by objects,
have been widely used as the mid-level representation for
images to bridge the semantic gap between low-level visual
features and high-level semantic labels. Actually, it’s always
difficult to directly construct models between visual features
and labels. Thus we can find some attributes as the intermediary which are predictable from visual features and lead
to natural models of categories. Attribute-based representation has shown promising results in many applications, such
as object recognition (Rastegari, Farhadi, and Forsyth 2012;
Yu et al. 2013), large-scale image retrieval (Siddiquie, Feris,
and Davis 2011), and facial verification (Kumar et al. 2009).
Designing attributes manually (Farhadi et al. 2009) may
lead to interpretable attributes. However, it’s burdensome
and costly to do so and it has been widely observed that
the performance of obtained attributes is sometimes worse
than random attributes because they are neither predictable
nor discriminative. Recently, learning latent attributes automatically from data has attracted increasingly attention
(Rastegari, Farhadi, and Forsyth 2012; Yu et al. 2013;
Akata et al. 2013). With some proper learning criteria, latent attributes are more predictable which means they can be
generated reliably from visual features by some models like
SVM classifier, and more discriminative such that superior
visual recognition performance can be achieved with them.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3783

