Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An SVD and Derivative Kernel Approach
to Learning from Geometric Data
Eric Wong

J. Zico Kolter

School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
ericwong0@cmu.edu

School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

the energy of new configurations, or within a Bayesian optimization procedure for finding the minimum energy configuration for a molecule.
A main contribution of this paper is the development of a
(improper) kernel approach to dealing with this data, based
upon the singular value decomposition. Geometric learning
problems of the type we consider typically exhibit certain
invariances, such as translational and rotational invariance
(i.e., rotating or translating all the atoms on a molecule do
not actually change any qualitative information about the
molecule, since it remains the same molecule), and we derive a kernel formulation that respects these invariances. Furthermore, because many physical simulations that serve as
the input to such geometric methods (notably those based
upon adjoint methods) can also provide derivatives of the
output quantity with respect to all point locations, we derive an approach to including derivative information into
our kernel learning. Finally, we highlight the method on examples from the molecular energy prediction task, showing
good performance in modeling previously unseen configurations. Incorporating the method into a Bayesian optimization
framework, we show significant improvement over existing
state of the art in molecular energy optimization.

Motivated by problems such as molecular energy prediction, we derive an (improper) kernel between geometric inputs, that is able to capture the relevant rotational and translation invariances in geometric data.
Since many physical simulations based upon geometric data produce derivatives of the output quantity with
respect to the input positions, we derive an approach
that incorporates derivative information into our kernel learning. We further show how to exploit the low
rank structure of the resulting kernel matrices to speed
up learning. Finally, we evaluated the method in the
context of molecular energy prediction, showing good
performance for modeling previously unseen molecular
configurations. Integrating the approach into a Bayesian
optimization, we show substantial improvement over
the state of the art in molecular energy optimization.

Introduction
This paper focuses on learning from geometric data, where
each input to the learning problem consists of a set of
points, typically in two or three dimensional space. While
many physical problems take this form, we focus here on
the task of molecular energy prediction from input data
describing the 3D configuration of atoms. This problem
has been studied before in the machine learning literature,
though in a slightly different context (Rupp et al. 2012;
Montavon et al. 2012), and has numerous applications ranging from energy materials to drug design. The basic task here
is, given a set of atoms and their respective 3D positions,
to predict the energy of the resulting configuration; since
molecules in nature will typically settle in minimum energy
configurations, in finding minima of these functions we can
assist in the design of new materials. Physically-based simulation to determine these configurations, notably methods
based upon density functional theory (DFT) approaches, are
a very mature technology, but are a very computationally intensive process. The canonical problem we consider in this
paper, therefore, is the task of learning a faster surrogate
function for this expensive process, using machine learning
techniques. This can be used simply as a means of predicting

Related work
This work builds upon a number of different approaches
in kernel methods, computer vision, Bayesian optimization,
and applications to material science. Kernel methods have
long been applied to spatial data in general (see, e.g. (Pozdnoukhov 2009)), which shares a high-level similarity to the
work we present here in that both methods use 2D or 3D coordinates as input to a learning system. However, the work
presented here differs substantially from most work in spatial learning, as the goal there is typically to predict a quantity at a single spatial point (and thus the notions of translational and rotational invariance are specifically inapplicable). In contrast, the work here looks at developing a kernel
that measures similarity between configurations of multiple
points, while respecting certain invariances in the data.
The basic singular value decomposition (SVD) approach
that we use, for finding optimal translation and rotations between molecules, has been previously studied for some time
(Horn, Hilden, and Negahdaripour 1988), and has been used
in the vision community as a subroutine for fast geometric

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1889

