Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Learning to Manipulate Unknown Objects in Clutter by Reinforcement
Abdeslam Boularias and J. Andrew Bagnell and Anthony Stentz
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
{abdeslam, dbagnell, tony}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

This makes object detection particularly difficult. Image segmentation is a core problem in computer vision, and the literature dedicated to it is abundant. Our contribution to solving this problem will be an integration of well-known techniques. Namely, we use k-means for local clustering of voxels into supervoxels (Papon et al. 2013), mean-shift for fast
detection of homogeneous regions of supervoxels (Comaniciu and Meer 2002), and spectral clustering for regrouping
the regions into objects (von Luxburg 2007). This hierarchical approach is justified by the real-time requirements.
Low-level clustering reduces the input size of top-level techniques, which are computationally more complex.
Second, the robot needs to learn grasp affordances from
the executed actions and their features (Detry et al. 2011).
In our case, the grasp affordances are the expected immediate rewards, which can also be interpreted as probabilities
of succeeding the grasps. Despite the fact that a large body
of work was devoted to manipulation learning, e.g. (Saxena, Driemeyer, and Ng 2008; Boularias, Kroemer, and Peters 2011), this problem remains largely unsolved, and rather
poorly understood. Besides, most of these methods either assume that the objects are isolated, or rely on an accurate segmentation for extracting the objects and computing their features. In this work, we take an agnostic approach that does
not depend on segmentation for grasping. The features of a
grasp are simply all the 3D points of the scene that may collide with the robotic hand during the action. We use kernel
density estimation for learning the expected reward function.
The only parameter is the kernel bandwidth, which is automatically learned online by cross-validation.
Third, pushing actions have long-term effects. The robot
should learn to predict the expected sum of future rewards
that result from a pushing action, given a policy. This is
an extremely difficult problem because of the unknown mechanical properties of the objects, as well as the complexity of physical simulations. A physics-based simulation was
used by Dogar et al. (2012) for predicting the effects of
pushing actions, but the authors considered only flat, wellseparated, objects on a smooth surface. A nonparametric approach was used by Merili, Veloso, and Akin (2014) for
learning the outcome of pushing large objects (furniture).
Also, Scholz et al. (2014) used a Markov Decision Process
(MDP) for modeling interactions between objects. However,
only simulation results were reported in that work.

We present a fully autonomous robotic system for grasping
objects in dense clutter. The objects are unknown and have
arbitrary shapes. Therefore, we cannot rely on prior models.
Instead, the robot learns online, from scratch, to manipulate
the objects by trial and error. Grasping objects in clutter is
significantly harder than grasping isolated objects, because
the robot needs to push and move objects around in order to
create sufficient space for the fingers. These pre-grasping actions do not have an immediate utility, and may result in unnecessary delays. The utility of a pre-grasping action can be
measured only by looking at the complete chain of consecutive actions and effects. This is a sequential decision-making
problem that can be cast in the reinforcement learning framework. We solve this problem by learning the stochastic transitions between the observed states, using nonparametric density estimation. The learned transition function is used only
for re-calculating the values of the executed actions in the
observed states, with different policies. Values of new stateactions are obtained by regressing the values of the executed
actions. The state of the system at a given time is a depth (3D)
image of the scene. We use spectral clustering for detecting
the different objects in the image. The performance of our
system is assessed on a robot with real-world objects.

1

Introduction

We propose an autonomous robotic system for rubble removal. The robot can execute two types of actions: grasping
and pushing. The robot gets a reward for every successful
grasp. Pushing actions are used only to free space for future
grasping actions. Pushing actions and failed grasping actions
are not rewarded. The robot chooses a sequence of actions
that maximizes the expected sum of discounted rewards over
a given period of time. An depth image of the cluttered scene
is the only sensory input available for decision-making.
This seemingly simple task is one of the most challenging problems in autonomous robotics (Amor et al. 2013;
Bohg et al. 2013). First, the image needs to be segmented
into separate objects in order to predict, at least at some high
level, the effects of the pushing actions. Objects that are typically found in rubble, such as rocks and debris, are unknown
and have irregular shapes, they are also usually occluded.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1336

