Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

BDD-Constrained Search: A Unified Approach to
Constrained Shortest Path Problems
Masaaki Nishino1 and Norihito Yasuda2 and Shin-ichi Minato2,3 and Masaaki Nagata1
1

2

NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
ERATO Minato Discrete Structure Manipulation System Project, Japan Science and Technology Agency
3
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University
nishino.masaaki@lab.ntt.co.jp
Abstract

able with the same method when we add constraints to the
problem. Efficient algorithms have been proposed for solving such constraint-added variants (e.g., (Oommen 1986)) of
DP-solvable problems, however, they are designed for specific combinations of a problem and a class of constraints,
and there may not exist any efficient algorithm for practical problems we want to solve. To develop a made-to-order
algorithm for each new combination of a problem and set
of constraints is unrealistic. In such cases, we usually resort
to using integer linear programming (ILP) solvers, however,
they lack theoretical guarantees on the computation time and
it is difficult to estimate the solution time.
We propose a unified method for solving a class of optimization problems that are made by adding constraints to
existing DP-solvable problems. Here we say that our method
is unified since it can solve optimization problems in the
same way regardless of the kinds of constraints added. The
class of problems our method can solve is the optimization
problems that can be solved using DP of finding the shortest
(or longest) path on a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Many
important optimization problems that are DP-solvable belong to this class. Typical examples in this class includes
the 0-1 knapsack problem (Kellerer, Pferschy, and Pisinger
2004), computation of the edit distance (Wagner and Fischer
1974) and the problem of finding the Viterbi path on a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) (Rabiner 1989).
The proposed method, named BDD-constrained search
(BCS), uses a binary decision diagram (BDD) (Akers 1978;
Bryant 1986) to represent additional logical constraints imposed on an optimization problem. Logical constraints are
constraints written as Boolean functions whose variables
correspond to edges of the DAG. In the above knapsack
problem example, the constraints on pairs of items can be
represented by Boolean functions. If there are no additional
constraints, a shortest path problem on a DAG can be solved
in time proportional to the number of edges due to the optimal substructure property. If additional logical constraints
exist, however, the problem loses this property and we have
to enumerate all possible paths to solve the problem. Our
key idea is to use a BDD as a “guide” to simultaneously
judge whether a partial path can be pruned, and find groups
of partial paths with which the optimal substructure property
holds, i.e., if the shortest path of the DAG contains any partial path contained in the group, then the contained partial

Dynamic programming (DP) is a fundamental tool used
to obtain exact, optimal solutions for many combinatorial optimization problems. Among these problems, important ones including the knapsack problems and the
computation of edit distances between string pairs can
be solved with a kind of DP that corresponds to solving
the shortest path problem on a directed acyclic graph
(DAG). These problems can be solved efficiently with
DP, however, in practical situations, we want to solve
the customized problems made by adding logical constraints to the original problems. Developing an algorithm specifically for each combination of a problem
and a constraint set is unrealistic. The proposed method,
BDD-Constrained Search (BCS), exploits a Binary Decision Diagram (BDD) that represents the logical constraints in combination with the DAG that represents the
problem. The BCS runs DP on the DAG while using the
BDD to check the equivalence and the validity of intermediate solutions to efficiently solve the problem. The
important feature of BCS is that it can be applied to
problems with various types of logical constraints in a
unified way once we represent the constraints as a BDD.
We give a theoretical analysis on the time complexity of
BCS and also conduct experiments to compare its performance to that of a state-of-the-art integer linear programming solver.

Introduction
Dynamic programming (DP) is a fundamental tool used for
solving various kinds of optimization problems to obtain
exact, optimal solutions. Many important problems such as
the knapsack problem, the computation of edit distances between string pairs, and the shortest path problem on a graph
can be efficiently solved by using DP. To cover practical situations, a natural demand is to extend optimization problems
by adding some constraints. For example, suppose that we
want to solve a knapsack problem and we know that some
combinations of items must not be contained in the solution.
Then we represent this property as constraints and solve the
problem with them to obtain a solution that does not contain the prohibited combinations of items. However, an optimization problem that can be solved by DP becomes unsolvCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1219

