Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Abstraction for Solving Large Incomplete-Information Games
Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract

Original game

Most real-world games and many recreational games
are games of incomplete information. Over the last
dozen years, abstraction has emerged as a key enabler
for solving large incomplete-information games. First,
the game is abstracted to generate a smaller, abstract
game that is strategically similar to the original game.
Second, an approximate equilibrium is computed in
the abstract game. Third, the strategy from the abstract
game is mapped back to the original game.

Abstracted game
Abstraction algorithm

Custom algorithm
for finding a Nash
equilibrium

In this paper, I will review key developments in the
field. I present reasons for abstracting games, and point
out the issue of abstraction pathology. I then review the
practical algorithms for information abstraction and action abstraction. I then cover recent theoretical breakthroughs that beget bounds on the quality of the strategy
from the abstract game, when measured in the original
game. I then discuss how to reverse map the opponent’s
action into the abstraction if the opponent makes a move
that is not in the abstraction. Finally, I discuss other topics of current and future research.

Nash equilibrium

Reverse model

Nash equilibrium

Figure 1: Framework for abstracting games.
• The original game may be too large to solve for equilibrium with today’s technology. This is the case, for example, in heads-up (i.e., two-player) Texas Hold’em poker—
even though the game is a two-player zero-sum game, and
such games can be solved in polynomial time in the size
of the game tree. The original game tree would simply be
prohibitively large (Johanson 2013).

Introduction
Most real-world games (such as auctions, negotiation settings, security games, cybersecurity games, and medical
games) and many recreational games are games of incomplete information. Over the last dozen years, abstraction
has emerged as a key enabler for solving large incompleteinformation games. For instance, it has become an essential
tool in the arsenal of the leading teams working on building
programs for playing poker.
At a high level, the process works in three stages, see Figure 1. First, the game is abstracted to generate a smaller, abstract game that is strategically similar to the original game.
Second, the abstract game is solved for (near-)equilibrium.
Third, the strategy from the abstract game is mapped back
to the original game.

• The equilibrium solver may require a simpler game class
than what the original game is. For example, it may require a game with discrete actions and/or states. Or, an
equilibrium might not even be known to exist in the original game class. This has been pointed out as a motivation
to abstract, for example, in computer billiards (Archibald
and Shoham 2009).
• The original game is too difficult or too large to write
down in full detail so abstraction is needed in modeling.
– This is the case typically in “empirical game theory” (Wellman 2006; Wellman et al. 2005) where the
game is not given explicitly but rather access to the
game is by taking part in a simulation, for example a
trading agents simulation.
– All modeling of real-world settings as games can be
thought of as abstraction. Thus it is important to have
results that tie the abstraction coarseness to solution
quality—for example, regret of the computed strategy
when evaluated in the original game. Otherwise, we

Reasons to abstract games
Depending on the setting, there can be different motivations
for using abstraction on games:
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4127

