Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Probabilistic Model for Bursty Topic Discovery in Microblogs
Xiaohui Yan, Jiafeng Guo, Yanyan Lan, Jun Xu, Xueqi Cheng
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Science
No.6 Kexueyuan South Road, Haidian District
Beijing, China 100190

Abstract

and Schifanella 2010; Li, Sun, and Datta 2012). However,
there are two drawbacks within these methods. First, they
require cumbersome and complicated heuristic tuning and
post-processing, since the bursty features detected are noisy
and ambiguous, which are not easy to cluster. Second, representing the topics only by bursty features will lose much
information, making them difficult to read and understand.
Another attempt is to discover bursty topics via topic
models, a widely used tool for topic discovery in text collections (Hofmann 1999; Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). However, conventional topic models are designed to reveal the
main topics in a collection (Blei 2012), not directly applicable for bursty topic discovery in microblogs. Although some
post-processing techniques can be used to detect bursty
topics from the learned topics of conventional topic models (Lau, Collier, and Baldwin 2012), it is not economical
since most of the discovered topics might not be bursty. To
amend this problem, some researchers tried to introduce the
temporal information into topic models (Diao et al. 2012;
Yin et al. 2013). Unfortunately, they still rely on postprocessing steps or heuristic techniques to distill bursty
topics. Furthermore, all of these above methods use topic
models designed for normal texts (e.g., LDA), which have
been shown not effective for short texts such as microblog
posts (Hong and Davison 2010; Yan et al. 2013).
In this paper, we focus on the problem of discovering
bursty topics in a microblog stream divided by certain time
slices (e.g., day). Formally, a topic is considered to be bursty
in a time slice if it is heavily discussed in that time slice, but
not in most of other time slices. We propose to discover such
bursty topics in a principled way via a novel probabilistic
model, namely Bursty Biterm Topic Model (BBTM). Our
work is based on a recently introduced Biterm Topic Model
(BTM) (Yan et al. 2013), which models biterms (i.e., word
pairs) rather than words for effective topic modeling in short
texts. The key idea of our approach is to exploit the burstiness of biterms as prior knowledge to incorporate into BTM
for bursty topic modeling. BBTM enjoys two substantial
merits over the previous methods. First, it well solves the
data sparsity problem in topic modeling over short texts, as
compared with those methods based on conventional topic
models. Second, it can learn bursty topics in a principled and
efficient way without any heuristic post-processing steps.
We have conducted extensive experiments over a stan-

Bursty topics discovery in microblogs is important for
people to grasp essential and valuable information.
However, the task is challenging since microblog posts
are particularly short and noisy. This work develops a
novel probabilistic model, namely Bursty Biterm Topic
Model (BBTM), to deal with the task. BBTM extends
the Biterm Topic Model (BTM) by incorporating the
burstiness of biterms as prior knowledge for bursty topic
modeling, which enjoys the following merits: 1) It can
well solve the data sparsity problem in topic modeling
over short texts as the same as BTM; 2) It can automatical discover high quality bursty topics in microblogs
in a principled and efficient way. Extensive experiments
on a standard Twitter dataset show that our approach
outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines significantly.

Introduction
Nowadays microblog services have become an important
platform for people to share and access information. In Twitter, about 58 million posts are produced every day, involving various topics such as daily chatting, business promotions, and news stories. Among them, there are always many
novel topics emerging and attracting wide interest, referred
as bursty topics. These topics are often related to some important events or issues in either cyber or physical space.
Thus discovering bursty topics can provide people essential
and valuable information, and consequently benefit many related applications such as public opinion analysis, business
intelligence, and news clues tracking.
However, bursty topic discovery in microblogs is challenging. First, the posts in microblogs are particularly short.
How to distill high quality topics from short texts is a nontrivial problem. Second, posts are particularly diverse and
noisy, with a large proportion of common and meaningless
subjects such as pointless babbles and daily chatting (Analytics 2009). These posts overwhelm in microblogs, making
it difficult to distinguish bursty topics from non-bursty content.
In previous studies, a typical way for this task is to detect bursty features (e.g., words or phrases) and then cluster them (Mathioudakis and Koudas 2010; Cataldi, Di Caro,
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

353

