Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

RANSAC versus CS-RANSAC
Geun-Sik Jo, Kee-Sung Lee, Devy Chandra, Chol-Hee Jang, Myung-Hyun Ga
Department of Computer & Information Engineering
INHA University
Incheon, Korea
gsjo@inha.ac.kr, lee.ks@outlook.kr, wiy_ch4n@hotmail.com, orange@eslab.inha.ac.kr, gagaman7777@eslab.inha.ac.kr

trix generated here depends heavily on the selected random
features. However, RANSAC algorithm picks the features
without considering their locations, which may lead to the
selection of sets of features distributed linearly or too close
to one another, resulting in an inaccurate homography matrix.
Figure 1 illustrates the pixels mapping (shown as green
grid) from the reference images in left column to the camera images in right column. The pixels mapping is done
using a homography matrix calculated based on four selected pairs of features (marked as yellow circles). In figure 1(A), the selected features lie on the same linear sequence, causing the homography matrix to be accurate
only for estimating objects in some areas where the features are selected (i.e. area inside the yellow rounded rectangle), but fail in estimating the pose of other objects in
other areas (e.g. the pitch trimmer annotated with orange
circles). The same result happens when the selected features lie too close to one another, as shown in figure 1(B).
In contrast, as shown in figure 1(C), a desirable homography matrix can be obtained to estimate the whole area of
the image by selecting only well-distributed features.
As illustrated in figure 1, accurately estimating the
whole area is more important than estimating only a specific area of an image to avoid the failure of the tracking system to track the target object as a result of some factors
such as fast movements or occlusions, particularly in an
AR system requiring a robust tracking system. To overcome the problems described in the figure 1 and also to
improve the existing variants of RANSAC, we are here
proposing CS-RANSAC algorithm which embed CSP into
the classic RANSAC.

Abstract
A homography matrix is used in computer vision field to solve
the correspondence problem between a pair of stereo images.
RANSAC algorithm is often used to calculate the homography
matrix by randomly selecting a set of features iteratively. CSRANSAC algorithm in this paper converts RANSAC algorithm
into two-layers. The first layer is addressing sampling problem
which we can describe our knowledge about degenerate features
by mean of Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSP). By dividing
the input image into a  grid and making feature points into
discrete domains, we can model the image into the CSP model to
efficiently filter out degenerate features. By expressing the
knowledge about degenerate feature samples using CSP in the
first layer, so that computer has knowledge about how to skip
computing the homography matrix in the model estimation step
for the second layer. The experimental results show that the proposed CS-RANSAC algorithm can outperform the most of variants of RANSAC without sacrificing its execution time.

Introduction
In recent years, augmented reality (AR) systems have received considerable attention as an effective method for
visualizing virtual information represented in text, still
images, animations, videos, or 3D objects annotated on
cameras or mobile device displays. Some studies have explored how to use an AR system to perform highly complex and sophisticated tasks, such as aircraft maintenance
and repair (Jo et al. 2014; Crescenzio et al. 2011; Lee,
Rosli and Jo. 2012). However, to correctly annotate a virtual object on a camera image in an AR system, it is necessary to accurately estimate the pose of the virtual object,
which can be done by calculating the homography matrix
between reference and camera images.
The calculation of a homography matrix can be solved
using the RANSAC algorithm, where each sample set is
randomly selected. The accuracy of the homography ma-

RANSAC Algorithm
RANSAC algorithm basically consists of two steps: hypothesis and evaluation (Zuliani 2012). In hypothesis step,
a small subset of data is randomly selected to compute a
model to fit the dataset. In evaluation step, thisPRGHOLVXV

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1350

