Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Clustering-Based Collaborative Filtering for Link Prediction ∗
Xiangyu Wang, Dayu He, Danyang Chen, Jinhui Xu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo
{xiangyuw,dayuhe,danyangc,jinhui}@buffalo.edu

1.1

Abstract

A number of methods have been developed to predict the
absent links, using either one or both types of features. A
straightforward way of link prediction is to first compute the
similarity between each pair of nodes and then use it to determine the likelihood of their possible link. Two types of
similarity between a pair of nodes are frequently used. One
is based on node attributes such as the number of common
features shared by them (Lin 1998), and the other is based
on graph-topological features such as the paths or neighbors connecting them (Leicht, Holme, and Newman 2006;
Lü, Jin, and Zhou 2009). A major challenge encountered by
such methods is that the node features are often treated independently of the topological features, and therefore it lacks
a consistent and appropriate way to define similarity using
the two types of correlated features. As a result, the performance of such methods could vary significantly among
different types of similarities. To overcome this obstacle,
several Bayesian probabilistic models have been proposed
to make predictions by learning a link probability distribution model from the observed network (Wang, Satuluri,
and Parthasarathy 2007; Miller, Griffiths, and Jordan 2009;
Sarkar, Chakrabarti, and Jordan 2012). In such models, the
node features and topological features are represented as
random variables, and their relations are estimated via some
assumed latent structure from the Bayesian method.
Another approach for link prediction is to formulate it as
an adjacency matrix recovery problem, and use some sparse
matrix recovery methods or collaborative filtering methods
to solve it (Menon and Elkan 2011; Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009; Singh and Gordon 2008; Agrawal, Garg, and
Narayanam 2013; Ye et al. 2013). Comparing to the statistical models, the matrix recovery approach has a prominent advantage, that is, its stability and accuracy of solutions
can be theoretically ensured by the well-developed sparse
recovery theory (Zhou et al. 2010; Candès and Plan 2009;
Wang and Xu 2012). However, it also suffers from two limitations. One limitation is that the matrix recovery approach
uses matrix norm as its measure and thus mainly focuses
on the topological features. The other limitation is that the
matrix recovery approach searches the missing links along
the norm-minimizing direction (Menon and Elkan 2011;
Chen 2008) (e.g., similar to the least square problem), and
the resulting matrix may not always reflect the real structure

In this paper, we propose a novel collaborative filtering approach for predicting the unobserved links in a network (or
graph) with both topological and node features. Our approach improves the well-known compressed sensing based
matrix completion method by introducing a new multipleindependent-Bernoulli-distribution model as the data sampling mask. It makes better link predictions since the model
is more general and better matches the data distributions in
many real-world networks, such as social networks like Facebook. As a result, a satisfying stability of the prediction can
be guaranteed. To obtain an accurate multiple-independentBernoulli-distribution model of the topological feature space,
our approach adjusts the sampling of the adjacency matrix
of the network (or graph) using the clustering information
in the node feature space. This yields a better performance
than those methods which simply combine the two types of
features. Experimental results on several benchmark datasets
suggest that our approach outperforms the best existing link
prediction methods.

1

Previous Work

Introduction

Over the last few years, there is a rapidly growing interest
in predicting the potential or absent links between nodes
in large, complex networks. The link information represents
the interactions, relationships, or influences between different nodes. Thus, predicting the likelihood of the unknown
links is essential to forecasting the future or determining the
hidden relationships between the nodes. For instance, with
the surge of social networks in our daily life, link prediction has been widely applied in friendship recommendation
and social network marketing (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg
2003). In this paper, we focus on predicting unknown links
in a partially observed network. The observed information
can be classified into two categories. One is the set of topological features, such as edges or links, and the other is the
set of node features, such as a user’s name, gender, location, school, and other profile elements in some networks
like Facebook.
∗
The research of this work was supported in part by NSF under
grants IIS-1115220, IIS-1422591, and CCF-1422324.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

332

