Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Some Fixed Parameter Tractability Results for Planning with
Non-Acyclic Domain-Transition Graphs
Christer Bäckström
Linköping University, SE-58183 Linköping, Sweden.
Email: christer.backstrom@liu.se

Abstract

tractable cases exist by imposing further restrictions. Recently, Bäckström (2014) combined these two approaches
by studying combined restrictions on both the DTGs and the
causal graph under parameterised complexity analysis.
While standard complexity only considers the size of the
instance, parameterised complexity is multi-dimensional in
the sense that it allows one or more parameters in addition to
the instance size, treating these parameters as independent.
In standard complexity, a problem is considered tractable if
it can be solved in time O(nc ), for some constant c, where
n is the size of the instance. For many problems, like the
NP-complete problems, we do not know of any better way
to solve them than combinatorial search. Somewhat simplified, we do not know if the problem can be solved faster
than time O(2n ). However, in practice the time is often not
exponential in the size of the instance, but in some smaller
part of it. Sometimes we can characterize this smaller part
by some parameter k that does not directly depend on n, and
it may be that the required time is only exponential in k, not
in n. Parameterised complexity uses the more relaxed concept of fixed-parameter tractability (fpt). For example, if a
problem can be solved in time O(2k nc ), where the parameter k is independent of n, then the problem is fpt in k. This
is intended to have more practical relevance since many fpt
problems can be considered as tractable in practice.
Parameterised complexity is a widely used technique in
many areas of computer science, including many subareas of
AI, like non-monotonic reasoning, constraints, social choice
and argumentation. There is also a growing body of parameterised results for planning. For instance, some early results
for S TRIPS planning (Downey, Fellows, and Stege 1999)
were followed by parameterised analysis of previously studied classes using plan length as parameter (Bäckström et al.
2012) as well as using other parameters (Kronegger, Pfandler, and Pichler 2013). Recent studies also include plan
reuse (de Haan, Roubı́cková, and Szeider 2013) and backdoors (Kronegger, Ordyniak, and Pfandler 2014).
Bäckströms (2014) study assumed that all domaintransition graphs (DTGs) are acyclic. He considered the parameters domain size (d), number of paths in the DTGs (k)
and the treewidth of the causal graph (w). He showed that
planning with acyclic DTGs is fpt in these three parameters
and that it is fpt in only k if also the causal graph is a polytree. Although acyclic DTGs may appear very limited, it was

Bäckström studied the parameterised complexity of planning
when the domain-transition graphs (DTGs) are acyclic. He
used the parameters d (domain size), k (number of paths in
the DTGs) and w (treewidth of the causal graph), and showed
that planning is fixed-parameter tractable (fpt) in these parameters, and fpt in only parameter k if the causal graph is
a polytree. We continue this work by considering some additional cases of non-acyclic DTGs. In particular, we consider
the case where each strongly connected component (SCC) in
a DTG must be a simple cycle, and we show that planning is
fpt for this case if the causal graph is a polytree. This is done
by first preprocessing the instance to construct an equivalent
abstraction and then apply Bäckströms technique to this abstraction. We use the parameters d and k, reinterpreting this
as the number of paths in the condensation of a DTG, and the
two new parameters c (the number of contracted cycles along
a path) and pmax (an upper bound for walking around cycles,
when not unbounded).

1

Introduction

Identifying tractable classes of planning problems is important for several reasons. From a theoretical perspective it
helps us to understand the factors influencing how difficult
it is to plan. From a practical perspective, there are applications that can be modelled in currently known tractable fragments (cf. Cooper, Maris, and Régnier (2014)). Even more
importantly, tractable fragments have provided the basis for
many successful planning heuristics (cf. Helmert (2004),
Katz and Domshlak (2008), Katz and Domshlak (2010)).
Early work on planning complexity studied mainly syntactical restrictions (Bylander 1994; Bäckström and Nebel
1995). One of the two main avenues for non-syntactical approaches is to study restrictions on the domain-transition
graphs (DTGs) for the variables (Jonsson and Bäckström
1998a; 1998b). The other one is to study restrictions
on the causal graph. For instance, planning is known to
be NP-complete for forks and inverted forks (Domshlak
and Dinitz 2001), chains (Giménez and Jonsson 2009),
polytrees (Giménez and Jonsson 2008) as well as fences
and polypaths (Bäckström and Jonsson 2013). Also many
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3232

