Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Characterizing Performance of Consistency Algorithms
by Algorithm Configuration of Random CSP Generators
Daniel J. Geschwender and Robert J. Woodward and Berthe Y. Choueiry
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, USA
{dgeschwe|rwoodwar|choueiry}@cse.unl.edu

Abstract

2012) and solving difficult CSPs with higher levels of consistency (Karakashian, Woodward, and Choueiry 2013). In
particular, we are interested in applying AllSol and PerTuple
locally to the clusters of a tree decomposition (Geschwender et al. 2013). The performance of the two algorithms vary
widely in practice: Indeed, one algorithm may finish reasonably fast while the other fails to terminate in a given
time threshold. This performance difference makes the algorithms ideal candidates for our configuration study.

In Constraint Processing, many algorithms for enforcing the
same level of local consistency may exist. The performance
of those algorithms varies widely. In order to understand what
problem features lead to better performance of one algorithm
over another, we utilize an algorithm configurator to tune the
parameters of a random problem generator and maximize the
performance difference of two consistency algorithms for enforcing constraint minimality. Our approach allowed us to
generate instances that run 1000 times faster for one algorithm over the other.

Configuration of RBGenerator
We use an algorithm configurator that guides a random CSP
generator to generate instances on which we execute PerTuple and AllSol. After comparing their performances on the
generated instances, the configurator selects new parameters
for the CSP generator in order to influence the performances.
Figure 1 shows the components of the configuration system.

Introduction
Constraint Processing is an expressive and powerful framework for modeling and solving constrained combinatorial
problems. A Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) is defined by a set of variables, their respective domains, and
a set of constraints over the variables restricting the combinations of values that can be assigned to the variables at
the same time. A solution to a CSP assigns all variables a
value from their respective domains such that no constraint
is violated. Determining the satisfiability of a CSP is NPcomplete, and a solution is typically found using backtrack
search search and/or constraint propagation. Many propagation algorithms exist with widely varied effectiveness. An
important research direction is the selection of the appropriate consistency algorithm to employ in solving a given
problem instance. As a step in that direction, we consider
the inverse question: we investigate what problems are particularly suited to the strengths of a given consistency algorithm. By investigating what type of problems an algorithm
performs best on, we aim to improve our abilities to select
the right algorithm in the appropriate context.

SMAC: Sequential Model-based Algorithm Configuration
Parameter Space Response Model
User-Defined Parameter Space
User-Defined Algorithm Wrapper
Input
parameters
Instance
list

Random
seed

RBGenerator

Random
CSP
instance

AllSol
log10 (

PerTuple

AllSol time
Result
)
PerTuple time

Figure 1: Operation of the configurator
RBGenerator. We use the random CSP generator RBGenerator (Xu et al. 2007), which is based on the model RB
and allows for easy generation of hard satisfiable instances
at the phase transition. RBGenerator uses the following parameters:
1. k ≥ 2 denotes the arity of the constraints
2. n denotes the number of variables
3. α determines the domain size d = nα of each variable
4. r determines the number m = r · n · ln(n) of constraints

Consistency Algorithms Considered
We consider two consistency algorithms, PerTuple and AllSol(Karakashian et al. 2010; Karakashian 2013). Both algorithms enforce constraint minimality, which guarantees that
every tuple in every relation can be extended to a full solution to the CSP (Montanari 1974). The importance of minimality was established for knowledge compilation (Gottlob

δ
5. δ determines the constraint tightness, t = pcr + 1000
,
α
−r
where pcr = 1 − e
is the location of phase transition
6. forced whether instances are forced satisfiable
7. merged whether constraints of similar scopes are joined

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4162

