Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Forecasting Collector Road Speeds Under High Percentage of Missing Data
Xin Xin∗

Chunwei Lu

Yashen Wang

Heyan Huang

School of Computer Science
Beijing Institute of Tech.
xxin@bit.edu.cn

Autopia Mobile
Tech Group Inc.
myles.lu@chetuobang.com

School of Computer Science
Beijing Institute of Tech.
yswang@bit.edu.cn

School of Computer Science
Beijing Institute of Tech.
hhy63@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate road speed predictions can help drivers in
smart route planning. Although the issue has been studied previously, most existing work focus on arterial
roads only, where sensors are configured closely for
collecting complete real-time data. For collector roads
where sensors sparsely cover, however, speed predictions are often ignored. With GPS-equipped floating
car signals being available nowadays, we aim at forecasting collector road speeds by utilizing these signals. The main challenge compared with arterial roads
comes from the missing data. In a time slot of the real
case, over 90% of collector roads cannot be covered by
enough floating cars. Thus most traditional approaches
for arterial roads, relying on complete historical data,
cannot be employed directly. Aiming at solving this
problem, we propose a multi-view road speed prediction framework. In the first view, temporal patterns are
modeled by a layered hidden Markov model; and in the
second view, spatial patterns are modeled by a collective
matrix factorization model. The two models are learned
and inferred simultaneously in a co-regularized manner.
Experiments conducted in the Beijing road network,
based on 10K taxi signals in 2 years, have demonstrated
that the approach outperforms traditional approaches by
10% in MAE and RMSE.

Figure 1: The task of forecasting collector road speeds
arterial roads in cities, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). In route
planning, forecasting collector road speeds usually has the
same importance with arterial roads, as they always compose the alternate routes. Unfortunately, this task has not
been thoroughly explored yet, and most predictions for collector roads are simply approximated by historical average
values.
While configuring sensors for each collector road is very
difficult, other ubiquitous data sources indicating collector
road speeds are already available. A typical example is the
signals from GPS-equipped floating cars, such as taxies and
cargo vans. These vehicles travel both arterial and collector roads in cities, and their real-time speeds can sense the
corresponding road speeds. Therefore, this brings alternative
opportunities for collector road speeds prediction.
The high percentage of missing data is the main challenge, which differentiates the task in this paper from previous tasks. The challenge of data sparsity is also common
in general urban computing tasks (Zheng et al. 2014). Traditional tasks are based on complete historical data, recorded
by sensors. But in our case, the historical data is incomplete
and sparse. Figure 1(b) shows a snapshot of Beijing collector roads covered in ten minutes by 10K taxis. Only 10%
have reliable observed road speeds, while a large percent of
the data is missing. Hence, most previous methods, relying
on complete data, cannot be directly applied.
In this work, aiming at forecasting collector road speeds
effectively and efficiently, we propose a multi-view learning
framework based on the following assumptions:

Introduction
With fast-paced lifestyles, people living in major cities are
increasingly concerned about the road congestion problem.
Spending hours daily on the road constantly compromises
one’s working efficiency and mood. As a result, forecasting
road speeds has become a crucial urban service nowadays.
It help drivers to avoid roads expected to be congested soon.
The problem of the road speed prediction has been extensively studied previously. But most previous work are
limited in dealing with freeways and arterial roads, where
sensors (such as loops, cameras) are configured closely to
collect complete real-time road speeds. Due to the nontrivial cost, collector roads are often sparsely covered by these
sensors, where most existing approaches will fail to work.
Collector roads refer to secondary main roads that connect
∗

The corresponding author.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. Temporal Patterns. The future speed of the active collec-

1917

