Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

An Association Network for Computing Semantic Relatedness
Keyang Zhang 1 and Kenny Q. Zhu 2

Seung-won Hwang

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
1
keyangzh@gmail.com, 2 kzhu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

POSTECH, Pohang, Republic of Korea
swhwang@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

and relatedness are ultimately human perceptions and thus
evaluated against human annotated scores, simple windowbased co-occurrences, often contaminated with noises, offer
insufficient signals to match the human perception. In other
words, there exists a perceptional gap between the relatedness perceived by humans and the co-occurrences we collect
from text corpora.
As a human perception signal to bridge such gap, we consider a well-studied psychological process called free association. In free association, a person is given a cue word and
is asked to produce the first word that comes to her mind as
the response. Previously, a number of free association experiments by psychologists resulted in a few data sets called
free association norms. Table is a fragment of the free association norms collected by the University of South Florida
(Nelson, McEvoy, and Schreiber 2004), known as Florida
Norms from now on.

To judge how much a pair of words (or texts) are semantically related is a cognitive process. However, previous algorithms for computing semantic relatedness are largely based
on co-occurrences within textual windows, and do not actively leverage cognitive human perceptions of relatedness.
To bridge this perceptional gap, we propose to utilize free association as signals to capture such human perceptions. However, free association, being manually evaluated, has limited
lexical coverage and is inherently sparse. We propose to expand lexical coverage and overcome sparseness by constructing an association network of terms and concepts that combines signals from free association norms and five types of cooccurrences extracted from the rich structures of Wikipedia.
Our evaluation results validate that simple algorithms on this
network give competitive results in computing semantic relatedness between words and between short texts.

Introduction
Table 1: The strongest reponses to the cue word “river”
Cue Response Strength
river
lake
15/150
river
stream
15/150
river
water
9/150
river
flow
8/150
river
boat
7/150
river
canoe
7/150

Computing semantic relatedness between two words (or
texts) is a fundamental task in natural language processing, artificial intelligence and information retrieval. Strictly
speaking, semantic relatedness is a more general notion than
semantic similarity as it captures not only closeness between
two objects within a type hierarchy (e.g., river and stream),
but also any other relations (e.g., river and boat) (Budanitsky and Hirst 2006). Traditionally, semantic similarity has
been computed either within some lexicon (Jarmasz 2003;
Resnik 1995; Jiang and Conrath 1997; Lin 1998) or by comparing the distributional properties of contexts (Deerwester
et al. 1990; Gabrilovich and Markovitch 2007; Hassan and
Mihalcea 2011). On the other hand, semantic relatedness
has been largely modeled by co-occurrences within a window in a large text corpus.
For both similarity and relatedness, co-occurrences play
a central role, hence how they are extracted and combined
can significantly influence the quality of relatedness computation. So far, dozens of similarity functions (McGill
1979) have been proposed for IR, all of which involving cooccurrences in one way or another, but few achieve satisfactory results on both similarity and relatedness. The reason
for such limited success, we argue, is that, since similarity

Each row of the data contains a cue word, a response word
and the strength of the association (a fraction of the people who responded with this pair of association in the experiment). The free association norms can be viewed as a
network in which nodes are the words, and edges carry the
strengths. One can see that edges in this network connect
both similar pairs (e.g., river and stream) and related ones
(e.g., river and boat), which seems ideal for computing semantic relatedness. However, this network suffers from two
limitations. First, the number of cue words in these datasets
ranges from 100 to 5000, which means only the most common English words are covered and the scale of such a network is too small for predicting the relatedness score between two arbitrary words. Second, due to the cost of free
association experiments, the number of human subjects is
usually small. A cue word is typically presented to a few

Copyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

593

