Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Inference Graphs: Combining Natural Deduction and
Subsumption Inference in a Concurrent Reasoner
Daniel R. Schlegela and Stuart C. Shapirob
a

b

Department of Biomedical Informatics
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University at Buffalo, Buffalo NY, 14260
<drschleg,shapiro>@buffalo.edu

Abstract

which is an ancestor of this work — and PowerLoom (USC
Information Sciences Institute 2014). Unlike PowerLoom,
IGs use a single graph structure to represent inference paths,
whether they be for subsumption or ND. Neither ANALOG
nor PowerLoom support concurrency.
IGs derive their ability to reason using both ND and subsumption largely from the logic they implement: a Logic of
Arbitrary and Indefinite Objects (LA ). LA is a first–order
logic which uses quantified terms instead of quantified formulas with universally and existentially bound variables.
There are two types of quantified terms: arbitrary and indefinite. Arbitrary terms replace universally quantified formulas, and indefinite terms replace existentially quantified
formulas. Both types of quantified terms are structured, having a set of restrictions which the quantified term satisfies.
A quantified term subsumes another quantified term if their
sets of restrictions are appropriately related (further detailed
in Section 3.1). For example, an arbitrary term, a1 , subsumes
another arbitrary term, a2 , if the restriction set of a1 is a
subset of that of a2 . Using this relationship, one can derive
new information about a2 from information about a1 , without introducing or knowing about any individuals which are
instances of a1 or a2 . This feature is the essence of subsumption reasoning.
LA allows for forming expressions that use propositional
connectives and quantified terms. Propositional connectives
can be reasoned about using ND, while quantified terms can
be reasoned about through subsumption reasoning. IGs allow the use of concurrency in both types of inference.
In Section 2 we will discuss LA and some KR concerns.
The IG formalism implementing LA is presented in Section 3. Section 4 will discuss the IG concurrency model. Finally, Section 5 presents an evaluation of IG performance.

There are very few reasoners which combine natural deduction and subsumption reasoning, and there are none which
do so while supporting concurrency. Inference Graphs are a
graph-based inference mechanism using an expressive first–
order logic, capable of subsumption and natural deduction reasoning using concurrency. Evaluation of concurrency
characteristics on a combination natural deduction and subsumption reasoning problem has shown linear speedup with
the number of processors.

1

Introduction

Inference Graphs (IGs) are a graph-based inference mechanism using an expressive first–order logic (FOL), capable
of subsumption and natural deduction (ND) reasoning using forward, backward, bi-directional (Shapiro, Martins, and
McKay 1982), and focused reasoning (Schlegel and Shapiro
2014a), all using concurrency. In this paper we will focus
our discussion on the ability of IGs to combine ND and subsumption reasoning using concurrency, a combination which
no other system provides.1
ND is a proof–theoretic reasoning method which makes
use of a set of introduction and elimination rules for each
logical connective. Subsumption is a reasoning method
which allows the derivation of knowledge about entire
classes of entities from knowledge about other classes, without needing to introduce instances. Subsumption reasoning
is most commonly associated with description logics (DLs)
(Baader et al. 2010). It is often missing from first order reasoners because of the lack of non–atomic conceptual descriptions (Woods 1991).
There have been many ND reasoners over the years, and
reasoning using subsumption is increasingly popular. The
combination of these two techniques allows for more sophisticated reasoning about entire classes of entities. We know
of only two reasoners which combine the two techniques,
namely, ANALOG (Ali and Shapiro 1993; Ali 1994) —

2
2.1

Background

A Logic of Arbitrary and Indefinite Objects

LA is a FOL designed for use as the logic of a KR system
for natural language understanding, and for commonsense
reasoning (Shapiro 2004). The logic is sound and complete,
using ND and subsumption inference. Throughout this paper we will assume the deductive rules implemented are the
standard rules of inference for FOL, though the actual implementation uses set-oriented connectives (Shapiro 2010),

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This paper is an extended and updated version of (Schlegel and
Shapiro 2014c). Parts of it are adapted from (Schlegel and Shapiro
2013) and (Schlegel 2014). A conception of IGs using only ground
predicate logic can be seen in (Schlegel and Shapiro 2014b).

579

