Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Binarisation via Dualisation for Valued Constraints
David A. Cohen

Martin C. Cooper

Peter G. Jeavons, Stanislav Živný∗

Royal Holloway
University of London
dave@cs.rhul.ac.uk

IRIT
University of Toulouse III
cooper@irit.fr

University of Oxford
{peter.jeavons,standa.zivny}
@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

2000) that both of these standard encodings can be extended
to soft constraints.
In this paper we focus on the dual encoding for the valued constraint satisfaction problem (VCSP). In particular,
we consider the effect of this encoding on the set of weighted
relations used to express the valued constraints.
Different subproblems of the VCSP can be obtained by
restricting, in various ways, the set of weighted relations
that can be used to express the constraints. Such a set of
weighted relations is generally called a valued constraint
language (Cohen et al. 2013; Jeavons, Krokhin, and Živný
2014). For any such valued constraint language Γ there is a
corresponding problem VCSP(Γ), and it has been shown that
the computational complexity of VCSP(Γ) is determined by
certain algebraic properties of the set Γ known as weighted
polymorphisms (Cohen et al. 2013).
Here we show that the dual encoding preserves many aspects of these algebraic properties. We show that there is a
one-to-one correspondence between the weighted polymorphisms of the original valued constraint language and the
weighted polymorphisms of the binary language obtained by
the dual encoding. Hence, as well as providing a way to convert any given instance of the VCSP to an equivalent binary
instance, the dual encoding also provides a way to convert
any valued constraint language to a binary language with essentially the same algebraic properties, and hence essentially
the same complexity and algorithmic properties.

Constraint programming is a natural paradigm for many
combinatorial optimisation problems. The complexity
of constraint satisfaction for various forms of constraints has been widely-studied, both to inform the
choice of appropriate algorithms, and to understand better the boundary between polynomial-time complexity
and NP-hardness.
In constraint programming it is well-known that any
constraint satisfaction problem can be converted to an
equivalent binary problem using the so-called dual encoding. Using this standard approach any fixed collection of constraints, of arbitrary arity, can be converted
to an equivalent set of constraints of arity at most two.
Here we show that this transformation, although it
changes the domain of the constraints, preserves all the
relevant algebraic properties that determine the complexity. Moreover, we show that the dual encoding preserves many of the key algorithmic properties of the
original instance. We also show that this remains true
for more general valued constraint languages, where
constraints may assign different cost values to different assignments. Hence, we obtain a simple proof of the
fact that to classify the computational complexity of all
valued constraint languages it suffices to classify only
binary valued constraint languages.

Introduction
There are two well-known methods for transforming a nonbinary constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) into a binary
one; the dual encoding (Dechter and Pearl 1989) and the hidden variable encoding (Rossi, Dahr, and Petrie 1990). Both
encode the non-binary constraints to variables that have
as domains of possible values the valid tuples of the constraints. That is, the techniques derive a binary encoding of
a non-binary constraint by changing the domain of the variables to an extensional representation of the original constraints. A combination of these two encodings, known as
the double encoding, has also been studied (Smith, Stergiou,
and Walsh 2000). It was observed in (Larrosa and Dechter

Related work One special case of our results is the case
when all the weighted relations in the valued constraint language we are considering are 0-weighted. This special case
corresponds to the standard constraint satisfaction problem
where constraints are specified by relations.
In this special case, (Feder and Vardi 1998) and (Atserias 2008) showed that for any constraint language Γ there
exists a constraint language Γ0 containing a single binary
relation such that CSP(Γ) and CSP(Γ0 ) are polynomialtime equivalent. Recently, (Bulı́n et al. 2013; 2014) have
given a different construction that gives the same result
but can be shown to preserve various types of identities
involving the polymorphisms of Γ. Building on this approach, (Powell and Krokhin 2014) have shown that essentially the same construction as in (Bulı́n et al. 2013;
2014) extends to the VCSP; in this case the valued constraint

∗
Stanislav Živný was supported by a Royal Society University
Research Fellowship.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3731

