Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Elicitation for Aggregation
Rafael M. Frongillo
Harvard University
raf@cs.berkeley.edu

Yiling Chen

Harvard University
yiling@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract

dence about those predictions, and show how to use this information to optimally aggregate in many situations.
We consider a Bayesian model where a principal, who
can consult a group of risk-neutral agents, wishes to obtain an informed prediction about a random variable. The
random variable follows a parameterized distribution that is
generated by some unknown parameters, the prior distribution over which is common knowledge. Each agent privately
observes some independent samples of the random variable
and forms a belief about it. The principal then elicits the
agents’ predictions of the random variable, and her goal is
to optimally aggregate agents’ private beliefs based on these
predictions—to compute the distribution of the random variable as if she had observed the samples of all agents.
This paper focuses on designing elicitation mechanisms
to achieve this optimal aggregation. We show that when the
prior distribution of the unknown parameters comes from a
conjugate prior family of the distribution of the random variable, the principal can leverage a few independent samples
that she observes to successfully elicit enough information
from the agents to achieve the optimal aggregation. This relies on important properties of the conjugate prior family.
Intuitively, we use the hyperparameter of a distribution in
the conjugate family to quantify the confidence of an agent’s
belief as the hyperparameter encodes information about the
samples that the agent has observed. Our mechanisms work
by eliciting predictions that allow the principal to infer the
confidence of the agents and then make use of the confidence
to achieve the optimal aggregation.
In particular, we prove that the principal can leverage a
single sample to achieve optimal aggregation if and only
if each distribution (modulo an equivalence relation) in the
conjugate family maps to a unique hyperparameter. With
this, we demonstrate how elicitation and optimal aggregation work for many common distributions of the random
variable, including the Poisson, Normal, and uniform distributions, among others.
When the unique mapping condition is not satisfied, such
as in the rain example above, we show that the hyperparameter of an agent’s posterior distribution cannot be inferred
with the principal’s single sample. Fortunately, in this setting we construct a mechanism where the principal can still
achieve the optimal aggregation if she has access to two independent samples of the random variable. Our mechanism

We study the problem of eliciting and aggregating probabilistic information from multiple agents. In order to successfully
aggregate the predictions of agents, the principal needs to
elicit some notion of confidence from agents, capturing how
much experience or knowledge led to their predictions. To
formalize this, we consider a principal who wishes to learn
the distribution of a random variable. A group of Bayesian
agents has each privately observed some independent samples
of the random variable. The principal wishes to elicit enough
information from each agent, so that her posterior is the same
as if she had directly received all of the samples herself.
Leveraging techniques from Bayesian statistics, we represent
confidence as the number of samples an agent has observed,
which is quantified by a hyperparameter from a conjugate
family of prior distributions. This then allows us to show that
if the principal has access to a few samples, she can achieve
her aggregation goal by eliciting predictions from agents using proper scoring rules. In particular, with access to one sample, she can successfully aggregate the agents’ predictions if
and only if every posterior predictive distribution corresponds
to a unique value of the hyperparameter, a property which
holds for many common distributions of interest. When this
uniqueness property does not hold, we construct a novel and
intuitive mechanism where a principal with two samples can
elicit and optimally aggregate the agents’ predictions.

1

Ian A. Kash

Microsoft Research
iankash@microsoft.com

Introduction

Imagine that a principal, Alice, wishes to estimate the probability of rain tomorrow. She consults two agents, Bob who
says 80%, and Carol who says 10%. How should Alice aggregate these two widely disparate predictions? If she knew
that Bob happened to have spent the day studying radar imagery, whereas Carol just looked outside for a second, it
would seem obvious that Alice should give much higher
weight to Bob’s prediction than Carol’s. In other words, in
order to aggregate these predictions, Alice needs to know the
agents’ confidence about their reports.
The aggregation of probabilistic information is an important problem in many domains, from multiagent systems to
crowdsourcing. In this paper, we propose a general method
of eliciting predictions together with a measure of confiCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

900

