Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Clustering Longitudinal Clinical Marker Trajectories from Electronic
Health Data: Applications to Phenotyping and Endotype Discovery
Peter Schulam

Fredrick Wigley

Suchi Saria

Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles St.
Baltimore, MD 21218
pschulam@jhu.edu

Division of Rheumatology
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine
733. N. Broadway
Baltimore, MD 21205
fwig@jhmi.edu

Department of Computer Science
Department of Health Policy & Mgmt.
Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles St.
Baltimore, MD 21218
ssaria@cs.jhu.edu

more thorough retrospective or prospective study to conﬁrm
their existence (e.g. Barr et al. 1999). Recently, however,
literature in the medical community has noted the need for
more objective methods for discovering subtypes (De Keulenaer and Brutsaert 2009). Growing repositories of health
data stored in electronic health record (EHR) databases
and patient registries (Blumenthal 2009; Shea and Hripcsak 2010) present an exciting opportunity to identify disease
subtypes in an objective, data-driven manner using tools
from machine learning that can help to tackle the problem
of combing through these massive databases. In this work,
we propose such a tool, the Probabilistic Subtyping Model
(PSM), that is designed to discover subtypes of complex,
systemic diseases using longitudinal clinical markers collected in EHR databases and patient registries.
Discovering and reﬁning disease subtypes can beneﬁt
both the practice and the science of medicine. Clinically, disease subtypes can help to reduce uncertainty in expected outcome of an individual’s case, thereby improving treatment.
Subtypes can inform therapies and aid in making prognoses
and forecasts about expected costs of care (Chang, Clark,
and Weiner 2011). Scientiﬁcally, disease subtypes can help
to improve the effectiveness of clinical trials (Gundlapalli
et al. 2008), drive the design of new genome-wide association studies (Kho et al. 2011; Kohane 2011), and allow medical scientists to view related diseases through a
more ﬁne-grained lens that can lead to insights that connect their causes and developmental pathways (Hoshida et
al. 2007). Disease subtyping is considered to be especially
useful for complex, systemic diseases where mechanism is
often poorly understood. Examples of disease subtyping research include work in autism (State and Sestan 2012), cardiovascular disease (De Keulenaer and Brutsaert 2009), and
Parkinson’s disease (Lewis et al. 2005).
Complex, systemic diseases are characterized using the
level of disease activity present in an array of organ systems. Clinicians typically measure the inﬂuence of a disease on an organ using clinical tests that quantify the extent to which that organ’s function has been affected by the
disease. The results of these tests, which we refer to as illness severity markers (s-markers for short), are being rou-

Abstract
Diseases such as autism, cardiovascular disease, and the autoimmune disorders are difﬁcult to treat because of the remarkable degree of variation among affected individuals.
Subtyping research seeks to reﬁne the deﬁnition of such complex, multi-organ diseases by identifying homogeneous patient subgroups. In this paper, we propose the Probabilistic Subtyping Model (PSM) to identify subgroups based on
clustering individual clinical severity markers. This task is
challenging due to the presence of nuisance variability—
variations in measurements that are not due to disease
subtype—which, if not accounted for, generate biased estimates for the group-level trajectories. Measurement sparsity
and irregular sampling patterns pose additional challenges in
clustering such data. PSM uses a hierarchical model to account for these different sources of variability. Our experiments demonstrate that by accounting for nuisance variability, PSM is able to more accurately model the marker data.
We also discuss novel subtypes discovered using PSM and
the resulting clinical hypotheses that are now the subject of
follow up clinical experiments.

Introduction and Background
Disease subtyping is the process of developing criteria for
stratifying a population of individuals with a shared disease into subgroups that exhibit similar traits; a task that
is analogous to clustering in machine learning. Under the
assumption that individuals with similar traits share an underlying disease mechanism, disease subtyping can help
to propose candidate subgroups of individuals that should
be investigated for biological differences. Uncovering such
differences can shed light on the mechanisms speciﬁc to
each group. Observable traits useful for identifying subpopulations of similar patients are called phenotypes. When
such traits have been linked to a distinct underlying pathobiological mechanism, these are then referred to as endotypes
(Anderson 2008).
Traditionally, disease subtyping research has been conducted as a by-product of clinical experience. A clinician
may notice the presence of subgroups, and may perform a
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2956

