Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Information Gathering and Reward
Exploitation of Subgoals for POMDPs
Hang Ma and Joelle Pineau

School of Computer Science
McGill University, Montreal, Canada

Abstract

Recent point-based planning algorithms have made impressive improvements by addressing one or the other of the
above challenges: PBVI (Pineau, Gordon, and Thrun 2003),
HSVI2 (Smith and Simmons 2004; 2005), FSVI (Shani,
Brafman, and Shimony 2007) and SARSOP (Kurniawati,
Hsu, and Lee 2008) work very successfully in problems
that require gathering information with a large state space,
using bias expansion of belief sampling to yield good approximations of value functions; MiGS (Kurniawati et al.
2011) and some online solvers, e.g. PUMA (He, Brunskill,
and Roy 2010), facilitate planning for problems that require long sequences of actions to reach a goal, by generating macro-actions and restricting the policy space. Other
approaches, including a dynamic programming adaption to
POMDPs called RTDP-Bel (Bonet and Geffner 2009) and
a UCT-based online method called POMCP (Silver and Veness 2010) have demonstrated strong performance on some
of the POMDP domains. However, we still lack methods that
can tackle problems simultaneously requiring substantial information gathering and long planning horizons.
Here we propose a point-based POMDP solution method,
called Information Gathering and Reward Exploitation of
Subgoals (IGRES), that effectively tackles both challenges
by incorporating elements from the two families of approaches: first, IGRES identifies potentially important states
as subgoals; second, IGRES only gathers information and
exploits rewards with macro-actions in the neighbourhood
of those subgoals. Thus, IGRES is efficient in terms of computational time and space in the sense that it covers the belief space well with a much smaller size of belief points
set for expensive backup operations while still maintaining good performance. Promising experimental results show
that IGRES provides state-of-the-art performance on tasks
that require significant information gathering and planning
with long sequences of actions. We also show that IGRES
can effectively tackle a new class of ecological adaptive
management problems presented in the IJCAI 2013 data
challenge track, thus providing evidence that IGRES is capable of solving tasks in useful real-world settings.

Planning in large partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) is challenging especially when a long
planning horizon is required. A few recent algorithms successfully tackle this case but at the expense of a weaker
information-gathering capacity. In this paper, we propose Information Gathering and Reward Exploitation of Subgoals
(IGRES), a randomized POMDP planning algorithm that
leverages information in the state space to automatically generate “macro-actions” to tackle tasks with long planning horizons, while locally exploring the belief space to allow effective information gathering. Experimental results show that
IGRES is an effective multi-purpose POMDP solver, providing state-of-the-art performance for both long horizon planning tasks and information-gathering tasks on benchmark domains. Additional experiments with an ecological adaptive
management problem indicate that IGRES is a promising tool
for POMDP planning in real-world settings.

Introduction
Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
have emerged as a rich framework for planning under uncertainty due to their ability to capture a number of important
planning aspects that appear in many real-world sequential
decision tasks, such as the ability to handle stochastic actions, missing or noisy observations, and stochastic costs and
rewards. The POMDP framework has been widely applied
to various complex situations in practice thanks to its rich
capabilities for planning in an uncertain environment (Cassandra 1998; Hsiao, Kaelbling, and Lozano-Pérez 2007;
Pineau and Atrash 2007; Chades et al. 2012). Despite their
mathematical expressivity, the difficulty of solving large
POMDPs has limited their application in complex domains.
For a POMDP problem modelled with n states, we must
reason in an (n 1)-dimensional continuous belief space.
Moreover, the complexity of POMDP planning is affected
by the length of planning horizon (Littman 1996). Practically speaking, solving real-world tasks in this framework
involves two challenges: how to carry out intelligent information gathering in a large high dimensional belief space;
and how to scale up planning with long sequences of actions
and delayed rewards.

Technical Background
A partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP)
is a tuple hS, A, ⌦, T, O, R, b0 , i (Kaelbling, Littman, and
Cassandra 1998), where S is a finite set of states, A is

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3320

