Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Modelling Class Noise with Symmetric and Asymmetric Distributions
Jun Du

Zhihua Cai

School of Computer Science
China University of Geosciences
Wuhan, P. R. China, 430074
dr.jundu@gmail.com

School of Computer Science
China University of Geosciences
Wuhan, P. R. China, 430074
zhcai@cug.edu.cn

the class noise p(y 6= y t |x) is distributed as an unnormalized Gaussian and an unnormalized Laplace centred at the
linear class boundary, and propose Gaussian-noise model
and Laplace-noise model respectively. These two models are
then further adapted to asymmetric cases.
Given this class noise perspective, we also reinterpret Logistic regression and Probit regression by using class noise
probability p(y t 6= y|x). These two models are also adapted
to asymmetric cases. Demonstrations are made to compare
Logistic regression and Probit regression with the proposed
class noise models.
Empirical study is conducted on synthetic data and realworld UCI (Bache and Lichman 2013) data. The experimental results demonstrate that the asymmetric models overall
outperform the benchmark linear models (including Logistic regression, Probit regression, and LinearSVM with L1
and L2 loss). In addition, the proposed asymmetric Laplacenoise model achieves the best performance among all.

Abstract
In classification problem, we assume that the samples
around the class boundary are more likely to be incorrectly annotated than others, and propose boundaryconditional class noise (BCN). Based on the BCN assumption, we use unnormalized Gaussian and Laplace
distributions to directly model how class noise is generated, in symmetric and asymmetric cases. In addition,
we demonstrate that Logistic regression and Probit regression can also be reinterpreted from this class noise
perspective, and compare them with the proposed models. The empirical study shows that, the proposed asymmetric models overall outperform the benchmark linear models, and the asymmetric Laplace-noise model
achieves the best performance among all.

Introduction
Take handwritten digit recognition for example. During the
process of manual annotation (to obtain the labelled training
data), it is fairly easy to correctly annotate legible handwritten digits, whereas mistakes are often made on the ambiguous ones. Therefore, given a set of annotated digits, it is
reasonable to assume that, the legible samples are often correctly labelled, whereas incorrect labels are more likely to
be attached to the ambiguous samples. Similar assumptions
can also be applied to many other real-world applications,
such as, speech recognition, spam filter, etc.
This assumption can be formalized in a more general
manner: We denote by y the observed corrupted label, and
by y t the unknown true label, in a classification problem.
Given a sample x, we assume that, p(y 6= y t |x) tends to be
low when x is far from the class boundary (like the legible
digits), and tends to become higher when x gets closer (like
the ambiguous digits). We call this type of noise boundaryconditional class noise (abbreviated BCN).
Based on the BCN assumption, instead of modelling how
data is generated (i.e., p(x, y), as in generative learning), or
modelling conditional class probability directly (i.e., p(y|x),
as in discriminative learning), in this paper, we propose to
model how this boundary-conditional class noise is generated (i.e., p(y 6= y t |x)). More specifically, we assume that

Related Work
Class noise has been extensively studied in machine learning
community. A recent comprehensive survey can be found
in (Frénay and Verleysen 2014). In general, researchers
use different strategies to solve the problem: Some aim to
identify and eliminate mislabelled samples, as in (Brodley and Friedl 1999; Zhu, Wu, and Chen 2003); some
tend to obtain more data or re-weight samples to improve
data quality, as in (Sheng, Provost, and Ipeirotis 2008;
Rebbapragada and Brodley 2007); others make certain assumptions on class noise and build noise-tolerant models,
as in (Angluin and Laird 1988; Dawid and Skene 1979;
Lawrence and Schölkopf 2001; Raykar et al. 2010; Natarajan, Dhillon, and Ravikumar 2013). Our work falls into the
last category.
More specifically, (Angluin and Laird 1988) proposed a
simple class noise framework random classification noise
(RCN), which has been commonly used thereafter. The
more flexible class-conditional class noise (CCN) framework has also been extensively studied, as in (Lawrence and
Schölkopf 2001; Raykar et al. 2010; Natarajan, Dhillon, and
Ravikumar 2013). However, both of these two frameworks
only consider sample-independent class noise, which imposes a rigid constraint on real-world applications. In contrast, motivated by real-world observations, the boundary-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2589

