Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Cognitive Social Learners:
An Architecture for Modeling Normative Behavior
Rahmatollah Beheshti

Awrad Mohammed Ali

Gita Sukthankar

Department of EECS
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL
beheshti@eecs.ucf.edu

Department of EECS
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL
awrad.emad@knights.ucf.edu

Department of EECS
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL
gitars@eecs.ucf.edu

Abstract

on modeling norm lifecycles can be organized into two categories: internal and external. In the first category, norms
are characterized as arising from internal mental processes
that can be specified using cognitive modeling techniques,
and normative behavior is viewed as the outcome of internalizing external preferences. The normative agents are
able to acquire new norms, rather than relying on preexisting constructs, and can deliberate about norm compliance
autonomously (Criado, Argente, and Botti 2010). In the second category, the focus is on social interactions, and gametheoretic models are used to quantify the bottom-up process of recognizing and complying with norms in the external social system (Sen and Airiau 2007). Convergence
occurs when agents arrive at a mutually agreed upon utility maximization strategy. A limitation of this type of system is that the agents lack a sense of normative expectation and do not distinguish between a strategy and a social
norm (Savarimuthu and Cranefield 2011).
Our proposed architecture, Cognitive Social Learners
(CSL), bridges the gap between these two types of architectures and provides a computational mechanism for transitioning behaviors learned during repeated social interactions
into the agent’s internal cognitive model of preexisting beliefs, desires, and intentions. Rather than modeling the normative lifecycle as a sequence of stages (e.g., recognition,
adoption, compliance), CSL implements norms through an
iterative process in which the normative behavior is developed incrementally within each agent’s cognitive model before it emerges in consistent patterns of observable behavior.
Normative multi-agent systems are a powerful mechanism for modeling complex social problems, including energy consumption, water usage, and soil conservation. For
instance, social norms have been found to affect enrollment
in payment for ecosystem services (PES) (Chen et al. 2012).
The general purpose of PESs is to provide incentives for
participants who voluntarily decrease the amount of harmful activities to the ecosystem. Group-oriented strategies
for cultivating sustainable practices, such as communitybased social marketing, have been shown to be effective, because they emphasize the cultivation of community
norms (McKenzie-Mohr 2013).
This paper presents a study of group normative behavior
in a public environment; we illustrate how norm emergence
under our hybrid CSL architecture differs from the perfor-

In many cases, creating long-term solutions to sustainability
issues requires not only innovative technology, but also largescale public adoption of the proposed solutions. Social simulations are a valuable but underutilized tool that can help
public policy researchers understand when sustainable practices are likely to make the delicate transition from being an
individual choice to becoming a social norm. In this paper,
we introduce a new normative multi-agent architecture, Cognitive Social Learners (CSL), that models bottom-up norm
emergence through a social learning mechanism, while using
BDI (Belief/Desire/Intention) reasoning to handle adoption
and compliance. CSL preserves a greater sense of cognitive
realism than influence propagation or infectious transmission
approaches, enabling the modeling of complex beliefs and
contradictory objectives within an agent-based simulation. In
this paper, we demonstrate the use of CSL for modeling norm
emergence of recycling practices and public participation in
a smoke-free campus initiative.

Introduction
Large-scale public adoption of proposed solutions is a major barrier for addressing sustainability challenges including
mitigating the effects of anthropogenic climate change, improving home energy efficiency, and effectively utilizing recycling options. A dilemma facing public policy planners is
that these sustainability issues often fall under the category
of “wicked problems” that aren’t easily evaluated and offer
reduced opportunities to learn by trial and error (Rittel and
Webber 1973). Modeling and simulation can serve as important tools for exploring the unforeseen consequences of
potential solutions. For instance, e-Policy, a decision support system for sustainable policy making, uses agent-based
modeling to assess the impact of policy initiatives (Eaton,
Gomes, and Williams 2014).
One research question is how to accurately model the influence of norms at governing the adoption of sustainable
practices. Norms play a significant role in determining the
behavior of people in human societies, and have been used
as a computational mechanism for creating coordinated action within normative multi-agent systems. Previous work
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2017

