Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

The Network Data Repository with
Interactive Graph Analytics and Visualization
Ryan A. Rossi and Nesreen K. Ahmed
Dept. of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906

Abstract
(NR) is the first interactive data repository with a web-based
platform for visual interactive analytics. Unlike other data
repositories (e.g., UCI ML Data Repository, and SNAP),
the network data repository (networkrepository.com) allows
users to not only download, but to interactively analyze and
visualize such data using our web-based interactive graph analytics platform. Users can in real-time analyze, visualize,
compare, and explore data along many different dimensions.
The aim of NR is to make it easy to discover key insights into
the data extremely fast with little effort while also providing
a medium for users to share data, visualizations, and insights.
Other key factors that differentiate NR from the current data
repositories is the number of graph datasets, their size, and variety. While other data repositories are static, they also lack a
means for users to collaboratively discuss a particular dataset,
corrections, or challenges with using the data for certain applications. In contrast, NR incorporates many social and collaborative aspects that facilitate scientific research, e.g., users
can discuss each graph, post observations, and visualizations.

Figure 1: Visualize graph structure and discover valuable
insights using our interactive graph visualization platform.
Compare with hundreds of other networks across many different collections and types.

Discussion
from 19 general collections (social, information, and biological networks, among others) that span a wide range of
types (bipartite, time-series, etc.) and domains (social sciences, physics, bioinformatics).
Unlike other data repositories (e.g., UCI ML Repository,
SNAP), NR allows users to not only download, but to interactively analyze and visualize the data in real-time on the
web (e.g., see Figure 2). NR goes beyond traditional static
repositories by giving users the ability to interactively explore and compare data along many different dimensions.
The goal of NR is to make it easy for users to discover key
insights into the data quickly with little effort, while also
providing a medium for researchers to share data, visualizations, and insights. In addition, we also make it easy for
users to upload and visualize their own data.
Static plots found in papers and other repositories are
severely limiting as they only provide a single view of the
data. By contrast, the interactive platform gives rise to an
infinite number of possible views (e.g., scaling, zooming,
filtering, and other data transformations). Thus, NR gives researchers the flexibility to interactively plot and visualize the
data according to the properties and characteristics of interest to them. Researchers can begin analyzing and investi-

This paper presents (NR) — the first interactive data repository with real-time graph analytics and visualization. NR has
hundreds of graphs and network datasets for users to download (and share). However, the key factor that differentiates
NR from other repositories (SNAP; UCI ML Repository) is
our interactive graph analytics and visualization platform.
NR allows users to interactively, in real-time, explore and
visualize the data.
Scientific progress depends on standard datasets for which
claims, hypotheses, and algorithms can be compared and
evaluated. NR aims to improve and facilitate the scientific
study of networks and other data by making it easy to interactively explore, visualize, and compare a large number of
datasets. NR is the first interactive graph data repository that
provides researchers with the ability to interactively explore
and visualize data in seconds using our fast and easy-to-use
interactive analytics platform (e.g., Figure 1 and 2). The
repository has a comprehensive and representative set of the
most popular and frequently used datasets in academia and
industry. More specifically, NR currently has 500+ graphs
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4292

