Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Continuity Editing for 3D Animation
Quentin Galvane

Rémi Ronfard

Christophe Lino

Marc Christie

INRIA
Univ. Grenoble Alpes & LJK

INRIA
Univ. Grenoble Alpes & LJK

INRIA
Univ. Grenoble Alpes & LJK

IRISA
University of Rennes I

Abstract

would, at least partially, support users in their creative process (Davis et al. 2013).
Previous contributions in automatic film editing have focused on generative methods mixing artificial intelligence
and computer graphics techniques. However, evaluating the
quality of film editing (whether generated by machines or by
artists) is a notoriously difficult problem (Lino et al. 2014).
Some contributions mention heuristics for choosing between
multiple editing solutions without further details (Christianson et al. 1996) while other minimize a cost function which
is insufficiently described to be reproduced (Elson and Riedl
2007). Furthermore, the precise timing of cuts has not been
addressed, nor the problem of controling the rhythm of cutting (number of shots per minute) and its role in establishing film tempo (Adams, Dorai, and Venkatesh 2002). Most
approaches yield a reactive style of editing known by professional editors as the dragnet style (Murch 1986), which
mechanically cuts to new speakers or actions.
In this paper, we propose a continuity editing model for
3D animations that provides a general solution to the automated creation of cinematographic sequences. Our model
encodes the continuity editing process as a search for the optimal path through an editing graph. In this editing graph, a
node represents a time-step (a temporal fragment of a shot),
and an arc represents a transition between two cameras, going from a camera to either the same camera (no cut) or another camera (cut).
Our optimization uses dynamic programming to minimize, under a semi-Markovian hypothesis, the errors made
along three criteria (see Figure 1): the quality of the shots
(with respect to the unfolding actions), the respect of continuity editing rules and the respect of a well-founded model
of rhythm (cutting pace). Semi-Markov models (Murphy
2002; Yu 2010) have been used before in the context of
information extraction (Sarawagi and Cohen 2004), speech
generation (Zen et al. 2007) and computer vision (Shi et al.
2008). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time they
are suggested as a computational model for film editing.
Our contributions are: (i) a detailed formalization of continuity editing for 3D animation, encompassing a thorough
number of visual properties and continuity rules (ii) an optimal algorithm for automatic editing in which parameters
such as pacing can be controlled, thereby significantly increasing the expressiveness of editing tools, and (iii) a vali-

We describe an optimization-based approach for automatically creating well-edited movies from a 3D animation. While previous work has mostly focused on
the problem of placing cameras to produce nice-looking
views of the action, the problem of cutting and pasting shots from all available cameras has never been addressed extensively. In this paper, we review the main
causes of editing errors in literature and propose an editing model relying on a minimization of such errors. We
make a plausible semi-Markov assumption, resulting in
a dynamic programming solution which is computationally efficient. We also show that our method can generate movies with different editing rhythms and validate the results through a user study. Combined with
state-of-the-art cinematography, our approach therefore
promises to significantly extend the expressiveness and
naturalness of virtual movie-making.

Introduction
The wide availability of high-resolution 3D models and the
facility to create new geometrical and animated contents, using low-cost input devices, opens to many the possibility of
becoming digital 3D storytellers. A convincing illustration
is the rise of the machinima1 community, consisting in creating movies by relying on contents and rendering engines
borrowed from computer games through ad-hoc techniques
or dedicated modeling tools2 .
To date there is however a clear lack of accessible tools
to easily create the cinematography (positioning the cameras to create shots) and perform the editing of such stories (selecting appropriate cuts between the shots created by
the cameras). Creating a movie requires the knowledge of
a significant amount of empirical rules and established conventions. In particular continuity editing – the creation of
a sequence of shots ensuring visual continuity – is a complex endeavor. Most 3D animation packages lack continuity
editing tools, calling the need for automatic approaches that
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
contraction of machine and cinema
2
see iClone http://www.reallusion.com/iclone/ or Moviestorm
http://www.moviestorm.co.uk/ tools

753

