Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Refer-to-as Relations as Semantic Knowledge
Song Feng

Sujith Ravi, Ravi Kumar

IBM T. J. Watson Research Center &
Google
Stony Brook University
Mountain View, CA
sfeng@us.ibm.com
sravi@google.com ravi.k53@gmail.com

Polina Kuznetsova
Computer Science Department
Stony Brook University
polina.sbu@gmail.com

Wei Liu, Alexander C. Berg, Tamara L. Berg

Yejin Choi

Computer Science Department
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{wliu, aberg, tlberg}@cs.unc.edu

Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
yejin@cs.washington.edu

We posit that the entry-level categorization can drive a
new type of semantic knowledge, Refer-to-as relations. Having this knowledge at scale could provide a useful enhancement to existing linguistic resources, like WordNet (Fellbaum 1998), by adding Refer-to-as relations that complement existing Is-a (hypernym) and Has-a (meronym) relations. Automatically extracted Refer-to-as relations could
also be useful in a number of natural language applications
ranging from coreference resolution of nominal nouns, to referring expression generation in human robot interactions, to
abstractive summarization or text simpliﬁcation with lexical
substitutions.
Experiments from psychology (Rosch 1978; Jolicoeur,
Gluck, and Kosslyn 1984) in the 70s and 80s have provided
insights into this natural cognitive conceptualization, which
are based on questions such as “what would you call this
object?” or “is this object a kind of X?”. However, due to
the nature of human-subject-based psycho-physical experiments, these studies were relatively small in scale, considering only on the order of tens of object categories.
Computational methods for modeling entry-level categorization remain largely unstudied. A notable exception is the
recent work of (Ordonez et al. 2013) who explore initial
methods to translate between encyclopedic and entry-level
categories using visual models and/or linguistic resources.
We take this idea much further in several dimensions. First,
we propose Refer-to-as relations to be studied as a new conceptual problem in semantic knowledge, with the distinct
purpose of learning the relations over all object names in an
encyclopedia knowledge base. Second, we posit that natural
cognitive conceptualization is inherently a collective inference process, and propose a formulation that infers Referto-as relations over all encyclopedia categories jointly. Additionally, we make use of recent deep learning based visual
features (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Girshick
et al. 2013) to measure the visual similarity of concepts.
Building on (Ordonez et al. 2013) we present a combinatorial optimization formulation to jointly infer Refer-toas relations. The objective function encodes some of the

Abstract
We study Refer-to-as relations as a new type of semantic knowledge. Compared to the much studied Is-a relation,
which concerns factual taxonomic knowledge, Refer-to-as relations aim to address pragmatic semantic knowledge. For example, a “penguin” is a “bird” from a taxonomic point of
view, but people rarely refer to a “penguin” as a “bird” in vernacular use. This observation closely relates to the entry-level
categorization studied in Psychology. We posit that Refer-toas relations can be learned from data, and that both textual
and visual information would be helpful in inferring the relations. By integrating existing lexical structure knowledge
with language statistics and visual similarities, we formulate
a collective inference approach to map all object names in
an encyclopedia to commonly used names for each object.
Our contributions include a new labeled data set, the collective inference and optimization approach, and the computed
mappings and similarities.

Introduction
We study Refer-to-as relations as a new type of semantic
knowledge. We deﬁne Refer-to-as(A,B) to denote the pragmatic knowledge about the language use such that an object
A is typically referred to as B in vernacular use. Compared
to the much studied Is-a relations (Hearst 1992), which concern strictly factual knowledge of taxonomy, Refer-to-as relations aim to address pragmatic semantic knowledge that is
crucial for practical language understanding and production
systems. For example, a “cat” is a “carnivore” from a taxonomy point of view (Is-a(cat, carnivore) ), but people rarely
refer to a “cat” as a “carnivore” in most conversational settings (¬Refer-to-as(cat, carnivore) ).
This closely relates to entry-level categories originally introduced in pioneering work from psychologists including
Eleanor Rosch (Rosch 1978) and Stephen Kosslyn (Jolicoeur, Gluck, and Kosslyn 1984). Entry-level categories are
the names people tend to associate with objects in the world.
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2160

