Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Tractable Cost-Optimal Planning over Restricted Polytree Causal Graphs
Meysam Aghighi, Peter Jonsson and Simon Ståhlberg
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linköping University
Linköping, Sweden
{meysam.aghighi, peter.jonsson, simon.stahlberg} at liu.se

• PG(Θ): (Plan Generation) Generate a plan for Π or indicate that no plan exists.

Abstract
Causal graphs are widely used to analyze the complexity of
planning problems. Many tractable classes have been identified with their aid and state-of-the-art heuristics have been derived by exploiting such classes. In particular, Katz and Keyder have studied causal graphs that are hourglasses (which is
a generalization of forks and inverted-forks) and shown that
the corresponding cost-optimal planning problem is tractable
under certain restrictions. We continue this work by studying polytrees (which is a generalization of hourglasses) under similar restrictions. We prove tractability of cost-optimal
planning by providing an algorithm based on a novel notion
of variable isomorphism. Our algorithm also sheds light on
the k-consistency procedure for identifying unsolvable planning instances. We speculate that this may, at least partially,
explain why merge-and-shrink heuristics have been successful for recognizing unsolvable instances.

1

• C OPG(Θ): (Cost-optimal Plan Generation) Generate a
plan with minimal total cost or indicate that no plan exists.
We let C OPE(Θ, k) denote the existence version of
C OPG(Θ), i.e. determine the weight of the plan with minimal total cost or indicate that no plan exists. Note that generating a plan cannot be computationally easier than determining the existence of one. Furthermore, PG cannot be easier
than C OPG.
A common approach to the problem of identifying
tractable instances is to impose restrictions on the causal
graph (cf., Brafman and Domshlak (2003), Katz and
Domshlak (2007), or Gimenéz and Jonsson (2012)). In this
paper, we consider instances whose causal graph is a polytree, i.e. acyclic graphs whose underlying undirected graphs
are trees. PG is known to be NP-hard for instances whose
causal graph is a directed path and having domain size ≥ 5
(Giménez and Jonsson 2009). This implies that such instances must be avoided when searching for tractable fragments. A natural parameter when considering causal graphs
is the diameter, i.e. the length of the longest simple path
in the undirected graph underlying the causal graph. Restrictions on the diameter have been used in previous work.
For instance, Katz & Domshlak (2008b; 2010) have studied
forks and inverted-forks while Katz & Keyder (2012) have
studied hourglasses. In all these cases, the causal graph is a
polytree with diameter ≤ 2. With this in mind, the restrictions we use in this paper are the following: the causal graph
is a polytree, the domain size (of the variables) is bounded by
a constant k, and the diameter of the causal graph is bounded
by a constant d.
Table 1 shows the current known results for instances using these restrictions. We note that some of the previous
work have used a slightly different set of restrictions and
is more general, but the results are still applicable to the set
of restrictions we consider. These results leave an open case:
what happens if both the domain size and the diameter are
bounded by arbitrary constants? We show that C OPE is in P
which immediately implies that C OPG is in P, too. This follows from the fact that the length of our optimal plans are
bounded by a polynomial in the instance size so we can use
prefix search for generating a cost-optimal plans given that

Introduction

It is well known that (first-order) planning is undecidable
and propositional planning is PSPACE-complete (Bylander
1994). Despite this, propositional planners have been highly
successful and are nowadays able to find solutions for relatively large instances. A common approach for finding solutions quickly is by using heuristic search (Katz and Domshlak 2010). One popular approach for constructing heuristic
functions is to: 1) find a tractable (i.e. polynomial-time solvable) class of planning instances, 2) abstract the original instance to an instance in the tractable class and solve it, and
3) use the cost of the solution for the abstract instance as a
heuristic value (cf., Helmert (2004); Helmert, Haslum and
Hoffman (2007); Katz and Domshlak (2010)). An ongoing
quest in the planning community is to map as many and as
general tractable classes as possible, since having knowledge of these might prove invaluable for constructing efficient planners (Katz and Domshlak 2008a).
Before we delve into complexity results, we define the
problems under consideration. Let Θ be an arbitrary set of
SAS+ instances (V, A, I, G, c) where c : A → N0 is an
action cost function. We have the following computational
problems.
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3225

