Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Probabilistic Graphical Models for Boosting
Cardinal and Ordinal Peer Grading in MOOCs
Fei Mi, Dit-Yan Yeung
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong
fmi@cse.ust.hk, dyyeung@cse.ust.hk
Abstract

tal for assessing learning outcomes of many courses (Paré
and Joordens 2008). Unfortunately, satisfactory automatic
grading of such assessment forms is beyond the current
state of the art. A practical approach to tackle this problem is peer grading or peer assessment (Godlee et al. 2003;
Sadler and Good 2006), in which students also play the role
of graders in grading a small number of assignments submitted by other students according to the rubrics or benchmarks
provided by the course instructor. The final score assigned to
a submission is usually some aggregate, such as the median
or mean, of the peer grades given by the graders. Due to the
great diversity in student background, purpose and engagement, applying peer grading to give students a fair judgment
of their learning efforts and achievements is hardly a trivial
task. For example, by monitoring the registration information and accessing IP addresses of the students in one of the
MOOCs offered by our university on the Coursera platform,
we found the students were from around 160 different countries. Also, a recent study (Anderson et al. 2014) showed
that students in a MOOC often exhibit different engagement
styles probably corresponding to different purposes.

With the enormous scale of massive open online
courses (MOOCs), peer grading is vital for addressing
the assessment challenge for open-ended assignments
or exams while at the same time providing students with
an effective learning experience through involvement in
the grading process. Most existing MOOC platforms
use simple schemes for aggregating peer grades, e.g.,
taking the median or mean. To enhance these schemes,
some recent research attempts have developed machine
learning methods under either the cardinal setting (for
absolute judgment) or the ordinal setting (for relative
judgment). In this paper, we seek to study both cardinal and ordinal aspects of peer grading within a common framework. First, we propose novel extensions to
some existing probabilistic graphical models for cardinal peer grading. Not only do these extensions give superior performance in cardinal evaluation, but they also
outperform conventional ordinal models in ordinal evaluation. Next, we combine cardinal and ordinal models
by augmenting ordinal models with cardinal predictions
as prior. Such combination can achieve further performance boosts in both cardinal and ordinal evaluations,
suggesting a new research direction to pursue for peer
grading on MOOCs. Extensive experiments have been
conducted using real peer grading data from a course
called “Science, Technology, and Society in China I”
offered by HKUST on the Coursera platform.

There are generally two basic rationales behind peer grading research, namely, cardinal and ordinal. In cardinal peer
grading or absolute judgment (Barnett 2003; Paré and Joordens 2008), the peer evaluations for assignments are in
the form of explicit numerical scores. This cardinal setting is currently the most common choice for MOOCs. Its
goal is usually to minimize the absolute prediction deviation from some ground truth. However, (Shah et al. 2013;
2014) argued that it is sometimes easier for non-expert peer
graders to make comparison than to give absolute scores
and hence ordinal evaluation can sometimes be more effective than cardinal evaluation. As demonstrated by (Stewart,
Brown, and Chater 2005; Carterette et al. 2008; Shah et al.
2014), on specific tasks, relative judgment or ordinal evaluation is more accurate than absolute judgment or cardinal
evaluation. In ordinal peer grading, peer graders perform ordinal comparisons by ranking different assignments in terms
of quality. A special case is pairwise comparison in which
two assignments are compared at a time. The goal of ordinal
peer grading is to predict the relative ranking correctly. We
note that curved grading is used by many courses. As such,
even absolute scores have to be converted into percentiles
before the final grades are assigned. Thus we believe that

Introduction
Massive open online courses (MOOCs) are drawing increased attention lately because they can go well beyond the
boundaries of traditional classrooms and audiences. While
each offering of a traditional course delivered by a famous professor from a top university can typically benefit
at most hundreds of students, and only students, an online
version can easily scale it up by several orders of magnitude and make it available to people from all walks of life
around the globe. However, the massive scale of MOOCs
poses great challenges to student assessment. While most
existing MOOCs simply give multiple-choice assignment or
exam questions which can be graded automatically, openended and free-response exercises or essays are arguably viCopyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

454

