Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Optimizing Bag Features for Multiple-Instance Retrieval
1

Zhouyu Fu1 , Feifei Pan2 , Cheng Deng3 , Wei Liu4

School of Computing, Engineering & Mathematics, University of Western Sydney, NSW, Australia
2
New York Institute of Technology, New York, NY, USA
3
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
4
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
z.fu@uws.edu.au, fpan@nyit.edu, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn, weiliu@us.ibm.com
Abstract

Lozano-perez 1997; Babenko, Yang, and Belongie 2011;
Fu et al. 2013).
Despite the importance of MI learning, existing methods
mainly focused on the classification task. To apply these
techniques to the retrieval task, one has to cast retrieval to
classification by treating examples in the same class as similar objects and those from different classes as dissimilar
ones. This is overly restrictive for practical applications, as
it is not always feasible to know the class labels of training
examples. For retrieval, we only need to know the similarity
of two objects instead of the class memberships.
In this paper, we address MI retrieval, a new problem in
MI learning that deals with the retrieval of similar bags of
instances. Unlike existing MI classification algorithms that
use bag labels for training and return a classifier at output, in
MI retrieval, supervised information is provided in the form
of similarity labels for bag pairs rather than class labels for
individual bags. The purpose of MI retrieval is to learn a
bag-level distance metric that can be used for ranking the
bags by similarity.
We propose a two step algorithm for MI retrieval. Firstly,
we employ a bag feature encoding scheme to convert each
bag of instances into a single bag feature vector in accordance with the label constraints of MI assumption. After
that, we develop an optimization algorithm to select the prototypes used to construct the bag-level feature vectors. In
this way, we can optimize the bag feature vectors which are
best aligned with the provided similarity labels for the retrieval task. As a result of optimization, distances between
similar bag pairs are minimized while distances between dissimilar pairs are maximized with the learned metric.
The paper has two major contributions in the following:

Multiple-Instance (MI) learning is an important supervised learning technique which deals with collections
of instances called bags. While existing research in MI
learning mainly focused on classification, in this paper we propose a new approach for MI retrieval to enable effective similarity retrieval of bags of instances,
where training data is presented in the form of similar and dissimilar bag pairs. An embedded scheme is
devised as encoding each bag into a single bag feature
vector by exploiting a similarity-based transformation.
In this way, the original MI problem is converted into
a single-instance version. Furthermore, we develop a
principled approach for optimizing bag features specific
to similarity retrieval through leveraging pairwise label
information at the bag level. The experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach
in comparison with the alternatives for MI retrieval.

Introduction
Multiple-Instance (MI) learning is an active research area in
machine learning, which deals with classification of bags of
instances (Dietterich, Lathrop, and Lozano-perez 1997). In
a standard MI problem, each training example is a bag containing a number of instances. Each instance is represented
by a feature vector. Both bags and instances have class labels, but only bag labels are available for the learning task.
Bag and instance labels are related by the MI assumption
which states that each positive bag should contain at least
one positive instance, whereas all instances are negative in a
negative bag.
Many real-world applications can be naturally cast to MI
learning problems. One example is content-based image retrieval (CBIR) (Chen, Bi, and Wang 2006; Li et al. 2009;
2011), where every image (bag) is segmented into different
regions (instances) and features are extracted from each region. An irrelevant (negative) image contains only irrelevant
regions, whereas a relevant (positive) image contains at least
a relevant region and possibly irrelevant regions. Other application areas for MI learning are drug activity detection,
visual tracking and audio retrieval (Dietterich, Lathrop, and

1. It proposes the first supervised method for similarity retrieval of MI data using only pairwise label information.
The method does not require bag labels for training.
2. It develops a prototype optimization algorithm to produce
a discriminative bag-level feature encoding for similarity retrieval. The algorithm is able to optimize prototypes
freely in the instance space and thus offers more flexibility and strength than existing feature encoding schemes
(Chen, Bi, and Wang 2006; Fu, Robles-Kelly, and Zhou
2011) that are only able to pick prototypes directly from
the training instances.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2596

