Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

A Succinct Conceptualization of the Foundations for a
Network Organization Paradigm
Saad Alqithami
Department of Computer Science
Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL 62901
alqithami@siu.edu

Abstract

be controlled at any time; i.e., asynchronously. Another extension for NO is to allow any credentialed network member
node to exert control on operations. In sum, NO provides a
more ubiquitously open model. This openness feature may
include transparent entry and exit to an organization.

The paper concisely proposes a distinguishing paradigm
to study a very large, collective group of agents that
is called Network Organization. We will formally define and substantially evaluate this paradigm for selfgoverning agents, in which the state value function
changes dynamically, and describe its salient properties.

An NO paradigm
The NO paradigm can model many operations. Examples
are systems of river dam control, factory cells, electrical
power grids, and traffic control on land, sea, and space. As
a paradigm, it does not functionally alter the operations to
which it is applied. The paradigm can be understood in terms
of the ways it permits command and control regimes. Invariably, NO relies on a network on which it dwells. Therefore, a profile of an NO residence is essential. NO membernodes/agents are critical constituents. Target problems (i.e.,
operations) modeled are important. For simplicity, we would
care about flow of data, control, and coordination. The organizations may represent one or more parent institutions that
govern its normative patterns of behavior. Broadly speaking, the functioning of an NO can be objective (i.e., charterbased) driven or pattern driven. Either of these could be captured in governance of the NO. At this very high level, we
summarize an NO in Definition 2.

When agents dwell inside an organization, they form patterns of interactions that we call paradigms. There are many
existing paradigms to describe organizations, which affect
its performance features. These paradigms include hierarchies, holarchies, coalitions, teams, congregations, societies,
federations, markets and matrix organizations (Horling and
Lesser 2004). Even though it is rare to find a single paradigm
that is best describe an organization through its life-cycle,
the best fitting paradigm (i.e., the style that best describes
an organization) helps to understand an organization and
recognize its possibilities. A different paradigm appears to
be useful when it comes to an open multi-agent systems,
where agents are self-governed by their own belief systems
and have rational behaviors. This paradigm helps in modeling organizations of large firms working on giant, in scope
or impact, problems that can be described as network organizations. In a previous work (Alqithami and Hexmoor
2014a), we studied an application of network organizations
paradigm in order to account for spontaneous exigencies in
the agents’ actions to benefit and shape an organization.

Definition 2 An NO is best described as a tuple of
hNetworks-profiles, Agents-profiles, Problems-profiles,
Governance-profiles, Institutions-profilesi.
To further specify the contents of each profile, the network
profile is a graph of nodes (i.e., individuals) and links among
them. Number of links will change as a result of not complete graph. Links might richly or thinly capture ties among
individuals because they are most likely to be assessed when
a mutual event occurs.

Definition 1 Network organizations (NO) are large, semiautonomous, networked communities with the aim of automating command and control of distributed complex tasks.
A significant step was established in the network-centric
warfare that allowed oversight and control of operations
from any location on the network. Network-centricity stimulates self-organization and self-integrating coordination.
The US Department of Defense adopted this paradigm
early on to accommodate collaboration and information resource sharing among distributed military assets and work
units (Alberts and Hayes 2003). Location ignorance is extended in NO to time ignorance; therefore, operations can

Definition 3 The network profile is presented in a tuple
~ , Resource , C, F,
~ P,
~ AU i.
hN
N is a set of agents’ profiles who are members of an NO.
Resource is the available resources that an NO provides to
the agents in order to achieve an organizational charter that
is C, which includes a set of goals presented by different
problems domains. F is a set of fitness functions for the
whole NO to help in evaluating its process over time to make
sure it follows a proper direction. P is a set of protocols to

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4140

