Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Obtaining Well Calibrated Probabilities Using Bayesian Binning
Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini1 , Gregory F. Cooper1,2 , and Milos Hauskrecht1,3
1

2

Intelligent Systems Program, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3
Computer Science Department, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Abstract

iments to perform), medicine (e.g., deciding which therapy
to give a patient), business (e.g., making investment decisions), and others. However, model calibration and the learning of well-calibrated probabilistic models have not been
studied in the machine learning literature as extensively as
for example discriminative machine learning models that
are built to achieve the best possible discrimination among
classes of objects. One way to achieve a high level of model
calibration is to develop methods for learning probabilistic
models that are well-calibrated, ab initio. However, this approach would require one to modify the objective function
used for learning the model and it may increase the computational cost of the associated optimization task. An alternative approach is to construct well-calibrated models by
relying on the existing machine learning methods and by
modifying their outputs in a post-processing step to obtain
the desired model. This approach is often preferred because
of its generality, flexibility, and the fact that it frees the designer of the machine learning model from the need to add
additional calibration measures into the objective function
used to learn the model. The existing approaches developed
for this purpose include histogram binning, Platt scaling, or
isotonic regression (Platt 1999; Zadrozny and Elkan 2001;
2002). In all these the post-processing step can be seen as
a function that maps the output of a prediction model to
probabilities that are intended to be well-calibrated. Figure
1 shows an example of such a mapping.

Learning probabilistic predictive models that are well calibrated is critical for many prediction and decision-making
tasks in artificial intelligence. In this paper we present a new
non-parametric calibration method called Bayesian Binning
into Quantiles (BBQ) which addresses key limitations of existing calibration methods. The method post processes the
output of a binary classification algorithm; thus, it can be
readily combined with many existing classification algorithms. The method is computationally tractable, and empirically accurate, as evidenced by the set of experiments
reported here on both real and simulated datasets.

Introduction
A rational problem solving agent aims to maximize its utility subject to the existing constraints (Russell and Norvig
1995). To be able to maximize the utility function for many
practical prediction and decision-making tasks, it is crucial to develop an accurate probabilistic prediction model
from data. Unfortunately, many existing machine learning
and data mining models and algorithms are not optimized
for obtaining accurate probabilities and the predictions they
produce may be miscalibrated. Generally, a set of predictions of a binary outcome is well calibrated if the outcomes
predicted to occur with probability p do occur about p fraction of the time, for each probability p that is predicted.
This concept can be readily generalized to outcomes with
more than two values. Figure 1 shows a hypothetical example of a reliability curve (DeGroot and Fienberg 1983;
Niculescu-Mizil and Caruana 2005), which displays the calibration performance of a prediction method. The curve
shows, for example, that when the method predicts Z = 1
to have probability 0.5, the outcome Z = 1 occurs in about
0.57 fraction of the instances (cases). The curve indicates
that the method is fairly well calibrated, but it tends to assign
probabilities that are too low. In general, perfect calibration
corresponds to a straight line from (0, 0) to (1, 1). The closer
a calibration curve is to this line, the better calibrated is the
associated prediction method.
Producing well-calibrated probabilistic predictions is critical in many areas of science (e.g., determining which exper-

Existing post-processing calibration methods can be divided into two groups: parametric and nonparametric methods. An example of a parametric method is Platt’s method
that applies a sigmoidal transformation that maps the output of a predictive model to a calibrated probability output
(Platt 1999). The parameters of the sigmoidal transformation function are learned using a maximum likelihood estimation framework. The key limitation of the approach is the
(sigmoidal) form of the transformation function, which only
rarely fits the true distribution of predictions. The most common non-parametric methods are based either on binning
(Zadrozny and Elkan 2001) or isotonic regression (Zadrozny
and Elkan 2002). In the histogram binning approach, also
known as quantile binning, the raw predictions of a binary
classifier are sorted first, and then they are partitioned into
B subsets of equal size, called bins. Given a prediction y,
the method finds the bin containing that prediction and re-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2901

