Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Fast Convention Formation in Dynamic Networks Using Topological Knowledge
Mohammad Rashedul Hasan

Anita Raja

Ana Bazzan

University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588, USA
hasan@unl.edu

The Cooper Union
New York, NY 10003, USA
araja@cooper.edu

Instituto de Informatica, UFRGS
C.P. 15064
91501-970, P. Alegre, RS, Brazil
bazzan@inf.ufrgs.br

Abstract

2013). However, these mechanisms deal with a relatively
simple convention space in which a global convention is
chosen from two possible convention alternatives or convention seeds. In large and open MAS, other challenging
issues need to be considered. First, multiple convention
seeds may exist and hence the convention space could be
complex. Second, it is possible that the existing convention seeds are not appropriate or good enough. Therefore,
agents may need to create new convention seeds as well as
form a higher-quality convention. Two significant mechanisms for solving this type of convention problem are described in (Salazar, Rodriguez-Aguilar, and Arcos 2010) and
in (Franks, Griffiths, and Jhumka 2013)1 . They model the
MAS using complex small-world and scale-free networks.
SRA uses a spreading based mechanism while FGJ augments this process by using a set of privileged agents with
high-quality convention seeds. However, both approaches
assume a static agent network and are unable to form a Large
Majority Convention State (henceforth referred as LMCS for
short) in which 90% or more agents adopt a single convention in a reasonable amount of time2 .
In this paper, our goal is to design a convention formation
mechanism in a dynamic MAS suitable for large convention
space that is able to overcome the limitations of SRA and
FGJ. Specifically, the intended mechanism should be (i) effective (able to converge into LMCS as well as the quality
of the most common convention is high) and (ii) efficient
(speed of reaching LMCS is fast). Similar to FGJ, in order
to validate our approach, we investigate a language coordination problem that captures the challenges involved in
creating high-quality conventions in large and open MAS.
To study the relevance of our contribution to practical applications, we consider a large number of agents in the MAS
being organized as various types of networks that include
regular, random (RN), small-world (SW) and scale-free (SF)
topologies. However, we emphasize the scale-free topology
that is ubiquitous in social and artificial systems.
In our approach, every agent starts off with an internal lex-

In this paper, we design a distributed mechanism that is
able to create a social convention within a large convention space for multiagent systems (MAS) operating on
various topologies. Specifically, we investigate a language coordination problem in which agents in a dynamic MAS construct a common lexicon in a decentralized fashion. Agent interactions are modeled using
a language game where every agent repeatedly plays
with its neighbors. Each agent stochastically updates
its lexicons based on the utility values of the received
lexicons from its immediate neighbors. We present a
novel topology-aware utility computation mechanism
and equip the agents with the ability to reorganize their
neighborhood based on this utility estimate to expedite
the convention formation process. Extensive simulation results indicate that our proposed mechanism is
both effective (able to converge into a large majority
convention state with more than 90% agents sharing a
high-quality lexicon) and efficient (faster) as compared
to state-of-the-art approaches for social conventions in
large convention spaces.

Introduction
Coordination of agent activities in large multiagent systems (MAS) is central to cooperative goal achievement.
A social convention is a technique for increasing coordination (DeVylder 2007; Sugawara 2011). It helps to reduce the overhead of coordination by simplifying agents’
decision-making process through the determination of action choices (Walker and Wooldridge 1995). Therefore, establishing a social convention acts as a useful mechanism
for deciding the dominant coordination strategy for building
consensus in MAS. For example, in online social networks
(such as in Facebook) creation of privacy-setting policy convention for third party applications could be useful for both
the users and the app developers. It could help by tailoring apps based on the conventions and reduce users privacy
risks (Hasan 2013).
Online convention formation mechanisms are suitable for
large and open MAS (Delgado 2002; Pujol et al. 2005;
Villatoro, Sen, and Sabater-Mir 2009; Hasan and Raja

1

Henceforth these two approaches are referred as SRA and FGJ
respectively.
2
In SRA as well as FGJ, the time-period for investigating the
emergence of a lexicon convention is comprised of 100,000 timesteps of the simulation. We use this duration as a definition of a
reasonable amount of time for convergence to occur.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2067

