Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Surveyor: A System for Generating Coherent
Survey Articles for Scientific Topics
Rahul Jha and Reed Coke

Dragomir Radev

Department of EECS
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, 48109

Department of EECS & School of Information
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, 48109

Abstract

• We propose a summarization algorithm that combines a
content model and a discourse model in a modular way to
build coherent summaries.
• We introduce the notion of Minimum Independent Discourse Contexts as a way of flexibly modeling discourse
relationships in a summarization system.
• We conducted several experiments for evaluating coherence and informativeness of Surveyor on a dataset of
15 topics in computational linguistics with 297 articles
and 30 human-written gold summaries (2 per topic). All
data used for our experiments is available at http://clair.si.
umich.edu/corpora/surveyor aaai 15.tgz.
We first give an overview of our summarization approach.
This is followed by details about our experimental setup and
a discussion of results. Finally, we summarize the related
work and conclude the paper with pointers for future work.

We investigate the task of generating coherent survey
articles for scientific topics. We introduce an extractive summarization algorithm that combines a content
model with a discourse model to generate coherent and
readable summaries of scientific topics using text from
scientific articles relevant to the topic. Human evaluation on 15 topics in computational linguistics shows that
our system produces significantly more coherent summaries than previous systems. Specifically, our system
improves the ratings for coherence by 36% in human
evaluation compared to C-Lexrank, a state of the art system for scientific article summarization.

Introduction
This paper is about generating coherent summaries of scientific topics. Given a set of input papers that are relevant
to a specific topic such as question answering, our system
called Surveyor extracts and organizes text segments from
these papers into a coherent and readable survey of the topic.
There are many applications for automated surveys thus generated. Human surveys do not exist for all topics and quickly
become outdated in rapidly growing fields like computer science. Therefore, an automated system for this task can be
very useful for new graduate students and cross-disciplinary
researchers who need to quickly familiarize themselves with
a new topic.
Our work builds on previous work on summarization of
scientific literature (Mohammad et al. 2009; Qazvinian and
Radev 2008). Prior systems for generating survey articles for
scientific topics such as C-Lexrank have focused on building
informative summaries but no attempt has been made to ensure the coherence and readability of the output summaries.
Surveyor on the other hand focuses on generating survey articles that contain well defined subtopics presented in a coherent order. Figure 1 shows part of the output of Surveyor
for the topic of question answering.
Our experimental results on a corpus of computational
linguistics topics show that Surveyor produces survey articles that are substantially more coherent and readable compared to previous work. The main contributions of this paper
are:

Overview of Summarization Approach
We first describe the two main components of our system
and then describe our summarization algorithm that is built

Figure 1: Example output of Surveyor for the topic of question answering. The survey contains three distinct subtopics
illustrated by different colors and separated by dashed lines.

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2167

