Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Sparse Deep Stacking Network for Image Classification
Jun Li, Heyou Chang, Jian Yang
School of Computer Science and Technology
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 219000, China.
junl.njust@gmail.com;changheyou891001@126.com;csjyang@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

using a projection matrix W and a sigmoid activation function, and linearly mapped to an output layer by a matrix U.
Clearly, W has discriminative ability because it is trained
by minimizing the least squares error between the output
vector and label vector. Moreover, SNNM can fast infer the
hidden representation by only calculating a projection multiplication and a nonlinear transformation. Following a stacked
scheme (Wolpert 1992), many SNNM modules are further
stacked to build a Deep Stacking Network (DSN), which
is previously named the Deep Convex Network (Deng and
Yu 2011b). Recently, DSN has received increasing attentions due to its successful application in speech classification and information retrieval (Deng, Yu, and Platt 2012;
Deng, He, and Gao 2013). Additionally, the DSN is attractive
in that SNNM’s the batch-mode nature offers a potential solution to the insurmountable problem of scalability in dealing
with virtually unlimited amount of training data available
nowadays (Deng and Yu 2013). Therefore, we extend DSN
for image classification.
Despite DSN’s success in speech classification, its framework also has several limitations. First, the conventional DSN
only has used the sigmoid activation function for the nonlinear hidden layer (Deng, Yu, and Platt 2012). Although
sigmoid has been widely used in the literature, it suffers
from a number of drawbacks: for example the training can be
slow, and with random initialization, the solution can stuck
at a poor local solution that does not have good predictive
performance (Glorot and Bengio 2010). In fact there are
another two types of activation functions. The one is hyperbolic tangent, which has been applied to training deep neural
networks. It suffers from the same problems as those of sigmoid functions. A more recent proposal is the rectifier linear
unit (ReLU) (Nair and Hinton 2010). It is observed that this
method is very useful for object recognition and often trains
significantly faster (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011).
Second, sparse representations play a key role in image classification because they have the power to learn
good robust features to noise, train gabor-like filters, and
model more higher-order features (Ranzato et al. 2007;
Lee, Ekanadham, and Ng 2008). Evidently, sparse representations have led to promising results in image classification
(Jiang, Lin, and Davis 2013). Furthermore, there is considerable evidence that in brain the percentage of neurons active
is between 1 and 4% (Lennie 2003). It is reasonable to con-

Sparse coding can learn good robust representation to
noise and model more higher-order representation for
image classification. However, the inference algorithm is
computationally expensive even though the supervised
signals are used to learn compact and discriminative
dictionaries in sparse coding techniques. Luckily, a simplified neural network module (SNNM) has been proposed to directly learn the discriminative dictionaries for
avoiding the expensive inference. But the SNNM module
ignores the sparse representations. Therefore, we propose a sparse SNNM module by adding the mixed-norm
regularization (l1 /l2 norm). The sparse SNNM modules
are further stacked to build a sparse deep stacking network (S-DSN). In the experiments, we evaluate S-DSN
with four databases, including Extended YaleB, AR, 15
scene and Caltech101. Experimental results show that
our model outperforms related classification methods
with only a linear classifier. It is worth noting that we
reach 98.8% recognition accuracy on 15 scene.

Introduction
It is well-known that sparse representations have a number of
theoretical and practical advantages in computer vision and
machine learning (Lee et al. 2007; Gregor and LeCun 2010;
Yang et al. 2012). In particular, sparse coding techniques
have led to promising results in image classification, e.g.
face recognition and digit classification. Sparse coding, as
a generative model, is a very important way to extract the
sparse representations. However, sparse coding has the expensive inference algorithm and does not use the label of
the training data. Although some researchers use the supervised signals to learn compact and discriminative dictionaries (Jiang, Lin, and Davis 2013; Zhuang et al. 2013;
Huang et al. 2013), the expensive inference algorithm is still
a problem. Since it is to train the dictionaries by using the
labels, do we directly learn the discriminative dictionaries for
avoiding the expensive inference?
Fortunately, a simplified neural network module (SNNM)
(Deng and Yu 2011a) can directly train the discriminative dictionaries and fast calculate the representations. In the SNNM,
the input layer is non-linearly mapped to a hidden layer by
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3804

