Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Acquiring Speech Transcriptions Using Mismatched Crowdsourcing
Preethi Jyothi and Mark Hasegawa-Johnson
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
405 N. Mathews, Urbana, Illinois 61801

people alike.1 On the face of it, recovering the original text
from mismatched transcriptions seems like a very hard problem as crucial information about the original text is lost in
such a transcription. However, even though no single individual can provide sufficient information to recover the
foreign language transcriptions, using a crowd of workers
might allow us to do so. We initiate a systematic inquiry
into this question.
We formalize the problem of decoding from mismatched
transcriptions as follows. We are given a corpus of speech
in a foreign language and access to a crowd unfamiliar with
that language. The crowd workers can be requested to listen
to segments of this speech and provide us with English letter
sequences that most closely match what they hear. The problem then is to recover a transcription of the original speech
from these letter sequences.
Our main contributions in this work are:

Abstract
Transcribed speech is a critical resource for building
statistical speech recognition systems. Recent work has
looked towards soliciting transcriptions for large speech
corpora from native speakers of the language using
crowdsourcing techniques. However, native speakers of
the target language may not be readily available for
crowdsourcing. We examine the following question: can
humans unfamiliar with the target language help transcribe? We follow an information-theoretic approach to
this problem: (1) We learn the characteristics of a noisy
channel that models the transcribers’ systematic perception biases. (2) We use an error-correcting code, specifically a repetition code, to encode the inputs to this channel, in conjunction with a maximum-likelihood decoding rule. To demonstrate the feasibility of this approach,
we transcribe isolated Hindi words with the help of Mechanical Turk workers unfamiliar with Hindi. We successfully recover Hindi words with an accuracy of over
85% (and 94% in a 4-best list) using a 15-fold repetition code. We also estimate the conditional entropy of
the input to this channel (Hindi words) given the channel output (transcripts from crowdsourced workers) to
be less than 2 bits; this serves as a theoretical estimate
of the average number of bits of auxiliary information
required for errorless recovery.

1

• We follow an information-theoretic approach, by modeling the mismatched crowd transcribers as a noisy channel,
along with using an encoding scheme (a repetition code)
and a maximum likelihood decoding rule.
• We provide an information-theoretic analysis of how
much information is lost in transmission through the mismatched channel; we derive a tight upper-bound for conditional entropy of the inputs given the outputs of the
channel.

Introduction

• We demonstrate the feasibility of our technique using an
isolated word recovery task for Hindi – we predict transcriptions for isolated words in Hindi using mismatched
transcriptions from crowd workers unfamiliar with Hindi.
We successfully recover more than 85% of the words (and
more than 94% in a 4-best list).

Recently, crowdsourcing has been explored as a valuable
resource to speedily derive transcriptions for large speech
databases, e.g. (Callison-Burch and Dredze 2010; Novotney
and Callison-Burch 2010; Eskenazi et al. 2013). However,
prior work has typically relied on the crowd workers being
native speakers of the language in question. An interesting
question to investigate is the possibility of recovering spoken words from mismatched transcriptions, i.e., transcriptions by crowd workers who do not know the language.
How does one hear (or rather, mishear) a foreign language? Indeed, the phenomenon of “cross-linguistic mondegreens” (mondegreen refers to the misinterpretation of a
phrase as a result of it being nearly homophonic with the
original) have captured the imagination of scholars and lay

2

Noisy Channel Model for Mismatched
Transcription

Mismatched transcription can be modeled as a noisy channel as shown in Figure 1. The input to the system is text
in the foreign language, X. It is then encoded into speech,
1
See, for example:
http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/∼myl/languagelog/archives/005100.
html
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homophonic translation

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1263

