Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Self-Organized Collective Decision-Making in a 100-Robot Swarm
Gabriele Valentini

Heiko Hamann

Marco Dorigo

IRIDIA, Université Libre de Bruxelles
50 Av. F. Roosevelt, Brussels, Belgium
+32 2 650 2712, gvalenti@ulb.ac.be,
http://iridia.ulb.ac.be/∼gvalentini/

Department of Computer Science
University of Paderborn
Paderborn, Germany
heiko.hamann@uni-paderborn.de

IRIDIA
Université Libre de Bruxelles
Brussels, Belgium
mdorigo@ulb.ac.be

Abstract

of the individual robot is defined by a finite-state machine
of 4 states (Fig. 1a). In the dissemination states (DA , DB )
agents broadcast their opinion in a limited spatial range.
Meanwhile, they perform random movements to stir their
spatial distribution within the nest thus preventing the fragmentation of opinions. Prior to move to the exploration state,
a robot determines its new opinion using the majority rule
over a set of opinions which consists of the opinions of the
robot’s neighbors and its own current opinion. In the exploration states (EA , EB ) robots travel from the nest to the site
associated with their current opinion, explore the site, estimate its quality, return to the nest, and proceed to the respective dissemination state.
To promote the spread of the best opinion, robots spend a
time in the dissemination which is proportional to the opinion’s quality (either ρA g or ρB g where g is a design parameter). Consequently, robots favoring the best site have
higher chances to influence the opinions of other peers. In
this way robots directly control the positive feedback effect
that drives the collective decision towards the best site.

We study a self-organized collective decision-making
strategy to solve a site-selection problem using a swarm
of simple robots. Robots can only move forward or turn
in place; sense the intensity of the ambient light; and exchange 3-byte messages with peers in a limited range.
The goal of the swarm is to collectively decide which of
the sites available in the environment is the best candidate site. We define a distributed and iterative decisionmaking strategy: robots explore the available options,
determine the options’ qualities, decide autonomously
which option to take, and communicate their decision
to neighboring robots. We study the effectiveness and
robustness of the proposed strategy using a swarm of
100 Kilobots and we focus on the impact of the neighborhood size over the dynamics of the system.

Introduction
In our research we study how large swarms of simple robots
can take efficient and accurate decisions when functioning
as a compact information processing entity by coordinating their actions using collective decision-making mechanisms. In this paper, we propose a self-organized collective
decision-making strategy to solve a site-selection problem
using a swarm or robots. Possible applications that may benefit from the scalability and robustness of swarm approaches
include finding the target location in a human body where
to deliver drugs or the most suitable location for construction in a hostile environment. The swarm is initially positioned in the nest, which is an area functioning as decisionmaking hub. The nest provides access to 2 equally distant
sites, A and B. Robots in the swarm may sample the quality ρi , i ∈ {A, B}, of a site by exploring it and may use this
information during the decision-making process. The goal
of the swarm is to collectively agree on which site has the
maximum quality. We implement our strategy in a swarm of
100 Kilobots (Rubenstein et al. 2014) and we show that it
requires minimal robot capabilities.
We define a self-organized decision-making strategy that
requires minimal perception and computational capabilities.
Robots always have a preference for a particular site (henceforth, the robot opinion). The high-level control algorithm

Robotic Experiment
We implemented the above-described distributed algorithm
in a swarm of Kilobots. The Kilobot is a low-cost, 3.3 cm
robot with stick-slip motion (1 cm/s forward, π/4 rad/s turn
in place), one ambient light sensor, and infrared communication capabilities (3-byte messages in a range up to 1020 cm). We place N = 100 robots in a rectangular arena of
100 × 190 cm2 (Fig. 1b). The arena is partitioned in three
regions: site A at the right side; nest at the center; and site B
at the left side. We consider a scenario where site A is twice
as good compared to site B (ρA = 1 and ρB = 0.5). Robots
can navigate between sites and nest using as a reference
point a light source positioned at the right side of the arena.
Due to the Kilobots’ limited perception capabilities, we emulate the identification of sites and the estimation of their
quality using infrared beacons positioned under the Perspex
surface of the arena. Each beacon repeatedly broadcasts a
message containing the type (A or B) and the quality (ρA
or ρB ) of a site. Robots perceive the beacons only at the site
in the proximity of the border with the nest.
Depending on the current perceptions and on the control state, a robot alternates three low-level motion behaviors: random motion (random walk) and oriented motion to-

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4216

