Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Combining Machine Learning and Crowdsourcing
for Better Understanding Commodity Reviews
Heting Wu1 , Hailong Sun1 , Yili Fang1 , Kefan Hu1 , Yongqing Xie1 , Yangqiu Song2 , Xudong Liu1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing,China, 100191
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States
{wuheting, sunhl, fangyili, hukefan, liuxd}@act.buaa.edu.cn, xyqhello@gmail.com, yqsong@illinois.edu
2

Abstract
In e-commerce systems, customer reviews are important information for understanding market feedbacks on certain
commodities. However, accurate analyzing reviews is challenging due to the complexity of natural language processing and informal descriptions in reviews. Existing methods
mainly focus on studying efficient algorithms that cannot
guarantee the accuracy for review analysis. Crowdsourcing
can improve the accuracy of review analysis while it is subject to extra costs and low response time. In this work, we
combine machine learning and crowdsourcing together for
better understanding customer reviews. First, we collectively
use multiple machine learning algorithms to pre-process review classification. Second, we select the reviews on which
all machine learning algorithms cannot agree and assign them
to humans to process. Third, the results from machine learning and crowdsourcing are aggregated to be the final analysis
results. Finally, we perform real experiments with practical
review data to confirm the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: Inconsistent results with ratings and reviews with
JD.com dataset
Straightforwardly, one goal of review analysis is to understand whether a review is positive, neutral or negative, which is essentially a problem of sentiment analysis. There have been a lot of studies(Hu and Liu 2004;
Dalal and Zaveri 2014) using machine learning methods to
analyze user reviews. Nonetheless, due to the complexity of
natural language processing and the noise texts in reviews,
the accuracy of existing methods still needs to be improved,
especially for neutral reviews, which we will show in experiment section. In recent years, crowdsourcing (Liu et al.
2012) has been successfully used to deal with problems that
are difficult for computer algorithms. However, crowdsourcing needs more costs for encouraging people to participate
and low efficiency is also a challenging issue. This work
aims at improving the accuracy of customer review analysis by combining machine learning algorithms with crowdsourcing. The core issue is to determine as less questions
as possible to be processed with crowdsourcing, which is
critical for the balance of accuracy, efficiency and costs.
First, automatic reviews classification is done by several machine learning algorithms respectively. Second, reviews are
selected to be assigned to humans to process, on which all
machine learning algorithms do not agree. Third, we aggregate the results from machine learning and crowdsourcing to
gain the final analysis results. With a dataset obtained from
JD.com and a crowdsourcing platform (http://service4all.
org.cn/crowdsourcing/ratings/login.jsp) developed by us, we
perform an extensive set of experiments to evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
Nowadays, as more and more online purchases take place,
ratings and reviews provided by consumers are widely used
to analyze the market feedback of certain products. A rating
is usually in the format of star level. For instance, a five-star
represents the best and a one-star represents the worst. And a
review is a certain length of text, possibly with pictures. The
former is often regarded as the standard to classifying the
latter. However, ratings can not always reflect consumers’
feedback accurately. For example, a user can give a highstar rating even he is not very satisfied, in order to avoid the
disturbance of corresponding customer service staff. Figure
1 shows the inconsistent customer evaluations using reviews
and ratings respectively, in which the data is obtained from
a major Chinese e-commerce company JD.com. The dataset
contains 1,890 mobile phone reviews and ratings. Figure 1
(a) shows the percentage of positive, neutral and negative
items with star based ratings. And Figure 1 (b) shows the
manual analysis results with both ratings and reviews, which
can be regarded as the ground truth. Therefore reviews can
provide valuable information for understanding customers’
evaluations.

Method Description
As is shown in Figure 2, when users submit a request, task
manager will crawl the corresponding product review, and

Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4220

