Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Splitting a Logic Program Revisited
Jianmin Ji

Hai Wan,∗ Ziwei Huo, Zhenfeng Yuan

School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei 230027, China
jianmin@ustc.edu.cn

School of Software
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou 510006, China
wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

“top” part, may introduce some new atoms. We show that
the task of computing the answer sets of the program can
be converted into the tasks of computing the answer sets of
these parts. The result extends Lifschitz and Turner’s splitting set theorem. When a splitting set is used to split a program, the splitting result in our method is the same as the
result in Lifschitz and Turner’s splitting method.
The usefulness of the result is illustrated through two aspects. First, we discuss some computational complexity issues related to the splitting method. We show that for some
typical programs the splitting process is efficient, which implies some potential applications. Second, we use the concept of splitting to investigate the program simplification
problem, i.e., how to simplify a program by a set of atoms
that are satisfied by every answer set of the program. We
show that this problem can be regarded as a splitting problem, which results a new approach to simplify a program.

Lifschitz and Turner introduced the notion of the splitting set and provided a method to divide a logic program
into two parts. They showed that the task of computing
the answer sets of the program can be converted into the
tasks of computing the answer sets of these parts. However, the empty set and the set of all atoms are the only
two splitting sets for many programs, then these programs cannot be divided by the splitting method. In this
paper, we extend Lifschitz and Turner’s splitting set theorem to allow the program to be split by an arbitrary set
of atoms, while some new atoms may be introduced in
the process. To illustrate the usefulness of the result, we
show that for some typical programs the splitting process is efficient and the program simplification problem
can be investigated using the concept of splitting.

Introduction
The notion of the splitting set was first introduced by Lifschitz and Turner (1994). Using a splitting set, a logic program can be divided into two parts, i.e., the “bottom” part
and the “top” part, the “bottom” part of which only mentions atoms in the splitting set. Moreover, the answer sets of
the program can be computed by first computing the answer
sets of the “bottom” part and then using them in the “top”
part to determine values of the rest atoms.
The idea of splitting has been proved to be a useful
method to decompose programs and a helpful tool to investigate answer set semantics (Dao-Tran et al. 2009). Lifschitz
and Turner’s splitting set theorem has been considered as
the theoretical foundation for the incremental ASP solver,
iclingo (Gebser et al. 2008). Beside, this idea has been extended to logic programs with nested expressions (Oikarinen
and Janhunen 2008) and arbitrary first-order formulas with
stable model semantics (Ferraris et al. 2009).
However, in many applications, the empty set and the set
of all atoms are the only two splitting sets of the program.
Then the program cannot be divided using Lifschitz and
Turner’s splitting method. In this paper, we propose a new
splitting method that allows the program to be split into two
parts by an arbitrary set of atoms, while one of them, the

Preliminaries
Logic Programs
In this paper, we consider only fully grounded finite logic
programs. A (disjunctive) logic program (DLP) is a finite
set of (disjunctive) rules of the form
a1 ∨ · · · ∨ ak ← ak+1 , . . . , am , not am+1 , . . . , not an . (1)
where n ≥ m ≥ k ≥ 1 and a1 , . . . , an are atoms. If k = 1,
it is a normal rule. In particular, a normal logic program
(NLP) is a finite set of normal rules. With a slight abuse of
the notion, a formula of the form
← ak+1 , . . . , am , not am+1 , . . . , not an .
is considered as an abbreviation of the rule
f ← not f, ak+1 , . . . , am , not am+1 , . . . , not an .
where f is a new atom that does not appear in other rules.
We will also write rule r of form (1) as
head(r) ← body(r).
where head(r) is a1 ∨ · · · ∨ ak , body(r) = body + (r) ∧
body − (r), body + (r) is ak+1 ∧ · · · ∧ am , and body − (r)
is ¬am+1 ∧ · · · ∧ ¬an , and we identify head(r),
body + (r), body − (r) with their corresponding sets of atoms,
and body(r) the set {ak+1 , . . . , am , not am+1 , . . . , not an }.
We denote Atoms(r) = head(r) ∪ body + (r) ∪ body − (r).
Let
head(R) =
S R be a set of+ rules, we denote
S
+
head(r),
body
(R)
=
body
(r), and
r∈R
r∈R
S
Atoms(R) = r∈R Atoms(r).

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1511

