AutoFocus: Efficient Multi-Scale Inference
Mahyar Najibi ∗
Bharat Singh ∗
Larry S. Davis
University of Maryland, College Park
{najibi,bharat,lsd}@cs.umd.edu

This paper describes AutoFocus, an efficient multi-scale
inference algorithm for deep-learning based object detectors. Instead of processing an entire image pyramid, AutoFocus adopts a coarse to fine approach and only processes
regions which are likely to contain small objects at finer
scales. This is achieved by predicting category agnostic segmentation maps for small objects at coarser scales, called
FocusPixels. FocusPixels can be predicted with high recall, and in many cases, they only cover a small fraction of
the entire image. To make efficient use of FocusPixels, an
algorithm is proposed which generates compact rectangular FocusChips which enclose FocusPixels. The detector is
only applied inside FocusChips, which reduces computation
while processing finer scales. Different types of error can
arise when detections from FocusChips of multiple scales
are combined, hence techniques to correct them are proposed. AutoFocus obtains an mAP of 47.9% (68.3% at 50%
overlap) on the COCO test-dev set while processing 6.4 images per second on a Titan X (Pascal) GPU. This is 2.5×
faster than our multi-scale baseline detector and matches
its mAP. The number of pixels processed in the pyramid can
be reduced by 5× with a 1% drop in mAP. AutoFocus obtains more than 10% mAP gain compared to RetinaNet but
runs at the same speed with the same ResNet-101 backbone.

1. Introduction
Human vision is foveal and active [1, 21]. The fovea,
which observes the world at high-resolution, only corresponds to 5 degrees of the total visual field [32]. Our
lower resolution peripheral vision has a field of view of 110
degrees [62]. To find objects, our eyes perform saccadic
movements which rely on peripheral vision [31]. When
moving between different fixation points, the region in between is simply ignored, a phenomenon known as saccadic
masking [7, 27, 50]. Hence, finding objects is an active
process and the search time depends on the complexity of
∗ Equal Contribution

Area Percentage/Image

Abstract

60
50
40
30

57%
Small: (0, 322]
Med: (322, 962]

40%

Large: (962, ∞)

20
10
0

0.3%

Small

3%

Med

Large

BG

Figure 1: Area of objects of different sizes and the background in the COCO validation set. Objects are divided
based on their area (in pixels) into small, medium, and large.
the scene. For example, locating a face in a portrait photograph would take much less time than finding every face in
a crowded market.
Adaptive processing, which is quite natural, brings several benefits. Many applications do not have real-time requirements and detectors are applied offline on billions of
images/videos. Therefore, computational savings in a batch
mode provide substantial monetary benefits. Examples include large-scale indexing of images and videos for visual
search, APIs provided by cloud services, smart retail stores
etc. While there is work on image classification which performs conditional computation [4, 39, 67], modern object
detection algorithms perform static inference and process
every pixel of a multi-scale image pyramid to detect objects
of different sizes [59, 60, 54]. This is a very inefficient process as the algorithm spends equal energy at every pixel at
different scales.
To provide some perspective, we show the percentage of
pixels occupied per image for different size objects in the
COCO dataset in Fig 1. Even though 40% of the object
instances are small, they only occupy 0.3% of the area. If
the image pyramid includes a scale of 3, then just to detect
such a small fraction of the dataset, we end up performing 9 times more computation at finer-scales. If we add
some padding around small objects to provide spatial context and only upsample these regions, their area would still

9745

