Drop to Adapt:
Learning Discriminative Features for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Seungmin Lee∗
Seoul National Univ.

Dongwan Kim∗
Seoul National Univ.

Namil Kim
NAVER LABS

Seong-Gyun Jeong
CODE42.ai

Abstract
Recent works on domain adaptation exploit adversarial
training to obtain domain-invariant feature representations
from the joint learning of feature extractor and domain discriminator networks. However, domain adversarial methods render suboptimal performances since they attempt to
match the distributions among the domains without considering the task at hand. We propose Drop to Adapt (DTA),
which leverages adversarial dropout to learn strongly discriminative features by enforcing the cluster assumption.
Accordingly, we design objective functions to support robust domain adaptation. We demonstrate efficacy of the
proposed method on various experiments and achieve consistent improvements in both image classification and semantic segmentation tasks. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/postBG/DTA.pytorch.

(a) Before adaptation

(b) Adapted model

(c) AdD on feature extractor

1. Introduction
The advent of deep neural networks (DNNs) has shown
exceptional performances on various visual recognition
tasks using large-scale datasets [8, 21, 13]. Training a
DNN model begins with curating data and its associated
label. In general, the annotation process is expensive
and time-consuming. Moreover, we are unable to collect
appropriate data in some cases, if events are rarely encountered or related to dangerous situations. Hence, researchers [32, 34, 10, 35] are paying attention to leverage
synthetic data in a simulation environment, where annotating labels is effortless to a wide range of scenarios.
To take full advantage of synthetic datasets, domain
adaptation has become an active research area. In the domain adaptation setting, we leverage rich annotations on a
source domain to achieve strong performance on a target domain regardless of poor annotations. Nevertheless, a model
trained only on the source domain provides disappointing
∗ denotes equal contribution.
This work was done while the authors were at NAVER LABS. Correspondence to {profile2697, dongwan123}@gmail.com

(d) AdD on classifier

Figure 1. We illustrate the domain adaptation process with adversarial dropout (AdD). We depict the source and target domains as
solid and dashed lines, respectively. Decision boundary of a model
only trained on the source domain easily violates the cluster assumption in that it passes through target feature-dense regions (a).
We can apply AdD on both the feature extractor (c) and classifier (d). When AdD is used on the feature extractor, the decision
boundary is pushed away from feature dense regions. On the contrary, AdD on the classifier pushes features away from the decision
boundary. Eventually, our domain adapted model draws a robust
decision boundary that avoids clusters (b).

outcomes when the target domain shows inherently different characteristics. This issue is known as domain shift and
is one of the main reasons for performance drops on the target domain. Therefore, we propose a novel method that can
reduce the domain shift for domain adaptation.
1 91

