Sym-Parameterized Dynamic Inference for Mixed-Domain Image Translation
Simyung Chang1,2 , SeongUk Park1 , John Yang1 , Nojun Kwak1
1
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
Samsung Electronics, Suwon, Korea
{timelighter, swpark0703, yjohn, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr
A (1,0,0) Reconstruction
Test Image

B (0,1,0) Adversarial
Van Gogh dataset

A

B

A

C

B

C

C (0,0,1) Perceptual
Style Image
(0.33, 0.33, 0.33)

(0.6, 0.2, 0.2)

(0.2, 0.6, 0.2)

(0.2, 0.2, 0.6)

(0.0, 1.5, 0.0)

Figure 1. Results of image translation to mixed-domains. These images are obtained by learning the SGN for three losses (reconstruction,
adversarial, perceptual) and then by inferring the input of a test image in a single generator with only changing the sym-parameter. The
numbers in the parentheses are sym-parameters for each A, B, and C domain.

Abstract
Recent advances in image-to-image translation have led
to some ways to generate multiple domain images through
a single network. However, there is still a limit in creating an image of a target domain without a dataset on it.
We propose a method that expands the concept of ‘multidomain’ from data to the loss area and learns the combined characteristics of each domain to dynamically infer translations of images in mixed domains. First, we introduce Sym-parameter and its learning method for variously mixed losses while synchronizing them with input conditions. Then, we propose Sym-parameterized Generative
Network (SGN) which is empirically confirmed of learning
mixed characteristics of various data and losses, and translating images to any mixed-domain without ground truths,
such as 30% Van Gogh and 20% Monet and 40% snowy.

1. Introduction
Recently, literature on multi-domain deep image translation has introduced many methods that learn the joint distribution of two or more domains and find transformations
among them. Particularly, a single generator is able to translate images to multiple domains based on training data distributions [3, 19, 24]. However, translating style features
across domains seen by the model is different from ‘creativeness’. Consider a case of generating a translated image
with a style that is 20% of Van Gogh, 50% of Picasso and
30% of the original image. Since the ground truths for learning such a translation do not exist, the target distribution to
approximate can not explicitly be provided for conventional
deep generative networks.
If we construe that the optimum of the target style is a
weighted sum of optima of the candidate styles, then the
objective function can be defined by a weighted sum of ob-

4803

