Unsupervised Out-of-Distribution Detection by Maximum Classifier Discrepancy
Qing Yu Kiyoharu Aizawa
The University of Tokyo, Japan
{yu, aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Since deep learning models have been implemented in
many commercial applications, it is important to detect
out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs correctly to maintain the
performance of the models, ensure the quality of the collected data, and prevent the applications from being used
for other-than-intended purposes. In this work, we propose a two-head deep convolutional neural network (CNN)
and maximize the discrepancy between the two classifiers
to detect OOD inputs. We train a two-head CNN consisting of one common feature extractor and two classifiers which have different decision boundaries but can classify in-distribution (ID) samples correctly. Unlike previous methods, we also utilize unlabeled data for unsupervised training and we use these unlabeled data to maximize the discrepancy between the decision boundaries of
two classifiers to push OOD samples outside the manifold of
the in-distribution (ID) samples, which enables us to detect
OOD samples that are far from the support of the ID samples. Overall, our approach significantly outperforms other
state-of-the-art methods on several OOD detection benchmarks and two cases of real-world simulation.

1. Introduction
After several breakthroughs of deep learning methods,
deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive results and even outperformed humans in fields such as image classification [8], face recognition [17], and natural language processing [5]. Meanwhile, increasingly more commercial applications have implemented DNNs in their systems for solving different tasks with high accuracy to improve the performance of their products.
To achieve stable recognition performance, the inputs
of these models should be drawn from the same distribution as the training data that was used to train the model
[33]. However, in the real-world, the inputs are uploaded
by users, and thus the application can be used in unusual environments or be utilized for other-than-intended purposes,
which means that these input samples can be drawn from

Figure 1: Experimental settings of OOD detection. Our
method utilizes both labeled ID data and unlabeled ID/OOD
data for training, which is different from previous methods.
Please notice that we do not know which semantic class the
unlabeled sample belongs to or whether the unlabeled sample is ID or OOD.
different distributions and lead DNNs to provide wrong predictions. Therefore, for these applications, it is important to
accurately detect out-of-distribution (OOD) samples.
In this work, we propose a new setting for unsupervised out-of-distribution detection. While previous studies
[9, 14, 16, 25, 26] only use labeled ID data to train the neural
network under supervision, we also utilize unlabeled data in
the training process. Fig. 1 shows our experimental settings
of OOD detection for food recognition. Though we do not
know the semantic class of the unlabeled sample or whether
the unlabeled sample is ID or OOD, we find that these data
are helpful for improving the performance of OOD detection and this kind of unlabeled data can be obtained easily
in real-world applications.
To utilize these unlabeled data, we also propose a novel
out-of-distribution detection method for DNNs. Many
OOD detection algorithms attempt to detect OOD samples using the confidence of the classifier [9, 14, 16, 26].
For each input, a confidence score is evaluated based on
a pre-trained classifier, then the score is compared to a
threshold, and a label is assigned to the input according

9518

