Domain Adaptation for Structured Output via
Discriminative Patch Representations
Yi-Hsuan Tsai1 Kihyuk Sohn1∗ Samuel Schulter1 Manmohan Chandraker1,2
1
NEC Laboratories America 2 University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Predicting structured outputs such as semantic segmentation relies on expensive per-pixel annotations to learn
supervised models like convolutional neural networks. However, models trained on one data domain may not generalize
well to other domains without annotations for model finetuning. To avoid the labor-intensive process of annotation,
we develop a domain adaptation method to adapt the source
data to the unlabeled target domain. We propose to learn discriminative feature representations of patches in the source
domain by discovering multiple modes of patch-wise output
distribution through the construction of a clustered space.
With such representations as guidance, we use an adversarial
learning scheme to push the feature representations of target
patches in the clustered space closer to the distributions of
source patches. In addition, we show that our framework
is complementary to existing domain adaptation techniques
and achieves consistent improvements on semantic segmentation. Extensive ablations and results are demonstrated on
numerous benchmark datasets with various settings, such as
synthetic-to-real and cross-city scenarios.

1. Introduction
With the availability of large-scale annotated datasets [8],
deep learning has made a significant impact on many computer vision tasks, such as object recognition [14, 21], detection [11], or semantic segmentation [3]. Unfortunately,
learned models may not generalize when evaluated on a
test domain different from the labeled training data [45].
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [10, 32] has been
proposed to close the performance gap introduced by the
mismatch between the source domain, where labeled data is
available, and the target domain. UDA circumvents an expensive data annotation process by utilizing only unlabeled
data from the target domain. Along this line, numerous UDA
methods have been developed and successfully applied for
classification tasks [1, 10, 23, 24, 32, 40, 41].
∗ Now at Google Cloud AI.

Figure 1. Our method aims at improving output distribution alignment via: 1) patch mode discovery from the source patch annotations to construct a clustered space and project to a feature space,
and 2) patch alignment from the target patch representation (unfilled
symbol) to the source distribution (solid symbols).

UDA is even more crucial for pixel-level prediction tasks
such as semantic segmentation as annotation is prohibitively
expensive. A prominent approach towards domain adaptation for semantic segmentation is distribution alignment
by adversarial learning [13, 10], where the alignment may
happen at different representation layers, such as pixellevel [16, 48], feature-level [16, 17] or output-level [39].
Despite these efforts, discovering all modes of the data distribution is a key challenge for domain adaptation [38], akin
to difficulties also faced by generative tasks [2, 26].
A critical step during adversarial training is the use of
a convolutional discriminator [19, 16, 39] that classifies
patches into source or target domains. However, the discriminator is not supervised to capture several modes in the
data distribution and it may end up learning only low-level
differences such as tone or texture across domains. In addition, for the task of semantic segmentation, it is important
to capture and adapt high-level patterns given the highly
structured output space.
In this work, we propose an unsupervised domain adap-

1456

