DenseRaC: Joint 3D Pose and Shape Estimation by Dense Render-and-Compare

1

Yuanlu Xu1,2
Song-Chun Zhu2
Tony Tung1
2
Facebook Reality Labs, Sausalito, USA
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
merayxu@gmail.com, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu, tony.tung@fb.com

Abstract
We present DenseRaC, a novel end-to-end framework for
jointly estimating 3D human pose and body shape from a
monocular RGB image. Our two-step framework takes the
body pixel-to-surface correspondence map (i.e., IUV map)
as proxy representation and then performs estimation of parameterized human pose and shape. Specifically, given an
estimated IUV map, we develop a deep neural network optimizing 3D body reconstruction losses and further integrating a render-and-compare scheme to minimize differences
between the input and the rendered output, i.e., dense body
landmarks, body part masks, and adversarial priors. To
boost learning, we further construct a large-scale synthetic
dataset (MOCA) utilizing web-crawled Mocap sequences,
3D scans and animations. The generated data covers diversified camera views, human actions and body shapes, and
is paired with full ground truth. Our model jointly learns to
represent the 3D human body from hybrid datasets, mitigating the problem of unpaired training data. Our experiments
show that DenseRaC obtains superior performance against
state of the art on public benchmarks of various humanrelated tasks.

1. Introduction
Though much progress has been made in human pose
estimation, body segmentation and action recognition, it remains underexplored to leverage such estimations into the
3D world, due to the difficulty in data acquisition, ambiguities from monocular inputs and nuisances in natural images
(e.g., illumination, occlusion, texture). Existing learningbased methods [22, 39, 55] heavily rely on sparse 2D/3D
landmarks (i.e., skeleton joints), body part masks or silhouettes. However, it is ambiguous to recover 3D human pose
and body shape from such limited information.
In this paper we propose DenseRaC, a new framework
for 3D human pose and body shape estimation from monocular RGB image, as illustrated in Fig. 2:
• The task is solved in a two-step framework, first by estimating pixel-to-surface correspondences (i.e., IUV images)
from the RGB inputs, and then by leveraging the estimated
IUV images into 3D human pose and body shape.
• A parametric human pose and body shape representation

Figure 1. DenseRaC estimates 3D human poses and body shapes
given people-in-the-wild images. The proposed framework handles scenarios with multiple people, all genders, and various clothing in real time. Here, we show results on Internet images [1].

is integrated into the forward pass and backward propagation, inspired by recent work [22, 39].
• An IUV image based dense render-and-compare scheme
is incorporated into the framework. We minimize 3D reconstruction errors as well as discrepancies between inputs and
rendered images from estimated outputs.
We learn the proposed model with both unpaired and
paired data, compatible with different levels of supervisions. The end-to-end training minimizes multiple losses
defined upon human pose and body shape jointly, including
parameter regression, 3D reconstruction, landmark reprojection, body part segmentation, as well as adversarial loss
on impossible configurations (see Sec. 3.3).
To boost learning, we further construct a large scale synthetic dataset covering diversified human poses and body
shapes. The synthetic data is generated using web-crawled
3D animations and scanned all-gender body shapes for human studies, and rendered from various camera views (see
Sec. 4). Learning from synthetic data mitigates the problem of unpaired, partial paired, or inaccurately annotated
training data in popular public people-in-the-wild and Mocap benchmarks, as well as improves the model robustness
against varied camera views and occlusions.
In our experiments, we evaluate DenseRaC on three
tasks: 3D pose estimation, semantic body segmentation and
3D body reconstruction. Qualitative and quantitative experimental results show DenseRaC outperforms existing methods on both public benchmarks and the newly proposed synthetic dataset (see Sec. 5).

7760

