Polarimetric Relative Pose Estimation
Zhaopeng Cui1 Viktor Larsson1 Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 2 Microsoft

Abstract
In this paper we consider the problem of relative pose
estimation from two images with per-pixel polarimetric information. Using these additional measurements we derive
a simple minimal solver for the essential matrix which only
requires two point correspondences. The polarization constraints allow us to pointwise recover the 3D surface normal up to a two-fold ambiguity for the diffuse reflection.
Since this ambiguity exists per point, there is a combinatorial explosion of possibilities. However, since our solver
only requires two point correspondences, we only need to
consider 16 configurations when solving for the relative
pose. Once the relative orientation is recovered, we show
that it is trivial to resolve the ambiguity for the remaining
points. For robustness, we also propose a joint optimization
between the relative pose and the refractive index to handle
the refractive distortion. In experiments, on both synthetic
and real data, we demonstrate that by leveraging the additional information available from polarization cameras,
we can improve over classical methods which only rely on
the 2D-point locations to estimate the geometry. Finally, we
demonstrate the practical applicability of our approach by
integrating it into a state-of-the-art global Structure-fromMotion pipeline.

1. Introduction
Estimating the relative pose between two images is a
classical problem in computer vision. The epipolar geometry is completely described by the essential matrix, which
can be minimally estimated from five 2D-point correspondences [21, 25, 10]. Once the essential matrix is recovered,
it can be decomposed into the relative rotation and translation [11]. In this paper we propose to exploit the additional
geometric information available in polarimetric images for
essential matrix estimation.
Different from normal color images, polarimetric images
directly encode information of the surface normals for a
wide range of materials. In the computer vision literature
there have been several papers which show that the encoded
normal information can be useful in geometric estimation

𝑐1

[𝑅, 𝑡]

𝑐2

Figure 1. Polarization cameras allow us to recover the 3D surface
normals from the 2D images. Using this additional geometric information we show that it is possible to estimate the relative pose
using only two 2D point correspondences.

problems. Kadambi et al. [13] use the surface normal information from polarization images for depth image enhancement. Cui et al. [5] exploit the partial normal information,
i.e. phase angles, to propagate depth information along isodepth contours for multi-view stereo. Yang et al. [31] further extend this idea for dense SLAM system. Chen et al.
[4] study the usage of phase angles for three-view geometry. Different from these papers, we will try to exploit polarimetric information for relative pose estimation between
two views.
There are mainly two challenges for using polarimetric
information in relative pose estimation. First, extracting
the surface normals from the polarization images requires
knowledge of the refractive index, also known as refractive
distortion [13]. The refractive index depends on the material and is in general unknown, but typically lies in the
interval [1.3, 1.6] [1]. To further complicate the problem,
this refractive index can vary pointwise in the scene due to
the inhomogeneous texture and other material properties.
Secondly, as was described in [13, 5], there is an unavoidable π-ambiguity for each azimuth angle. This azimuthal ambiguity will lead to two possible polarization
normals for each point. Additionally, this ambiguity is independent between the two images, even for corresponding
points in the two views. This leads to a combinatorial explo-

2671

