Semantic Adversarial Attacks:
Parametric Transformations That Fool Deep Classifiers
Ameya Joshi

Amitangshu Mukherjee Soumik Sarkar
Iowa State University

Chinmay Hegde∗

{ameya, amimukh, soumiks, chinmay}@iastate.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been shown to exhibit an intriguing vulnerability to adversarial input images corrupted
with imperceptible perturbations. However, the majority
of adversarial attacks assume global, fine-grained control
over the image pixel space. In this paper, we consider a
different setting: what happens if the adversary could only
alter specific attributes of the input image? These would
generate inputs that might be perceptibly different, but still
natural-looking and enough to fool a classifier. We propose a novel approach to generate such “semantic” adversarial examples by optimizing a particular adversarial loss
over the range-space of a parametric conditional generative model. We demonstrate implementations of our attacks
on binary classifiers trained on face images, and show that
such natural-looking semantic adversarial examples exist.
We evaluate the effectiveness of our attack on synthetic and
real data, and present detailed comparisons with existing
attack methods. We supplement our empirical results with
theoretical bounds that demonstrate the existence of such
parametric adversarial examples.

1. Introduction
The existence of adversarial inputs for deep neural
network-based classifiers has been well established by several recent works [5, 10, 16, 17, 58, 41]. The adversary
typically confounds the classifier by adding an imperceptible perturbation to a given input image, where the range of
the perturbation is defined in terms of bounded pixel-space
ℓp -norm balls. Such adversarial “attacks” appear to catastrophically affect the performance of state-of-the-art classifiers [1, 22, 23, 54].
Pixel-space norm-constrained attacks reveal interesting
∗ This work was supported in part by NSF grants CCF-1750920, CNS-

1845969, DARPA AIRA grant PA-18-02-02, AFOSR YIP Grant FA955017-1-0220, an ERP grant from ISU, a GPU gift grant from NVIDIA corp.,
and faculty fellowships from the Black and Veatch Foundation.

Figure 1. Examples of semantic adversarial attacks with a single
modifiable attribute. The first and third columns are original images. Semantic adversarial examples (Columns 2 and 4) are generated by optimizing over the manifold of parametric (attribute)
generative models to fool deep classifiers; specifically for adversarial facial attributes for Col. 2 and illumination for Col. 4.

insights about generalization properties of deep neural networks. However, imperceptible attacks are certainly not the
only means available to an adversary. Consider an input example that comprises salient, invariant features along with
modifiable attributes. An example would be an image of
a face, which consists of invariant features relevant to the
identity of the person, and variable attributes such as hair
color and presence/absence of eyeglasses. Such adversarial
examples, though perceptually distinct from the original input, appear natural and acceptable to an oracle or a human
observer but would still be able to subvert the classifier. Unfortunately, the large majority of adversarial attack methods
do not port over to such natural settings.
A systematic study of such attacks is paramount in
safety-critical applications that deploy neural classifiers,
such as face-recognition systems or vision modules of autonomous vehicles. These systems are required to be immune to a limited amount of variability in input data, particularly when these variations are achieved through natural means. Therefore, a method to generate adversarial examples using natural perturbations, such as facial attributes
in the case of face images, or different weather conditions
for autonomous navigation systems, would shed further in-

4773

