VAT E X: A Large-Scale, High-Quality Multilingual Dataset
for Video-and-Language Research
vatex.org
Xin Wang∗1

Jiawei Wu∗1 Junkun Chen2 Lei Li2 Yuan-Fang Wang1
1
University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
2
ByteDance AI Lab, Beijing, China

William Yang Wang1

Abstract
We present a new large-scale multilingual video description dataset, VAT E X1 , which contains over 41, 250 videos
and 825, 000 captions in both English and Chinese. Among
the captions, there are over 206, 000 English-Chinese parallel translation pairs. Compared to the widely-used MSRVTT dataset [64], VAT E X is multilingual, larger, linguistically complex, and more diverse in terms of both video
and natural language descriptions. We also introduce two
tasks for video-and-language research based on VAT E X:
(1) Multilingual Video Captioning, aimed at describing a
video in various languages with a compact unified captioning model, and (2) Video-guided Machine Translation, to
translate a source language description into the target language using the video information as additional spatiotemporal context. Extensive experiments on the VAT E X dataset
show that, first, the unified multilingual model can not only
produce both English and Chinese descriptions for a video
more efficiently, but also offer improved performance over
the monolingual models. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
the spatiotemporal video context can be effectively utilized
to align source and target languages and thus assist machine translation. In the end, we discuss the potentials of
using VAT E X for other video-and-language research.

1. Introduction
Recently, researchers in both computer vision and natural language processing communities are striving to bridge
videos and natural language. For a deeper understanding of
the activities, the task of video captioning/description aims
at describing the video content with natural language. A
few datasets have been introduced for this task and cover a
variety of domains, such as cooking [15, 70], movie [45],
∗ Equal contribution.
1 VAT E X stands for Video And TEXt, where X also represents various
languages.

Captioning
Model

A little boy reaches into a
basket and puts clothes
into the washing machine.
Ӟӻੜካ਎ᒊࣁ။ᤏ๢ෟᬟ,
಩ᓯৼ᯾ጱᚍᤏ๐ಒᬰ
။ᤏ๢᯾̶

(a) Multilingual Video Captioning
A man stands in a
doorway using a
pull up bar to do
pull ups.

Machine Translation

⼀一个 男⼈人 站在 ⻔门⼝口
使⽤用 拉起酒吧 做 拉。
(pulling pub) (do pull)

Video-guided
Machine Translation

⼀一个 男⼈人 在 ⻔门⼝口
使⽤用 拉杆 做 向上运动。
(pull-up bar) (do upward
movement)

(b) Video-guided Machine Translation
Figure 1: Demonstration of the VAT E X tasks. (a) A compact unified video captioning model is required to accurately describe the
video content in both English and Chinese. (b) The machine translation model mistakenly interprets “pull up bar” as “pulling pub”
and “do pull ups” as “do pull” (two verbs), which are meaningless. While with the relevant video context, the English sentence
is precisely translated into Chinese.

human actions [13, 64], and social media [21]. Despite the
variants of this task, the fundamental challenge is to accurately depict the important activities in a video clip, which
requires high-quality, diverse captions that describe a wide
variety of videos at scale. Moreover, existing large-scale
video captioning datasets are mostly monolingual (English
only) and thus the development of video captioning models
is restricted to English corpora. However, the study of multilingual video captioning is essential for a large population
on the planet who cannot speak English.
To this end, we collect a new large-scale multilingual
dataset for video-and-language research, VAT E X, that con14581

