Self-similarity Grouping: A Simple Unsupervised Cross Domain Adaptation
Approach for Person Re-identification
Yang Fu1 , Yunchao Wei1,2 , Guanshuo Wang3 , Yuqian Zhou1
Honghui Shi4,1,5 , Thomas S. Huang1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney,
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 4 IBM Research, 5 University of Oregon

Abstract
Domain adaptation in person re-identification (re-ID)
has always been a challenging task. In this work, we
explore how to harness the similar natural characteristics existing in the samples from the target domain for
learning to conduct person re-ID in an unsupervised manner. Concretely, we propose a Self-similarity Grouping (SSG) approach, which exploits the potential similarity (from the global body to local parts) of unlabeled
samples to build multiple clusters from different views
automatically. These independent clusters are then assigned with labels, which serve as the pseudo identities to supervise the training process. We repeatedly
and alternatively conduct such a grouping and training
process until the model is stable. Despite the apparent simplify, our SSG outperforms the state-of-the-arts by
more than 4.6% (DukeMTMC→Market1501) and 4.4%
(Market1501→DukeMTMC) in mAP, respectively. Upon
our SSG, we further introduce a clustering-guided semisupervised approach named SSG++ to conduct the oneshot domain adaption in an open set setting (i.e. the number of independent identities from the target domain is
unknown). Without spending much effort on labeling,
our SSG++ can further promote the mAP upon SSG by
10.7% and 6.9%, respectively. Our Code is available at:
https://github.com/OasisYang/SSG .

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims at matching images
of a person in one camera with the images of this person
from other different cameras. Because of its essential applications in security and surveillance, person re-ID has been
drawing lots of attention from both academia and industry.
Despite the dramatic performance improvement obtained
by the convolutional neural network [20, 36, 38], it is reported that deep re-ID models trained on the source domain

Target Dataset
Whole Bodies

…

Upper Parts

…

Bottom Parts

…

CNN Model
Self-similarity
Grouping

Self-spaces

Model Updating
with Assigned Labels

Self-space C

…

Self-space B
Self-space A

𝐶𝐴1

𝐶𝐴2

𝐶𝐵1 … 𝐶𝐵2

𝐶𝐴3

𝐶𝐶1 … 𝐶𝐶2

𝐶𝐵3

𝐶𝐶3

Figure 1. Illustration of proposed Self-similarity Grouping (SSG).
We group target images by three cues, whole bodies, upper parts
and bottom parts, independently and assign labels according to the
corresponding group. The global information of the whole body
and the local information of body parts can help us learn a better
representation of individuals.

may have a significant performance drop on the target domain [8, 10] due to the data-bias existing between source
and target datasets. Since it is costly and unfeasible to annotate all images in target dataset, one of the most popular
solutions for such issue is unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA).
Currently, the common UDA has been studied extensively in image classification, object detection, face recognition and semantic segmentation. However, the traditional
UDA approaches [4, 5, 27] always have an assumption that
the source and target domain share the same set of classes,
which does not hold for the person re-ID problem. Notably,
in the person re-ID, different datasets have different identities (i.e. classes). Recently, several unsupervised domain
16112

