AFD-Net: Aggregated Feature Difference Learning for Cross-Spectral Image
Patch Matching
Dou Quan1

Xuefeng Liang1,2
Shuang Wang1
Shaowei Wei1
Yanfeng Li1
1
1
Ning Huyan
Licheng Jiao
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Shaanxi, China 2 Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
shwang@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Image patch matching across different spectral domains
is more challenging than in a single spectral domain. We
consider the reason is twofold: 1. the weaker discriminative feature learned by conventional methods; 2. the significant appearance difference between two images domains.
To tackle these problems, we propose an aggregated feature difference learning network (AFD-Net). Unlike other methods that merely rely on the high-level features, we
find the feature differences in other levels also provide useful learning information. Thus, the multi-level feature differences are aggregated to enhance the discrimination. To
make features invariant across different domains, we introduce a domain invariant feature extraction network based
on instance normalization (IN). In order to optimize the
AFD-Net, we borrow the large margin cosine loss which
can minimize intra-class distance and maximize inter-class
distance between matching and non-matching samples. Extensive experiments show that AFD-Net largely outperforms the state-of-the-arts on the cross-spectral dataset, meanwhile, demonstrates a considerable generalizability on a single spectral dataset.

1. Introduction
Establishing the local correspondences between images
plays a crucial role in many computer vision tasks, e.g.
image retrieval [19], multi-view stereo reconstruction [29],
and image registration [35]. Recently, increasing attention
has been focused on the cross-spectral image matching because the different spectral domains provide complementary information [10, 15, 24]. For example, visible spectrum
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No.61771379), the Foundation for Innovative Research Groups of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.61621005),
the Fundamental Research Funds of the Central Universities of China
(No.JC1904) and the Program for Cheung Kong Scholars and Innovative
Research Team in University (No.IRT 15R53).

Figure 1. The changes of feature difference (FD) and aggregated difference (AD), and their standard deviations (STD) at different layers for
matching (M) and non-matching (N) samples in a cross-spectral dataset.

images (VIS) and near-infrared images (NIR) can mutually
compensate the rich color information and the high texture
structure [2]. Therefore, matching images across different
domains becomes a new challenge.
The conventional matching methods are based on the
handcraft local feature descriptors, such as SIFT [21], SURF [6], GISIFT [10] and shape context [7]. They perform
rather well on the visible light images. However, as shown
in Fig. 1, cross-spectral images appear significantly different at pixel-level due to the varied imaging mechanisms,
which severely degrades the performance of handcraft features in the matching task. Recently, the deep learningbased methods have shown unprecedented advantage in feature learning for image matching. Generally, there are two
major categories: Descriptor learning [3, 5, 16, 22, 30, 32]
and Metric learning [2, 11, 25, 38]. Descriptor learning
methods extract the high-level features of input image
patches through the convolutional network, and measure
their similarity by feature distance. Instead, metric learning methods transform this problem into a binary classification task (matching and non-matching) by adding a classifier network after the feature extraction network. Commonly,
the framework is optimized by the cross-entropy loss. One
can see that both of these methods merely rely on the highlevel features, because they are more abstract and invariant

3017

