Deep CG2Real: Synthetic-to-Real Translation via Image Disentanglement
Sai Bi1
Eli Shechtman2

Kalyan Sunkavalli2
Federico Perazzi2
Vladimir G. Kim2
Ravi Ramamoorthi1
1
2
UC San Diego
Adobe Research

Abstract
We present a method to improve the visual realism of
low-quality, synthetic images, e.g. OpenGL renderings.
Training an unpaired synthetic-to-real translation network
in image space is severely under-constrained and produces
visible artifacts. Instead, we propose a semi-supervised
approach that operates on the disentangled shading and
albedo layers of the image. Our two-stage pipeline first
learns to predict accurate shading in a supervised fashion using physically-based renderings as targets, and further increases the realism of the textures and shading with
an improved CycleGAN network. Extensive evaluations
on the SUNCG indoor scene dataset demonstrate that our
approach yields more realistic images compared to other
state-of-the-art approaches. Furthermore, networks trained
on our generated “real” images predict more accurate
depth and normals than domain adaptation approaches,
suggesting that improving the visual realism of the images
can be more effective than imposing task-specific losses.

(a) OpenGL image

(c) Our predicted real image

(b) CycleGAN result

(a)

(b)

(c)

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Our two-stage adversarial framework translates an
OpenGL rendering (a) to a realistic image (c). Compared to
single-stage prediction with CycleGAN (b), our result has
more realistic illumination and better preserves texture details, as shown in the insets. (Best viewed in digital).

Deep learning-based image synthesis methods are generating images with increasingly higher visual quality [11,
18, 21, 36, 37] even from minimal input like latent codes or
semantic segmentation maps. While impressive, one challenge with these approaches is the lack of fine-grained control over the layout and appearance of the synthesized images. On the other hand, it is possible to compose 3D scenes
with a desired layout and appearance and render them to
create photo-realistic images. However, this requires highquality scene assets (geometries, materials, lighting) and
compute-heavy physically-based rendering.
The goal of this work is to combine the advantages of
these two approaches. Given a low-quality synthetic image
of a scene—the coarse models in the SUNCG indoor scene
dataset [32] rendered with a simple rendering engine like
OpenGL—we train a deep neural network to translate it to a
high-quality realistic image. One approach to this problem
would be to train an unpaired image-to-image translation
network, like CycleGAN [43], from synthetic OpenGL im-

ages to real photographs. However, the unpaired nature of
this problem—it is not clear how we would create a dataset
of synthetic images with their “real” counterparts—makes
it challenging and results in images with signficiant artifacts
like implausible lighting and texture distortions (Fig. 1(b)).
In contrast, our result retains the layout and coarse appearance of the original image, but introduces realistic lighting
including global illumination, improves the quality of the
scene textures, and removes effects like aliasing (Fig. 1(c)).
Improving the realism of a synthetic image requires improving the quality of both illumination and texture. Moreover, these two aspects need to be handled in different ways:
illumination needs to be synthesized globally while textures
can be modified locally. To this end, we propose disentangling a synthetic image into its constituent shading and
albedo layers—i.e., an intrinsic image decomposition [1]—
and training separate translation networks for each of them.
We leverage the intrinsic images disentanglement to
change this problem from a purely unpaired setting to a

2730

