Learning Shape Templates with Structured Implicit Functions
Kyle Genova1,2 Forrester Cole2 Daniel Vlasic2 Aaron Sarna2 William T. Freeman2 Thomas Funkhouser1, 2
1

2

Princeton University

Google Research

Figure 1. Shapes from the ShapeNet [8] database, fit to a structured implicit template, and arranged by template parameters using tSNE [51]. Similar shape classes, such as airplanes, cars, and chairs, naturally cluster by template parameters.1

Abstract
Template 3D shapes are useful for many tasks in graphics and vision, including fitting observation data, analyzing
shape collections, and transferring shape attributes. Because of the variety of geometry and topology of real-world
shapes, previous methods generally use a library of handmade templates. In this paper, we investigate learning a
general shape template from data. To allow for widely varying geometry and topology, we choose an implicit surface
representation based on composition of local shape elements. While long known to computer graphics, this representation has not yet been explored in the context of machine learning for vision. We show that structured implicit
functions are suitable for learning and allow a network to
smoothly and simultaneously fit multiple classes of shapes.
The learned shape template supports applications such as
shape exploration, correspondence, abstraction, interpolation, and semantic segmentation from an RGB image.

1. Introduction
Fitting a 3D shape template to observations is one of
the oldest and most durable vision techniques [42]. Templates offer a concise representation of complex shapes and

a strong prior for fitting. They can be used to directly correspond and compare shapes, and supervised learning approaches may be applied to correspond the template and a
photograph [53, 5]. In order to fit a wide range of shapes,
however, multiple, hand-made templates are usually required, along with a procedure for choosing the appropriate
one [13].
The goal of this paper is to construct a general shape
template that fits any shape, and to learn the parameters of
this template from data. We view a shape as a level set
of a volumetric function and approximate that function by
a collection of shape elements with local influence, a formulation we term a structured implicit function. The template itself is defined by the number of and formula for the
shape elements, and the template parameters are simply the
concatenation of the parameters of each element. An example of this type of representation is the classic metaballs
method [3], but more sophisticated versions have been proposed since [56, 4, 36].
Given a template definition, we show that a network can
be trained to fit the template to shapes with widely varying geometry and topology (Figure 1). Critically, the net1 See templates.cs.princeton.edu for video, supplemental,
and high resolution results.

17154

