Tell, Draw, and Repeat: Generating and Modifying Images
Based on Continual Linguistic Instruction
Alaaeldin El-Nouby1,4,∗ Shikhar Sharma2 Hannes Schulz2 Devon Hjelm2,3,5
Layla El Asri2 Samira Ebrahimi Kahou2 Yoshua Bengio3,5,6 Graham W. Taylor1,4,6
1

4

University of Guelph 2 Microsoft Research 3 Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence 5 University of Montreal 6 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research

Abstract
Conditional text-to-image generation is an active area
of research, with many possible applications. Existing research has primarily focused on generating a single image from available conditioning information in one step.
One practical extension beyond one-step generation is a
system that generates an image iteratively, conditioned
on ongoing linguistic input or feedback. This is significantly more challenging than one-step generation tasks,
as such a system must understand the contents of its generated images with respect to the feedback history, the
current feedback, as well as the interactions among concepts present in the feedback history. In this work, we
present a recurrent image generation model which takes
into account both the generated output up to the current
step as well as all past instructions for generation. We
show that our model is able to generate the background,
add new objects, and apply simple transformations to existing objects. We believe our approach is an important
step toward interactive generation. Code and data is available at: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/
project/generative-neural-visual-artist-geneva/.

1. Introduction
Vision is one of the most important ways in which humans experience, interact with, understand, and learn about
the world around them. Intelligent systems that can generate images and video for human users have a wide range
of applications, from education and entertainment to the
pursuit of creative arts. Such systems also have the potential to serve as accessibility tools for the physically impaired; many modern and creative works are now generated
or edited using digital graphic design tools, and the complexity of these tools can lead to inaccessibility issues, particularly with people with insufficient technical knowledge
or resources. A system that can follow speech- or text-based
∗ Work was performed during an internship with Microsoft Research.

Empty Canvas

Add a yellow sphere
at the center
Turn 1

Add a purple cube behind
it on the right
Turn 2
Add a blue sphere in front of
it on the left and in front of
the yellow sphere on the left
Turn 3

GeNeVA-GAN

Figure 1. We present the Generative Neural Visual Artist
(GeNeVA) task. Starting from an empty canvas, a Drawer
(GeNeVA-GAN) iteratively constructs a scene based on a series
of instructions and feedback from a Teller.

instructions and then perform a corresponding image editing task could improve accessibility substantially. These
benefits can easily extend to other domains of image generation such as gaming, animation, creating visual teaching
material, etc. In this paper, we take a step in this exciting research direction by introducing the neural visual artist task.
Conditional generative models allow for generation of
images from other input sources, such as labels [1] and dialogue [2]. Image generation conditioned on natural language is a difficult yet attractive goal [3, 4, 5, 6]. Though
these models are able to produce high quality images for
simple datasets, such as birds, flowers, furniture, etc., good
caption-conditioned generators of complex datasets, such as
Microsoft Common Objects in Context (MS COCO) [7] are
nonexistent. This lack of good generators may be due to
the limited information content of captions, which are not
rich enough to describe an entire image [2]. Combining ob-

10304

