Program-Guided Image Manipulators
Jiayuan Mao1∗
Xiuming Zhang1∗
Yikai Li1,2
William T. Freeman1,3
Joshua B. Tenenbaum1
Jiajun Wu1
1
2
3
MIT CSAIL
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Google Research
http://pgim.csail.mit.edu
Input

Repeated
Object
Detection

Repeated Objects
(Centroids)

Program
Induction

for i in range(0, 5):
for j in range(0, 9):
if i + j >= 8:
draw(
33 + 45 * i + 24 * j,
6 + 45 * j,

Neural Image
Manipulation
(trained only on
inpainting)

)

Input

Output

A. Inpainting

Input

Output

B. Extrapolation

Input

Output

C. Regularity Editing

Figure 1: Given an input image, the Program-Guided Image Manipulator (PG-IM) detects repeated entities in the image (pieces of cereal)
and then infers a program-like representation for describing the regularity of the image. The regularity representation empowers multiple
downstream tasks, such as image inpainting, extrapolation, and regularity editing.

Abstract
Humans are capable of building holistic representations
for images at various levels, from local objects, to pairwise relations, to global structures. The interpretation of
structures involves reasoning over repetition and symmetry of the objects in the image. In this paper, we present
the Program-Guided Image Manipulator (PG-IM), inducing
neuro-symbolic program-like representations to represent
and manipulate images. Given an image, PG-IM detects
repeated patterns, induces symbolic programs, and manipulates the image using a neural network that is guided by the
program. PG-IM learns from a single image, exploiting its
internal statistics. Despite trained only on image inpainting,
PG-IM is directly capable of extrapolation and regularity
editing in a unified framework. Extensive experiments show
that PG-IM achieves superior performance on all the tasks.

1. Introduction
Looking at the images in Figure 1, we effortlessly identify
the objects (pieces of cereal) in the image, interpret their
pairwise relations, and reason over the global regularity:
∗ equal contribution; order determined by a coin toss.

all pieces of cereal are organized on a 2D lattice with a
triangular boundary. This holistic representation empowers
our imagination of unseen objects: we can inpaint missing
pixels in images, extrapolate images while preserving the
regularity [33], and reduce or exaggerate the regularity.
While tremendous progress has been made in object
recognition [17] and visual relation detection [27], a global
representation for structural regularity is still missing in
these studies. In this paper, we propose to augment deep
networks, which are very powerful in pixel-level recognition, with symbolic programs, which are flexible to capture
high-level regularity within the image. The intuition is that
the disentanglement between perception and reasoning will
enable complex image manipulation, preserving both highlevel scene structure and low-level object appearance.
Our model, the Program-Guided Image Manipulator (PGIM), induces symbolic programs for global regularities and
manipulates images with deep generative models guided by
the programs. PG-IM consists of three modules: a neural
module that detects repeated patterns within the input image, a symbolic program synthesizer that infers programs
for spatial regularity (lattice structure) and content regular-

4030

