Zero-Shot Anticipation for Instructional Activities
Fadime Sener
University of Bonn, Germany

Angela Yao
National University of Singapore

sener@cs.uni-bonn.de

ayao@comp.nus.edu.sg

Figure 1: We learn procedural knowledge from large text corpora and transfer it to the visual domain to anticipate the future. Our system
is composed of four RNNs: a sentence encoder and decoder, a video encoder and a recipe network.

Abstract
How can we teach a robot to predict what will happen
next for an activity it has never seen before? We address
this problem of zero-shot anticipation by presenting a hierarchical model that generalizes instructional knowledge
from large-scale text-corpora and transfers the knowledge
to the visual domain. Given a portion of an instructional
video, our model predicts coherent and plausible actions
multiple steps into the future, all in rich natural language.
To demonstrate the anticipation capabilities of our model,
we introduce the Tasty Videos dataset, a collection of 2511
recipes for zero-shot learning, recognition and anticipation.

1. Introduction
Imagine a not-so-distant future, where your kitchen is
serviced by a robot chef1 . How should we teach robots to
cook? By reading all the recipes on the web? By watching
all the cooking videos on YouTube? The ability to learn and
generalize from a set of instructions, be it in text, image, or
video form, is a highly challenging and open problem faced
by those working in machine learning and robotics.
In this work, we limit our scope of training the next
robo-chef to predicting subsequent steps as it watches a human cook a never-before-seen dish. We frame our problem
as one of future action prediction in a zero- and/or fewshot learning scenario. This best reflects the situation under which service robots will be introduced [18, 49]. The
robot is pre-trained extensively, but not necessarily with
knowledge matching exactly the deployment environment,
thereby forcing it to generalize from prior knowledge. At
1 Robots cooking specific recipes [3, 9, 51] already exist!

the same time, it is important for the robot to anticipate what
will happen in the future, to ensure a safe and smooth collaborative experience with the human [28, 56].
Instructional data and in particular cooking recipes can
be readily found on the web [1, 2]. The richest forms are
multimodal, e.g. images plus text, or videos with narrations.
Such data fits well into our scenario in which the service
robot visually recognizes the current context and makes future predictions. However, learning complex, multi-step
activities requires significant amounts of data, and despite
their online abundance, it is still difficult to find sufficient
examples in multi-modal form. Furthermore, learning the
visual appearance of specific steps would require temporally aligned data, which is less common and/or expensive
to obtain. Our strategy is therefore to separate the procedural learning from the visual appearance learning. Procedural
knowledge is learned from text, which is readily available in
large corpora on the scale of millions [46]. This knowledge
is then transferred to video, so that the learning of visual appearances can then be simplified to only a grounding model
done via aligned video and text (Fig. 1). More specifically,
we encode text and/or video into context vectors. The context is fed to a recipe network, which models the sequential
structure of the recipe and makes following step predictions
in vector form which are then decoded back into sentences.
Our work is highly novel in two key regards. First and
foremost, we are working with zero-shot action anticipation under a semi-supervised setting, as we target prediction for never-before-seen dishes. We achieve this by generalizing cooking knowledge from large-scale text corpora
and then transferring the knowledge to the visual domain.
This relieves us of the burden and impracticality of provid-

862

