Symmetric Graph Convolutional Autoencoder
for Unsupervised Graph Representation Learning
Jiwoong Park1
1

Minsik Lee2

Hyung Jin Chang3

Kyuewang Lee1

Jin Young Choi1

2

ASRI, Dept. of ECE., Seoul National University
Div. of EE., Hanyang University
3
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham

{ptywoong,kyuewang,jychoi}@snu.ac.kr, mleepaper@hanyang.ac.kr, h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a symmetric graph convolutional autoencoder which produces a low-dimensional latent representation from a graph. In contrast to the existing graph autoencoders with asymmetric decoder parts, the proposed
autoencoder has a newly designed decoder which builds
a completely symmetric autoencoder form. For the reconstruction of node features, the decoder is designed based
on Laplacian sharpening as the counterpart of Laplacian
smoothing of the encoder, which allows utilizing the graph
structure in the whole processes of the proposed autoencoder architecture. In order to prevent the numerical instability of the network caused by the Laplacian sharpening introduction, we further propose a new numerically stable form of the Laplacian sharpening by incorporating the
signed graphs. In addition, a new cost function which finds a
latent representation and a latent affinity matrix simultaneously is devised to boost the performance of image clustering tasks. The experimental results on clustering, link prediction and visualization tasks strongly support that the proposed model is stable and outperforms various state-of-theart algorithms.

1. Introduction
A graph, which consists of a set of nodes and edges,
is a powerful tool to seek the geometric structure of data.
There are various applications using graphs in the machine
learning and data mining fields such as node clustering [26],
dimensionality reduction [1], social network analysis [15],
chemical property prediction of a molecular graph [7], and
image segmentation [30]. However, conventional methods
for analyzing a graph have several problems such as low
computational efficiency due to eigendecomposition or singular value decomposition, or only showing a shallow relationship between nodes.
In recent years, an emerging field called geometric deep
learning [2], generalizes deep neural network models to

𝐴

𝑊1

𝑋

𝑊2

Encoder

𝐻

𝐴

𝜎(𝐻𝐻𝑇 ) 𝐴መ

𝑋

Decoder

𝑋

𝑊1

 𝑋෠

𝐻= ҧ
𝐴𝑋𝑊.

Single-layer Autoencoder

(a) VGAE [13]

𝐴

𝑊

(b) MGAE [35]

𝑊2

Encoder

𝐻

𝑊3

𝑊4

 𝑋෠

Decoder

(c) Proposed autoencoder

Figure 1: Architectures of existing graph convolutional autoencoders and proposed one. A, X, H and W denote the
affinity matrix (structure of graph), node attributes, latent
representations and the learnable weight of network respectively.
non-Euclidean domains such as meshes, manifolds, and
graphs [14, 24, 20]. Among them, finding deep latent representations of geometrical structures of graphs using an autoencoder framework is getting growing attention. The first
attempt is VGAE [13] which consists of a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [14] encoder and a matrix outerproduct decoder as shown in Figure 1 (a). As a variant of
VGAE, ARVGA [27] has been proposed by incorporating
an adversarial approach to VGAE. However, VGAE and
ARVGA were designed to reconstruct the affinity matrix
A instead of node feature matrix X. Hence, the decoder
part cannot be learnable, therefore, the graphical feature
cannot be used at all in the decoder part. These facts can
degrade the capability of graph learning. Following that,
MGAE [35] has been proposed, which uses stacked single
layer graph autoencoder with linear activation function and

6519

