Fashion++: Minimal Edits for Outfit Improvement
Wei-Lin Hsiao1,4
1

Isay Katsman∗2,4

UT Austin

2

Chao-Yuan Wu∗1,4

Cornell Tech

3

Georgia Tech

Devi Parikh3,4
4

Kristen Grauman1,4

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Given an outfit, what small changes would most improve its fashionability? This question presents an intriguing new vision challenge. We introduce Fashion++, an approach that proposes minimal adjustments to a full-body
clothing outfit that will have maximal impact on its fashionability. Our model consists of a deep image generation neural network that learns to synthesize clothing conditioned on learned per-garment encodings. The latent encodings are explicitly factorized according to shape and texture, thereby allowing direct edits for both fit/presentation
and color/patterns/material, respectively. We show how to
bootstrap Web photos to automatically train a fashionability model, and develop an activation maximization-style approach to transform the input image into its more fashionable self. The edits suggested range from swapping in a new
garment to tweaking its color, how it is worn (e.g., rolling up
sleeves), or its fit (e.g., making pants baggier). Experiments
demonstrate that Fashion++ provides successful edits, both
according to automated metrics and human opinion.

1. Introduction
“Before you leave the house, look in the mirror and take
one thing off.” – Coco Chanel
The elegant Coco Chanel’s famous words advocate for
making small changes with large impact on fashionability.
Whether removing an accessory, selecting a blouse with a
higher neckline, tucking in a shirt, or swapping to pants a
shade darker, often small adjustments can make an existing
outfit noticeably more stylish. This strategy has practical
value for consumers and designers alike. For everyday consumers, recommendations for how to edit an outfit would
allow them to tweak their look to be more polished, rather
than start from scratch or buy an entirely new wardrobe.
For fashion designers, envisioning novel enhancements to
familiar looks could inspire new garment creations.
Motivated by these observations, we introduce a new
computer vision challenge: minimal edits for outfit improvement. To minimally edit an outfit, an algorithm must pro∗ Authors contributed equally.

Figure 1: Minimal outfit edits suggest minor changes to an existing
outfit in order to improve its fashionability. For example, changes
might entail (left) removing an accessory; (middle) changing to a
blouse with higher neckline; (right) tucking in a shirt.

pose alterations to the garments/accessories that are slight,
yet visibly improve the overall fashionability. A “minimal”
edit need not strictly minimize the amount of change; rather,
it incrementally adjusts an outfit as opposed to starting from
scratch. It can be recommendations on which garment to
put on, take off, or swap out, or even how to wear the same
garment in a better way. See Figure 1.
This goal presents several technical challenges. First,
there is the question of training. A natural supervised approach might curate pairs of images showing better and
worse versions of each outfit to teach the system the difference; however, such data is not only very costly to procure,
it also becomes out of date as trends evolve. Secondly, even
with such ideal pairs of images, the model needs to distinguish very subtle differences between positives and negatives (sometimes just a small fraction of pixels as in Fig. 1),
which is difficult for an image-based model. It must reason about the parts (garments, accessories) within the original outfit and how their synergy changes with any candidate
tweak. Finally, the notion of minimal edits implies that adjustments may be sub-garment level, and the inherent properties of the person wearing the clothes—e.g., their pose,
body shape—should not be altered.
Limited prior work explores how to recommend a garment for an unfinished outfit [9, 13, 31, 44] (e.g., the fillin-the-blank task). Not only is their goal different from
ours, but they focus on clean per-garment catalog photos,
and their recommendations are restricted to retrieved garments from a dataset. However, we observe that in the fash15047

