Depth Completion from Sparse LiDAR Data with Depth-Normal Constraints
Yan Xu1,2,3

Xinge Zhu2
1

Jianping Shi1

Guofeng Zhang3

Hujun Bao3

Hongsheng Li2

SenseTime Research 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Depth completion aims to recover dense depth maps
from sparse depth measurements. It is of increasing importance for autonomous driving and draws increasing attention from the vision community. Most of existing methods
directly train a network to learn a mapping from sparse
depth inputs to dense depth maps, which has difficulties
in utilizing the 3D geometric constraints and handling the
practical sensor noises. In this paper, to regularize the
depth completion and improve the robustness against noise,
we propose a unified CNN framework that 1) models the geometric constraints between depth and surface normal in a
diffusion module and 2) predicts the confidence of sparse LiDAR measurements to mitigate the impact of noise. Specifically, our encoder-decoder backbone predicts surface normals, coarse depth and confidence of LiDAR inputs simultaneously, which are subsequently inputted into our diffusion refinement module to obtain the final completion results. Extensive experiments on KITTI depth completion
dataset and NYU-Depth-V2 dataset demonstrate that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance. Further ablation study and analysis give more insights into the proposed method and demonstrate the generalization capability and stability of our model.

1. Introduction
The widely used depth sensors, such as LiDAR, RGBD camera and TOF cameras, generally generate sparse
depth measurements due to the limited sensing scope, interferences from environments and economic considerations.
For example, the top-class LiDAR sensor, Velodyne HDL64E, costs about $100,000, but can only provide sparse
measurements with vertical resolution/angular resolution of
0.4◦ /0.08◦ . On the other hand, dense depth maps are required in many high-level applications including semantic
This work was done when Yan Xu was an intern at SenseTime Research.

(a) LiDAR input

(c) Coarse depth prediction

(e) Final result

(b) RGB input

(d) Normal prediction

(f) Groundtruth

(g) Noises & misalignment

(h) Confidence prediction

Figure 1: From sparse LiDAR measurements and color images (a-b), our model first infers the maps of coarse depth
and normal (c-d), and then recurrently refines the initial
depth estimation by enforcing the constraints between depth
and normals. Moreover, to address the noises in practical
LiDAR measurements (g), we employ a decoder branch to
predict the confidences (h) of sparse inputs for better regularization. Best viewed on screen.
segmentation, 3D reconstruction, SLAM, etc. To mitigate
the gap between sparse and dense depth maps, depth completion, i.e., generating dense depth maps from sparse depth
measurements, has been widely adopted.
With the advances of deep learning methods, many depth
completion approaches based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been proposed. The mainstream of
these methods is to directly input the sparse depth maps
(with/without color images) into an encoder-decoder network and predict dense depth maps [26, 16, 36, 15, 10,
23, 2]. These black-box methods force the CNN to learn
a mapping from sparse depth measurements to dense maps,
which is generally a challenging task and leads to unsatisfactory completion results, as shown in Fig. 1 (c). We
argue that proper geometric constraints should be incorporated into the end-to-end framework to regularize the completion process and make it more interpretable. Depth and
surface normal are two strongly correlated factors in the 3D

2811

