Deep Supervised Hashing with Anchor Graph
Yudong Chen1,2 , Zhihui Lai1,3,∗, Yujuan Ding4 , Kaiyi Lin5 , Wai Keung Wong4
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, Shenzhen, China
4
Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
5
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Recently, a series of deep supervised hashing methods
were proposed for binary code learning. However, due to
the high computation cost and the limited hardware’s memory, these methods will first select a subset from the training
set, and then form a mini-batch data to update the network
in each iteration. Therefore, the remaining labeled data
cannot be fully utilized and the model cannot directly obtain
the binary codes of the entire training set for retrieval. To
address these problems, this paper proposes an interesting
regularized deep model to seamlessly integrate the advantages of deep hashing and efficient binary code learning by
using the anchor graph. As such, the deep features and label
matrix can be jointly used to optimize the binary codes, and
the network can obtain more discriminative feedback from
the linear combinations of the learned bits. Moreover, we
also reveal the algorithm mechanism and its computation
essence. Experiments on three large-scale datasets indicate
that the proposed method achieves better retrieval performance with less training time compared to previous deep
hashing methods.

1. Introduction
Hashing methods are widely used to learn a set of binary codes for feature representation. Since the features
only contain values 0 and 1, we can rapidly measure the
hamming distances between the data points on large-scale
datasets for image retrieval. With the desirable binary property, hashing has been extensively applied in some related
areas, such as large-scale clustering [36], collaborative filtering [34] and sketch retrieval [26, 19].
Existing hashing methods can be divided into two categories, i.e., data-independent methods and data-dependent
methods. The traditional data-independent method Locality
∗ Corresponding author: Z. Lai (lai zhi hui@163.com).

Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [6] can obtain binary codes very
fast by using random projection matrix. Due to the simplicity, some extensions of LSH are also developed [4, 14].
However, these methods require more bits to represent the
data for high retrieval accuracy.
On the other hand, the data-dependent methods can obtain more effective binary codes by using large number of
training data to learn the hashing functions. The unsupervised methods, such as Spectral Hashing (SH) [30] and
Locally Linear Hashing (LLH) [10] aim at preserving the
manifold structure of the dataset in binary space. Since it
is time-consuming to compute the affinity matrix, the Anchor Graph Hashing (AGH) [20] designs an anchor graph
to implicitly characterize the local structure. Besides, The
Iterative Quantization (ITQ) [7] and Jointly Sparse Hashing
(JSH) [15] focus on reducing the information loss by adding
a rotation matrix to their optimization models. To utilize
the labeled information of training data, Semi-Supervised
Hashing (SSH) [28], Latent Factor Hashing (LFH) [35] and
Supervised Discrete Hashing (SDH) [25] are proposed for
discriminative binary code learning. Inspired by the outstanding performance on single-modal retrieval, some hashing methods, such as Co-Regularized Hashing (CRH) [38],
Supervised Matrix Factorization Hashing (SMFH) [27] and
Discriminant Cross-modal Hashing (DCMH) [32], are designed for cross-modal retrieval. However, as these methods are based on hand-crafted features, they lack the ability
of feature learning.
To tackle this problem, hashing methods based on deep
neural network are introduced, which are called deep hashing methods [24, 1]. In recent years, deep neural network
has attracted great attention since it can effectively characterize the non-linear property of data and greatly improve
the classification performance [9]. To utilize the deep neural
network for feature extraction, some deep hashing methods
are proposed including the Deep Semantic Ranking Based
Hashing (DSRH) [37], Deep Supervised Hashing (DSH)
[18] and Convolutional Neural Network Hashing (CNNH)

9796

