Bit-Flip Attack: Crushing Neural Network with Progressive Bit Search
Adnan Siraj Rakin† , Zhezhi He† and Deliang Fan
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287
†
These authors contributed equally
{asrakin, Zhezhihe, dfan}@asu.edu

Abstract
Several important security issues of Deep Neural Network (DNN) have been raised recently associated with different applications and components. The most widely investigated security concern of DNN is from its malicious input,
a.k.a adversarial example. Nevertheless, the security challenge of DNN’s parameters is not well explored yet. In this
work, we are the first to propose a novel DNN weight attack methodology called Bit-Flip Attack (BFA) which can
crush a neural network through maliciously flipping extremely small amount of bits within its weight storage memory system (i.e., DRAM). The bit-flip operations could be
conducted through well-known Row-Hammer attack, while
our main contribution is to develop an algorithm to identify
the most vulnerable bits of DNN weight parameters (stored
in memory as binary bits), that could maximize the accuracy
degradation with a minimum number of bit-flips. Our proposed BFA utilizes a Progressive Bit Search (PBS) method
which combines gradient ranking and progressive search to
identify the most vulnerable bit to be flipped. With the aid of
PBS, we can successfully attack a ResNet-18 fully malfunction (i.e., top-1 accuracy degrade from 69.8% to 0.1%) only
through 13 bit-flips out of 93 million bits, while randomly
flipping 100 bits merely degrades the accuracy by less
than 1%. Code is released at: https://github.com/
elliothe/Neural_Network_Weight_Attack

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated its great potential of surpassing or close to humanlevel performance in multiple domains, such as object
recognition [14], Game AI [34], synthetic voice [27], neighborhood voting prediction [10] and etc [9]. It stimulates
the demand for deploying state-of-the-art deep learning algorithms in real-world applications to release labors from
repetitive work. Under such circumstance, the security and
robustness of deep neural network is an essential concern
which cannot be circumvented.

Adversarial example [11] (aka., adversarial attack) is a
well-known security issue of DNN, which can cause the
system malfunction with the magnitude-constrained input
noise that mankind cannot discern. Both attack and defense
of adversarial example on the input end of DNN has been
heavily investigated in the past couple of years [26, 11, 36]
and still be in progress [16, 29, 22]. Nevertheless, the security issue of network parameters themselves is not yet well
explored. Recently, the development of fault injection attack [25] has raised further security concerns on the storage
of DNN parameters.
The possible reasons that there was a lack of concerns on
the security of network parameters may come in twofold:
1) The neural network is widely recognized as a robust system against parameter variations. 2) The DNNs are used to
be only deployed on the high-performance computing system (e.g., CPUs, GPUs, and other accelerators [33, 1, 30]),
which normally contains a variety of methods ensuring data
integrity. Thus, attacking the parameters is more related
to a system cyber-security topic. However, the game has
been changed during the past few years. First, the robustness of the neural network to small perturbation has been
put into the spotlight by adversarial examples on DNN input [11, 26]. Second, with the aid of DNN compression
techniques (e.g., pruning[13] and quantization [39]) and
outstanding compact neural network architectures [18, 32],
deep neural networks now are friendly to the resourcelimited mobile device as well. Such resource-limited platforms normally lack effective data integrity check mechanism, which makes the deployed DNN vulnerable to popular fault injection techniques, such as row hammer and laser
beam [3].
Recently, there exist a cohort of works [25, 5] in an attempt to attack DNN network parameters stored in DRAM
using Row Hammer Attack (RHA). However, the key limitation to these previous attack methods is that they primarily
focused on extremely vulnerable full-precision DNN model
(i.e., parameters in floating-point format). Our conducted
simulation shows that randomly flipping the exponent part
of floating-point weight could easily overwhelm the func11211

