TAPA-MVS: Textureless-Aware PAtchMatch Multi-View Stereo
Andrea Romanoni
Politecnico di Milano, Italy

Matteo Matteucci
Politecnico di Milano, Italy

andrea.romanoni@polimi.it

matteo.matteucci@polimi.it

Abstract
One of the most successful approaches in Multi-View
Stereo estimates a depth map and a normal map for each
view via PatchMatch-based optimization and fuses them
into a consistent 3D points cloud. This relies on photoconsistency to evaluate the goodness of a depth estimate.
It generally produces very accurate results, however, the reconstructed model often lacks completeness, especially in
correspondence of broad untextured areas where the photoconsistency metrics are unreliable. Assuming the untextured areas piecewise planar, in this paper we generate
novel PatchMatch hypotheses so to expand reliable depth
estimates in neighboring untextured regions. At the same
time, we modify the photo-consistency measure such to favor standard or novel PatchMatch depth hypotheses depending on the textureness of the considered area. Finally,
we propose a depth refinement step to filter out wrong estimates and to fill gaps on both the depth and normal maps,
while preserving discontinuities. Our method proved its effectiveness against several state of the art algorithms in the
publicly available ETH3D dataset containing a wide variety of high and low-resolution images.

1. Introduction
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) aims at recovering a dense 3D
representation of the scene perceived by a set of calibrated
images, for instance, to map cities, to create a digital library of cultural heritage or to help robots navigating an
environment. Thanks to the availability of public datasets
[22, 25, 9], several successful MVS algorithms have been
proposed in the last decade, and their performance keeps
increasing.
Depth map estimation represents one of the fundamental and most challenging steps on which most MVS methods rely. Depth maps are then fused together directly into
a point cloud [32, 19], or into a volumetric representation, such as a voxel grid [18, 3] or Delaunay triangulation
[11, 27, 10, 15, 13]. In the latter case a 3D mesh is extracted and can be further refined via variational methods

(a) RGB image

(b) COLMAP

(c) DeepMVS

(d) TAPA-MVS

Figure 1. Example of the depth map produced by the proposed
method with respect to the state-of-the-art

[27, 2, 14, 17] and eventually labelled with semantics [16].
Although Machine Learning methods have begun to appear [7, 28, 31], PatchMatch-based algorithms, emerged
some years ago, are still among the top performing approaches for efficient and accurate depth map estimation.
The core idea of PatchMatch, pioneered by Barnes et al. [1]
and extended for depth estimation by Bleyer et al. [4], is to
choose for each pixel a random guess of the depth and then
propagate the most likely estimates to their neighborhood.
Starting from this idea, Schönberger et al. [19] recently proposed a robust framework able to jointly estimate the depth,
the normals, and the pixel-wise camera visibility for each
view.
One of the major drawbacks of PatchMatch methods is
that most of the untextured regions are not managed correctly (Figure 1(b)). Indeed the optimization highly relies
on the photometric measure to discriminate which random
estimate is the best guess and to filter out unstable estimates.
The depth of the untextured regions is hard to define with
enough confidence since they are homogeneous and thus,
the photometric measure alone hardly discerns neighboring
regions.
In this paper, we specifically address the untextured re-

10413

