Onion-Peel Networks for Deep Video Completion
Seoung Wug Oh
Yonsei University

Sungho Lee
Yonsei University

Joon-Young Lee
Adobe Research

Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University

1. Introduction
Recently, we have seen rapid progress in the image completion task – synthesizing missing pixels in an image – using deep neural networks [14, 37, 25, 20, 36]. Generative
adversarial networks [8] are often used to hallucinate missing contents and have shown impressive results. Despite the
progress in image completion, video completion has been
rarely explored using deep networks and still remains in
an early stage. In video completion, we need to fill missing regions with coherent contents through time rather than
synthesizing contents at each frame independently. When
removing an object in a video, the region occluded by the
object may be visible in other (potentially distant) frames,
and filling the region without considering the original content in other frames will severely break the temporal consistency. Therefore, it is difficult to directly extent ideas of
image inpainting networks to the video completion problem
using 3D convolutional or recurrent networks because their

Huang et al.
VINet
Ours

We propose the onion-peel networks for video completion. Given a set of reference images and a target image
with holes, our network fills the hole by referring the contents in the reference images. Our onion-peel network progressively fills the hole from the hole boundary enabling it
to exploit richer contextual information for the missing regions every step. Given a sufficient number of recurrences,
even a large hole can be inpainted successfully. To attend to
the missing information visible in the reference images, we
propose an asymmetric attention block that computes similarities between the hole boundary pixels in the target and
the non-hole pixels in the references in a non-local manner.
With our attention block, our network can have an unlimited
spatial-temporal window size and fill the holes with globally
coherent contents. In addition, our framework is applicable to the image completion guided by the reference images
without any modification, which is difficult to do with the
previous methods. We validate that our method produces
visually pleasing image and video inpainting results in realistic test cases.

Input

Abstract

Figure 1: Video completion results from Huang et al. [13],
VINet [17], and our method. Our method is able to handle
challenging cases where the flow computation is not easy
due to occlusions or large holes.

temporal receptive fields are too limited or directional.
For video completion, the traditional approach like the
global flow field based optimization technique [13] produces outputs with state-of-the-art quality. Although it performs well in many cases, it is slow because it is computationally intensive and difficult to parallelize. In addition, it
suffers from challenging cases where optical flows are noisy
(e.g. occlusions or large holes). Recently, two deep learning based video completion methods have been proposed.
CombCN [30] is built by combining 2D and 3D CNNs, but
it is only validated on low-resolution videos of aligned faces
and vehicles with fixed square holes, making it difficult to
be used for real object removal cases. VINet [17] is designed as a recurrent network and internally computes the
flow fields from 5 adjacent frames1 to the target frame. Due
to the network design, its temporal window is restricted to
the nearby frames, therefore, it is difficult to inpaint holes
with the faithful content that can be visible outside the temporal window. Both works are meaningful in tackling the
challenging video completion task using deep networks and
1 [t-6, t-3, t-1, t+3, t+6], where the current frame is at t

4403

