Co-segmentation Inspired Attention Networks for
Video-based Person Re-identification
Arulkumar Subramaniam, Athira Nambiar, Anurag Mittal
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
{aruls, anambiar, amittal}@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is an important realworld surveillance problem that entails associating a person’s identity over a network of cameras. Video-based ReID approaches have gained significant attention recently
since a video, and not just an image, is often available.
In this work, we propose a novel Co-segmentation inspired video Re-ID deep architecture and formulate a Cosegmentation based Attention Module (COSAM) that activates a common set of salient features across multiple
frames of a video via mutual consensus in an unsupervised
manner. As opposed to most of the prior work, our approach
is able to attend to person accessories along with the person. Our plug-and-play and interpretable COSAM module
applied on two deep architectures (ResNet50, SE-ResNet50)
outperform the state-of-the-art methods on three benchmark
datasets.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) [14] is the task of
matching person images/videos across two or more nonoverlapping camera views. Recently, it has been drawing
significant attention owing to its wide range of applications
in surveillance [62], activity analysis [33], etc. However,
the problem is challenging due to severe occlusions, background clutter, viewpoint change, etc., and can be thought
of as a proxy for other general matching problems as well.
Person Re-ID approaches are based on either images
[2, 1] or videos [26, 35]. Early works in person Re-ID were
conducted in images, either via discriminative feature extraction [2, 34] or metric learning [1, 38, 17] approaches.
Recently, various similar ideas have been proposed utilizing a deep learning setting [11, 12, 55, 17, 60]. However, Image-based approaches are intrinsically limited due
to the visual ambiguity in inter-class appearance as well as
the lack of spatio-temporal data. In contrast, Video-based
Re-ID benefits from rich spatio-temporal data in video
frames and addresses the task of matching between video

sequences [35, 26]. This, combined with the release of
large-scale datasets such as MARS [59] and DukeMTMCVideoReID [54] has led to a gradual shift in the research
community towards Video-based Re-ID from Image-based
Re-ID.

a) Pose-estimation

b) Segmentation

c) Co-segmentation based Attention (ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of various solutions to focus on the subject
rather than the background. (a) use of pose estimation[46, 58, 48]
& (b) segmentation masks[39, 44] in Re-ID may miss salient accessories associated with the subjects (e.g. backpack, bag), (c) cosegmentation based attention (ours) exploits spatio-temporal data
to capture common regions including persons along with their accessories (for e.g., a mobile phone).

Many of the video-based person Re-ID approaches in
the literature extract frame-level features by considering the
frame’s whole spatial area followed by temporal feature aggregation, i.e., LSTM/pooling [35, 62, 29]. One of the pioneering works by Mclaughlin et al. [35] used a three-layer
deep CNN to extract features from RGB & optical flow and
a recurrent layer followed by a temporal average pooling
(TPavg ) for feature aggregation. Chung et al. [8] extended
this approach by utilizing a two-stream network. Unfortunately, such approaches often fail, especially in large-scale
surveillance scenarios due to severe occlusions and background clutter. In such cases, it is highly probable that
noisy background features from irrelevant non-salient regions may get misinterpreted as the person’s features and
get aggregated in the video descriptor. Along with this, the
subject alignment and scene variation aggravate the prob1562

