Scaling Object Detection by Transferring Classification Weights
Jason Kuen1 Federico Perazzi2 Zhe Lin2 Jianming Zhang2 Yap-Peng Tan1
1
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Adobe Research

Abstract
Large scale object detection datasets are constantly increasing their size in terms of the number of classes and annotations count. Yet, the number of object-level categories
annotated in detection datasets is an order of magnitude
smaller than image-level classification labels. State-of-the
art object detection models are trained in a supervised fashion and this limits the number of object classes they can
detect. In this paper, we propose a novel weight transfer
network (WTN) to effectively and efficiently transfer knowledge from classification network’s weights to detection network’s weights to allow detection of novel classes without
box supervision. We first introduce input and feature normalization schemes to curb the under-fitting during training of a vanilla WTN. We then propose autoencoder-WTN
(AE-WTN) which uses reconstruction loss to preserve classification network’s information over all classes in the target latent space to ensure generalization to novel classes.
Compared to vanilla WTN, AE-WTN obtains absolute performance gains of 6% on two Open Images evaluation sets
with 500 seen and 57 novel classes respectively, and 25%
on a Visual Genome evaluation set with 200 novel classes.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art object detectors [12, 34] are typically
trained with a large number of bounding box annotations.
Large-scale datasets such as COCO [26], Pascal VOC
[7] and OpenImages [22] provide a substantial amount of
bounding boxes, but the number of annotated object categories is often very limited. The reason is that scaling
the number of bounding boxes can be semi-automated, e.g.
[22], while increasing the number of classes requires significant human labor. On the other hand, image-level labels
such as those available in classification datasets are much
easier to collect as they do not require costly bounding
box annotations. As a consequence, several works investigated the training of object detectors in a weakly-supervised
regime, using only image-level labels. These methods leverage a variety of classes available in classification datasets
or image tags found in social networks [29] but neglect the

Figure 1. Our proposed detector has no access to box-level training
annotations for the object class represented by the red box, “Carbonara”. It learns to detect novel object classes by transferring
weight knowledge from large-scale pre-trained image classification network.

spatial information available in object detection datasets.
In contrast, partial supervised methods [16] employ both
types of annotations. While existing methods [24, 33, 39,
40] that transfer knowledge from a classification network to
a detection network with partial supervision achieve higher
accuracy than weakly-supervised methods [3, 4, 24], they
incur a significant computational cost during training and
testing. The overhead comes either from joint training of
the two networks [24, 33], or from performing forward
passes of the classification network during testing [39, 40].
Furthermore, joint-training methods often require storageintensive, large-scale classification datasets to be present
while training the detection network.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel approach to transfer discriminative semantic knowledge from
classification to detection with a non-linear weight-transfer
network (WTN) [16]. Given a set of common classes annotated for both tasks, we learn a function, the weight-transfer
network, that maps weights at the fully-connected layer of
the classification network to those of the object detection
network. Once trained, WTN is used to extend the number
of categories recognized by the object detector via transferring weights of unseen classes from the classification network. This strategy is advantageous because it only adds
little computational and memory overheads to training and

6044

