PR Product: A Substitute for Inner Product in Neural Networks
Zhennan Wang†, Wenbin Zou†, Chen Xu∗
Shenzhen University
wangzhennan2017@email.szu.edu.cn, {wzou, xuchen szu}@szu.edu.cn

||x||2Erx

Abstract
In this paper, we analyze the inner product of weight
vector w and data vector x in neural networks from the
perspective of vector orthogonal decomposition and prove
that the direction gradient of w decreases with the angle
between them close to 0 or π. We propose the Projection
and Rejection Product (PR Product) to make the direction
gradient of w independent of the angle and consistently
larger than the one in standard inner product while keeping
the forward propagation identical. As a reliable substitute
for standard inner product, the PR Product can be applied
into many existing deep learning modules, so we develop the
PR Product version of fully connected layer, convolutional
layer and LSTM layer. In static image classification, the
experiments on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets demonstrate that the PR Product can robustly enhance the ability
of various state-of-the-art classification networks. On
the task of image captioning, even without any bells and
whistles, our PR Product version of captioning model can
compete or outperform the state-of-the-art models on MS
COCO dataset. Code has been made available at:https:
//github.com/wzn0828/PR_Product.

1. Introduction
Models based on neural networks, especially deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) and recurrent neural
networks (RNN), have achieved state-of-the-art results in
various computer vision tasks [11, 10, 1]. Most of the
optimization algorithms for these models rely on gradientbased learning, so it is necessary to analyze the gradient
of inner product between weight vector w ∈ Rd and data
vector x ∈ Rd , a basic operation in neural networks.
Denoted by P (w, x) = wT x the inner product, the gradient
† The authors are with College of Electronic and Information
Engineering, the Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Machine
Learning and Applications, the Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Information Processing, Shenzhen University.
∗ Corresponding author is with the College of Mathematics and
Statistics, Shenzhen University.

Rx
x

x

w

Px

θ
(a)

w
Px

θ
(b)

Figure 1. The orthogonal decomposition of the gradient w.r.t.
weight vector w in two-dimensional space. (a) The case of the
standard inner product. (b) The case of our proposed PR Product.
For the length gradient, both are the vector projection Px of x onto
w. However, the direction gradient is changed from the vector
rejection Rx in (a) to kxk2 Erx in (b), where Erx represents the
unit vector along Rx .

of P (w, x) w.r.t. w is exactly the data vector x which
can be orthogonally decomposed into the vector projection
Px on w and the vector rejection Rx from w, as shown
in Figure 1 (a). The vector projection Px is parallel to
the weight vector w and will update the length of w in
next training iteration, called the length gradient. While the
vector rejection Rx is orthogonal to w, it will change the
direction of w, called the direction gradient.
Driven by the orthogonal decomposition of the gradient
w.r.t. w, a question arises: Which is the key factor
for optimization, length gradient or direction gradient?
To answer this question, we optimize three 5-layer fully
connected neural networks on Fashion-MNIST [36] with
different variants of inner product: standard inner product,
a variant without length gradient and a variant without
direction gradient. The top-1 accuracy is 88.42%, 88.32%
and 38.59%, respectively. From these comparative experiments we can observe that the direction gradient is the
key factor for optimization and is far more critical than the
length gradient, which might be unsurprising. However,
the direction gradient would be very small when w and x
are nearly parallel, which would hamper the update of the

6013

