Video Compression With Rate-Distortion Autoencoders
Amirhossein Habibian, Ties van Rozendaal, Jakub M. Tomczak, Taco S. Cohen
Qualcomm AI Research∗, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
{habibian, ties, jtomczak, tacos}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
In this paper we present a deep generative model for
lossy video compression. We employ a model that consists of a 3D autoencoder with a discrete latent space and
an autoregressive prior used for entropy coding. Both autoencoder and prior are trained jointly to minimize a ratedistortion loss, which is closely related to the ELBO used
in variational autoencoders. Despite its simplicity, we find
that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art learned
video compression networks based on motion compensation
or interpolation. We systematically evaluate various design
choices, such as the use of frame-based or spatio-temporal
autoencoders, and the type of autoregressive prior.
In addition, we present three extensions of the basic
method that demonstrate the benefits over classical approaches to compression. First, we introduce semantic
compression, where the model is trained to allocate more
bits to objects of interest. Second, we study adaptive compression, where the model is adapted to a domain with limited variability, e.g. videos taken from an autonomous car,
to achieve superior compression on that domain. Finally,
we introduce multimodal compression, where we demonstrate the effectiveness of our model in joint compression of
multiple modalities captured by non-standard imaging sensors, such as quad cameras. We believe that this opens up
novel video compression applications, which have not been
feasible with classical codecs.

1. Introduction
In recent years, tremendous progress has been made in
generative modelling. Although much of this work has been
motivated by potential future applications such as model
based reinforcement learning, data compression is a very
natural application that has received comparatively little attention. Deep learning-based video compression in particular has only recently started to be explored [11, 33, 40]. This
is remarkable because improved video compression would
∗ Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

Inc.

code model
p($( |$)( )

encoder
q($|")

AAC

sender
receiver

0
1
1
0
0
1

"

*

$

code model
p($( |$)( )

0
1
1
0
0
1

decoder
p("|$)

AAC

$
"&
*
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed compression inference
pipeline. The encoder encodes a sequence of frames x into
a sequence of quantized latent variables z. A code model
p(zt |z<t ) is used to transform z into a bitstream b using
adaptive arithmetic coding (AAC). On the receiver side, the
bitstream is used to reconstruct z which is then lossily decoded into x̂.

have a large economic impact: it is estimated that very soon,
80% of internet traffic will be in the form of video [12].
In this paper, we present a simple yet effective and theoretically grounded method for video compression that can
serve as the basis for future work in this nascent area. Our
model consists of off-the-shelf components from the deep
generative modelling literature, namely autoencoders (AE)
and autoregressive models (ARM). Despite its simplicity,
the model outperforms all methods to which a direct comparison is possible, including substantially more complicated approaches.
On the theoretical side, we show that our method, as well
as state-of-the-art image compression methods [28] can be
interpreted as VAEs [25, 31] with a discrete latent space
and a deterministic encoder. The VAE framework is an especially good fit for the problem of lossy compression, because it provides a natural mechanism for trading off rate
and distortion, as measured by the two VAE loss terms [3].
However, as we will argue in this paper, it is not beneficial
for the purpose of compression to use a stochastic encoder
17033

