Video Instance Segmentation
Linjie Yang∗
ByteDance AI Lab

Yuchen Fan
UIUC

Ning Xu
Adobe Research

linjie.yang@bytedance.com

yuchenf4@illinois.edu

nxu@adobe.com

Abstract
In this paper we present a new computer vision task,
named video instance segmentation. The goal of this new
task is simultaneous detection, segmentation and tracking
of instances in videos. In words, it is the first time that
the image instance segmentation problem is extended to
the video domain. To facilitate research on this new task,
we propose a large-scale benchmark called YouTube-VIS,
which consists of 2,883 high-resolution YouTube videos, a
40-category label set and 131k high-quality instance masks.
In addition, we propose a novel algorithm called MaskTrack R-CNN for this task. Our new method introduces
a new tracking branch to Mask R-CNN to jointly perform
the detection, segmentation and tracking tasks simultaneously. Finally, we evaluate the proposed method and several
strong baselines on our new dataset. Experimental results
clearly demonstrate the advantages of the proposed algorithm and reveal insight for future improvement. We believe
the video instance segmentation task will motivate the community along the line of research for video understanding.

1. Introduction
Segmentation in images and videos is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. In the image domain,
the task of instance segmentation, i.e. simultaneous detection and segmentation of object instances in images, was
first proposed by Hariharan et al. [11] and since then has
attracted tremendous amount of attention in computer vision due to its importance. In this paper, we extend the
instance segmentation problem in the image domain to the
video domain. Different from image instance segmentation,
the new problem aims at simultaneous detection, segmentation and tracking of object instances in videos. Figure 1 illustrates a sample video with ground truth annotations for this problem. Naturally, we name the new task
video instance segmentation. The new task opens up pos∗ This work is partially done when Linjie is with Snap Inc.

Video frames

Video instance annotations

Video instance predictions

Figure 1. A illustration of video instance segmentation. The
three rows show image frames in a video, video instance annotations, and video instance predictions by our algorithm respectively. Masks in same color belong to the same object instance.
Ground truth and predicted object categories are given on top of
each bounding box.

sibilities for applications which requires video-level object
masks such as video editing, autonomous driving and augmented reality. To our best knowledge, this is the first work
to address video instance segmentation problem.
Video instance segmentation is more challenging than
image instance segmentation in that it not only requires
instance segmentation on individual frames, but also the
tracking of instances across frames. On the other hand,
video content contains richer information than a single image such as motion pattern of different objects and temporal
consistency, and thus provides more cues for object recognition and segmentation. Video instance segmentation is also
related to several existing tasks. For example, video object segmentation [3, 22, 23] aims at segmenting and tracking objects in videos, but does not require recognition of
object categories. Video object detection aims at detecting
and tracking objects, but does not deal with object segmentation.
One potential reason that video instance segmentation is
seldomly studied is the lack of a large-scale dataset. Despite
15188

