BAE -N ET: Branched Autoencoder for Shape Co-Segmentation
Zhiqin Chen1 , Kangxue Yin1 , Matthew Fisher2 , Siddhartha Chaudhuri2,3 , and Hao Zhang1
1

Simon Fraser University

2

Adobe Research

3

IIT Bombay

Abstract
We treat shape co-segmentation as a representation
learning problem and introduce BAE -N ET, a branched autoencoder network, for the task. The unsupervised BAE N ET is trained with a collection of un-segmented shapes,
using a shape reconstruction loss, without any ground-truth
labels. Specifically, the network takes an input shape and
encodes it using a convolutional neural network, whereas
the decoder concatenates the resulting feature code with a
point coordinate and outputs a value indicating whether the
point is inside/outside the shape. Importantly, the decoder
is branched: each branch learns a compact representation
for one commonly recurring part of the shape collection,
e.g., airplane wings. By complementing the shape reconstruction loss with a label loss, BAE -N ET is easily tuned for
one-shot learning. We show unsupervised, weakly supervised, and one-shot learning results by BAE -N ET, demonstrating that using only a couple of exemplars, our network can generally outperform state-of-the-art supervised
methods trained on hundreds of segmented shapes. Code is
available at https://github.com/czq142857/BAE-NET.

1. Introduction
Co-segmentation takes a collection of data sharing some
common characteristic and produces a consistent segmentation of each data item. Specific to shape co-segmentation,
the common characteristic of the input collection is typically tied to the common category that the shapes belong
to, e.g., they are all lamps or chairs. The significance of the
problem is attributed to the consistency requirement, since
a shape co-segmentation not only reveals the structure of
each shape but also a structural correspondence across the
entire shape set, enabling a variety of applications including
attribute transfer and mix-n-match modeling.
In recent years, many deep neural networks have been
developed for segmentation [3, 21, 26, 32, 43, 65]. Most
methods to date formulate segmentation as a supervised
classification problem and are applicable to segmenting a

Figure 1. Unsupervised co-segmentation by BAE -N ET on the lamp
category from the ShapeNet part dataset [64]. Each color denotes
a part labeled by a specific branch of our network.

single input. Representative approaches include SegNet [3]
for images and PointNet [42] for shapes, where the networks are trained by supervision with ground-truth segmentations to map pixel or point features to segment labels.
Co-segmentation seeks a structural understanding or explanation of an entire set. If one were to abide by Occam’s
razor, then the best explanation would be the simplest one.
This motivates us to treat co-segmentation as a representation learning problem, with the added bonus that such learning may be unsupervised without any ground-truth labels.
Given the strong belief that object recognition by humans
is part-based [14, 15], the simplest explanation for a collection of shapes belonging to the same category would be a
combination of universal parts for that category, e.g., chair
backs or airplane wings. Hence, an unsupervised shape
co-segmentation would amount to finding the simplest part
representations for a shape collection. Our choice for the
representation learning module is a variant of autoencoder.
In principle, autoencoders learn compact representations
of a set of data via dimensionality reduction while minimizing a self-reconstruction loss. To learn shape parts, we
introduce a branched version of autoencoders, where each

8490

