Creativity Inspired Zero-Shot Learning
Mohamed Elhoseiny1,2
Mohamed Elfeki3
1
Facebook AI Research (FAIR), 2 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
3
University of Central Florida
mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa,elfeki@cs.ucf.edu

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims at understanding unseen
categories with no training examples from class-level descriptions. To improve the discriminative power of zeroshot learning, we model the visual learning process of unseen categories with an inspiration from the psychology of
human creativity for producing novel art. We relate ZSL
to human creativity by observing that zero-shot learning is
about recognizing the unseen and creativity is about creating a likable unseen. We introduce a learning signal inspired by creativity literature that explores the unseen space
with hallucinated class-descriptions and encourages careful deviation of their visual feature generations from seen
classes while allowing knowledge transfer from seen to unseen classes. Empirically, we show consistent improvement over the state of the art of several percents on the
largest available benchmarks on the challenging task or
generalized ZSL from a noisy text that we focus on, using
the CUB and NABirds datasets. We also show the advantage of our approach on Attribute-based ZSL on three additional datasets (AwA2, aPY, and SUN). Code is available at
https://github.com/mhelhoseiny/CIZSL.

1. Introduction
With hundreds of thousands of object categories in the
real world and countless undiscovered species, it becomes
unfeasible to maintain hundreds of examples per class to
fuel the training needs of most existing recognition systems.
Zipf’s law, named after George Zipf (1902−1950), suggests
that for the vast majority of the world-scale classes, only
a few examples are available for training, validated earlier in language (e.g., [60, 61]) and later in vision (e.g.,
[43]). This problem becomes even more severe when we
target recognition at the fine-grained level. For example,
there exists tens of thousands of bird and flower species, but
the largest available benchmarks have only a few hundred
classes motivating a lot of research on classifying instances
of unseen classes, known as Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL).

Figure 1: Generalizing the learning of zero-shot models requires a deviation from seen classes to accommodate recognizing unseen classes. We carefully model a learning signal that inductively encourages deviation of unseen classes
from seen classes, yet not pushed far that the generation fall
in the negative hedonic unrealistic range on the right and
loses knowledge transfer from seen classes. Interestingly,
this curve is similar to the famous Wundt Curve in the Human Creativity literature (Martindale, 1990) [33].
People have a great capability to identify unseen visual
classes from text descriptions like “The crested auklet is
subspecies of birds with dark-gray bodies tails and wings
and orange-yellow bill. It is known for its forehead crests,
made of black forward-curving feathers.”; see Fig 1 (bottom). We may imagine the appearance of “crested auklet” in
different ways yet all are correct and may collectively help
us understand it better. This imagination notion been modeled in recent ZSL approaches (e.g., [19, 29, 20, 59, 55])
successfully adopting deep generative models to synthesize
visual examples of an unseen object given its semantic description. After training, the model generates imaginary
data for each unseen class transforming ZSL into a standard
classification task with the generated data.
However, these generative ZSL methods do not guarantee the discrimination between seen and unseen classes
since the generations are not motivated with a learning signal to deviate from seen classes. For example, “Parakeet
Auklet” as a seen class in Fig 1 (left) has a visual text description [52] that significantly overlaps with “Crested Auklet” description, yet one can identify “Crested Auklet”’s
15784

