MonoLoco: Monocular 3D Pedestrian Localization and Uncertainty Estimation
Lorenzo Bertoni, Sven Kreiss, Alexandre Alahi
EPFL VITA lab
CH-1015 Lausanne
lorenzo.bertoni@epfl.ch

Abstract
We tackle the fundamentally ill-posed problem of 3D
human localization from monocular RGB images. Driven
by the limitation of neural networks outputting point estimates, we address the ambiguity in the task by predicting confidence intervals through a loss function based on
the Laplace distribution. Our architecture is a light-weight
feed-forward neural network that predicts 3D locations and
corresponding confidence intervals given 2D human poses.
The design is particularly well suited for small training
data, cross-dataset generalization, and real-time applications. Our experiments show that we (i) outperform stateof-the-art results on KITTI and nuScenes datasets, (ii) even
outperform a stereo-based method for far-away pedestrians, and (iii) estimate meaningful confidence intervals. We
further share insights on our model of uncertainty in cases
of limited observations and out-of-distribution samples.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving vehicles commonly rely on LiDAR sensing solutions despite high cost and sparsity
of point clouds over long ranges [10, 59, 45]. Costeffective perception systems have been proposed by adopting stereo/multiple cameras to address the fundamental ambiguity of monocular solutions [9, 32]. Yet researchers are
studying how to push the limits of monocular perception to
further contribute to multi-sensor fusion [33]. Progress has
been made estimating 3D positions of vehicles from monocular images [8, 38, 48], while pedestrians have received
far less attention due to lack of adequate performances. In
fact, inferring 3D locations of pedestrians from a single image is particularly ambiguous due to the variance in human
heights and shapes. In this work, we explicitly study the
intrinsic ambiguity of locating pedestrians in the scene and
investigate whether we can learn this ambiguity from the
data. Driven by this perception task, we aim at providing
more insights to the general problem of uncertainty estimation in deep learning.

Figure 1. 3D localization of pedestrians from a single RGB image.
Our method leverages 2D poses to find 3D locations as well as
confidence intervals. The confidence intervals are shown as blue
lines in the left 3D view and as ellipses in the right birds-eye-view.

Kendall and Gal [25] introduced practical uncertainty estimation for deep learning in perception tasks, distinguishing between aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty [11, 25].
The former models noise inherent in the observations, while
the latter is a property of the model parameters and can be
reduced by collecting more data. While their proposed measure of uncertainty is inspiring, they could not compare it
with a known uncertainty, referred to as a task error. In
this work, based on the statistical variation of human height
within the adult population [52], we quantify the ambiguity of the task, i.e., the task error: an upper bound of performances for monocular 3D pedestrian localization. Surprisingly, the task error is reasonably low. Our experiments

6861

