Topological Map Extraction From Overhead Images
Zuoyue Li1 , Jan Dirk Wegner2 , Aurélien Lucchi1
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
1

{li.zuoyue,aurelien.lucchi}@inf.ethz.ch, 2 jan.wegner@geod.baug.ethz.ch

Abstract
We propose a new approach, named PolyMapper, to
circumvent the conventional pixel-wise segmentation of
(aerial) images and predict objects in a vector representation directly. PolyMapper directly extracts the topological map of a city from overhead images as collections of
building footprints and road networks. In order to unify
the shape representation for different types of objects, we
also propose a novel sequentialization method that reformulates a graph structure as closed polygons. Experiments are
conducted on both existing and self-collected large-scale
datasets of several cities. Our empirical results demonstrate
that our end-to-end learnable model is capable of drawing
polygons of building footprints and road networks that very
closely approximate the structure of existing online map
services, in a fully automated manner. Quantitative and
qualitative comparison to the state-of-the-art also shows
that our approach achieves good levels of performance. To
the best of our knowledge, the automatic extraction of largescale topological maps is a novel contribution in the remote
sensing community that we believe will help develop models
with more informed geometrical constraints.

1. Introduction
A fundamental research task in computer vision is pixelaccurate image segmentation, where steady progress has
been measured with benchmark challenges such as [27, 12,
11]. The classical approach in this field consists of assigning a label to each image pixel describing what category it
belongs to, thus yielding a labeled image as output. However, for many applications, this is not the final desired output from a user’s point of view. In this paper, we will instead
focus on applications that require a graph or polygon representation as output. Our interest will be in developing a
method that, from an input image, directly produces a polygon representation that describes geometric objects using a
vector data structure. Motivated by the success of recent
works [10, 8, 5, 1], we avoid explicit pixel-wise labeling altogether, but instead directly predict polygons from images
in an end-to-end learnable approach.

Figure 1: PolyMapper result for Boston overlaid on top of
the original aerial imagery. Buildings and roads are directly
predicted as polygons. See additional results in Fig. 10.
Our research is inspired by the insight that for many applications, image segmentation is just an intermediate step
of a more comprehensive workflow that aims at a higherlevel, abstract, vectorized representation of the image content. A good example is automated map generation from
aerial imagery where existing research has mostly focused
on aerial image segmentation such as [9, 48, 50, 30, 20, 51,
31]. We make this application our core scenario because we
have access to virtually unlimited data from OpenStreetMap
(OSM) [17, 16, 14] and high-resolution RGB orthophotos
from Google Maps.
Usually, a full mapping pipeline consists of converting an orthophoto to a semantically meaningful raster map
(i.e., semantic segmentation), followed by further processing such as object shape refinement, vectorization, and map
generalization techniques. Here, we turn this multi-step
workflow into an end-to-end learnable deep learning architecture, PolyMapper, which outputs topological maps of
buildings and roads directly, given aerial imagery as input.
Our approach performs object detection, instance segmentation, and vectorization within a unified approach that
relies on modern CNNs architectures and RNNs with convolutional long-short term memory (ConvLSTM) [45] modules. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the CNN takes as input a city
tile and extracts keypoints and edge evidence of building
footprints and road networks, which are fed sequentially to
the multi-layer ConvLSTM modules. The latter produces
a vector representation for each object in a given tile. In

1715

