From Strings to Things: Knowledge-enabled VQA Model
that can Read and Reason
Ajeet Kumar Singh1
1

TCS Research, Pune, India

Anand Mishra2,∗ Shashank Shekhar3
2

3

IIT Jodhpur, India

Anirban Chakraborty3

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Abstract
Text present in images are not merely strings, they provide useful cues about the image. Despite their utility in
better image understanding, scene texts are not used in traditional visual question answering (VQA) models. In this
work, we present a VQA model which can read scene texts
and perform reasoning on a knowledge graph to arrive at
an accurate answer. Our proposed model has three mutually interacting modules: (i) proposal module to get word
and visual content proposals from the image, (ii) fusion
module to fuse these proposals, question and knowledge
base to mine relevant facts, and represent these facts as
multi-relational graph, (iii) reasoning module to perform a
novel gated graph neural network based reasoning on this
graph.
The performance of our knowledge-enabled VQA model
is evaluated on our newly introduced dataset, viz. textKVQA. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first dataset
which identifies the need for bridging text recognition with
knowledge graph based reasoning. Through extensive experiments, we show that our proposed method outperforms
traditional VQA as well as question-answering over knowledge base-based methods on text-KVQA.

1. Introduction
“The more that you read, the more things you will
know.”

Word proposals [16]: Subway, open
Visual content proposals [55]: fast food restaurant, shop
front
Q. Which restaurant is this?
A. Subway
Q. Can I get a sandwich here?
A. Yes
Q. Is this a French brand?
A. No
Figure 1. VQA model which only relies on visual cues may not
be necessarily sufficient to answer many natural questions, for example, Which restaurant is this? for the given image. On the
other hand, the text “subway” appearing on image and rich knowledge graph containing information like Subway is a restaurant,
are indispensable cues for visual question answering. We present
a VQA model that seamlessly integrates visual content (shown in
cyan), recognized word (shown in orange), a question and knowledge facts to answer questions often asked in a real-world setting.
[Best viewed in color].

Dr. Seuss (in ‘I Can Read With My Eyes Shut!’)

Texts appearing in images open the door to the world of
knowledge and help gain a deeper and holistic understanding of the visual content. However, traditional visual question answering models do not leverage it. In this work, we
introduce a novel task of knowledge-enabled visual question answering by reading text in images.
∗ Anand Mishra was associated with the Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore when this work was carried out.

Visual question answering (VQA) has emerged as an important problem spanning vision and language. Traditionally, VQA models [5, 20, 59] restrict themselves to analyze
visual cues alone. It may not necessarily be sufficient, especially when the question asked demands deeper knowledge
beyond the immediate visual content of the scene. For instance, consider an image shown in Figure 1, and a question
Which restaurant is this?, visual cues are not enough to suggest the name of the restaurant. However, the fact that this
14602

