A Delay Metric for Video Object Detection:
What Average Precision Fails to Tell
Huizi Mao
Stanford University

Xiaodong Yang
NVIDIA

William J. Dally
Stanford University & NVIDIA

huizimao@stanford.edu

xiaodongy@nvidia.com

dally@stanford.edu

Abstract
Average precision (AP) is a widely used metric to evaluate detection accuracy of image and video object detectors.
In this paper, we analyze object detection from videos and
point out that AP alone is not sufficient to capture the temporal nature of video object detection. To tackle this problem, we propose a comprehensive metric, average delay
(AD), to measure and compare detection delay. To facilitate
delay evaluation, we carefully select a subset of ImageNet
VID, which we name as ImageNet VIDT with an emphasis
on complex trajectories. By extensively evaluating a wide
range of detectors on VIDT, we show that most methods
drastically increase the detection delay but still preserve AP
well. In other words, AP is not sensitive enough to reflect
the temporal characteristics of a video object detector. Our
results suggest that video object detection methods should
be additionally evaluated with a delay metric, particularly
for latency-critical applications such as autonomous vehicle perception.

1. Introduction
There is a growing interest in video object detection.
Many real-world applications, such as surveillance analysis
and autonomous driving, deal with video streams. Several
single-image object detection algorithms have been proposed in the past few years [5, 20, 30], but they are computeintensive to run on a full-resolution video stream. Exploiting temporal information is therefore an important direction
to improve the accuracy-cost trade-off [12, 19, 33].
Prior research suffers the lack of densely annotated video
datasets. KITTI [9] is a dataset targeting at autonomous
driving that provides frame-level bounding box annotations.
However, it is relatively small compared with other largescale datasets for training deep neural networks. Since
the introduction of object detection from video challenge
(VID) [6], more research focus has been drawn into the
study of video object detection algorithms.

There are two general goals of video object detection:
improving detection accuracy [2, 8, 12, 37] and reducing
computational cost [4, 24, 38]. Currently, the accuracy of
proposed detection algorithms are mostly evaluated with average precision (AP) or mean average precision (mAP) that
is the average of APs over all classes [6, 9, 18]. Video object
detection benchmarks like VID also adopt the mAP, where
every frame is treated as an individual image for evaluation.
However, such an evaluation metric ignores the temporal
nature of videos and fails to capture the dynamics of detection results, e.g., a detector that detects the later half occurrences of an instance holds the same mAP as a detector that
detects every other frame. As indicated in later experiments,
video detectors tend to demonstrate different temporal behaviors compared to their single-image counterparts.
We introduce average delay (AD), a new detection delay metric. Measuring video object detection delay seems
trivial, as the delay can be simply defined as the number of
frames from when an object appears to when it is detected.
However, to avoid the case where an algorithm trivially detects every bounding box in an image, a false alarm rate
constraint is necessary. AD also needs to be designed to be
comprehensive like AP, so that the delays at different false
alarm rates can be combined. We discuss our design rationale in Section 3.
Most video snippets in VID contain fixed numbers of instances (typically only one), which is not suitable for the
delay evaluation. We therefore select a portion of the validation set in VID and name it as VID with multiple tracklets
(VIDT). Details of the new VIDT dataset are described in
Section 4. With VIDT we then evaluate the AD of a wide
range of the recent proposed video detection algorithms in
Section 5. A general trend is shown in Figure 1, which indicates that some computation-reducing methods [24, 38] preserve the mAP well but increase the AD. Alternative methods leverage the temporal information to improve detection
accuracy but worsen the detection delay [37]. Our results
suggest that video object detection methods should be evaluated with a delay metric, particularly for latency-critical
applications such as autonomous vehicle perception.
1573

