DistInit: Learning Video Representations Without a Single Labeled Video
*

Rohit Girdhar1 Du Tran2 Lorenzo Torresani2,3 Deva Ramanan1,4
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Facebook 3 Dartmouth College 4 Argo AI

Abstract
Video recognition models have progressed significantly
over the past few years, evolving from shallow classifiers
trained on hand-crafted features to deep spatiotemporal
networks. However, labeled video data required to train
such models has not been able to keep up with the ever
increasing depth and sophistication of these networks. In
this work we propose an alternative approach to learning
video representations that requires no semantically labeled
videos, and instead leverages the years of effort in collecting and labeling large and clean still-image datasets. We
do so by using state-of-the-art models pre-trained on image
datasets as “teachers” to train video models in a distillation framework. We demonstrate that our method learns
truly spatiotemporal features, despite being trained only
using supervision from still-image networks. Moreover, it
learns good representations across different input modalities, using completely uncurated raw video data sources
and with different 2D teacher models. Our method obtains
strong transfer performance, outperforming standard techniques for bootstrapping video architectures with imagebased models by 16%. We believe that our approach opens
up new approaches for learning spatiotemporal representations from unlabeled video data.

“Cat”

“Living room”
(1)
Pre-trained
2D models
on object/scene
labels

(1)
Large
labeled
datasets

(2)
Large sets of
unlabeled
videos

(2)
Pretraining

(3)
Use (1) + (2) to train
video models for
action labels

Copy
weights

(3)
Finetuning
“Playing with a cat”
Traditional transfer learning framework

Our proposed framework (DistInit)

Figure 1: Learning video representations through transfer.
Traditional approaches to transfer learning follow the process on
left: train deep models on large well labeled datasets and finetune
on specific task or dataset of choice. This approach, while hugely
popular, significantly limits the types of models we can use for
our specific task, as they must be “compatible” with the model
pre-trained on the large dataset for the learned weights to transfer.
This problem is further accentuated in the case of videos, where
datasets tend to be small or weakly labeled, and models tend to involve 3D/(2+1)D convolutions, making them “incompatible” with
image models. We propose an approach, DistInit, to transfer image models to video as shown on the right. DistInit starts from
models pre-trained on well labeled image datasets with object or
scene labels, and use them as “teachers” for supervising video
models. Hence, the video model is able to learn spatio-temporal
features for video understanding, without needing an explicit action label for that video.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition tasks have been revolutionized by the
resurgence of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [30,
31] along with the availability of large and well-labeled
datasets [32, 40, 60]. This has caused a paradigm shift
in computer vision: rather than hand-designing better features [4, 29, 33], most approaches now train deep models
that learn features themselves. However, deep learning has
been transformative not just because models perform well,
but because models also transfer. The dominant illustration of this is the use of ImageNet pre-training [40]. It is
a near-ubiquitous practice that yields strong improvements
across a wide range of tasks, from image classification on
* Work done as a part of an internship at Facebook

small datasets [26] to pixel-labeling tasks like detection and
segmentation [19]. Such pre-training is an empirically effective approach to knowledge transfer, where “knowledge”
is manifested as labeled and curated datasets.
However, feature learning has not been quite as transformative for video understanding. Early attempts for human
action recognition [24] achieved only marginal improvements over previous state-of-the-art hand-crafted features.
Since then, numerous deep architectures [8, 9, 15, 16, 44,
51] have been proposed. Interestingly, most performance
gains seem to arise from the recent introduction of largescale video datasets that are carefully curated and annotated [3, 25], enabling effective pre-training. Our work introduces simple but novel approaches for pre-training with

852

