Towards Precise End-to-end Weakly Supervised Object Detection Network
Ke Yang
Dongsheng Li
Yong Dou
National University of Defense Technology
yangke13@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
It is challenging for weakly supervised object detection
network to precisely predict the positions of the objects, since there are no instance-level category annotations. Most
existing methods tend to solve this problem by using a twophase learning procedure, i.e., multiple instance learning
detector followed by a fully supervised learning detector
with bounding-box regression. Based on our observation,
this procedure may lead to local minima for some object categories. In this paper, we propose to jointly train the
two phases in an end-to-end manner to tackle this problem.
Specifically, we design a single network with both multiple instance learning and bounding-box regression branches that share the same backbone. Meanwhile, a guided
attention module using classification loss is added to the
backbone for effectively extracting the implicit location information in the features. Experimental results on public
datasets show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

MIL detector
Training images

Testing images

Pseudo
GT
Supervision

Fast(er) R-CNN
Training images

Testing images

MIL Detector
Boxes Regressor
Training images

Testing images

1. Introduction

Figure 1: The learning strategy comparison of existing
weakly supervised object detection methods (above the blue
solid line) and our proposed method (below the blue solid
line).

In recent years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
approaches have achieved great success in computer vision
field, due to its ability to learn generic visual features that
can be applied in many tasks such as image classification
[20, 31, 12], object detection [10, 9, 26] and semantic segmentation [23, 2]. Fully supervised object detection has
been widely studied and achieved promising results. There
are also plenty of public datasets which provide precise location and category annotations of the objects. However,
precise object-level annotations are always expensive in human resource and huge data volume is required by training
accurate object detection models. In this paper, we focus
on Weakly Supervised Object Detection (WSOD) problem,
which uses only image-level category labels so that significant cost of preparing training data can be saved. Due to
the lack of accurate annotations, this problem has not been
well handled and the performance is still far from the fully
supervised methods.

Recent WSOD methods [5, 1, 34, 22, 18] usually follows
a two-phase learning procedure as shown in the top part of
Figure 1. In the first phase, the Multiple Instance Learning
(MIL) [4, 18, 34, 1] like weakly learning pipeline is used,
which trains a MIL detector by using CNN as feature extractor. In the second phase, a fully supervised detector,
e.g. Fast R-CNN [9] or Faster R-CNN [26], is trained to
further refine object location by using the selected proposals of the first phase as supervision. The main functionality
of the second phase is to regress the object locations more
precisely. However, we observed that the two-phase learning is easy to get stuck into local minima if the selected
proposals of the first phase are too far from real Ground
Truth (GT). As shown in the top part of Figure 1, in some
categories, the MIL detector tends to focus on the local discriminative parts of the objects, such as the head of a cat,

8372

