Detecting the Unexpected via Image Resynthesis ∗

Krzysztof Lis

Krishna Nakka

Pascal Fua

Mathieu Salzmann

Computer Vision Laboratory, EPFL

Abstract
Classical semantic segmentation methods, including the
recent deep learning ones, assume that all classes observed
at test time have been seen during training. In this paper, we
tackle the more realistic scenario where unexpected objects
of unknown classes can appear at test time. The main trends
in this area either leverage the notion of prediction uncertainty to flag the regions with low confidence as unknown, or
rely on autoencoders and highlight poorly-decoded regions.
Having observed that, in both cases, the detected regions
typically do not correspond to unexpected objects, in this
paper, we introduce a drastically different strategy: It relies on the intuition that the network will produce spurious
labels in regions depicting unexpected objects. Therefore,
resynthesizing the image from the resulting semantic map
will yield significant appearance differences with respect to
the input image. In other words, we translate the problem
of detecting unknown classes to one of identifying poorlyresynthesized image regions. We show that this outperforms
both uncertainty- and autoencoder-based methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has progressed tremendously in
recent years and state-of-the-art methods rely on deep learning [4, 5, 44, 42]. Therefore, they typically operate under
the assumption that all classes encountered at test time have
been seen at training time. In reality, however, guaranteeing that all classes that can ever be found are represented
in the database is impossible when dealing with complex
outdoors scenes. For instance, in an autonomous driving
scenario, one should expect to occasionally find the unexpected, in the form of animals, snow heaps, or lost cargo
on the road, as shown in Fig. 1. Note that the corresponding labels are absent from standard segmentation training
datasets [7, 43, 15]. Nevertheless, a self-driving vehicle
∗ This work was supported in part by the International Chair Drive for
All - MINES ParisTech - Peugeot-Citroën - Safran - Valeo, and by the
Swiss National Science Foundation.

Input

Ours

Uncertainty (Dropout)

RBM autoencoder

Figure 1: Detecting the unexpected. While uncertaintyand autoencoder-based methods tend to be distracted by the
background, our approach focuses much more accurately
on the unknown objects.

should at least be able to detect that some image regions
cannot be labeled properly and warrant further attention.
Recent approaches to addressing this problem follow
two trends. The first one involves reasoning about the prediction uncertainty of the deep networks used to perform
the segmentation [19, 23, 20, 12]. In the driving scenario,
we have observed that the uncertain regions tend not to coincide with unknown objects, and, as illustrated by Fig. 1,
these methods therefore fail to detect the unexpected. The
second trend consists of leveraging autoencoders to detect
anomalies [8, 31, 1], assuming that never-seen-before objects will be decoded poorly. We found, however, that autoencoders tend to learn to simply generate a lower-quality
version of the input image. As such, as shown in Fig. 1,
they also fail to find the unexpected objects.
In this paper, we therefore introduce a radically different approach to detecting the unexpected. Fig. 2 depicts our
pipeline, built on the following intuition: In regions containing unknown classes, the segmentation network will make
spurious predictions. Therefore, if one tries to resynthesize
the input image from the semantic label map, the resynthe-

2152

