Zero-Shot Emotion Recognition via Affective Structural Embedding
Chi Zhan1 , Dongyu She1 , Sicheng Zhao2 , Ming-Ming Cheng1 , Jufeng Yang1 
1
Nankai University 2 University of California, Berkeley
{chizhan nt, sherry6656}@163.com, schzhao@gmail.com, {cmm, yangjufeng}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Image emotion recognition attracts much attention in recent years due to its wide applications. It aims to understand the emotional response of humans, where candidate
emotion categories are generally defined by specific psychological theories. However, with the development of psychological theories, emotion categories become increasingly
diverse, fine-grained, and difficult to collect samples. In
this paper, we investigate zero-shot learning (ZSL) problem
in the emotion recognition task, which aims to recognize the
new unseen emotions. Specifically, we propose an affective
structural embedding framework, utilizing mid-level semantic representation, i.e., adjective-noun pairs (ANP) features,
to construct an intermediate embedding space. By doing
this, the learned intermediate space can bridge the affective
gap between low-level visual features and high-level semantics. In addition, we introduce an adversarial constraint to
combine the visual and affective embeddings so as to retain the discriminative capacity of visual features and the
affective structural information of semantic features during
training process. Our method is evaluated on five widelyused affective datasets and the experimental results show
that the proposed algorithm outperforms the state-of-theart approaches.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of social media, more and
more people prefer to record their lives and express opinions
via visual contents, e.g., images and videos [47]. In particular, computational understanding emotions of online images
has attracted increasing attention from academia and industry due to its various applications, e.g., opinion mining [30],
online advertisement [15] and social networks [18].
In the past few years, many methods [38, 39, 43, 49]
have made huge progress for image emotion recognition,
which aims to classify emotions evoked by image content.
Most existing methods follow the general view in psychology that a speciﬁc emotion can be recognized as a ﬁxed

sadness

happiness

awe
disgust

anger

excitement

fear
surprise

trust

Test image from
unknown category

anticipation

Figure 1. Overview of zero-shot emotion recognition problem.
Each class has a prototype (denoted by a star). Training classes
are on the manifold with different colors. Test unseen classes are
in red and side information is provided to determine where an unseen classes locates. To classify an unseen image, we assign it a
label that corresponds to the nearest unseen prototypes.

number of basic emotions. Peng et al. [28] train regression models to predict the probabilities of Ekman’s six basic emotions [11, 10], including happiness, sadness, disgust,
anger, fear, and surprise. There are also methods employing
different psychological theory for emotion modeling. For
example, Yang et al. [40] jointly optimize emotion classiﬁcation and distribution learning task according to Mikels’
wheel [24], which replace happiness and surprise in Ekman’s basic emotions with amusement, content, awe, and
excitement. However, with the development of psychological theories, basic emotion categories become increasingly
ﬁne-grained. Traditional supervised learning methods can
only recognize the seen classes, e.g., happiness, anger and
other four emotions on the manifold as shown in Fig. 1.
Such recognition model trained on the pre-deﬁned categories cannot recognize emotions dynamically, when new
categories are explored according to different psychological theories. In addition, it is labor-intensive and timeconsuming to collect samples for rare emotion categories.
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) [37] aims to recognize new categories that are not exists in the training set, which has been
widely used in various vision tasks [9, 34, 51]. The conventional zero-shot learning methods usually build a common

1151

