Self-Guided Network for Fast Image Denoising
Shuhang Gu1 , Yawei Li1 , Luc Van Gool1,2 , Radu Timofte1
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, 2 KU Leuven, Belgium
{yawei.li, shuhang.gu, vangool, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
During the past years, tremendous advances in image
restoration tasks have been achieved using highly complex
neural networks. Despite their good restoration performance, the heavy computational burden hinders the deployment of these networks on constrained devices, e.g. smart
phones and consumer electronic products. To tackle this
problem, we propose a self-guided network (SGN), which
adopts a top-down self-guidance architecture to better exploit image multi-scale information. SGN directly generates multi-resolution inputs with the shuffling operation.
Large-scale contextual information extracted at low resolution is gradually propagated into the higher resolution
sub-networks to guide the feature extraction processes at
these scales. Such a self-guidance strategy enables SGN to
efficiently incorporate multi-scale information and extract
good local features to recover noisy images. We validate the
effectiveness of SGN through extensive experiments. The experimental results demonstrate that SGN greatly improves
the memory and runtime efficiency over state-of-the-art efficient methods, without trading off PSNR accuracy.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is one of the fundamental problems in
the signal processing and computer vision communities.
Given a noisy observation y = x+v, image denoising aims
to remove the noise v and estimate the latent clean image
x. With the wide availability of various consumer cameras,
the demand for highly accurate and efficient image denoising algorithms has become stronger than ever.
During the past several years, deep neural networks have
been very successful at image denoising [10, 1]. By stacking convolution, batch normalization [16], ReLU layers and
adopting the idea of residual learning, Zhang et al. [45]
proposed the DnCNN approach, which achieves a much
higher PSNR index than conventional state-of-the-art approaches [7, 11]. The great success achieved by DnCNN
has inspired multiple follow-up works. For the pursuit
of highly accurate denoising results, some complex networks [25, 38] have been proposed. Although these net-

Figure 1. Comparison of PSNR, runtime and peak GPU memory
consumption by the proposed SGN (L3g3m2) 1 and state-of-theart approaches DnCNN [45], U-Net [33], RED [25] and MemNet [38]. The runtimes are evaluated on a TITAN Xp GPU.

works can obtain very competitive denoising performance
on benchmark datasets, their heavy computation and memory footprint hinder their application on hardware constrained devices, such as smart phones or consumer electronic products. In Fig. 1, we compare the average running
time, peak GPU memory consumption as well as denoising performance by different denoising algorithms on the
benchmark dataset Set68 [26]. As can be seen in the figure,
it takes the state-of-the-art MemNet [38] more than 150 ms
to process a 480×320 image, which obviously cannot fulfill
the requirements of current real-time systems.
In this paper, we propose a self-guided neural network
(SGN) to seek a better trade-off between denoising performance and the consumption of computational resources. In
Fig. 2, we present an SGN with 3 shuffle levels. To better capture the relationship between input and target images, we adopt a top-down guidance strategy to design the
network structure of SGN. Concretely, we adopt shuffling
operations to generate multi-resolution inputs. Having the
multi-resolution input variations, SGN firstly processes the
top-branch which is 8× smaller than the original input im1 More details on the memory consumption and PSNR of the proposed
SGN with other hyper parameters are provided in the experimental section.

12511

