Make a Face: Towards Arbitrary High Fidelity Face Manipulation
Shengju Qian1∗ Kwan-Yee Lin5 Wayne Wu2,5 Yangxiaokang Liu3 Quan Wang5
Fumin Shen3 Chen Qian5 Ran He4
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tsinghua University
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 4 NLPR, CASIA
5
SenseTime Research
Input

Face Manipulation Results of Our Model

Figure 1: Face manipulation results on in-the-wild samples via transferring knowledge learned from the CelebA dataset. The first column
shows input images and the remainders are images generated by AF-VAE with target expression/rotation boundary maps as the condition.
Note that the model is fine-tuned with movie clip frames from YouTube of 256 × 256 resolution. All the generated poses are unseen before.

Abstract
Recent studies have shown remarkable success in face
manipulation task with the advance of GANs and VAEs
paradigms, but the outputs are sometimes limited to lowresolution and lack of diversity.
In this work, we propose Additive Focal Variational
Auto-encoder (AF-VAE), a novel approach that can arbitrarily manipulate high-resolution face images using a simple yet effective model and only weak supervision of reconstruction and KL divergence losses. First, a novel additive Gaussian Mixture assumption is introduced with an
unsupervised clustering mechanism in the structural latent

space, which endows better disentanglement and boosts
multi-modal representation with external memory. Second,
to improve the perceptual quality of synthesized results, two
simple strategies in architecture design are further tailored
and discussed on the behavior of Human Visual System
(HVS) for the first time, allowing for fine control over the
model complexity and sample quality. Human opinion studies and new state-of-the-art Inception Score (IS) / Fréchet
Inception Distance (FID) demonstrate the superiority of our
approach over existing algorithms, advancing both the fidelity and extremity of face manipulation task.

1 Work done during an internship at SenseTime Research.

10033

