M3D-RPN: Monocular 3D Region Proposal Network for Object Detection
Garrick Brazil, Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI
{brazilga, liuxm}@msu.edu

1. Introduction
Scene understanding in 3D plays a principal role in designing effective real-world systems such as in urban autonomous driving [2, 10, 15] and robotics [17, 36]. Currently, the foremost methods [12, 24, 31, 35, 41] on 3D detection rely extensively on expensive LiDAR sensors to provide sparse depth data as input. In comparison, monocular
image-only 3D detection [7, 8, 28, 40] is considerably more
difficult due to an inherent lack of depth cues. As a consequence, the performance gap between LiDAR-based methods and monocular approaches remains substantial.
Prior work on monocular 3D detection have each relied
heavily on external state-of-the-art (SOTA) sub-networks,
which are individually responsible for performing point
cloud generation [8], semantic segmentation [7], 2D detec-

IM

Understanding the world in 3D is a critical component
of urban autonomous driving. Generally, the combination
of expensive LiDAR sensors and stereo RGB imaging has
been paramount for successful 3D object detection algorithms, whereas monocular image-only methods experience
drastically reduced performance. We propose to reduce the
gap by reformulating the monocular 3D detection problem
as a standalone 3D region proposal network. We leverage
the geometric relationship of 2D and 3D perspectives, allowing 3D boxes to utilize well-known and powerful convolutional features generated in the image-space. To help
address the strenuous 3D parameter estimations, we further design depth-aware convolutional layers which enable
location specific feature development and in consequence
improved 3D scene understanding. Compared to prior work
in monocular 3D detection, our method consists of only the
proposed 3D region proposal network rather than relying
on external networks, data, or multiple stages. M3D-RPN
is able to significantly improve the performance of both
monocular 3D Object Detection and Bird’s Eye View tasks
within the KITTI urban autonomous driving dataset, while
efficiently using a shared multi-class model.

3D Object Detection

CNN

M3D-RPN

Abstract

Figure 1. M3D-RPN uses a single monocular 3D region proposal
network with global convolution (orange) and local depth-aware
convolution (blue) to predict multi-class 3D bounding boxes.

tion [28], or depth estimation [40]. A downside to such approaches is an inherent disconnection in component learning as well as system complexity. Moreover, reliance on
additional sub-networks can introduce persistent noise, contributing to a limited upper-bound for the framework.
In contrast, we propose a single end-to-end region proposal network for multi-class 3D object detection (Fig. 1).
We observe that 2D object detection performs reasonably
and continues to make rapid advances [5, 6, 11, 14, 19, 33].
The 2D and 3D detection tasks each aim to ultimately
classify all instances of an object; whereas they differ in
the dimensionality of their localization targets. Intuitively,
we expect the power of 2D detection can be leveraged to
guide and improve the performance of 3D detection, ideally
within a unified framework rather than as separate components. Hence, we propose to reformulate the 3D detection
problem such that both 2D and 3D spaces utilize shared anchors and classification targets. In doing so, the 3D detector
is naturally able to perform on par with the performance of
its 2D counterpart, from the perspective of reliably classifying objects. Therefore, the remaining challenge is reduced
to 3D localization within the camera coordinate space.
To address the remaining difficultly, we propose three
key designs tailored to improve 3D estimation. Firstly,
we formulate 3D anchors to function primarily within the
image-space and initialize all anchors with prior statistics
for each of its 3D parameters. Hence, each discretized
anchor inherently has a strong prior for reasoning in 3D,
based on the consistency of a fixed camera viewpoint and
the correlation between 2D scale and 3D depth. Sec-

9287

