Recover and Identify:
A Generative Dual Model for Cross-Resolution Person Re-Identification
Yu-Jhe Li1,3∗

Yun-Chun Chen1,2,3∗ Yen-Yu Lin2 Xiaofei Du5 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,3,4
1
2
National Taiwan University
Academia Sinica
3
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
4
5
Asus Intelligent Cloud Services
Umbo Computer Vision

{yujheli, ycchen, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw, yylin@citi.sinica.edu.tw, xiaofei.du@umbocv.com

Abstract
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims at matching images
of the same identity across camera views. Due to varying
distances between cameras and persons of interest, resolution mismatch can be expected, which would degrade person re-ID performance in real-world scenarios. To overcome this problem, we propose a novel generative adversarial network to address cross-resolution person re-ID, allowing query images with varying resolutions. By advancing adversarial learning techniques, our proposed model
learns resolution-invariant image representations while being able to recover the missing details in low-resolution input images. The resulting features can be jointly applied for
improving person re-ID performance due to preserving resolution invariance and recovering re-ID oriented discriminative details. Our experiments on five benchmark datasets
confirm the effectiveness of our approach and its superiority
over the state-of-the-art methods, especially when the input
resolutions are unseen during training.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) [49] aims at recognizing
the same person across images taken by different cameras,
and is an active research topic in computer vision. A variety of applications ranging from person tracking [1], video
surveillance system [25], to computational forensics [42]
are highly correlated this research topic. Nevertheless, due
to the presence of background clutter, occlusion, illumination or viewpoint changes, person re-ID remains a challenging task for practical applications.
Driven by the recent success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), several learning-based methods [19, 34, 39,
51] have been proposed. Despite promising performances,
these methods are typically developed under the assumption
∗ indicates equal contributions.

Query

HR
SR 2x

SR 3x

Feature Space

SR 4x

SR
Unseen resolution

?x

Different Input Resolutions

Different Identities

Figure 1: Illustration and challenges of cross-resolution
person re-ID. Note that existing approaches typically leverage SR models with pre-selected resolutions followed by
person re-ID modules. This cannot not be easily applied to
query images with varying or unseen resolutions.
that both query and gallery images are of similar or sufficiently high resolutions. This assumption, however, may not
hold in practice since image resolutions would vary drastically. For instance, query images captured by surveillance
cameras are often of low resolution (LR) whereas those in
the gallery set are carefully selected beforehand and are of
high resolution (HR). As a result, direct matching of LR
query images and HR gallery ones would lead to non-trivial
resolution mismatch problems.
To address cross-resolution person re-ID, most existing
methods [22, 44] employ super-resolution (SR) models to
convert LR inputs into their HR versions followed by person
re-ID. However, these methods suffer from two limitations.
First, each employed SR model is designed to upscale image resolutions by a particular factor. Thus, these methods
need to pre-determine the resolutions of LR queries so that

431

