SinGAN: Learning a Generative Model from a Single Natural Image
Tamar Rott Shaham
Technion
Single training image

Tali Dekel
Google Research

Tomer Michaeli
Technion

Random samples from a single image

Figure 1: Image generation learned from a single training image. We propose SinGAN–a new unconditional generative
model trained on a single natural image. Our model learns the image’s patch statistics across multiple scales, using a
dedicated multi-scale adversarial training scheme; it can then be used to generate new realistic image samples that preserve
the original patch distribution while creating new object configurations and structures.

Abstract
We introduce SinGAN, an unconditional generative
model that can be learned from a single natural image.
Our model is trained to capture the internal distribution of
patches within the image, and is then able to generate high
quality, diverse samples that carry the same visual content
as the image. SinGAN contains a pyramid of fully convolutional GANs, each responsible for learning the patch distribution at a different scale of the image. This allows generating new samples of arbitrary size and aspect ratio, that have
significant variability, yet maintain both the global structure and the fine textures of the training image. In contrast
to previous single image GAN schemes, our approach is not
limited to texture images, and is not conditional (i.e. it generates samples from noise). User studies confirm that the
generated samples are commonly confused to be real images. We illustrate the utility of SinGAN in a wide range of
image manipulation tasks.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) [19] have made a
dramatic leap in modeling high dimensional distributions
of visual data. In particular, unconditional GANs have
shown remarkable success in generating realistic, high quality samples when trained on class specific datasets (e.g.,
faces [33], bedrooms[47]). However, capturing the distribution of highly diverse datasets with multiple object classes

(e.g. ImageNet [12]), is still considered a major challenge
and often requires conditioning the generation on another
input signal [6] or training the model for a specific task (e.g.
super-resolution [30], inpainting [41], retargeting [45]).
Here, we take the use of GANs into a new realm – unconditional generation learned from a single natural image.
Specifically, we show that the internal statistics of patches
within a single natural image typically carry enough information for learning a powerful generative model. SinGAN,
our new single image generative model, allows us to deal
with general natural images that contain complex structures
and textures, without the need to rely on the existence of a
database of images from the same class. This is achieved by
a pyramid of fully convolutional light-weight GANs, each
is responsible for capturing the distribution of patches at
a different scale. Once trained, SinGAN can produce diverse high quality image samples (of arbitrary dimensions),
which semantically resemble the training image, yet contain
new object configurations and structures (Fig. 1).
Modeling the internal distribution of patches within a
single natural image has been long recognized as a powerful prior in many computer vision tasks [64]. Classical examples include denoising [65], deblurring [39], super resolution [18], dehazing [2, 15], and image editing
[37, 21, 9, 11, 50]. The most closley related work in
this context is [48], where a bidirectional patch similarity measure is defined and optimized to guarantee that the
patches of an image after manipulation are the same as the
original ones. Motivated by these works, here we show

4570

