Learning Trajectory Dependencies for Human Motion Prediction
Wei Mao1 , Miaomiao Liu1,3 , Mathieu Salzmann2 , Hongdong Li1,3
1
Australian National University, 2 CVLab, EPFL,3 Australia Centre for Robotic Vision
{wei.mao, miaomiao.liu, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
Human motion prediction, i.e., forecasting future body
poses given observed pose sequence, has typically been
tackled with recurrent neural networks (RNNs). However,
as evidenced by prior work, the resulted RNN models suffer
from prediction errors accumulation, leading to undesired
discontinuities in motion prediction. In this paper, we propose a simple feed-forward deep network for motion prediction, which takes into account both temporal smoothness
and spatial dependencies among human body joints. In this
context, we then propose to encode temporal information
by working in trajectory space, instead of the traditionallyused pose space. This alleviates us from manually defining
the range of temporal dependencies (or temporal convolutional filter size, as done in previous work). Moreover,
spatial dependency of human pose is encoded by treating a human pose as a generic graph (rather than a human skeletal kinematic tree) formed by links between every
pair of body joints. Instead of using a pre-defined graph
structure, we design a new graph convolutional network to
learn graph connectivity automatically. This allows the network to capture long range dependencies beyond that of
human kinematic tree. We evaluate our approach on several standard benchmark datasets for motion prediction,
including Human3.6M, the CMU motion capture dataset
and 3DPW. Our experiments clearly demonstrate that the
proposed approach achieves state of the art performance,
and is applicable to both angle-based and position-based
pose representations. The code is available at https:
//github.com/wei-mao-2019/LearnTrajDep

1. Introduction
Human motion prediction is key to the success of applications where one needs to forecast the future, such
as human robot interaction [15], autonomous driving [18]
and human tracking [8]. While traditional data-driven approaches, such as Hidden Markov Model [3] and Gaussian
Process latent variable models [24], have proved effective
for simple periodic motions and acyclic motions, such as

Figure 1. Human motion prediction. The left frames correspond
to the observations. From top to bottom, we show the ground truth,
and predictions obtained by the methods of [17] and [16], and by
our approach on joint angles and 3d coordinates. Our predictions
better match the ground truth.

walking and golf swing, more complicated ones are typically tackled using deep networks [7, 11, 5, 17, 9, 16].
Because of the temporal nature of the signal of interest,
the most common trend consists of using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [7, 11, 17, 9]. However, as argued
in [9, 16] , besides their well-known training difficulty [19],
RNNs for motion prediction suffer from several drawbacks:
First, existing works [7, 17] that use the estimation at the
current RNN step as input to the next prediction tend to accumulate errors throughout the generated sequence, leading to unrealistic predictions at inference time. Second, as
observed in [16, 17], earlier RNN-based methods [7, 11]
often produce strong discontinuities between the last observed frame and the first predicted one. These discontinuities are partially due to the frame-by-frame regression
procedure that does not encourage global smoothness of the
sequence [9]. As a consequence, several works have proposed to rely on feed-forward networks for motion prediction [5, 16]. In this paper, we introduce a new feed-forward
approach to motion prediction, leading to more accurate
predictions than RNN ones, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
When using feed-forward networks for a time-related
problem such as motion prediction, the question of how to
encode the temporal information naturally arises. In [5, 16],
this was achieved by using convolutions across time on the
observed poses. The temporal dependencies that such an
approach can encode, however, strongly depend on the size

9489

