The Trajectron: Probabilistic Multi-Agent Trajectory Modeling
With Dynamic Spatiotemporal Graphs
Boris Ivanovic
Marco Pavone
Stanford University
{borisi, pavone}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Developing safe human-robot interaction systems is a
necessary step towards the widespread integration of autonomous agents in society. A key component of such systems is the ability to reason about the many potential futures
(e.g. trajectories) of other agents in the scene. Towards this
end, we present the Trajectron, a graph-structured model
that predicts many potential future trajectories of multiple
agents simultaneously in both highly dynamic and multimodal scenarios (i.e. where the number of agents in the
scene is time-varying and there are many possible highlydistinct futures for each agent). It combines tools from recurrent sequence modeling and variational deep generative
modeling to produce a distribution of future trajectories for
each agent in a scene. We demonstrate the performance
of our model on several datasets, obtaining state-of-the-art
results on standard trajectory prediction metrics as well as
introducing a new metric for comparing models that output
distributions.

1. Introduction
Modeling the future behavior of humans is an important
step towards developing safe autonomous systems that are
a part of society. One of the main reasons that humans are
naturally able to navigate through many social interaction
scenarios (e.g. traversing through a dense crowd or negotiating traffic on a highway onramp) is that humans have an
inherent Theory of Mind (ToM), which is the capacity to
reason about other people’s actions in terms of their mental states [17]. Currently, most autonomous systems do not
have such reasoning capabilities which forces them to operate in low-risk roles with minimal human interaction, a
fact that will surely change with the ever-rising growth of
automation in manufacturing, warehouses, and transportation. Thus, it is desirable to develop computational ToM
models that can be used by autonomous systems to inform
their own planning and decision making, helping them navigate naturally through the same social interaction scenarios. However, developing models of human behavior in-

t=T

t=T

t = T + 1.6s

t = T + 3.2s

Figure 1. A scene from the ETH multi-human trajectory dataset
as it evolves over time. An undirected graph representation of the
same scene is also visualized, illustrating how its structure varies
through time. Nodes and edges are represented as white circles
and solid black lines, respectively. Arrows depict potential future
agent velocities, with colors representing different high-level behavior modes. They are only shown once for clarity. Best viewed
in color.

volves addressing a unique set of challenges. Some of the
most demanding challenges are that humans are highly multimodal, dynamic, and variable. Here, “multimodal” refers
to the possibility of many highly-distinct future behaviors;
“dynamic” refers to the ability of humans to appear and disappear in a scene, e.g. as they move into and out of view
of cameras; and “variable” refers to the fact that in any
scene there can be a different number of humans, meaning
any multi-agent model needs to be able to handle a variable number of inputs. An example of the multimodal, dynamic, and variable nature of real world human motion is
illustrated in Fig. 1. There have been targeted efforts that
tackle each of these challenges separately (or two out of
three), but seldom all.
Specifically, multimodality is an aspect that has been neglected by prior approaches to human trajectory modeling
as they were mainly focused on predicting a single future
trajectory per agent [1, 21, 26, 49, 50], rather than a distribution over possible trajectories [16, 24]. We argue that a
distribution is more useful for downstream tasks (e.g. motion planning and decision making) where information such
as variance can be used to make safer decisions.

2375

