Texture Fields: Learning Texture Representations in Function Space
Michael Oechsle1,2 Lars Mescheder1 Michael Niemeyer1 Thilo Strauss2† Andreas Geiger1
1
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems and University of Tübingen
2
ETAS GmbH, Bosch Group, Stuttgart
1

†

{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

{firstname.lastname}@etas.com

Abstract
In recent years, substantial progress has been achieved
in learning-based reconstruction of 3D objects. At the same
time, generative models were proposed that can generate
highly realistic images. However, despite this success in
these closely related tasks, texture reconstruction of 3D objects has received little attention from the research community and state-of-the-art methods are either limited to comparably low resolution or constrained experimental setups.
A major reason for these limitations is that common representations of texture are inefficient or hard to interface for
modern deep learning techniques. In this paper, we propose Texture Fields, a novel texture representation which is
based on regressing a continuous 3D function parameterized with a neural network. Our approach circumvents limiting factors like shape discretization and parameterization,
as the proposed texture representation is independent of the
shape representation of the 3D object. We show that Texture
Fields are able to represent high frequency texture and naturally blend with modern deep learning techniques. Experimentally, we find that Texture Fields compare favorably to
state-of-the-art methods for conditional texture reconstruction of 3D objects and enable learning of probabilistic generative models for texturing unseen 3D models. We believe
that Texture Fields will become an important building block
for the next generation of generative 3D models.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction is one of the grand goals of computer
vision. Recently, the vision community has witnessed impressive progress in reconstruction tasks like single image
3D reconstruction [6, 7, 9, 13, 23, 25, 43, 45] and generating 3D objects [4, 32, 46] using learning-based techniques
which resolve ambiguities by incorporating prior knowledge. However, previous work on learning-based 3D reconstruction has mainly focused on the problem of reconstructing geometry. In contrast, texture reconstruction of
3D objects has received less attention from the community.

3D Model

Textured 3D Model
Texture Field

2D Image

Figure 1: Texture Fields take a 3D shape and (optionally) a
single 2D image of an object as input and learn a continuous
function tθ which maps any 3D point p to a color value c,
enabling the prediction of accurately textured 3D models.
Previous approaches for texture reconstruction from single images differ in how texture information is represented.
Several recent works [39, 42] have proposed volumetric
voxel representations for colored 3D reconstruction. Unfortunately, however, due to the computational cost of voxel
representations, which grows cubically with the resolution,
the voxelizations are limited to rather low resolutions (usually 323 or 643 ) and hence cannot represent high frequency
details. An alternative representation of texture consists of
a 2D texture atlas and a parameterized mesh using a UVmapping that maps a point on the shape manifold to a pixel
in the texture atlas. However, current approaches based on
mesh representations usually assume known topology and a
predefined template mesh which limits these approaches to
specific object categories such as birds [18] or faces [8, 36].
Predicting texture in the general case for arbitrary shapes
without template mesh remains an unsolved problem.
Contributions: The main limiting factor of the aforementioned methods is their texture representation which
either does not allow for high resolution reconstruction
or strongly relies on task-specific shape parameterizations,
limiting generality of these methods. An ideal texture representation, in contrast, should be independent of the shape
representations (voxels, point cloud, mesh, etc.) and be able
to represent high frequency detail. Towards this goal, we

4531

