Diversity with Cooperation: Ensemble Methods for Few-Shot Classification
Nikita Dvornik, Cordelia Schmid, Julien Mairal
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Few-shot classification consists of learning a predictive
model that is able to effectively adapt to a new class, given
only a few annotated samples. To solve this challenging
problem, meta-learning has become a popular paradigm
that advocates the ability to “learn to adapt”. Recent works
have shown, however, that simple learning strategies without meta-learning could be competitive. In this paper, we
go a step further and show that by addressing the fundamental high-variance issue of few-shot learning classifiers, it is possible to significantly outperform current metalearning techniques. Our approach consists of designing an
ensemble of deep networks to leverage the variance of the
classifiers, and introducing new strategies to encourage the
networks to cooperate, while encouraging prediction diversity. Evaluation is conducted on the mini-ImageNet, tieredImageNet and CUB datasets, where we show that even a
single network obtained by distillation yields state-of-theart results.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks [17] have become standard tools in computer vision to model images, leading to
outstanding results in many visual recognition tasks such as
classification [16], object detection [8, 19, 26], or semantic segmentation [8, 20, 27]. Massively annotated datasets
such as ImageNet [28] or COCO [18] seem to have played
a key role in this success. However, annotating a large corpus is expensive and not always feasible, depending on the
task at hand. Improving the generalization capabilities of
deep neural networks and removing the need for huge sets
of annotations is thus of utmost importance.
While such a grand challenge may be addressed from
different complementary points of views, e.g., large-scale
unsupervised learning [4], self-supervised learning [7, 12],
or by developing regularization techniques dedicated to
deep networks [2, 36], we choose in this paper to focus on
variance-reduction principles based on ensemble methods.

Cooperation
Predictors

Softmax

Independent
Predictors

Softmax

Diversity
Predictors

CNN 1

CNN 1

CNN 1

CNN 2

CNN 2

CNN 2

Softmax

Figure 1: Illustration of the cooperation and diversity
strategies on two networks. All networks receive the same
image as input and compute corresponding class probabilities with softmax. Cooperation encourages the non-ground
truth probabilities (in red) to be similar, after normalization,
whereas diversity encourages orthogonality.
Specifically, we are interested in few-shot classification,
where a classifier is first trained from scratch on a mediumsized annotated corpus—that is, without leveraging external
data or a pre-trained network, and then we evaluate its ability to adapt to new classes, for which only very few annotated samples are provided (typically 1 or 5). Unfortunately,
simply fine-tuning a convolutional neural network on a new
classification task with very few samples has been shown to
provide poor results [9], which has motivated the community to develop dedicated approaches.
The dominant paradigm in few-shot learning builds upon
meta-learning [9, 24, 30, 32, 31, 33], which is formulated
as a principle to learn how to adapt to new learning problems. These approaches split a large annotated corpus into
classification tasks, and the goal is to transfer knowledge
across tasks in order to improve generalization. While the
meta-learning principle seems appealing for few-shot learning, its empirical benefits have not been clearly established
yet. There is indeed strong evidence [5, 11, 23] that training CNNs from scratch using meta-learning performs substantially worse than if CNN features are trained in a standard fashion—that is, by minimizing a classical loss function relying on corpus annotations; on the other hand, learn-

3723

