FAB: A Robust Facial Landmark Detection Framework
for Motion-Blurred Videos
Keqiang Sun1 , Wenyan (Wayne) Wu2 , Tinghao Liu3 , Shuo Yang4
Quan Wang3 , Qiang Zhou2 , Zuochang Ye1 , Chen Qian3
1
Institute of Microelectronics, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Tsinghua University
3
SenseTime Research 4 Amazon Rekognition
{skq17,wwy15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zuochang,zhouqiang}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
{liutinghao,wangquan,qianchen}@sensetime.com, shuoy@amazon.com

Abstract
Recently, facial landmark detection algorithms have
achieved remarkable performance on static images. However, these algorithms are neither accurate nor stable in
motion-blurred videos. The missing of structure information makes it difficult for state-of-the-art facial landmark
detection algorithms to yield good results.
In this paper, we propose a framework named FAB
that takes advantage of structure consistency in the temporal dimension for facial landmark detection in motionblurred videos. A structure predictor is proposed to
predict the missing face structural information temporally, which serves as a geometry prior. This allows
our framework to work as a virtuous circle. On one
hand, the geometry prior helps our structure-aware deblurring network generates high quality deblurred images
which lead to better landmark detection results. On the
other hand, better landmark detection results help structure predictor generate better geometry prior for the next
frame. Moreover, it is a flexible video-based framework
that can incorporate any static image-based methods to
provide a performance boost on video datasets. Extensive experiments on Blurred-300VW, the proposed Realworld Motion Blur (RWMB) datasets and 300VW demonstrate the superior performance to the state-of-the-art methods. Datasets and models will be publicly available at
https://keqiangsun.github.io/projects/FAB/FAB.html.

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection, or known as face alignment,
serves as a key component for many face applications, e.g.
face recognition, face verification and face augmented reality. Previous researches [41, 45, 46, 39, 8, 9, 38, 25] mainly

Figure 1: The first column is the frames of Blurred-300VW. In
the second column, the results of state-of-the-art facial landmark
detection algorithm are given. The third column corresponds to a
naive combination of deblurring and facial landmark detection. In
the fourth column are the results of our proposed algorithm.

focus on detecting facial landmarks in static images. One
natural extension of image-based facial landmark detection
is video facial landmark detection, which tries to locate facial landmarks in sequential frames. Different from static
images, motion blur usually appears in videos, due to the
mismatch of the motion speed and shutter closing speed.
As shown in Figure 1, the missing of structure information,
i.e. edges or boundaries, in the motion-blurred videos makes
it difficult for the state-of-the-art facial landmark detection
algorithms to capture facial structure. The objective of this
paper is to devise an effective framework to handle facial
landmark detection in motion-blurred videos.

5462

