AdaTransform: Adaptive Data Transformation
Zhiqiang Tang
Rutgers University

Xi Peng
University of Delaware

Tingfeng Li
Rutgers University

zhiqiang.tang@rutgers.edu

xipeng@udel.edu

tingfeng.li1@rutgers.edu

Yizhe Zhu
Rutgers University

Dimitris Metaxas
Rutgers University

yizhe.zhu@rutgers.edu

dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Data augmentation is widely used to increase data variance in training deep neural networks. However, previous
methods require either comprehensive domain knowledge
or high computational cost. Can we learn data transformation automatically and efficiently with limited domain
knowledge? Furthermore, can we leverage data transformation to improve not only network training but also network testing? In this work, we propose adaptive data transformation to achieve the two goals. The AdaTransform can
increase data variance in training and decrease data variance in testing. Experiments on different tasks prove that it
can improve generalization performance.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of deep learning, from the data
perspective, benefits from the capability of optimizing millions of free parameters [10, 11] to capture extensive data
variance. Yet, sufficient data varieties are not always available in practice due to data scarcity and annotation cost [33].
The technique of perturbing data without changing class
labels, also known as data augmentation, is widely used to
address this issue. Generally speaking, data augmentation
can be either sampled from predefined distributions or generated by learnable agents. The former, known as random
augmentation [5, 8], usually relies on hand-craft rules without optimization, yielding insufficient training. The latter,
known as auto or adversarial augmentation [19, 27, 16],
also suffers from various limitations.
Auto augmentation [19] explores a huge solution space
to achieve an optimal solution on the validation set, which
is extremely time-consuming. The network training has to
be repeated 15, 000 times to get the final policy. Adversarial augmentation, on the other hand, follows a greedy
design to speed up learning. However, the current designs
[27, 16] rely on comprehensive domain knowledge to spec-

ify the transformation types and boundaries. This inevitably
results in restricted transformation space. Moreover, previous methods mainly focus on network training, neglecting
the potential to apply data transformation in testing.
This raises research questions: 1) Can we learn data
transformation more efficiently? 2) Can we explore the
transformation space (types and boundaries) without comprehensive domain knowledge? 3) Can data transformation
also help improve network deploying?
In this paper, we answer the questions by proposing AdaTransform: adaptive data transformation. We leverage reinforcement learning in conjunction with adversarial training
to compose meta-transformations (discrete transformation
operations). This enables us to efficiently explore a large
transformation space with limited domain knowledge.
Specifically, we learn data transformation in bi-direction:
At the training stage, AdaTransform performs a competitive
task to increase data variance, reducing over-fitting; at the
testing stage, AdaTransform performs a cooperative task to
decrease data variance, yielding improved deploying. The
two tasks are learned through optimizing a triplet: a transformer, a discriminator, and a target network, as illustrated
in Figure 1. To summarize, our key contributions are:
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to investigate adaptive data transformation in order to improve
both network training and testing.
• We propose to learn a competitive task (for training)
and a cooperative task (for testing) simultaneously by
jointly optimizing a triplet online.
• AdaTransform can automatically and efficiently explore the data transformation space, yielding a highly
flexible and versatile solution for broad applications.
• Extensive experiments on image classification, human
pose estimation, and face alignment prove the favorable performance of AdaTransform especially when
testing perturbations exist.

2998

