Video Face Clustering with Unknown Number of Clusters
Makarand Tapaswi1,2,3
Marc T. Law2,3,4
Sanja Fidler2,3,4
1
2
3
Inria
University of Toronto
Vector Institute 4 NVIDIA
makarand.tapaswi@inria.fr, {makarand,law,fidler}@cs.toronto.edu
https://github.com/makarandtapaswi/BallClustering_ICCV2019

Abstract
Understanding videos such as TV series and movies requires analyzing who the characters are and what they are
doing. We address the challenging problem of clustering
face tracks based on their identity. Different from previous
work in this area, we choose to operate in a realistic and
difficult setting where: (i) the number of characters is not
known a priori; and (ii) face tracks belonging to minor or
background characters are not discarded.
To this end, we propose Ball Cluster Learning (BCL),
a supervised approach to carve the embedding space into
balls of equal size, one for each cluster. The learned ball
radius is easily translated to a stopping criterion for iterative merging algorithms. This gives BCL the ability to
estimate the number of clusters as well as their assignment,
achieving promising results on commonly used datasets. We
also present a thorough discussion of how existing metric
learning literature can be adapted for this task.

1. Introduction
Characters are a central aspect of any story. While video
streaming platforms such as Netflix provide the ability to
find a movie based on metadata, searching a video collection
to find the right clip when “Jack Sparrow first meets Will”
requires analyzing the content of the video. Understanding
characters also has a direct influence on important research
such as video captioning [34, 35], question-answering [22,
44], studying social situations [45] and 4D effects [56].
Characters are often studied by analyzing face tracks
(sequences of temporally related detections) in videos. A
significant part of this analysis is identification - labeling
face tracks with their names, and typically employs supervision from web images [1, 29], transcripts [3, 9], or even
dialogs [7, 15]. We are interested in an equally popular alternative - clustering face tracks based on identity. Note that
clustering is complementary to identification, and if achieved
successfully can dramatically reduce the amount of required
labeling effort. Clustering is also an interesting problem in
itself as it can answer questions such as who are the main
characters, or what are their social interaction groups.

Figure 1. Video face clustering is a challenging problem that is
further accentuated by a large portion of characters that play small
roles. Can you guess how many characters are in this montage and
which faces belong to them? See Fig. 2 for our solution.

While there exists a large body of work in video face
clustering (e.g. [6, 18, 55]), most of it addresses a simplified
setup where background characters1 are ignored and the total
number of characters is known. With recent advances in face
representations [4], their application towards clustering [38],
and the ability to learn cast-specific metrics by looking at
overlapping face tracks [6], we encourage the community to
address the challenging problem of estimating the number
of characters and not ignoring background cast (see Fig. 1).
In this paper, we propose Ball Cluster Learning (BCL)
- a supervised approach to carve the embedding space into
equal-sized balls such that samples within a ball belong to
one cluster. In particular, we formulate learning constraints
that create such a space and show how the ball radius (also
learned) can be associated with the stopping criterion for
agglomerative clustering to estimate both the number of
clusters and assignment (Sec. 3). We demonstrate BCL on
video face clustering in a setup where we are unaware of
the number of characters, and all face tracks, main character or otherwise, are included (Sec. 4). Thus, BCL is truly
applicable to all videos as it does not place assumptions on
availability of cast lists (to determine number of clusters) or
track labels (to discard background characters). To evaluate
our approach, we augment standard datasets used in video
1 We consider three types of characters based on their roles: primary

or recurring characters have major roles in several episodes; secondary or
minor characters are named and play an important role in some episodes;
and background or unknown (Unk) characters are unnamed and uncredited.

5027

