Dynamic Curriculum Learning for Imbalanced Data Classification
Yiru Wang ∗, Weihao Gan ∗ , Jie Yang, Wei Wu, Junjie Yan
SenseTime Group Limited
{wangyiru,ganweihao,yangjie,wuwei,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Human attribute analysis is a challenging task in the
field of computer vision. One of the significant difficulties
is brought from largely imbalance-distributed data. Conventional techniques such as re-sampling and cost-sensitive
learning require prior-knowledge to train the system. To address this problem, we propose a unified framework called
Dynamic Curriculum Learning (DCL) to adaptively adjust the sampling strategy and loss weight in each batch,
which results in better ability of generalization and discrimination. Inspired by curriculum learning, DCL consists
of two-level curriculum schedulers: (1) sampling scheduler which manages the data distribution not only from imbalance to balance but also from easy to hard; (2) loss
scheduler which controls the learning importance between
classification and metric learning loss. With these two
schedulers, we achieve state-of-the-art performance on the
widely used face attribute dataset CelebA and pedestrian
attribute dataset RAP.

1. Introduction
Human attribute analysis, including facial characteristics
and clothing categories, has facilitated the society in various aspects, such as tracking and identification. However,
different from the general image classification problem like
ImageNet challenge [28], human attribute analysis naturally
involves largely imbalanced data distribution. For example,
when collecting the face data of attribute ‘Bald’, most of
them would be labeled as ‘No Bald’ and its imbalanced ratio to the ‘Bald’ class would be relatively high. Training the
classification model with equal importance for samples in
different classes may result in a bias to the majority class
of the data and poor accuracy for the minority class. Therefore, it is of great importance to handle the imbalanced data
learning problem, especially in human attribute analysis.
Impressive results have been achieved for the general imbalanced data learning in the past years. One intuitive moti∗ Equal contribution.

vation is resampling [2, 9, 13, 16, 36, 15], which either oversamples the minority class data or downsamples the majority class data, to balance the data distribution. However,
oversampling could easily cause overfitting problem due
to repeatedly visiting duplicated minority samples, while
downsampling may discards much useful information in the
majority samples. Another kind of approach called costsensitive learning is also exploited to handle the imbalanced
data learning problem, which directly imposes heavier cost
on the misclassified minority class [48, 50, 55, 57] . However, it is difficult to determine the exact cost for different
samples in various distributions. Hand et al. [14] proposed
a batch-wise method that selects part of the majority samples and increases the weight of minority samples to match
a pre-defined target distribution. Besides the standard cross
entropy classification loss, Dong et al. [7, 8] proposed to
add another class rectification loss (CRL) to avoid the dominant effect of majority classes. A specific metric is proposed
for imbalanced datasets by above methods. For the general
classification problem, class-biased accuracy is defined as
the number of correctly predicted samples divided by the
number of the whole test data. While for imbalanced data
classification, class-balanced accuracy is defined as the
average of the accuracy in each class for evaluation.
Our proposed Dynamic Curriculum Learning (DCL)
method is motivated by the following two considerations.
(1) Sampling is an acceptable strategy for the problem, but
keeping targeting at a balanced distribution in the whole
process would hurt the generalization ability, particularly
for a largely imbalanced task. For example, in the early
stage of learning with balanced target distribution, the system discards lots of majority samples and emphasizes too
much on the minority samples, tending to learn the valid
representation of the minority class but the bad/unstable
representation of the majority one. However, what we expect is to make the system first learn the appropriate general representations for both of the classes on the target attributes and then classify the samples into correct labels,
which results in a favorable balance between the class bias
accuracy and class balanced accuracy. (2) It is reasonable
to combine cross entropy loss (CE) and metric learning loss

5017

