SPLINE-Net: Sparse Photometric Stereo through
Lighting Interpolation and Normal Estimation Networks
Qian Zheng1♯∗ Yiming Jia2 ♯† Boxin Shi3,4 ∗

Xudong Jiang1 Ling-Yu Duan3,4 Alex C. Kot1

1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Department of CS, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{zhengqian, exdjiang, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg, jiaym15@outlook.com, {shiboxin, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper solves the Sparse Photometric stereo through
Lighting Interpolation and Normal Estimation using a generative Network (SPLINE-Net). SPLINE-Net contains a
lighting interpolation network to generate dense lighting
observations given a sparse set of lights as inputs followed
by a normal estimation network to estimate surface normals. Both networks are jointly constrained by the proposed symmetric and asymmetric loss functions to enforce
isotropic constrain and perform outlier rejection of global
illumination effects. SPLINE-Net is verified to outperform
existing methods for photometric stereo of general BRDFs
by using only ten images of different lights instead of using
nearly one hundred images.

1. Introduction
The problem of photometric stereo [35] inversely solves
for the radiometric image formation model to recover surface normals from different appearances of objects under
various lighting conditions with a fixed camera view. The
classic method [35] assumes an ideal Lambertian image formation model without global illumination effects (such as
inter-reflection and shadows), which deviates from the realistic scenario and prevents photometric stereo from being
able to handle real-world objects. To make photometric
stereo practical, the major difficulties lie in dealing with
objects of general reflectance and global illumination effects. These can be achieved by either exploring analytical Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF)
representations (e.g., [14]) and general BRDF properties
(e.g., [30]) to model non-Lambertian interactions of lighting
and surface normal or suppressing global effects by treating them as outliers (e.g., [37]). Recently, deep learning
♯ Authors contributed equally to this work.
∗ Corresponding authors.
† Work completed while interning at NTU and PKU.

Figure 1. An illustration of observation maps corresponding to two
surface normals (a brief introduction of observation maps can be
found in Section 3.2 and [18]). (a) Two surface normals and their
observation maps with dense lights, (b) sparse observation maps
with 10 order-agnostic lights, (c) dense observation maps generated by our SPLINE-Net given sparse observation maps in (b) as
inputs, and (d) ground truth of dense observation maps with 1000
lights. We use v = (0, 0, 1)⊤ to represent viewing direction and
n to represent surface normal in this paper.

based approaches are introduced to solve these difficulties
by implicitly learning both the image formation process and
global illumination effects from training data (e.g., [9, 18]).
According to a comprehensive benchmark evaluation
[28] (including quantitative results for representative methods published before 2016) and the additional results reported in most recent works [9, 18, 40], a moderately dense
lighting distribution (e.g., around 100 directional lights randomly sampled from the visible hemisphere) is required
to achieve reasonably good normal estimation for objects
with general materials (e.g., angular error around 10◦ for a
shiny plastic). This is because multi-illumination observations under a dense set of lights are required to fit the parameters in analytic BRDF models [14], to analyze general
BRDF properties [30], to observe sufficient inliers and outliers [37], and to ensure the convergence of training neural
networks [9]. How to achieve high accuracy in normal estimation for objects given general BRDFs with a sparse set
of lights (e.g., 10), which we call sparse photometric stereo
in this paper, is still an open yet challenging problem [28].

8549

