Dynamic-Net: Tuning the Objective Without Re-training for Synthesis Tasks
Alon Shoshan
Technion, Israel

Roey Mechrez
Technion, Israel

Lihi Zelnik-Manor
Technion & Alibaba Group

shoshan@campus.technion.ac.il

roey@campus.technion.ac.il

lihi@technion.ac.il

Figure 1: Dynamic-Net: We propose an approach that enables traversing the “objective-space”, spanned by two different
objectives, at test-time, without re-training, as illustrated by the blue dot moving along the blue curve in the plot. This is
different from the common practice of training a separate network for each objective, represented by ×’s on the plot. Using a
single Dynamic-Net we can tune the level of stylization of an image, monitor completion quality per image, or control facial
attributes, all interactively at test-time, without re-training. [Animated figure, please view at our webpage].

Abstract
One of the key ingredients for successful optimization of
modern CNNs is identifying a suitable objective. To date,
the objective is fixed a-priori at training time, and any variation to it requires re-training a new network. In this paper we present a first attempt at alleviating the need for
re-training. Rather than fixing the network at training time,
we train a “Dynamic-Net” that can be modified at inference time. Our approach considers an “objective-space”
as the space of all linear combinations of two objectives,
and the Dynamic-Net is emulating the traversing of this
objective-space at test-time, without any further training.
We show that this upgrades pre-trained networks by providing an out-of-learning extension, while maintaining the
performance quality. The solution we propose is fast and
allows a user to interactively modify the network, in realtime, in order to obtain the result he/she desires. We show
the benefits of such an approach via several different applications.

1. Introduction
“I can’t change the direction of the wind, but I can adjust
my sails to always reach my destination”
—Jimmy Dean
A common practice in image generation is to train a
deep network with an appropriate objective. The objective is often complex and integrates multiple loss terms,
e.g., in style transfer [6, 11], super-resolution [2, 18], inpainting [16], image-to-image transformations [10], domain
transfer [19, 12] and attribute manipulation [24]. To date,
the choice of the specific objective, and the trade-off between its multiple terms, are set a-priori during training.
This results in trained networks that are fixed for a specific
working point. This is limiting for three reasons. First, oftentimes one would like the flexibility to produce different
results, e.g., stronger or weaker style transfer. Second, in
many cases the best working point is different for different
inputs. Last, it is hard to predict the optimal working point,
especially when the full objective is complex and when ad-

3215

