Block Annotation: Better Image Annotation with Sub-Image Decomposition
Hubert Lin

Paul Upchurch

Kavita Bala

Cornell University

Cornell University

Cornell University

Abstract
Image datasets with high-quality pixel-level annotations
are valuable for semantic segmentation: labelling every
pixel in an image ensures that rare classes and small objects are annotated. However, full-image annotations are
expensive, with experts spending up to 90 minutes per image.
We propose block sub-image annotation as a replacement
for full-image annotation. Despite the attention cost of frequent task switching, we find that block annotations can
be crowdsourced at higher quality compared to full-image
annotation with equal monetary cost using existing annotation tools developed for full-image annotation. Surprisingly,
we find that 50% pixels annotated with blocks allows semantic segmentation to achieve equivalent performance to
100% pixels annotated. Furthermore, as little as 12% of
pixels annotated allows performance as high as 98% of the
performance with dense annotation. In weakly-supervised
settings, block annotation outperforms existing methods by
3-4% (absolute) given equivalent annotation time. To recover the necessary global structure for applications such as
characterizing spatial context and affordance relationships,
we propose an effective method to inpaint block-annotated
images with high-quality labels without additional human
effort. As such, fewer annotations can also be used for these
applications compared to full-image annotation.

1. Introduction
Recent large-scale computer vision datasets place a heavy
emphasis on high-quality fully dense annotations (in which
over 90% of the pixels are labelled) for hundreds of thousands of images. Dense annotations are valuable for both
semantic segmentation and applications beyond segmentation such as characterizing spatial context and affordance
relationships [11, 23]. The long-tail distribution of classes
means it is difficult to gather annotations for rare classes, especially if these classes are difficult to segment. Annotating
every pixel in an image ensures that pixels corresponding to
rare classes or small objects are labelled. Dense annotations
also capture pixels that form the boundary between classes.
For applications such as understanding spatial context between classes or affordance relationships, dense annotations

are required for principled conclusions to be drawn. In the
past, polygon annotation tools have enabled partially dense
annotations (in which small semantic regions are densely
annotated) to be crowdsourced at scale with public crowd
workers. These tools paved the way for the cost-effective creation of large-scale partially dense datasets such as [8, 37].
Despite the success of these annotation tools, fully dense
datasets have relied extensively on expensive expert annotators [60, 14, 41, 64, 42] and private crowdworkers [11].
We propose annotation of small blocks of pixels as a
stand-in replacement for full-image annotation (figure 1).
We find that these annotations can be effectively gathered
by crowdworkers, and that annotation of a sparse number of
blocks per image can train a high performance segmentation
network. We further show these sparsely annotated images
can be extended automatically to full-image annotations.
We show block annotation has:
• Wide applicability. (Section 3) Block annotations can be
effectively crowdsourced at higher quality compared to full
annotation. It is easy to implement and works with existing
advances in image annotation.
• Cost-efficient Design. (Section 3) Block annotation reflects a cost-efficient design paradigm (while current research focuses on reducing annotation time). This is reminiscent of gamification and citizen science where enjoyable
tasks lead to low-cost high-engagement work.
• Complex Region Annotation. (Section 3) Block annotation shifts focus from categorical regions to spatial regions.
When annotating categorical regions, workers segment simple objects before complex objects. With spatial regions,
informative complex regions are forced to be annotated.
• Weakly-Supervised Performance. (Section 4) Block annotation is competitive in weakly-supervised settings, outperforming existing methods by 3-4% (absolute) given equivalent annotation time.
• Scalable Performance. (Section 4) Full-supervision performance is achieved by annotating 50% of blocks per image.
Thus, blocks can be annotated until desired performance is
achieved, in contrast to methods such as scribbles.
• Scalable Structure. (Section 5) Block-annotated images
can be effectively inpainted with high quality labels without
additional human effort.
15290

