An Efficient Solution to the Homography-Based Relative Pose Problem With a
Common Reference Direction
Yaqing Ding1 , Jian Yang1 , Jean Ponce2,3 , and Hui Kong1,4
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{dingyaqing,csjyang,konghui}@njust.edu.cn

3

2

jean.ponce@inria.fr

Département d’informatique de l’ENS, ENS, CNRS, PSL University, Paris, France

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to two-view
minimal-case relative pose problems based on homography
with a common reference direction. We explore the rank-1
constraint on the difference between the Euclidean homography matrix and the corresponding rotation, and propose
an efficient two-step solution for solving both the calibrated
and partially calibrated (unknown focal length) problems.
We derive new 3.5-point, 3.5-point, 4-point solvers for two
cameras such that the two focal lengths are unknown but
equal, one of them is unknown, and both are unknown and
possibly different, respectively. We present detailed analyses and comparisons with existing 6- and 7-point solvers,
including results with smart phone images.

INRIA, Paris, France

4

IAAI Nanjing, Horizon Robotics

relative pose estimation with a common reference direction.
The main contributions of this paper are:
• A rank-1 constraint on the difference between the
Euclidean homography matrix and the corresponding
rotation is introduced to formulate the problem efficiently.
• Based on this constraint, we propose an efficient twostep solution for eliminating part of the unknowns
from the original equations.
• This allows us to solve the homography-based relative
pose problems with a common direction, including the
calibrated case (3-point), two cameras with equal focal lengths (3.5-point), two cameras where one is calibrated and the other’s focal length is unknown (3.5point), and two cameras with different focal lengths
(4-point).

1. Introduction

2. Related work

RANSAC [7] has been established as one of the most
successful techniques for model estimation from data with
outliers. Using a minimal point-correspondence is of extreme importance for handling large amounts of outliers
in the image correspondences [8]. However, reducing the
number of point correspondence requires reasonable assumptions or extra data, e.g., coplanar points, planar motion, pure rotation or translation, etc. When a common reference direction (e.g.,gravity) is known for both cameras,
there is only one unknown rotation parameter [41], and the
relative pose of the cameras has only four degrees of freedom. In practice, modern cellphones or camera-IMU (inertial measurement unit) systems have accelerometers which
can provide the gravity vector. Similar situations arise when
we detect a vanishing point. On the other hand, in indoor
and outdoor environments, planar parts of the scene are often dominant, such as floor, walls, doors, street or other
general structures. In this paper, we assume that the scene
contains at least one plane, and propose new homographybased minimal solvers to calibrated and partially calibrated

When the two cameras are semi-calibrated, in the sense
that the only unknown intrinsic parameter are the focal
lengths, at least seven point correspondences are needed to
recover the motion and focal lengths of two cameras [16, 2].
If the two cameras have the same focal length, at least six
point correspondences are needed [38, 27, 14, 21, 22]. One
the other hand, if 4 points are coplanar, only one extra point
is enough [40]. When one camera is fully calibrated and the
other one’s focal length is unknown, six point correspondences are needed as well [3, 21, 22]. Given a fully calibrated camera, it is well known that the relative pose problem can be solved using five point correspondences [33, 28,
21]. If the points are coplanar, homography-based solver
need four point correspondences [15]. Recently, it has been
shown that with a common direction, the two-view relative
pose problem can be solved with only three point correspondences using epipolar constraints [9, 32, 39] or homographies [37, 36]. In [11], the author propose a homographybased relative pose estimation assuming a known vertical
direction and a dominant ground plane.

1655

