Pareto Meets Huber: Efficiently Avoiding Poor Minima in Robust Estimation
Christopher Zach
Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden

Guillaume Bourmaud
University of Bordeaux, France

christopher.m.zach@gmail.com

guillaume.Bourmaud@u-bordeaux.fr

Abstract
Robust cost optimization is the task of fitting parameters
to data points containing outliers. In particular, we focus on
large-scale computer vision problems, such as bundle adjustment, where Non-Linear Least Square (NLLS) solvers
are the current workhorse. In this context, NLLS-based
state of the art algorithms have been designed either to
quickly improve the target objective and find a local minimum close to the initial value of the parameters, or to have
a strong ability to avoid poor local minima. In this paper,
we propose a novel algorithm relying on multi-objective optimization which allows to match those two properties. We
experimentally demonstrate that our algorithm has an ability to avoid poor local minima that is on par with the best
performing algorithms with a faster decrease of the target
objective.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision problems can be stated as finding the parameters of a generative model that explain best
the observed data points. The assumption, that the observed data points are functions of unknown parameters corrupted by known Gaussian noise, leads to non-linear leastsquares (NLLS) minimization tasks to obtain a maximumlikelihood estimate of the unknowns. One advantage of
NLLS problems is that minimizers can be found efficiently
by leveraging second-order methods. In practice not all observations are just corrupted by non-problematic Gaussian
noise, but an unknown fraction of data points may be proper
outliers subject to an arbitrary (but independent) noise process. In order to cope with such outlier data points, robust
estimation (a.k.a. m-estimation [18]) replaces the squared
residuals in the NLLS problem with terms based on socalled robust kernels (or robust functions), which reduces
the impact of large residuals. When the amount of outliers is large compared to the number of inliers, as it is the
case for difficult matching scenarios, it is necessary to use
a non-convex kernel, such as Tukey’s Biweight, to significantly reduce the influence of outliers. However, summing

such non-convex functions results in an overall highly nonconvex cost function with many local minima. As a consequence, standard approaches such as Iterated Reweighted
Least Squares (IRLS), which performs well with convex
kernels (e.g. Huber kernel), easily get trapped in poor local minima for non-convex robust kernels. In order to avoid
those poor local minima, state of the art approaches either
smooth or alternatively “lift” the cost function before applying an NLLS solver. Thus, both types of methods effectively modify or distort the target objective to some extent.
In the specific context, where the practitioner seeks a
compromise between efficiency and accuracy, as e.g. in
real-time applications, it is also important to select an algorithm that quickly decreases the target objective. Such
behavior allows the practitioner to stop the optimization
process at any time (e.g. when a time budget is exhausted)
with the guarantee that the initial cost was significantly reduced. Smoothing approaches do not possess this feature
while, as it experimentally shown in the paper, lifting-based
approaches sometimes have troubles avoiding poor minima.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel NLLSbased algorithm that is inspired by Multi-Objective Optimization (MOO). To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first robust estimation algorithm that both quickly decreases
the target objective and possesses a strong ability to avoid
poor local minima. More precisely, our contributions are:
1. we identify a major element of the success of liftingbased approaches and are therefore able to easily construct failure cases,
2. we propose to use an MOO approach to obtain an algorithm able of both avoiding poor local minima and
quickly decreasing the target objective,
3. and we derive an efficient Levenberg-Marquardt-MOO
method yielding cooperative minimization steps.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec. 2 discusses the related work while Sec. 3 introduces important
definitions and notations regarding robust estimation. Our
contributions are detailed in Sec. 4 and Sec. 5. Experimental results and a conclusion are provided in Sec. 6 and 7,
respectively.
110243

