Exploring Overall Contextual Information for Image Captioning in Human-Like
Cognitive Style

1

Hongwei Ge1 , Zehang Yan1 , Kai Zhang1 , Mingde Zhao2 , Liang Sun1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Mila, McGill University, Montréal, Canada
{hwge,liangsun}@dlut.edu.cn, mingde.zhao@mail.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Image captioning is a research hotspot where encoderdecoder models combining convolutional neural network
(CNN) and long short-term memory (LSTM) achieve
promising results. Despite significant progress, these models generate sentences differently from human cognitive
styles. Existing models often generate a complete sentence
from the first word to the end, without considering the influence of the following words on the whole sentence generation. In this paper, we explore the utilization of a human-like
cognitive style, i.e., building overall cognition for the image
to be described and the sentence to be constructed, for enhancing computer image understanding. This paper first
proposes a Mutual-aid network structure with Bidirectional LSTMs (MaBi-LSTMs) for acquiring overall contextual
information. In the training process, the forward and backward LSTMs encode the succeeding and preceding words
into their respective hidden states by simultaneously constructing the whole sentence in a complementary manner. In
the captioning process, the LSTM implicitly utilizes the subsequent semantic information contained in its hidden states.
In fact, MaBi-LSTMs can generate two sentences in forward
and backward directions. To bridge the gap between crossdomain models and generate a sentence with higher quality, we further develop a cross-modal attention mechanism
to retouch the two sentences by fusing their salient parts as
well as the salient areas of the image. Experimental results on the Microsoft COCO dataset show that the proposed
model improves the performance of encoder-decoder models and achieves state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
As a multimodal task, image caption generation associates with expressing image content in a sentence accurately [17], which is called ‘translation’ from image to language
[3, 37]. Providing an accurate description for an image is a

Image

MaBi-LSTMs
LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

1) A woman standing next to two bags of luggage.
2) A women stands on the sidewalk with her luggage.

CNN

Cross-modal Attention Module
AttV

AttV

AttV

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

AttL

AttL

AttL

A smiling woman standing on a sidewalk beside two pieces of luggage.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed model. In the training process,
image features extracted by CNN are input into MaBi-LSTMs to
generate two sentences in an interactive manner. In the captioning
process, the two sentences and image features are input into crossmodal attention module for generating the final sentence.

challenging task for computers. The difficulties lie in that it
not only requires the recognition of objects, attributes, and
activities in an image but also the establishment of fluent
sentences satisfying grammatical constraints and rules.
Extensive studies have been conducted and achieve
promising results by combing advanced technologies of
computer vision and natural language processing. According to the different ways of generating sentences, the existing methods generally fall into three categories [16], i.e.,
the template-based, the transfer-based and the deep modelbased methods. The template-based methods utilize multiple classifiers to recognize objects, attributes and activities in an image by mapping from image to semantics, and
then fill the identified semantic words into a manually designed template to make a sentence [34, 35, 18]. However, their performance noticeably deteriorates when dealing
with more complex images due to the limitation of the number of classifiers and the lack of flexibility in templates.
Different from the template-based methods, the transferbased methods employ retrieving techniques to find visu-

1754

