DeepPruner: Learning Efficient Stereo Matching via Differentiable PatchMatch
Shivam Duggal1 , Shenlong Wang1,2 , Wei-Chiu Ma1,3 , Rui Hu1 and Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Uber ATG, 2 University of Toronto, 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
Our goal is to significantly speed up the runtime of current state-of-the-art stereo algorithms to enable real-time
inference. Towards this goal, we developed a differentiable
PatchMatch module that allows us to discard most disparities without requiring full cost volume evaluation. We then
exploit this representation to learn which range to prune
for each pixel. By progressively reducing the search space
and effectively propagating such information, we are able
to efficiently compute the cost volume for high likelihood
hypotheses and achieve savings in both memory and computation. Finally, an image guided refinement module is
exploited to further improve the performance. Since all
our components are differentiable, the full network can
be trained end-to-end. Our experiments show that our
method achieves competitive results on KITTI and SceneFlow datasets while running in real-time at 62ms.

1. Introduction
Stereo estimation is the process of estimating depth (or
disparity) from a pair of images with overlapping fields of
view. It is a fundamental building block for many applications such as robotics and computational photography. Despite many decades of research, stereo estimation of realworld scenes remains an open problem. State-of-the-art approaches still have difficulties tackling repetitive structures,
texture-less regions, occlusions and thin objects. Furthermore, runtime is also a challenge. While real-time inference is required for many applications, it is hard to achieve
without a significant compromise on accuracy.
Classic stereo approaches typically start by computing
robust feature representations [38, 36, 31, 20, 41]. A cost
volume is then computed for each pixel, encoding the similarity between its representation and the representation of
all pixels along the corresponding epipolar line on the other
image. Post-processing techniques [14, 30] are typically
exploited for smoothing and noise removal. The lowestcost disparity value is then picked for each pixel as the final
prediction. Yet this pipeline is usually computationally demanding, due to the size of the solution space and the use of

sophisticated post-processing procedures. A plethora of acceleration approaches have been proposed toward achieving
real-time performance, such as solution space pruning [6],
coarse-to-fine cost volume computation [16] and efficient
variational optimization [10]. Among them, PatchMatch
[3] is one of the most popular techniques used to achieve
competitive performance with real-time inference [5, 6].
More recently, with the flourishing of deep learning,
networks inspired by traditional stereo matching pipelines
have been designed. They achieve state-of-the-art results
by learning deep representations [22, 23] and building deep
cost volumes [15, 8, 16]. While these approaches can be
accelerated with GPUs, memory consumption and computation requirement is still a concern for most architectures.
An alternative is to design a regression network that takes
a stereo pair as input and directly regresses disparity without explicit matching or cost volume construction. Unfortunately, there is typically a large performance gap between
real-time methods and best-performing algorithms.
Our goal is to significantly speed up the runtime of current state-of-the-art deep stereo algorithms to enable realtime inference. We build our model based on two key observations: first, the search space for stereo matching is large,
yet a lot of candidates can be confidently discarded without
requiring full evaluation; second, due to the coherent nature
of the world, adjacent pixels often possess similar disparities. This suggests that once we know the disparity of one
pixel, we can effectively propagate such information to its
neighbors.
With these intuitions in mind, we propose DeepPruner,
a real-time stereo matching model. Specifically, we first
leverage a novel differentiable PatchMatch algorithm to obtain a sparse representation of the cost volume. We then
exploit this representation to learn which range to prune
for each pixel. Finally, an image guided refinement module is exploited to further improve the performance. Since
all components are differentiable, the full network can be
trained in an end-to-end fashion. By progressively reducing
the search space and effectively propagating such information, we are able to efficiently compute the cost volume for
high likelihood hypotheses and significantly reduces both
memory consumption and computational cost.
4321
4384

