Graph-Based Object Classification for Neuromorphic Vision Sensing
Yin Bi, Aaron Chadha, Alhabib Abbas, Eirina Bourtsoulatze and Yiannis Andreopoulos
Department of Electronic & Electrical Engineering
University College London, London, U.K.
{yin.bi.16, aaron.chadha.14, alhabib.abbas.13, e.bourtsoulatze, i.andreopoulos}@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Neuromorphic vision sensing (NVS) devices represent
visual information as sequences of asynchronous discrete
events (a.k.a., “spikes”) in response to changes in scene reflectance. Unlike conventional active pixel sensing (APS),
NVS allows for significantly higher event sampling rates at
substantially increased energy efficiency and robustness to
illumination changes. However, object classification with
NVS streams cannot leverage on state-of-the-art convolutional neural networks (CNNs), since NVS does not produce frame representations. To circumvent this mismatch
between sensing and processing with CNNs, we propose
a compact graph representation for NVS. We couple this
with novel residual graph CNN architectures and show that,
when trained on spatio-temporal NVS data for object classification, such residual graph CNNs preserve the spatial
and temporal coherence of spike events, while requiring less
computation and memory. Finally, to address the absence
of large real-world NVS datasets for complex recognition
tasks, we present and make available a 100k dataset of NVS
recordings of the American sign language letters, acquired
with an iniLabs DAVIS240c device under real-world conditions.

1. Introduction
Object classification finds numerous applications in visual surveillance, human-machine interfaces, image retrieval and visual content analysis systems. Following the
prevalence and advances of CMOS active pixel sensing
(APS), deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
already achieved good performance in APS-based object
classification problems [28, 24]. However, APS-based sensing is known to be cumbersome for machine learning systems because of limited frame rate, high redundancy between frames, blurriness due to slow shutter adjustment under varying illumination, and high power requirements [18].
Inspired by the photoreceptor-bipolar-ganglion cell information flow in low-level mammalian vision, researchers

Figure 1: Examples of objects captured by APS and neuromorphic vision sensors. Left: Conventional APS image. Right: Events stream from NVS sensor (Red:ON,
Blue:OFF).
have devised cameras based on neuromorphic vision sensing (NVS) [18, 51, 42]. NVS hardware outputs a stream
of asynchronous ON/OFF address events (a.k.a., “spikes”)
that indicate the changes in scene reflectance. An example is shown in Fig 1, where the NVS-based spike events
correspond to a stream of coordinates and timestamps of reflectance events triggering ON or OFF in an asynchronous
manner. This new principle significantly reduces the memory usage, power consumption and redundant information
across time, while offering low latency and very high dynamic range.
However, it has been recognized that current NVSbased object classification systems are inferior to APSbased counterparts because of the limited amount of work
on NVS object classification and the lack of NVS data with
reliable annotations to train and test with [18, 42, 60]. In
this work, we improve on these two issues by firstly proposing graph-based object classification method for NVS data.
Previous approaches have either artificially grouped events
into frame forms [65, 16, 13, 12] or derived complex feature descriptors [57, 15, 29], which do not always provide
for good representations for complex tasks like object classification. Such approaches dilute the advantages of compactness and asynchronicity of NVS streams, and may be
sensitive to the noise and change of camera motion or viewpoint orientation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
1491

