Implicit Surface Representations as Layers in Neural Networks
Mateusz Michalkiewicz2 , Jhony K. Pontes1 , Dominic Jack1 , Mahsa Baktashmotlagh2 , Anders Eriksson2
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology
2
School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, University of Queensland

Abstract
Implicit shape representations, such as Level Sets, provide a very elegant formulation for performing computations involving curves and surfaces. However, including implicit representations into canonical Neural Network formulations is far from straightforward. This has consequently
restricted existing approaches to shape inference, to significantly less effective representations, perhaps most commonly voxels occupancy maps or sparse point clouds.
To overcome this limitation we propose a novel formulation that permits the use of implicit representations of
curves and surfaces, of arbitrary topology, as individual layers in Neural Network architectures with end-to-end trainability. Specifically, we propose to represent the output as
an oriented level set of a continuous and discretised embedding function. We investigate the benefits of our approach
on the task of 3D shape prediction from a single image and
demonstrate its ability to produce a more accurate reconstruction compared to voxel-based representations. We further show that our model is flexible and can be applied to a
variety of shape inference problems.

1. Introduction
This work concerns the use of implicit surface representations in established learning frameworks. More specifically, we consider how to integrate and treat Level Set representations as singular and individual layers in Neural Networks architectures. In canonical Neural Networks the output of each layer is obtained as the composition of basic
function primitives, i.e. matrix multiplication, vector addition and simple non-linear activation functions, applied to
its input. By allowing the use of a more expressive surface
model, such as Level Sets, our proposed formulation will
permit end-to-end trainable architectures capable of inferring richer shapes with much finer details than previously
possible, with comparable memory requirements, figure 1.
As a research field, 3D understanding & reconstruction
has achieved great progress trying to tackle many categories
of problems such as structure from motion [14], multi-view

Figure 1. Examples of different 3D shape representations. (left)
Ground-truth (polygon mesh), (middle) Voxels occupancy map,
(right) Level Set representation. Here the latter two representations are both defined on a discrete Cartesian grid with a resolution
of 203 .

stereo [11] and reconstruction from a single image [5]. The
application domain includes, but is not limited to, roboticassisted surgery, self-driving cars, intelligent robots, and
helping visually impaired people to interact with the surrounding world via augmented reality.
A majority of existing learning-based approaches involving 3D shape or structure are based on voxel occupancy
[3, 12, 29, 30], but a considerable amount of attention has
also been put on point clouds [10, 28] and explicit shape
parameterisation [21]. Each of these representations come
with their own advantages and disadvantages, in particular
for the application of shape inference in a learning framework, see figure 2. Explicit representations, such as triangle
meshes are exceedingly popular in the graphics community
as they provide a compact representation able to capture
detailed geometry of most 3D objects. However, they are
irregular in nature, not uniquely defined, and they cannot
be easily integrated into learning frameworks. Voxel occupancy maps on the other hand are defined on fixed regular
grids making them exceptionally well suited for learning
applications, in particular convolutional approaches. However, unless the resolution of the tessellated grid is high this
class of representations typically result in coarse reconstructions. Point clouds are also commonly used to describe
the shape of 3D objects. However, this approach suffers
from many of the same drawbacks as polygon meshes and
is, in addition, only able to provide sparse representations
of shapes. In this work we instead argue that implicit representations, or level sets, constitutes a more appropriate
choice for the task of learned shape inference. Similar to
voxels, level sets are defined on regular grids, making them
14743

