ACNet: Strengthening the Kernel Skeletons for Powerful CNN via Asymmetric
Convolution Blocks

1

Xiaohan Ding 1 Yuchen Guo 2 Guiguang Ding 1 Jungong Han 3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist);
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University;
Institute for Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
WMG Data Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom
dxh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
As designing appropriate Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) architecture in the context of a given application
usually involves heavy human works or numerous GPU
hours, the research community is soliciting the architectureneutral CNN structures, which can be easily plugged into
multiple mature architectures to improve the performance
on our real-world applications. We propose Asymmetric
Convolution Block (ACB), an architecture-neutral structure as a CNN building block, which uses 1D asymmetric
convolutions to strengthen the square convolution kernels.
For an off-the-shelf architecture, we replace the standard
square-kernel convolutional layers with ACBs to construct
an Asymmetric Convolutional Network (ACNet), which can
be trained to reach a higher level of accuracy. After training, we equivalently convert the ACNet into the same original architecture, thus requiring no extra computations anymore. We have observed that ACNet can improve the performance of various models on CIFAR and ImageNet by a
clear margin. Through further experiments, we attribute
the effectiveness of ACB to its capability of enhancing the
model’s robustness to rotational distortions and strengthening the central skeleton parts of square convolution kernels.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has achieved
great success in visual understanding, which makes them
useful for various applications in wearable devices, security
systems, mobile phones, automobiles, etc. As the frontend devices are usually limited in computational resources
and demand real-time inference, these applications require

yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com
jungonghan77@gmail.com

CNN that delivers high accuracy with the constraints of a
certain level of computational budgets. Thus it may not be
practical to enhance the model by simply employing more
trainable parameters and complicated connections. Therefore, we consider it meaningful to improve the performance
of CNN with no extra inference-time computations, memory footprint, or energy consumption.
On the other hand, along with the advancements in the
CNN architecture designing literature, the performance of
the off-the-shelf models has been significantly improved.
However, when the existing models cannot meet our specific needs, we may not be allowed to customize a new architecture at the costs of heavy human works or numerous
GPU hours [36]. Recently, the research community is soliciting innovative architecture-neutral CNN structures, e.g.,
SE blocks [14] and quasi-hexagonal kernels [30], which can
be directly combined with various up-to-date architectures
to improve the performance on our real-world applications.
Some recent investigations on CNN architectures focus
on 1) how the layers are connected with each other, e.g.,
simply stacked together [20, 28], through identity mapping
[13, 31, 35] or densely connected [15] and 2) how the outputs of different layers are combined to increase the quality of learned representations [16, 31, 32, 33]. Considering
this, in quest of a generic architecture-neutral CNN structure which can be combined with numerous architectures,
we seek to strengthen standard convolutional layers by digging into an orthogonal aspect: the relationship between the
weights and their spatial locations in the kernels.
In this paper, we propose Asymmetric Convolution
Block (ACB), an innovative structure as a building block to
replace the standard convolutional layers with square kernels, e.g., 3 × 3 layers, which are widely used in modern
CNN. Concretely, for the replacement of a d × d layer,

1911

