Ego-Pose Estimation and Forecasting as Real-Time PD Control
Ye Yuan Kris Kitani
Carnegie Mellon University
{yyuan2, kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu

Figure 1. Proposed method estimates camera wearer’s 3D poses (solid) and forecasts future poses (translucent) in real-time.

Abstract
We propose the use of a proportional-derivative (PD)
control based policy learned via reinforcement learning
(RL) to estimate and forecast 3D human pose from egocentric videos. The method learns directly from unsegmented egocentric videos and motion capture data consisting of various complex human motions (e.g., crouching,
hopping, bending, and motion transitions). We propose
a video-conditioned recurrent control technique to forecast physically-valid and stable future motions of arbitrary
length. We also introduce a value function based fail-safe
mechanism which enables our method to run as a single
pass algorithm over the video data. Experiments with both
controlled and in-the-wild data show that our approach outperforms previous art in both quantitative metrics and visual quality of the motions, and is also robust enough to
transfer directly to real-world scenarios. Additionally, our
time analysis shows that the combined use of our pose estimation and forecasting can run at 30 FPS, making it suitable for real-time applications.1

1. Introduction
With a single wearable camera, our goal is to estimate
and forecast a person’s pose sequence for a variety of complex motions. Estimating and forecasting complex human
1 Project page: https://www.ye-yuan.com/ego-pose

motions with egocentric cameras can be the cornerstone of
many useful applications. In medical monitoring, the inferred motions can help physicians remotely diagnose patients’ condition in motor rehabilitation. In virtual or augmented reality, anticipating motions can help allocate limited computational resources to provide better responsiveness. For athletes, the forecasted motions can be integrated
into a coaching system to offer live feedback and reinforce
good movements. In all these applications, human motions
are very complex, as periodical motions (e.g., walking, running) are often mixed with non-periodical motions (e.g.,
turning, bending, crouching). It is challenging to estimate
and forecast such complex human motions from egocentric
videos due to the multi-modal nature of the data.
It has been shown that if the task of pose estimation can
be limited to a single mode of action such as running or
walking, it is possible to estimate a physically-valid pose
sequence. Recent work by Yuan and Kitani [67] has formulated egocentric pose estimation as a Markov decision
process (MDP): a humanoid agent driven by a control policy with visual input to generate a pose sequence inside a
physics simulator. They use generative adversarial imitation
learning (GAIL [14]) to solve for the optimal control policy. By design, this approach guarantees that the estimated
pose sequence is physically-valid. However, their method
focuses on a single action modality (i.e., simple periodical motions including walking and running). The approach
110082

