Anchor Loss: Modulating Loss Scale based on Prediction Difficulty
Serim Ryou
California Institute of Technology

Seong-Gyun Jeong
CODE42.ai

Pietro Perona
California Institute of Technology

Abstract
We propose a novel loss function that dynamically rescales the cross entropy based on prediction difficulty regarding a sample. Deep neural network architectures in
image classification tasks struggle to disambiguate visually
similar objects. Likewise, in human pose estimation symmetric body parts often confuse the network with assigning
indiscriminative scores to them. This is due to the output
prediction, in which only the highest confidence label is selected without taking into consideration a measure of uncertainty. In this work, we define the prediction difficulty
as a relative property coming from the confidence score gap
between positive and negative labels. More precisely, the
proposed loss function penalizes the network to avoid the
score of a false prediction being significant. To demonstrate
the efficacy of our loss function, we evaluate it on two different domains: image classification and human pose estimation. We find improvements in both applications by achieving higher accuracy compared to the baseline methods.

1. Introduction
In many computer vision tasks, deep neural networks
produce bi-modal prediction scores when the labeled sample point is confused with the other class. Figure 1 illustrates some examples of network predictions with the
presence of visually confusing cases. In all cases, though
the network produces a non-trivial score about the correct
label, the output prediction is wrong by taking the highest confidence label. For examples, human body parts
are mostly composed of symmetric pairs. Even advanced
deep architectures [19, 34] are vulnerable to mistaking subtle differences of the left-and-right body parts [39]. Also,
in image recognition, the output label confusion of lookalike instances is an unsolved problem [21]. Nevertheless,
these tasks employ straightforward loss functions to optimize model parameters, e.g., mean squared error or cross
entropy.
In practice, look-alike instances incur an ambiguity in
prediction scores, but it is hard to capture subtle differences
in the network outputs by measuring the divergence of true

Figure 1. The overview of anchor loss. A network is confused
about left-and-right body parts due to the symmetrical appearance
of the human body, and struggles to disambiguate visually similar
objects. Although the network output scores on the correct labels
are relatively high, the final prediction is always chosen by the
index of the highest score, resulting in a wrong prediction. Our
loss function is designed to resolve this issue by penalizing more
than cross entropy when the non-target (background) probability
is higher than the anchor probability.

and predicted distributions. Most classification tasks afterward make a final decision by choosing a label with the
highest confidence score. We see that the relative score from
the output distribution becomes an informative cue to resolve the confusion regarding the final prediction. We thus
propose a novel loss function, which self-regulates its scale
based on the relative difficulty of the prediction.
We introduce anchor loss that adaptively reshapes the
loss values using the network outputs. Specifically, the proposed loss function evaluates the prediction difficulties using the relative confidence gap between the target and background output scores, produced by the network, to capture
the uncertainty. In other words, we increase the loss for hard
samples (Figure 2a), while we down-weight the loss when
a sample leads the network to assign a relatively high confidence score about the target class (Figure 2c). Finally, the
anchor loss alleviates the need for a post-processing step by
taking the prediction difficulty into account while training.
This idea, adjusting the loss scales based on prediction
difficulty, has been applied to the task of object detection,
which inherently suffers from severe class imbalance issue
(countless background vs. scarce object proposals). Focal loss [31] is designed to overcome such class imbalance
by avoiding major gradient updates on trivial predictions.

5992

