ACE: Adapting to Changing Environments for Semantic Segmentation
Zuxuan Wu1 , Xin Wang2 , Joseph E. Gonzalez2 , Tom Goldstein1 , Larry S. Davis1
1

University of Maryland,

Abstract
Deep neural networks exhibit exceptional accuracy when
they are trained and tested on the same data distributions.
However, neural classifiers are often extremely brittle when
confronted with domain shift—changes in the input distribution that occur over time. We present ACE, a framework for semantic segmentation that dynamically adapts
to changing environments over time. By aligning the distribution of labeled training data from the original source
domain with the distribution of incoming data in a shifted
domain, ACE synthesizes labeled training data for environments as it sees them. This stylized data is then used
to update a segmentation model so that it performs well
in new environments. To avoid forgetting knowledge from
past environments, we introduce a memory that stores feature statistics from previously seen domains. These statistics can be used to replay images in any of the previously
observed domains, thus preventing catastrophic forgetting.
In addition to standard batch training using stochastic gradient decent (SGD), we also experiment with fast adaptation methods based on adaptive meta-learning. Extensive
experiments are conducted on two datasets from SYNTHIA,
the results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach when adapting to a number of tasks.

1. Introduction
When computer vision systems are deployed in the real
world, they are exposed to changing environments and nonstationary input distributions that pose major challenges.
For example, a deep network optimized using images collected on sunny days with clear skies may fail drastically
at night under different lighting conditions. In fact, it has
been recently observed that deep networks demonstrate severe instability even under small changes to the input distribution [12], let alone when confronted with dynamically
changing streams of information.
The problem of domain shift can be avoided by collecting sufficient training data to cover all possible input distributions that occur at test time. However, the expense of

2

UC Berkeley

Task
Memory

Task:

Task:

Source
task

Figure 1: A conceptual overview of the framework. ACE
adapts a model trained on a source task to a sequence of target tasks. This is done by aligning the feature statistics of
labeled images from a source task with incoming images of
the target task. This alignment produces labeled images in
the target domain that can be used to update the segmentation model. A memory unit also facilitates replay of images
from domains seen in the past to prevent forgetting.

collecting and manually annotating data makes this infeasible in many applications. This is particularly true for detailed visual understanding tasks like object detection and
semantic segmentation where image annotation is laborintensive. It is worth noting that humans are capable of
“lifelong learning,” in which new tasks and environments
are analyzed using accumulated knowledge from the past.
However, achieving the same goal in deep neural networks
is non-trivial as (i) new data domains come in at real time
without labels, and (ii) deep networks suffer from catastrophic forgetting [33], in which performance drops on previously learned tasks when optimizing for new tasks.
We consider the lifelong learning problem of adapting a
pre-trained model to dynamically changing environments,
whose distributions reflect disparate lighting and weather
conditions. In particular, we assume access to image-label
pairs from an original source environment, and only unlabeled images from new target environments that are not observed in the training data. Furthermore, we consider the
difficulties posed by learning over time, in which target environments appear sequentially.
We focus on the specific task of semantic segmenta12121

