Few-Shot Generalization for Single-Image 3D Reconstruction via Priors
Bram Wallace
Cornell University

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

bw462@cornell.edu

bharathh@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Recent work on single-view 3D reconstruction shows impressive results, but has been restricted to a few fixed categories where extensive training data is available. The problem of generalizing these models to new classes with limited training data is largely open. To address this problem,
we present a new model architecture that reframes singleview 3D reconstruction as learnt, category agnostic refinement of a provided, category-specific prior. The provided
prior shape for a novel class can be obtained from as few
as one 3D shape from this class. Our model can start reconstructing objects from the novel class using this prior
without seeing any training image for this class and without
any retraining. Our model outperforms category-agnostic
baselines and remains competitive with more sophisticated
baselines that finetune on the novel categories. Additionally, our network is capable of improving the reconstruction given multiple views despite not being trained on task
of multi-view reconstruction.

1. Introduction
A key aspect of visual understanding is recovering the
3D structure of a scene. While classically such recovery
of 3D structure has used multiple views of a scene, there
has been recent research on 3D reconstruction from a single image using machine learning techniques. However, recovering 3D structure from a single image is a challenging
learning problem. First, the output space is not just very
large (e.g., represented as voxels, a 100 × 100 × 100 grid is
already a million-dimensional space) but also very structured: of all possible 3D shapes that are consistent with
an image of a chair, a vanishingly small number are valid
chair shapes. To perform well, the machine learning algorithm needs to capture a prior over possible chair shapes.
Large, deep networks can indeed capture such priors when
provided enough chairs for training, and this has been the
dominant approach taken by prior work. However this leads
to the second challenge: the cost of acquiring training data.
Training data for single view 3D reconstruction requires

Figure 1. We train on 7 base categories and test the model’s fewshot transfer ability on 6 novel categories. Our model takes in an
image of the object to reconstruct along with a category-specific
prior shape which can be as simple as a single novel class example. It then optionally iteratively refines this prior to produce a
reconstruction.

either 3D shapes [5] or at the very least multiple views of
the same physical object [33]. Such training data can be
acquired for a small number of categories, but is too expensive to obtain for every single object class we might want to
reconstruct. Prior work attempts to circumvent this issue by
training a category-agnostic model [32, 33], but such models might underperform due to ignoring category-specific
structure in the output space. Therefore, we ask: is it possible to capture category-specific shape priors for singleimage 3D reconstruction from very limited training data?
In this paper, we show that the answer is yes. We present
a simple few-shot transfer learning approach that can very
13818

