Constructing Self-motivated Pyramid Curriculums for Cross-Domain Semantic
Segmentation: A Non-Adversarial Approach

1

Qing Lian1 , Fengmao Lv1 , Lixin Duan1 , Boqing Gong2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Google

{lianqing1997, lxduan}@gmail.com, fengmaolv@126.com, boqinggo@outlook.com

Abstract
We propose a new approach, called self-motivated pyramid curriculum domain adaptation (PyCDA), to facilitate
the adaptation of semantic segmentation neural networks
from synthetic source domains to real target domains. Our
approach draws on an insight connecting two existing
works: curriculum domain adaptation and self-training. Inspired by the former, PyCDA constructs a pyramid curriculum which contains various properties about the target domain. Those properties are mainly about the desired label
distributions over the target domain images, image regions,
and pixels. By enforcing the segmentation neural network
to observe those properties, we can improve the network’s
generalization capability to the target domain. Motivated
by the self-training, we infer this pyramid of properties by
resorting to the semantic segmentation network itself. Unlike prior work, we do not need to maintain any additional
models (e.g., logistic regression or discriminator networks)
or to solve min max problems which are often difficult to
optimize. We report state-of-the-art results for the adaptation from both GTAV and SYNTHIA to Cityscapes, two
popular settings in unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic segmentation1 .

(a) Synthetic images with labeling-free pixel-wise groundtruth annotations.

(b) Segmentation results of a real image with and without adaptation.

1. Introduction
The objective of semantic segmentation is to assign a semantic label to every pixel of an image. Over the past few
years, a great amount of effort has been made by the community to tackle this problem [23, 1, 41, 3, 21], leading to
sophisticated and high-performing deep convolutional neural networks as the main solution. However, to collect and
label images for training such networks is a very daunting work [6]. To alleviate the heavy annotation burden, a
promising alternative is to employ photo-realistic simulators to efficiently collect and label training data. Richter et
al. [28] use the GTAV game engine to aid user annotations,
1 Code available at https://github.com/lianqing11/pycda

Figure 1: Unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic
segmentation. The segmentation results for real images
can be significantly improved by explicit domain adaptation
techniques when we adapt a segmentation model trained using synthetic imagery.
resulting a dataset of 25 thousand synthetic urban scene images labeled in only 49 hours (about 7 seconds per image).
The clear visual mismatch between the synthetic
(source) domains and real (target) domains (cf. Figs. 3
and 4), however, inevitably causes significant performance
degradation when one applies the model trained on the
source domain to the real images of the target domain.
In order to better take advantage of the synthetic im-

6758

