Aligning Latent Spaces for 3D Hand Pose Estimation
Linlin Yang∗1 , Shile Li∗2 , Dongheui Lee2,3 , Angela Yao4
∗
Equal contribution
1
University of Bonn, Germany 2 Technical University of Munich, Germany
3
German Aerospace Center, Germany 4 National University of Singapore, Singapore

Abstract
Hand pose estimation from monocular RGB inputs is a
highly challenging task. Many previous works for monocular settings only used RGB information for training despite
the availability of corresponding data in other modalities
such as depth maps. In this work, we propose to learn a
joint latent representation that leverages other modalities
as weak labels to improve RGB-based hand pose estimation.
By design, our architecture is highly flexible in embedding
various diverse modalities such as heat maps, depth maps
and point clouds. In particular, we find that encoding and
decoding the point cloud of the hand surface can improve
the quality of the joint latent representations. Experiments
show that with the aid of other modalities during training,
our proposed method boosts the accuracy of RGB-based
hand pose estimation systems and significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art on two public benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Hand pose estimation plays an important role in areas
such as human activity analysis, human computer interaction, and robotics. Depth-based 3D hand pose estimation
methods are now highly accurate [25, 10, 28] largely due
to advancements from deep learning. Despite commodity
depth sensors being more commonplace, high-quality depth
maps can still only be captured indoors, thereby limiting
the environments in which depth-based methods can be deployed. Furthermore, simple RGB cameras, as well as existing RGB footage are still far more ubiquitous than depth
cameras and depth data. As such, there is still a need for
accurate RGB-based 3D hand pose estimation methods, especially from monocular viewpoints.
To tackle the ambiguities associated with monocular
RGB inputs, previous works have relied on large amounts of
training data [31, 12]. Gains from purely increasing dataset
size tend to saturate, because it is very difficult to obtain
accurate ground truth labels, i.e. 3D hand poses. Annotating 3D hand joint positions accurately is a difficult task

Figure 1: Latent space interpolation. The far left and far right
columns (dashed boxes) are generated poses and point clouds from
monocular RGB images sampled from the training data. Other
columns are generated from linear interpolations on the latent
space. The smoothness and consistency imply that different crossmodal latent spaces can be embedded and aligned into one shared
latent space.

and there is often little consensus between human annotators [20]. While several methods have been developed to
generate RGB images [12], there still exists a large domain
gap between synthesized and real-world data, limiting the
utility of synthetic data.
Even though accurate ground truth for RGB data is hard
to collect, there exists plenty of unlabelled RGB-D hand
data which can be leveraged together with labelled depth
maps. Cai et al. [2] first proposed the use of labelled depth
maps as regularizers to boost RGB-based methods. Yang et
al. [27] introduced a disentangled representation so that
viewpoint can be used as a weak label. Inspired by these
works, we aim to leverage multiple modalities as weak labels for enhancing RGB-based hand pose estimation.
In this paper, we consider different modalities of hand
data (e.g. RGB images, depth maps, point clouds, 3D poses,
heat maps and segmentation masks) and formulate RGBbased hand pose estimation as a cross-modal inference
problem. In particular, we propose the use of a multimodal variational autoencoder (VAE). VAEs are an attrac-

2335

