Very Long Natural Scenery Image Prediction by Outpainting
Zongxin Yang1,2 Jian Dong3 Ping Liu2 Yi Yang2 Shuicheng Yan4
1
SUSTech-UTS Joint Centre of CIS, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney 3 Qihoo 360 4 Yitu Technology
zongxin.yang@student.uts.edu.au, dongjian-iri@360.cn, {ping.liu,yi.yang}@uts.edu.au, shuicheng.yan@yitu-inc.com

Abstract
Outpainting

Comparing to image inpainting, image outpainting receives less attention due to two challenges in it. The first
challenge is how to keep the spatial and content consistency between generated images and original input. The
second challenge is how to maintain high quality in generated results, especially for multi-step generations in which
generated regions are spatially far away from the initial input. To solve the two problems, we devise some innovative
modules, named Skip Horizontal Connection and Recurrent Content Transfer, and integrate them into our designed
encoder-decoder structure. By this design, our network can
generate highly realistic outpainting prediction effectively
and efficiently. Other than that, our method can generate
new images with very long sizes while keeping the same
style and semantic content as the given input. To test the
effectiveness of the proposed architecture, we collect a new
scenery dataset with diverse, complicated natural scenes.
The experimental results on this dataset have demonstrated
the efficacy of our proposed network.

1. Introduction
Image outpainting, as illustrated in Fig. 1, is to generate new contents beyond the original boundaries for a given
image. The generated image should be consistent with the
given input, both on spatial configuration and semantic content. Although image outpainting can be used in various
applications, the solutions with promising results are still in
shortage due to the difficulties of this problem.
The difficulties for image outpainting exist in two aspects. First, it is not easy to keep the generated image consistent with the given input in terms of the spatial configuration and semantic content. Previous works, e.g., [28]
needs local warping to make sure there is no sudden change
between the input image and the generated region, especially around the boundaries of the two images. Second, it
is hard to make the generated image look realistic since it
has less contextual information comparing with image in-

?
Figure 1. Illustration of image outpainting in one step. Given an
image as input, image outpainting generates a new image with the
same size but outside the original boundary. The spatial configuration and semantic meaning between generated images and the
original input must keep consistent.
Prediction

Input
×N

...

Figure 2. Illustration of image outpainting for natural scenery images horizontally in multi-steps.

painting [2, 16].
For solving image outpainting problems, a few preliminary works were published [14, 23, 34, 28]. However, none
of those works [14, 23, 34, 28] utilize ConvNets. Those
works attempt to “search” image patch(es) from given candidates, concatenate the best match(es) with the original input spatially. Those works have their limitations: (1) they
need handcrafted features to summarize the image; (2) they
need image processing techniques, for example, local warping [28], to make sure there is no sudden visual change between input and generated images; (3) the final performance
is heavily dependent on the size of the candidate pool.
Inspired by the success of deep networks on inpainting
problems [17], we draw on a similar encoder-decoder structure with a global and a local adversarial loss, to solve image outpainting. In our architecture, the encoder is to compress the given input into a compact feature representation,
and the decoder generates a new image based on the compact feature representation. More than that, to solve the two
challenging problems in image outpainting, we make several innovative improvements in our architecture.
To make the generated images spatial and semantic consistent with original input, it is necessary to take full advantages of the information from the encoder and fuse it
into the decoder. For this purpose, we design a Skip Hori-

10561

