SpaceNet MVOI: a Multi-View Overhead Imagery Dataset
Nicholas Weir1 , David Lindenbaum2 , Alexei Bastidas3 , Adam Van Etten1 , Sean McPherson3 , Jacob
Shermeyer1 , Varun Kumar3 , and Hanlin Tang3
1

In-Q-Tel CosmiQ Works, [nweir, avanetten, jshermeyer]@iqt.org
Accenture Federal Services, david.lindenbaum@accenturefederal.com
3
Intel AI Lab, [alexei.a.bastidas, sean.mcpherson, varun.v.kumar, hanlin.tang]@intel.com
2

Abstract
Detection and segmentation of objects in overheard imagery is a challenging task. The variable density, random orientation, small size, and instance-to-instance heterogeneity of objects in overhead imagery calls for approaches distinct from existing models designed for natural
scene datasets. Though new overhead imagery datasets are
being developed, they almost universally comprise a single
view taken from directly overhead (“at nadir”), failing to
address a critical variable: look angle. By contrast, views
vary in real-world overhead imagery, particularly in dynamic scenarios such as natural disasters where first looks
are often over 40◦ off-nadir. This represents an important
challenge to computer vision methods, as changing view angle adds distortions, alters resolution, and changes lighting. At present, the impact of these perturbations for algorithmic detection and segmentation of objects is untested.
To address this problem, we present an open source MultiView Overhead Imagery dataset, termed SpaceNet MVOI,
with 27 unique looks from a broad range of viewing angles
(−32.5◦ to 54.0◦ ). Each of these images cover the same
665 km2 geographic extent and are annotated with 126,747
building footprint labels, enabling direct assessment of the
impact of viewpoint perturbation on model performance.
We benchmark multiple leading segmentation and object
detection models on: (1) building detection, (2) generalization to unseen viewing angles and resolutions, and (3)
sensitivity of building footprint extraction to changes in resolution. We find that state of the art segmentation and object
detection models struggle to identify buildings in off-nadir
imagery and generalize poorly to unseen views, presenting an important benchmark to explore the broadly relevant
challenge of detecting small, heterogeneous target objects
in visually dynamic contexts.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen increasing use of convolutional
neural networks to analyze overhead imagery collected
by aerial vehicles or space-based sensors, for applications
ranging from agriculture [18] to surveillance [39, 32] to
land type classification [3]. Segmentation and object detection of overhead imagery data requires identifying small,
visually heterogeneous objects (e.g. cars and buildings)
with varying orientation and density in images, a task illaddressed by existing models developed for identification of
comparatively larger and lower-abundance objects in natural scene images. The density and visual appearance of target objects change dramatically as look angle, geographic
location, time of day, and seasonality vary, further complicating the problem. Addressing these challenges will provide broadly useful insights for the computer vision community as a whole: for example, how to build segmentation
models to identify low-information objects in dense contexts.
Though public overhead imagery datasets explore geographic and sensor homogeneity [8, 12, 22, 34, 19], they
generally comprise a single view of the imaged location(s)
taken nearly directly overhead (“at nadir”). Nadir imagery
is not representative of collections during disaster response
or other urgent situations: for example, the first public highresolution cloud-free image of San Juan, Puerto Rico following Hurricane Maria was taken at 51.9◦ “off-nadir”, i.e.,
a 51.9◦ angle between the nadir point directly underneath
the satellite and the center of the imaged scene [10]. The
disparity between looks in public training data and relevant use cases hinders development of models applicable
to real-world problems. More generally, satellite and drone
images rarely capture identical looks at objects in different
contexts, or even when repeatedly imaging the same geography. Furthermore, no existing datasets or metrics permit
assessment of model robustness to different looks, prohibit-

992

