MetaPruning: Meta Learning for Automatic Neural Network Channel Pruning
Zechun Liu1

Haoyuan Mu2
Xiangyu Zhang3
Zichao Guo3
Xin Yang4
Tim Kwang-Ting Cheng1
Jian Sun3
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Tsinghua University
3
Megvii Technology 4 Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel meta learning approach for automatic channel pruning of very deep neural
networks. We first train a PruningNet, a kind of meta network, which is able to generate weight parameters for any
pruned structure given the target network. We use a simple stochastic structure sampling method for training the
PruningNet. Then, we apply an evolutionary procedure to
search for good-performing pruned networks. The search is
highly efficient because the weights are directly generated
by the trained PruningNet and we do not need any finetuning at search time. With a single PruningNet trained
for the target network, we can search for various Pruned
Networks under different constraints with little human participation. Compared to the state-of-the-art pruning methods, we have demonstrated superior performances on MobileNet V1/V2 and ResNet. Codes are available on https:
//github.com/liuzechun/MetaPruning.

1. Introduction
Channel pruning has been recognized as an effective
neural network compression/acceleration method [32, 22, 2,
3, 21, 52] and is widely used in the industry. A typical pruning approach contains three stages: training a large overparameterized network, pruning the less-important weights
or channels, finetuning or re-training the pruned network.
The second stage is the key. It usually performs iterative
layer-wise pruning and fast finetuning or weight reconstruction to retain the accuracy [17, 1, 33, 41].
Conventional channel pruning methods mainly rely
on data-driven sparsity constraints [28, 35], or humandesigned policies [22, 32, 40, 25, 38, 2]. Recent AutoMLstyle works automatically prune channels in an iterative
mode, based on a feedback loop [52] or reinforcement
learning [21]. Compared with the conventional pruning
This work is done when Zechun Liu and Haoyuan Mu are interns at
Megvii Technology.

Figure 1. Our MetaPruning has two steps. 1) training a PruningNet. At each iteration, a network encoding vector (i.e., the
number of channels in each layer) is randomly generated. The
Pruned Network is constructed accordingly. The PruningNet takes
the network encoding vector as input and generates the weights
for the Pruned Network. 2) searching for the best Pruned Network. We construct many Pruned Networks by varying network
encoding vector and evaluate their goodness on the validation data
with the weights predicted by the PruningNet. No finetuning or
re-training is needed at search time.

methods, the AutoML methods save human efforts and can
optimize the direct metrics like the hardware latency.
Apart from the idea of keeping the important weights in
the pruned network, a recent study [36] finds that the pruned
network can achieve the same accuracy no matter it inherits the weights in the original network or not. This finding
suggests that the essence of channel pruning is finding good
pruning structure - layer-wise channel numbers.
However, exhaustively finding the optimal pruning structure is computationally prohibitive. Considering a network
with 10 layers and each layer contains 32 channels. The
possible combination of layer-wise channel numbers could
be 3210 . Inspired by the recent Neural Architecture Search
(NAS), specifically One-Shot model [5], as well as the
weight prediction mechanism in HyperNetwork [15], we

3296

