Analyzing the Variety Loss in the Context of Probabilistic Trajectory Prediction
Luca Anthony Thiede ∗
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen
luca.thiede@yahoo.com

Pratik Prabhanjan Brahma
Innovation and Engineering Center California
Volkswagen Group of America
pratik.brahma@vw.com

Abstract
Trajectory or behavior prediction of traffic agents is
an important component of autonomous driving and robot
planning in general. It can be framed as a probabilistic future sequence generation problem and recent literature has
studied the applicability of generative models in this context. The variety or Minimum over N (MoN) loss, which
tries to minimize the error between the ground truth and
the closest of N output predictions, has been used in these
recent learning models to improve the diversity of predictions. In this work, we present a proof to show that the MoN
loss does not lead to the ground truth probability density
function, but approximately to its square root instead. We
validate this finding with extensive experiments on both simulated toy as well as real world datasets. We also propose
multiple solutions to compensate for the dilation to show
improvement of log likelihood of the ground truth samples
in the corrected probability density function.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction is an important problem with many
applications. It can be used for tracking [30], anomaly
detection [38], video games [20] or safety simulation [32].
Arguably, the most safety critical application is to use
trajectory prediction to help robots navigate environments
that they share with other people, for example in the case of
self driving cars. While driving, humans have an intuitive
anticipation of what other traffic participants are likely to
do and react accordingly. This is remarkable since future
trajectories are non-deterministic and multimodal (See
Figure 1). For this reason, a recent line of research takes
the approach to model the natural probability distribution of recorded data, for example with mixture density
networks [4, 10], occupancy grids [22] or generative models [39, 18, 13, 25]. One of the recent works, Social–GAN
∗ Work done during internship at Volkswagen Group of America Innovation and Engineering Center located in Belmont, California.

Figure 1: Trajectory prediction is a multimodal problem. In
order to learn this distribution, the variety loss can be used.
It is computed as the distance between the groundtruth
(green) trajectory and its closest prediction.

[18], trained their generative model with a combination
of the adversarial loss [16] and the variety loss (hereafter
referred to as Minimum over N or MoN). They, and many
other recently published works [37, 36, 25, 28, 40], used
the same MoN loss as a metric to benchmark their model
against others, arguing that it is better suited to measure
performance on multimodal data as compared to the widely
used average displacement error [34]. Additionally we
noticed that researchers in other fields apart from trajectory
prediction used variations of the MoN loss/metric as well
[12, 15, 17, 44, 9, 5, 29]. However, we could not find any
theoretical analysis of the MoN loss/metric.
In this work, we present a proof in section 3 that the
optimal solution of the MoN loss is not the ground truth
PDF but its square root instead. In section 4, we discuss
if MoN can be used as a viable metric nonetheless. Then,
in section 5, we propose various algorithms to recover the

9954

