Deformable Surface Tracking by Graph Matching
Tao Wang1,2

Haibin Ling3 Congyan Lang1

Songhe Feng1

Xiaohui Hou2

1

2

Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
HiScene Information Technologies, Shanghai 201210, China
3
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

{twang,cylang,shfeng}@bjtu.edu.cn, hling@cs.stonybrook.edu, houxh@hiscene.com

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of deformable surface
tracking from monocular images. Specifically, we propose
a graph-based approach that effectively explores the structure information of the surface to enhance tracking performance. Our approach solves simultaneously for feature correspondence, outlier rejection and shape reconstruction by
optimizing a single objective function, which is defined by
means of pairwise projection errors between graph structures instead of unary projection errors between matched
points. Furthermore, an efficient matching algorithm is developed based on soft matching relaxation. For evaluation,
our approach is extensively compared to state-of-the-art algorithms on a standard dataset of occluded surfaces, as well
as a newly compiled dataset of different surfaces with rich,
weak or repetitive texture. Experimental results reveal that
our approach achieves robust tracking results for surfaces
with different types of texture, and outperforms other algorithms in both accuracy and efficiency.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of tracking a generic
deformable surface with a known initial 3D shape, namely template, and recovering its 3D shape in a video sequence under monocular perspective projection. The template could be provided manually in advance or computed
from a few video frames using shape-from-motion [1, 27].
Popular approaches to deformable surface tracking can
be roughly classified as dense approaches (e.g. [12, 25, 31,
48]) or feature-based ones (e.g. [4,9,24,34]). Dense approaches directly use pixel appearance without extracting features, and optimize a similarity measure between a template and a captured image. This type of approaches is
usually guided by the brightness consistency assumption,
and thus suffers from illumination change, partial occlusion
and motion blur. Besides, most of them cost much computational time due to the large parameter space. Feature-

based approaches perform shape reconstruction based on
point correspondences between the template and an input
image. Once point correspondences can be established,
many shape-from-template approaches [4, 7, 9, 22, 24, 34]
can reconstruct the 3D shape in the input image. These methods rely on the quality of the correspondences, and most
of them establish correspondences based solely on local appearance without sufficient consideration of the spatial relationships among the feature points and the constraints imposed. Therefore, they often fail if the texture quality is
too poor to guarantee reliable correspondences, as happens
in the presence of repetitive patterns, dramatic deformation
between the template and the input image, and environmental perturbations such as illumination change.
To obtain high quality correspondences between two
images, graph-based methods [13,42,49] are widely used by
constructing graphs that encode the geometric relationships
between feature points and then accomplishing correspondences by means of graph matching. However, these graphbased methods suffer from several shortages when applied
to deformable surface tracking. Firstly, graph matching
amounts to an NP-hard binary programming problem, and
many graph matching algorithms [47, 49] may take several minutes to process a few hundred points despite some
approximation strategies are employed. It is therefore difficult to use them directly in 3D shape reconstruction where
thousands of reliable correspondences are usually required
to compute an accurate 3D shape. Secondly, these graphbased methods are independent of subsequent steps of outlier rejection and shape reconstruction, which may hurt the
accuracy of the reconstructed shape due to lack of information about the deformation model.
Addressing the issues discussed above, we propose a novel graph-based method to deformable surface reconstruction and tracking. Different from traditional methods that
usually treat separately feature correspondence, outlier rejection and shape reconstruction, we integrate these procedures into a unified graph-based framework, and propose
to solve optimizations of correspondence and deformation
1901

