Towards Unsupervised Image Captioning with Shared Multimodal Embeddings
Iro Laina
Technische Universität München

Christian Rupprecht
University of Oxford

Nassir Navab
Technische Universität München

iro.laina@tum.de

chrisr@robots.ox.ac.uk

nassir.navab@tum.de

Abstract
Image Domain → Visual Concepts

Understanding images without explicit supervision has
become an important problem in computer vision. In this
paper, we address image captioning by generating language descriptions of scenes without learning from annotated pairs of images and their captions. The core component of our approach is a shared latent space that is structured by visual concepts. In this space, the two modalities should be indistinguishable. A language model is first
trained to encode sentences into semantically structured
embeddings. Image features that are translated into this embedding space can be decoded into descriptions through the
same language model, similarly to sentence embeddings.
This translation is learned from weakly paired images and
text using a loss robust to noisy assignments and a conditional adversarial component. Our approach allows to exploit large text corpora outside the annotated distributions
of image/caption data. Our experiments show that the proposed domain alignment learns a semantically meaningful
representation which outperforms previous work.

man
tennis ball
tennis racquet

dog
grass

Shared Embedding Space

frisbee

man
motorcycle
stop sign
tree

Shared Decoder
“A man riding a motorcycle
next to a traffic sign”
...

Language Domain → Visual Word Co-occurrence
A man about to hit the ball with the tennis racket.
A person on a court with a tennis racket.
...
A small dog is catching the red frisbee.
The dog is holding a frisbee in its mouth.
...

1. Introduction
Generating natural language descriptions for images has
gained attention as it aims to teach machines how humans
see, understand and talk about the world. Assisting visually impaired people [23, 62] and human-robot interaction [12, 39] are some examples of the importance of image
captioning. Even though it is straightforward for humans
to describe the contents of a scene, machine generation of
image descriptions is a challenging problem that requires
compositional perception of images translated into semantically and grammatically correct sentences.
Traditionally, image captioning has been carried out using full supervision in the form of image-caption pairs,
given by human annotators. Crowd-sourcing captions is a
cumbersome task that requires extensive quality control and
further manual cleaning. Since annotators are often paid per
image, the captions tend to be short and repetitive. In addition, current captioning benchmarks [38, 49] consist of a

The motor cycle rider is going through a stop sign.
A person on a motorcycle between two trees.
...

Figure 1. Method overview. Our model learns a joint embedding
space of language and image features that is structured by visual
concepts and their co-occurrence. Images and text come from disjoint sources. During inference, model embeds images into the
shared space from which a caption can be decoded.

limited number of object categories and are focused on performance under imperfect evaluation metrics. Thus, methods developed on such datasets might not be easily adopted
in the wild. Nevertheless, great efforts have been made to
extend captioning to out-of-domain data [3, 9, 69] or different styles beyond mere factual descriptions [22, 55].
In this work we explore unsupervised captioning, where
image and language sources are independent. The unsuper17414

