Generative Adversarial Training for Weakly Supervised Cloud Matting
Zhengxia Zou*
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Zhenwei Shi
Beihang University

Wenyuan Li
Beihang University

Tianyang Shi
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab

Jieping Ye
Didi Chuxing & University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Abstract
The detection and removal of cloud in remote sensing images are essential for earth observation applications. Most previous methods consider cloud detection as a
pixel-wise semantic segmentation process (cloud v.s. background), which inevitably leads to a category-ambiguity
problem when dealing with semi-transparent clouds. We
re-examine the cloud detection under a totally different
point of view, i.e. to formulate it as a mixed energy separation process between foreground and background images,
which can be equivalently implemented under an image
matting paradigm with a clear physical significance. We
further propose a generative adversarial framework where
the training of our model neither requires any pixel-wise
ground truth reference nor any additional user interactions.
Our model consists of three networks, a cloud generator
G, a cloud discriminator D, and a cloud matting network
F , where G and D aim to generate realistic and physically meaningful cloud images by adversarial training, and
F learns to predict the cloud reflectance and attenuation.
Experimental results on a global set of satellite images
demonstrate that our method, without ever using any pixelwise ground truth during training, achieves comparable and
even higher accuracy over other fully supervised methods,
including some recent popular cloud detectors and some
well-known semantic segmentation frameworks.

1. Introduction
The rapid development of remote sensing technology has
opened a door for people to better understand the earth. Remote sensing satellites fly around the earth several times a
day, providing up-to-date information for human activities
in all walks of life, such as disaster relief, land monitoring,
and military reconnaissance. Despite its wide applications,
as reported by C. Stubenrauch et al [37], on average of more
than half of the earth’s surface is covered by clouds every
* Corresponding author: Zhengxia Zou (zzhengxi@umich.edu)

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed method. Our model consists of a cloud generator G, a cloud discriminator D, and a cloud
matting network F . On one hand, G and D contradict each other
to generate realistic and physically meaningful cloud images. On
the other hand, F predicts the cloud reflectance and attenuation so
that the background under the cloud can be recovered.

day, which has greatly limited the data accessibility and has
increased difficulty in data analysis. The research on cloud
detection and removal thus has received great attention in
recent years.
Clouds in an image may visually present various transparency, where in most cases, the energy received by an
imaging sensor can be approximated by a linear combination of the reflected energy of the clouds and the ground
objects [27, 38]. In recent years, most of the cloud detection methods frame the detection as a pixel-wise classification process (cloud vs background), i.e. to generate binary
masks of the predicted foreground (cloud) and background
regions. Some commonly used methods include the band
grouping/thresholding methods [13, 15, 20, 45, 48, 49], and
the semantic segmentation based methods [1, 18, 39, 41,
43, 44]. As most of these methods are borrowed from the
computer vision community without considering the mechanism behind the imaging process, the pixel-wise classification based paradigm will inevitably lead to a categoryambiguity in terms of detecting semi-transparent clouds

201

