Gaussian YOLOv3: An Accurate and Fast Object Detector Using Localization
Uncertainty for Autonomous Driving
Jiwoong Choi1 , Dayoung Chun1 , Hyun Kim2 , and Hyuk-Jae Lee1
Seoul National University, 2 Seoul National University of Science and Technology
{jwchoi, jjeonda}@capp.snu.ac.kr, hyunkim@seoultech.ac.kr, hjlee@capp.snu.ac.kr
1

Abstract
The use of object detection algorithms is becoming increasingly important in autonomous vehicles, and object
detection at high accuracy and a fast inference speed is essential for safe autonomous driving. A false positive (FP)
from a false localization during autonomous driving can
lead to fatal accidents and hinder safe and efficient driving. Therefore, a detection algorithm that can cope with
mislocalizations is required in autonomous driving applications. This paper proposes a method for improving the detection accuracy while supporting a real-time operation by
modeling the bounding box (bbox) of YOLOv3, which is the
most representative of one-stage detectors, with a Gaussian
parameter and redesigning the loss function. In addition,
this paper proposes a method for predicting the localization
uncertainty that indicates the reliability of bbox. By using
the predicted localization uncertainty during the detection
process, the proposed schemes can significantly reduce the
FP and increase the true positive (TP), thereby improving
the accuracy. Compared to a conventional YOLOv3, the
proposed algorithm, Gaussian YOLOv3, improves the mean
average precision (mAP) by 3.09 and 3.5 on the KITTI and
Berkeley deep drive (BDD) datasets, respectively. Nevertheless, the proposed algorithm is capable of real-time detection at faster than 42 frames per second (fps) and shows
a higher accuracy than previous approaches with a similar
fps. Therefore, the proposed algorithm is the most suitable
for autonomous driving applications.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has been actively applied
in various fields including computer vision [9], autonomous
driving [5], and social network services [15]. The development of sensors and GPU along with deep learning algorithms has accelerated research into autonomous vehicles based on artificial intelligence. An autonomous vehicle with self-driving capability without a driver interven-

tion must accurately detect cars, pedestrians, traffic signs,
traffic lights, etc. in real time to ensure safe and correct
control decisions [25]. To detect such objects, various sensors such as cameras, light detection and ranging (Lidar),
and radio detection and ranging (Radar) are generally used
in autonomous vehicles [27]. Among these various types
of sensors, a camera sensor can accurately identify the object type based on texture and color features and is more
cost-effective [24] than other sensors. In particular, deeplearning based object detection using camera sensors is becoming more important in autonomous vehicles because it
achieves a better level of accuracy than humans in terms of
object detection, and consequently it has become an essential method [11] in autonomous driving systems.
An object detection algorithm for autonomous vehicles
should satisfy the following two conditions. First, a high
detection accuracy of the road objects is required. Second, a real-time detection speed is essential for a rapid response of a vehicle controller and a reduced latency. Deeplearning based object detection algorithms, which are indispensable in autonomous vehicles, can be classified into two
categories: two-stage and one-stage detectors. Two-stage
detectors, e.g., Fast R-CNN [8], Faster R-CNN [22], and RFCN [4], conduct a first stage of region proposal generation,
followed by a second stage of object classification and bbox
regression. These methods generally show a high accuracy but have a disadvantage of a slow detection speed and
lower efficiency. One-stage detectors, e.g., SSD [17] and
YOLO [19], conduct object classification and bbox regression concurrently without a region proposal stage. These
methods generally have a fast detection speed and high efficiency but a low accuracy. In recent years, to take advantage of both types of method and to compensate for their respective disadvantages, object detectors combining various
schemes have been widely studied [1, 11, 29, 28, 16]. MSCNN [1], a two-stage detector, improves the detection speed
by conducting detection on various intermediate network
layers. SINet [11], also a two-stage detector, enables a fast
detection using a scale-insensitive network. CFENet [29], a
one-stage detector, uses a comprehensive feature enhance-

502

