Photo-Realistic Monocular Gaze Redirection
Using Generative Adversarial Networks
Zhe He1, 2 , Adrian Spurr1 , Xucong Zhang1 , Otmar Hilliges1
1
AIT Lab, ETH Zürich
2
Institute of Neuroinformatics, ETH Zürich & University of Zürich
zhehe@student.ethz.ch, {adrian.spurr, xucong.zhang, otmar.hilliges}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Gaze redirection is the task of changing the gaze to a
desired direction for a given monocular eye patch image.
Many applications such as videoconferencing, films, games,
and generation of training data for gaze estimation require
redirecting the gaze, without distorting the appearance of
the area surrounding the eye and while producing photorealistic images. Existing methods lack the ability to generate perceptually plausible images. In this work, we present
a novel method to alleviate this problem by leveraging generative adversarial training to synthesize an eye image conditioned on a target gaze direction. Our method ensures
perceptual similarity and consistency of synthesized images
to the real images. Furthermore, a gaze estimation loss is
used to control the gaze direction accurately. To attain highquality images, we incorporate perceptual and cycle consistency losses into our architecture. In extensive evaluations
we show that the proposed method outperforms state-of-theart approaches in terms of both image quality and redirection precision. Finally, we show that generated images can
bring significant improvement for the gaze estimation task
if used to augment real training data.

1. Introduction
In the cognitive sciences it is well understood that gaze
plays a crucial rule in social communication [16], since it
conveys important non-verbal cues such as emotion, intention and attention. Hence, many applications such as videoconferencing and movies would benefit from the ability to
redirect the gaze in images to establish eye-contact with
the viewer. Furthermore, learning-based gaze estimation
has recently made significant progress based on in-the-wild
datasets [18, 33]. However, such data is difficult to acquire
and datasets often only cover a restricted range of gaze angles due to the collection devices. A high-fidelity gaze redirection technique could be leveraged to alleviate this issue

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Gaze redirection on Columbia Gaze dataset [26].
(a) Gaze of the subject in the source image is fully centered.
(b) Sequence of eye images with different gaze directions
synthesized by our method.

by synthesizing novel samples to augment existing datasets.
A reliable and robust gaze redirection approach must be
able to (a) redirect the gaze precisely into any given direction, and (b) produce photo-realistic output images which
preserve shape and texture details from the input images.
Traditional solutions re-render the entire scene by performing 3D transformations, which requires heavy instrumentation to acquire the depth information [20, 31, 34, 5]. Recently, Ganin et al. directly rearranged the pixels of the input image to rotate the gaze direction via warping flow generated by a neural network [8]. However, their method fails
to generate photo-realistic images for large redirection angles, especially in the presence of large dis-occlusions, such
as large parts of the eyeball being covered by the eyelid in
the source image. More importantly, such warping methods
cannot be perceptually plausible in terms of gaze redirection, since it minimizes pixel-wise differences between the
synthesized and ground-truth images without any geometric
regularization.
To address the limitations of previous methods, we propose a novel gaze redirection method that builds upon generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9]. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first approach applying GANs to gaze
redirection.
As shown in Fig. 1, the proposed method can output

6932

