Object Guided External Memory Network for Video Object Detection
Hanming Deng 1 , Yang Hua2 , Tao Song1 , Zongpu Zhang1 , Zhengui Xue1 , Ruhui Ma∗1 , Neil
Robertson2 , and Haibing Guan1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{denghanmig,songt333,zhang-z-p,zhenguixue,ruhuima,hbguan}@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Queen’s University Belfast

{Y.Hua, N.Robertson}@qub.ac.uk

Abstract
Video object detection is more challenging than image
object detection because of the deteriorated frame quality. To enhance the feature representation, state-of-the-art
methods propagate temporal information into the deteriorated frame by aligning and aggregating entire feature maps
from multiple nearby frames. However, restricted by feature map’s low storage-efficiency and vulnerable contentaddress allocation, long-term temporal information is not
fully stressed by these methods. In this work, we propose
the first object guided external memory network for online
video object detection. Storage-efficiency is handled by object guided hard-attention to selectively store valuable features, and long-term information is protected when stored in
an addressable external data matrix. A set of read/write operations are designed to accurately propagate/allocate and
delete multi-level memory feature under object guidance.
We evaluate our method on the ImageNet VID dataset and
achieve state-of-the-art performance as well as good speedaccuracy tradeoff. Furthermore, by visualizing the external
memory, we show the detailed object-level reasoning process across frames.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art image-based object detectors [13, 9, 27,
5, 23, 26, 22] provide effective detection frameworks for
general object detection. However, their performance decays when they are directly applied to videos due to the low
quality of video frames, such as motion blur, out-of-focus
∗ Ruhui Ma is the corresponding author.
† This work was supported in part by National NSF of China (NO.
61525204, 61732010, 61872234) and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Scalable Computing and Systems.

(a) Densely aggregated methods [46, 2, 35]. In order to provide sufficient temporal information for detecting one frame,
multiple feature maps have to
be stored and aligned.

(b) Recurrently aggregated
methods [44, 39, 43]. All past
information is compressed into
one temporal feature map. This
temporal feature map has to be
aligned at each time step.

(c) Our method using an object guided external memory. Only features
within bounding boxes can be stored for storage-efficiency, and each
feature is deleted only when redundant to protect long-term information.

Figure 1: Comparison between our method and others. After alignment & aggregation, the aggregated feature map is
used for detection on current frame. Best viewed in color.

and occlusion.
In order to improve the detection performance in a principled way, state-of-the-art video object detectors [45, 44,
2, 35, 39, 43] exploit rich temporal information in videos
to enhance the feature representation on these deteriorated
frames. Feature maps of different frames are first aligned
due to frame content displacement and then aggregated with
the current frame. These temporal feature maps, referred
to as various names like spatial-temporal memory [39] or
memory buffer [45], are taken directly as memory to prop-

6678

