Exploiting temporal consistency for real-time video depth estimation∗
Haokui Zhang1 , Chunhua Shen2 , Ying Li1 , Yuanzhouhan Cao2 , Yu Liu2 , Youliang Yan3
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 University of Adelaide 3 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei

Abstract
Accuracy of depth estimation from static images has
been significantly improved recently, by exploiting hierarchical features from deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). Compared with static images, vast information exists among video frames and can be exploited to improve
the depth estimation performance. In this work, we focus
on exploring temporal information from monocular videos
for depth estimation. Specifically, we take the advantage of
convolutional long short-term memory (CLSTM) and propose a novel spatial-temporal CSLTM (ST-CLSTM) structure. Our ST-CLSTM structure can capture not only the spatial features but also the temporal correlations/consistency
among consecutive video frames with negligible increase in
computational cost. Additionally, in order to maintain the
temporal consistency among the estimated depth frames, we
apply the generative adversarial learning scheme and design a temporal consistency loss. The temporal consistency
loss is combined with the spatial loss to update the model in
an end-to-end fashion. By taking advantage of the temporal
information, we build a video depth estimation framework
that runs in real-time and generates visually pleasant results. Moreover, our approach is flexible and can be generalized to most existing depth estimation frameworks. Code
is available at: https://tinyurl.com/STCLSTM

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the powerful convolutional neural networks (CNNs), some recent methods [47, 10, 30, 9, 21]
have achieved outstanding performance on depth estimation
from monocular static images. The success of these methods is based on the deeply stacked network structures and
large amount of training data. For instance, the state-ofthe-art depth estimation model DORN [10] has more than
one hundred of convolution layers, the high computational
cost may hamper it from practical applications. However,
in some scenarios such as automatic driving [2] and robots
navigation [35], estimating of depths in real-time is re-

quired. Directly extend existing methods from static image
to video sequence is not feasible because of the excessive
computational cost. In addition, sequential frames which
contain rich temporal information are usually provided in
such scenarios. The existing methods fail to take the temporal information into consideration.
In this work, we exploit temporal information from
videos by making use of the convolutional long short-term
memory (CLSTM) and the generative adversarial networks
(GANs), and propose a real-time depth estimation framework. We illustrate our proposed framework in Fig. 1.
It consists of three main parts: 1) spatial features extraction part; 2) temporal correlations collection part and 3)
spatial-temporal loss calculation part. The spatial features
extraction part and the temporal correlations collection part
compose our novel spatial-temporal CLSTM (ST-CLSTM)
structure. The spatial features extraction part
 first takes
as input n continuous frames x1 , x2 , · · · , xn and outputs
high level features f 1 , f 2 , · · · , f n . The temporal correlations collection part then takes as input the high-level
 features and outputs depth estimations d1 , d2 , · · · , dn . With
the cell and gate modules, the CLSTM can make use of
the cues acquired from the previous frame to reason the
current frame, and thus encode the temporal information.
As for spatial-temporal loss calculation, we first calculate
the spatial loss between the estimated and the ground-truth
depths. In order to further enforce the temporal consistency,
we design a new temporal loss by introducing a generative
adversarial learning scheme. Specifically, we apply a 3D
CNN as the discriminator which takes as input the estimated
and ground-truth depth sequences and outputs the temporal
loss. The temporal loss is combined with the spatial loss and
back propagated through the entire framework to update the
weights in an end-to-end fashion.
To summarize, our main contributions are as follows.
• We propose a novel ST-CLSTM structure that is able to
capture spatial features as well as temporal correlations
for video depth estimation. To our knowledge, this is
the first time that CLSTM is employed for video depth
estimation.
• We design a novel temporal consistency loss by using
the generative adversarial learning scheme. Our tem-

∗ Work was done when H. Zhang was visiting University of Adelaide.
Correspondence should be addressed to C. Shen and Y. Li.

1725

