Mask-ShadowGAN: Learning to Remove Shadows from Unpaired Data
Xiaowei Hu1 , Yitong Jiang2 , Chi-Wing Fu1,2,∗ , and Pheng-Ann Heng1,2,∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
not match

Abstract
This paper presents a new method for shadow removal
using unpaired data, enabling us to avoid tedious annotations and obtain more diverse training samples. However, directly employing adversarial learning and cycleconsistency constraints is insufficient to learn the underlying relationship between the shadow and shadow-free domains, since the mapping between shadow and shadow-free
images is not simply one-to-one. To address the problem,
we formulate Mask-ShadowGAN, a new deep framework
that automatically learns to produce a shadow mask from
the input shadow image and then takes the mask to guide
the shadow generation via re-formulated cycle-consistency
constraints. Particularly, the framework simultaneously
learns to produce shadow masks and learns to remove shadows, to maximize the overall performance. Also, we prepared an unpaired dataset for shadow removal and demonstrated the effectiveness of Mask-ShadowGAN on various
experiments, even it was trained on unpaired data.

1. Introduction
Shadow removal is a very challenging task. We have to
remove the shadows, and simultaneously, restore the background behind the shadows. Particularly, shadows have a
wide variety of shapes over a wide variety of backgrounds.
Recently, learning-based methods [10, 11, 18, 32], especially those using deep learning [13, 27, 35], have become
the de facto standard for shadow removal, given their remarkable performance. These methods are typically trained
on pairs of shadow and shadow-free images in a supervised
manner, where the paired data is prepared by taking a photo
with shadows and then taking another photo of the scene
without shadows by removing the associated objects.
Such approach to prepare training data has several limitations. First, it is very tedious to prepare the training data,
since for each scene, we need to manually fix the camera
∗ Co-corresponding authors

𝐺𝑓

not match

𝐺𝑠

(a) Cycle-consistency constraint
match

𝐺𝑓

𝐺𝑠

match
(b) Mask-guided cycle-consistency constraint

Figure 1: Directly using (a) the cycle-consistency constraint is insufficient; the generator Gs cannot produce different shadow image outputs for different inputs. (b) MaskShadowGAN learns a shadow mask from the input to guide
Gs to generate shadow images that better match the inputs.
and then add & remove objects to obtain a pair of shadow
and shadow-free images. Moreover, the approach limits the
kinds of scenes that data can be prepared, since it is hard
to capture shadow-free images for shadows casted by large
objects such as trees and buildings. Lastly, the training
pairs may have inconsistent colors and luminosity, or shift
in camera views, since the camera exposure and pose, as
well as the environmental lighting, may vary when we take
the photo pair with and without the shadows.
To address these problems, we present a new approach
to learn to remove shadows from unpaired training data.
Our key idea is to learn the underlying relationship between
a shadow domain Ds (a set of real images with shadows)
and a shadow-free domain Df (a set of real shadow-free
images), where we do not have any explicit association between individual images in Ds and Df . Here, we want to
train a network Gf , which takes a shadow image as input and produces an output image that is indistinguishable
from the shadow-free images in Df , by adversarial learn-

2472

