DeceptionNet: Network-Driven Domain Randomization
Sergey Zakharov *,✝ , Wadim Kehl ✣ , and Slobodan Ilic *,✝
*

Technical University of Munich ✣ Toyota Research Institute ✝ Siemens Corporate Technology
sergey.zakharov@tum.de, wadim.kehl@tri.global, slobodan.ilic@siemens.com

Abstract
We present a novel approach to tackle domain adaptation between synthetic and real data. Instead, of employing ”blind” domain randomization, i.e., augmenting synthetic renderings with random backgrounds or changing illumination and colorization, we leverage the task network
as its own adversarial guide toward useful augmentations
that maximize the uncertainty of the output. To this end, we
design a min-max optimization scheme where a given task
competes against a special deception network to minimize
the task error subject to the specific constraints enforced by
the deceiver. The deception network samples from a family
of differentiable pixel-level perturbations and exploits the
task architecture to find the most destructive augmentations.
Unlike GAN-based approaches that require unlabeled data
from the target domain, our method achieves robust mappings that scale well to multiple target distributions from
source data alone. We apply our framework to the tasks of
digit recognition on enhanced MNIST variants, classification and object pose estimation on the Cropped LineMOD
dataset as well as semantic segmentation on the Cityscapes
dataset and compare it to a number of domain adaptation
approaches, thereby demonstrating similar results with superior generalization capabilities.

1. Introduction
The alluring possibility of training machine learning
models on purely synthetic data allows for a theoretically
infinite supply of both input data samples and associated label information. Unfortunately, for computer vision applications, the domain gap between synthetic renderings and
real-world imagery poses serious challenges for generalization. Despite the apparent visual similarity, synthetic images structurally differ from real camera sensor data. First,
synthetic image formation produces clear edges with approximate physical shading and illumination, whereas real
images undergo many types of noise, such as optical aber-

rations, Bayer demosaicing, or compression artifacts. Second, the visual differences between synthetic CAD models
and their actual physical counterparts can be quite significant. Apart from the visual gap, supervised approaches also
require cumbersome and error-prone human labeling of real
training data in the form of 2D bounding boxes, segmentation masks, or 6D poses [25, 17]. For other approaches,
such as robotic control learning, solutions must be found
by exploration in tight simulation-based feedback loops that
require synthetic rendering [28, 39, 31].
The gap between the visual domains is nowadays mainly
bridged with adaptation and/or randomization techniques.
In the case of supervised domain adaptation approaches [54,
32, 3, 30], a certain amount of labeled data from the target domain exists, while in unsupervised approaches [13,
46, 41, 4] the target data are available but unlabeled. In
both cases, the goal is to match the source and target
distributions by finding either a direct mapping, a common latent space, or through regularization of task networks trained on the source data. Recent unsupervised approaches are mostly based on generalized adversarial networks (GANs) [4, 22, 26, 46, 49, 24, 43, 36, 1] and although
these methods perform proper target domain transfers, they
can overfit to the chosen target domain and exhibit a decline
in performance for unfamiliar out-of-distribution samples.
Domain randomization methods [47, 21, 29, 52, 45]
have no access to any target domain and employ the rather
simple technique of randomly perturbing (synthetic) source
data during training to make the tasks networks robust to
perceptual differences. This approach can be effective, but
is generally unguided, and needs an exhaustive evaluation
to find meaningful augmentations that increase the target
domain performance. Last but not least, results from pixellevel adversarial attacks [6, 44] suggest the existence of
architecture-dependent effects that cannot be addressed by
”blind” domain randomization for robust transfer.
We propose herein a general framework that performs
guided randomization with the help of an auxiliary deception network trained in a similar min-max fashion as GAN

532

