DewarpNet: Single-Image Document Unwarping With Stacked 3D and 2D
Regression Networks
Sagnik Das∗

Ke Ma∗

Zhixin Shu
Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University

Roy Shilkrot

{sadas, kemma, zhshu, samaras, roys}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Capturing document images with hand-held devices in
unstructured environments is a common practice nowadays.
However, “casual” photos of documents are usually unsuitable for automatic information extraction, mainly due to
physical distortion of the document paper, as well as various camera positions and illumination conditions. In this
work, we propose DewarpNet, a deep-learning approach
for document image unwarping from a single image. Our
insight is that the 3D geometry of the document not only
determines the warping of its texture but also causes the illumination effects. Therefore, our novelty resides on the explicit modeling of 3D shape for document paper in an endto-end pipeline. Also, we contribute the largest and most
comprehensive dataset for document image unwarping to
date – Doc3D. This dataset features multiple ground-truth
annotations, including 3D shape, surface normals, UV map,
albedo image, etc. Training with Doc3D, we demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance for DewarpNet with extensive
qualitative and quantitative evaluations. Our network also
significantly improves OCR performance on captured document images, decreasing character error rate by 42% on
average. Both the code and the dataset are released 1 .

1. Introduction
Paper documents carry valuable information and serve
an essential role in our daily work and life. Digitized documents can be archived, retrieved, and shared in a convenient, safe, and efficient manner. With the increasing popularity of portable cameras and smartphones, document digitization becomes more accessible to users through picture
taking. Once captured, the document images can be converted into electronic formats, for example, a PDF file, for
further processing, exchange, information extraction, and
content analysis. While capturing images, it is desirable to
∗ indicates equal contribution.
1 https://www.cs.stonybrook.edu/∼cvl/dewarpnet.html

Figure 1. Document image unwarping. Top row: input images.
Middle row: predicted 3D coordinate maps. Bottom row: predicted unwarped images. Columns from left to right: 1) curled,
2) one-fold, 3) two-fold, 4) multiple-fold with OCR confidence
highlights in Red (low) to Blue (high).

preserve the information on the document with the best possible accuracy – with a minimal difference from a flatbedscanned version. However, casual photos captured with mobile devices often suffer from different levels of distortions
due to uncontrollable factors such as physical deformation
of the paper, varying camera positions, and unconstrained
illumination conditions. As a result, these raw images are
often unsuitable for automatic information extraction and
content analysis.
Previous literature has studied the document-unwarping
problem using various approaches. Traditional approaches
[26, 46] usually rely on the geometric properties of the paper to recover the unwarping. These methods first estimate
the 3D shape of the paper, represented by either some parametric shape representations [9, 47] or some non-parametric
shape representations [35, 45]. After that, they compute the

131

