Active Learning for Deep Detection Neural Networks
Hamed H. Aghdam1 , Abel Gonzalez-Garcia1 , Joost van de Weijer1 , Antonio M. López1,2
Computer Vision Center (CVC)1 and Computer Science Dpt.2 , Univ. Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB)
{haghdam,agonzalez,joost,antonio}@cvc.uab.es

Abstract
The cost of drawing object bounding boxes (i.e. labeling) for millions of images is prohibitively high. For instance, labeling pedestrians in a regular urban image could
take 35 seconds on average. Active learning aims to reduce
the cost of labeling by selecting only those images that are
informative to improve the detection network accuracy. In
this paper, we propose a method to perform active learning
of object detectors based on convolutional neural networks.
We propose a new image-level scoring process to rank unlabeled images for their automatic selection, which clearly
outperforms classical scores. The proposed method can be
applied to videos and sets of still images. In the former
case, temporal selection rules can complement our scoring
process. As a relevant use case, we extensively study the
performance of our method on the task of pedestrian detection. Overall, the experiments show that the proposed
method performs better than random selection.

1. Introduction
Having comprehensive and diverse datasets is essential
for training accurate neural networks, which becomes critical in problems such as object detection since the visual appearance of objects and background vary considerably. The
usual approach to create such datasets consists of collecting
as many images as possible and drawing bounding boxes
(labeling) for all objects of interest in all images. However,
this approach has two major drawbacks.
While labeling small datasets is tractable, it becomes
extremely costly when the dataset is large. For instance,
according to our experiments with six labeling tools (LabelMe, VoTT, AlpsLabel, LabelImg, BoundingBox Annotation, Fast Annotation), on average, a human (i.e. the oracle) takes a minimum of 35 seconds for labeling pedestrians of a typical urban road scene; the time can be longer
depending on the tool and oracle’s labeling experience. In a
dataset where hundred-thousands of images contain pedestrians, the total labeling time could be prohibitively high.
One way to deal with this problem is to select a random
subset for labeling. Unless the selected random subset is

large, this does not guarantee that it will capture diverse
visual patterns. As a result, the accuracy of the network
trained on the random subset might be significantly lower
than training on the full dataset.
Instead of selecting the subset randomly, active learning
[22] aims to select samples which are able to improve the
knowledge of the network. To this end, an active learning
method employs the current knowledge of the network to
select informative samples for labeling. The general hypothesis is that the network trained on the subset selected
by active learning will be more accurate than training on a
random subset of the same number of samples. This way,
not only the labeling cost is reduced by selecting a smaller
subset for labeling but also it guarantees that the network
will be sufficiently accurate by training on this subset.
As we will see in Section 2, most work in active learning
has focused on image classification. However, in general,
the labeling cost is considerably higher for a detection task
compared to a classification task. In this paper, we propose
a method to perform active learning on detection tasks.
Problem formulation: We use the set of images Xl , labeled with object bounding boxes, to train an object detector, Θ, based on a convolutional neural network. Afterward,
we receive an unlabeled set of still images or videos Xu .
The goal is to improve the accuracy of Θ by labeling a small
subset of Xu . Xl and Xu may be from the same distribution,
or there may exist a domain shift [19] between them, being
the Xu from the domain in which Θ must perform well. In
either cases, active learning aims at automatically selecting a subset Xal ⊂ Xu such that finetuning Θ on Xal produces more accurate results than finetuning on a randomly
selected subset Xrnd ⊂ Xu ; where |Xal | = |Xrnd | = B and
both, Xal and Xrnd , are labeled by an oracle (e.g. human)
before finetuning. We term B as total labeling budget1 .
Contribution: In this paper, we propose a new method
to perform active learning on deep detection neural networks (Section 3). In particular, given such an object
detector, our method examines a set of unlabeled images
1 There are other ways to define the labeling budget. In this paper, we
use “image-centric” definition for simplicity.

3672

