Learning Similarity Conditions Without Explicit Supervision
Reuben Tan
Boston University
rxtan@bu.edu

Mariya I. Vasileva
University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign

Kate Saenko
Boston University

Bryan A. Plummer
Boston University

saenko@bu.edu

bplum@bu.edu

mvasile2@illinois.edu

Abstract
Many real-world tasks require models to compare images along multiple similarity conditions (e.g. similarity
in color, category or shape). Existing methods often reason about these complex similarity relationships by learning condition-aware embeddings. While such embeddings
aid models in learning different notions of similarity, they
also limit their capability to generalize to unseen categories
since they require explicit labels at test time. To address this
deficiency, we propose an approach that jointly learns representations for the different similarity conditions and their
contributions as a latent variable without explicit supervision. Comprehensive experiments 1 across three datasets,
Polyvore-Outfits, Maryland-Polyvore and UT-Zappos50k,
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach: our model
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, even those that
are strongly supervised with pre-defined similarity conditions, on fill-in-the-blank, outfit compatibility prediction
and triplet prediction tasks. Finally, we show that our model
learns different visually-relevant semantic sub-spaces that
allow it to generalize well to unseen categories.

1. Introduction
Reasoning about the similarity between images or data
of different modalities is an inherent challenge in computer
vision. Beyond its prevalence in fundamental problems
such as image-sentence retrieval [41, 38], cross-domain
image-matching [32, 16], attribution learning [4, 33] and visual categorization [29], it also has an increasingly prominent role in computer vision problems in the fashion and
retail domains like outfit style modeling [14], fashion item
retrieval and recommendation [10, 22] and automatic capsule wardrobe generation [15]. Metric learning (the task
of learning a distance function between features based on
supervised similar/dissimilar pairs) is a common approach
1 https://github.com/rxtan2/
Learning-Similarity-Conditions

Labels
Top

(Bottom-Top
Subspace)

Prior
Work
Bottom

(Bottom-Shoes
Subspace)

Our
Approach

(Color-Pattern
Compatibility
Subspace)
SCE-Net

(Category
Subspace)

Figure 1: We propose the SCE-Net model for learning
multi-faceted similarity between images, such as compatibility of two fashion items. Previous work needed userdefined labels to learn multiple feature subspaces for measuring different aspects of similarity, e.g., one for comparing tops and bottoms and another for comparing bottoms
and shoes (e.g., [36, 27, 35]). In contrast, our approach
learns important subspaces without such labels in a datadriven manner. The concepts and their contributions to a
final similarity score are learned together as a single end-toend trained model.

used to tackle the above-mentioned problems and is often
addressed by learning representations for objects in a unified embedding space, where the distances provide a measure of their similarity. However, this is not naturally representative of the real world. Objects can usually be described
with multiple visual attributes such as color, shape or category. Consider the example where a red shirt is similar to a
pair of red shoes in color but dissimilar in object category.
A single embedding space is unable to learn representations
for these contradicting notions of similarity. By discounting
such valuable information, these embeddings are not able

10373

