Learning Compositional Representations for Few-Shot Recognition
Pavel Tokmakov
Yu-Xiong Wang
Martial Hebert
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{ptokmako,yuxiongw,hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
One of the key limitations of modern deep learning approaches lies in the amount of data required to train them.
Humans, by contrast, can learn to recognize novel categories from just a few examples. Instrumental to this rapid
learning ability is the compositional structure of concept
representations in the human brain — something that deep
learning models are lacking. In this work, we make a step
towards bridging this gap between human and machine
learning by introducing a simple regularization technique
that allows the learned representation to be decomposable
into parts. Our method uses category-level attribute annotations to disentangle the feature space of a network into
subspaces corresponding to the attributes. These attributes
can be either purely visual, like object parts, or more abstract, like openness and symmetry. We demonstrate the
value of compositional representations on three datasets:
CUB-200-2011, SUN397, and ImageNet, and show that
they require fewer examples to learn classifiers for novel
categories. Our code and trained models together with the
collected attribute annotations are available at https:
//sites.google.com/view/comprepr/home.

1. Introduction
Consider the images representing four categories from
the CUB-200-2011 dataset [41] in Figure 1. Given a representation learned using the first three categories, shown in
red, can a classifier for the fourth category, shown in green,
be learned from just a few, or even a single example? This is
a problem known as few-shot learning [39, 21, 18, 44, 12].
Clearly, it depends on the properties of the representation.
Cognitive science identifies compositionality as a property
that is crucial to this task. Human representations of concepts are decomposable into parts [5, 17], such as the ones
shown in the top right corners of the images in Figure 1,
allowing classifiers to be rapidly learned for novel concepts
through combinations of known primitives [13]. Taking the
novel bird category as an example, all of its discriminative
attributes have already been observed in the first three cate-

Figure 1. Images from four categories of the CUB-200-2011
dataset, together with some of their attribute annotations. We propose to learn image representations that are decomposable over
the attributes. These representations can thus be used to recognize
new categories from few examples.

gories. These ideas have been highly influential in computer
vision, with some of the first models for visual concepts being built as compositions of parts and relations [26, 27, 45].
However, state-of-the-art methods for virtually all visual
recognition tasks are based on deep learning [24, 20]. The
parameters of deep neural networks are optimized for the
end task with gradient-based methods, resulting in representations that are not easily interpretable. There has been a
lot of effort on qualitative interpretation of these representations [47, 48], demonstrating that some of the neurons represent object parts. Very recently, a quantitative approach
to evaluating the compositionality of deep representations
has been proposed [3]. Nevertheless, these approaches do
not investigate the problem of improving the compositional
properties of neural networks. In this paper, we propose a
simple regularization technique that forces deep image representations to be decomposable into parts, and we empirically demonstrate that such representations facilitate learning classifiers for novel concepts from fewer examples.
Our method takes as input a dataset of images together
with their class labels and category-level attribute annotations. The attributes can be either purely visual, such as object parts (beak shape) and scene elements (grass), or
more abstract, such as openness of a scene. In [3] a fea-

6372

