Saliency-Guided Attention Network for Image-Sentence Matching
Zhong Ji Haoran Wang
School of Electrical and Information Engineering
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China

Jungong Han∗
WMG Data Science
University of Warwick, Coventry, UK

{jizhong, haoranwang}@tju.edu.cn

jungong.han@warwick.ac.uk

Yanwei Pang∗
School of Electrical and Information Engineering
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
pyw@tju.edu.cn

Abstract


This paper studies the task of matching image and sentence, where learning appropriate representations to bridge
the semantic gap between image contents and language appears to be the main challenge. Unlike previous approaches
that predominantly deploy symmetrical architecture to represent both modalities, we introduce a Saliency-guided Attention Network (SAN) that is characterized by building
an asymmetrical link between vision and language to efficiently learn a fine-grained cross-modal correlation. The
proposed SAN mainly includes three components: saliency
detector, Saliency-weighted Visual Attention (SVA) module,
and Saliency-guided Textual Attention (STA) module. Concretely, the saliency detector provides the visual saliency
information to drive both two attention modules. Taking
advantage of the saliency information, SVA is able to learn
more discriminative visual features. By fusing the visual
information from SVA and intra-modal information as a
multi-modal guidance, STA affords us powerful textual representations that are synchronized with visual clues. Extensive experiments demonstrate SAN can improve the state-ofthe-art results on the benchmark Flickr30K and MSCOCO
datasets by a large margin.1

1. Introduction
Vision and language are two fundamental elements for
human to perceive the real world. Recently, the prevalence
of deep learning promotes them to be increasingly intertwined, which has captured great interests of researchers to
explore their intrinsic correlation. In this paper, we focus on
∗ The corresponding authors are Jungong Han, Yanwei Pang.
1 The source code of this paper will be made available at https://
github.com/HabbakukWang1103/SAN.

Saliency-guided
Textual Representation
The
street
signs
for
Gladys
and
Detroit
streets
are
attached
to

Saliency
Detection

a
wooden
pole

Figure 1. The conceptual diagram of Saliency-guided Attention Network (SAN) for image-sentence matching. The imagesentence pair on the left denote the original data, and the colorized
image regions and words on the right represent their attentive results predicted by SAN (best viewed in color).

tackling the task of image-sentence matching, which facilitates various applications using cross-modal data, such as
image captioning [40, 1], visual question answering (VQA)
[2], and visual grounding [30, 4]. Concretely, it refers to
searching for the most relevant images (sentences) given
a sentence (image) query. Currently, the common solution [7, 27, 36, 22, 38] is to seek a joint semantic space
on which the data from both modalities can be well represented. Finding such a joint space is usually treated as
an optimization problem where a bi-directional ranking loss
encourages the corresponding representations to be as close
as possible [19].
Although thrilling progress [7, 22, 27, 26] has been
made, it is still nontrivial to represent data from different
modalities in a joint semantic space precisely, due to the
existence of “heterogeneity gap”. Currently, the bulk of
previous efforts [7, 26] employs global Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) feature vectors as visual representations. While it could effectively represent high-level seman15754

