A Quaternion-based Certifiably Optimal Solution
to the Wahba Problem with Outliers
Heng Yang and Luca Carlone
Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems (LIDS)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{hankyang, lcarlone}@mit.edu

Abstract

(a)

(b)

Truncated Least Squares
Least Squares
Cost

The Wahba problem, also known as rotation search,
seeks to find the best rotation to align two sets of vector
observations given putative correspondences, and is a fundamental routine in many computer vision and robotics applications. This work proposes the first polynomial-time
certifiably optimal approach for solving the Wahba problem when a large number of vector observations are outliers. Our first contribution is to formulate the Wahba
problem using a Truncated Least Squares (TLS) cost that
is insensitive to a large fraction of spurious correspondences. The second contribution is to rewrite the problem using unit quaternions and show that the TLS cost
can be framed as a Quadratically-Constrained Quadratic
Program (QCQP). Since the resulting optimization is still
highly non-convex and hard to solve globally, our third contribution is to develop a convex Semidefinite Programming
(SDP) relaxation. We show that while a naive relaxation
performs poorly in general, our relaxation is tight even in
the presence of large noise and outliers. We validate the
proposed algorithm, named QUASAR (QUAternion-based
Semidefinite relAxation for Robust alignment), in both synthetic and real datasets showing that the algorithm outperforms RANSAC, robust local optimization techniques, global
outlier-removal procedures, and Branch-and-Bound methods. QUASAR is able to compute certifiably optimal solutions (i.e. the relaxation is exact) even in the case when 95%
of the correspondences are outliers.

1. Introduction
The Wahba problem [52, 18], also known as rotation
search [42, 27, 6], is a fundamental problem in computer
vision, robotics, and aerospace engineering and consists in
finding the rotation between two coordinate frames given
vector observations taken in the two frames. The problem finds extensive applications in point cloud registration [8, 54], image stitching [6], motion estimation and 3D

inlier

bi

outlier

ai

− c̄σ Residual c̄σ
Figure 1. We propose QUASAR (QUAternion-based Semidefinite
relAxation for Robust alignment), a certifiably optimal solution to
the Wahba problem with outliers. (a) Wahba problem with four
vector observations (three inliers and a single outlier). (b) Contrary to standard least squares formulations, QUASAR uses a truncated least squares cost that assigns a constant cost to measurements with large residuals, hence being insensitive to outliers.

reconstruction [10, 19, 35], and satellite attitude determination [52, 18, 15], to name a few.
Given two sets of vectors ai , bi ∈ R3 , i = 1, . . . , N , the
Wahba problem is formulated as a least squares problem
PN
2
2
min
(1)
i=1 wi kbi − Rai k
R∈SO(3)

which computes the best rotation R that aligns vectors ai
and bi , and where {wi2 }N
i=1 are (known) weights associated
.
to each pair of measurements. Here SO(3) = {R ∈ R3×3 :
T
T
R R = RR = I3 , det(R) = 1} is the 3D Special Orthogonal Group containing proper 3D rotation matrices and Id
denotes the identity matrix of size d. Problem (1) is known
to be a maximum likelihood estimator for the unknown rotation when the ground-truth correspondences (ai , bi ) are
known and the observations are corrupted with zero-mean
isotropic Gaussian noise [48]. In other words, (1) computes
an accurate estimate for R when the observations can be
written as bi = Rai + ǫi (i = 1, . . . , N ), where ǫi is
isotropic Gaussian noise. Moreover, problem (1) can be
solved in closed form [37, 28, 36, 3, 47, 29].
Unfortunately, in practical application, many of the vector observations may be outliers, typically due to incorrect
vector-to-vector correspondences, cf. Fig. 1(a). In com11665

