IMP: Instance Mask Projection for High Accuracy Semantic Segmentation of
Things
Cheng-Yang Fu

Tamara L. Berg
Facebook AI

Alexander C. Berg

Abstract
In this work, we present a new operator, called Instance
Mask Projection (IMP), which projects a predicted instance
segmentation as a new feature for semantic segmentation.
It also supports back propagation and is trainable end-toend. By adding this operator, we introduce a new way to
combine top-down and bottom-up information in semantic
segmentation. Our experiments show the effectiveness of
IMP on both clothing parsing (with complex layering, large
deformations, and non-convex objects), and on street scene
segmentation (with many overlapping instances and small
objects). On the Varied Clothing Parsing dataset (VCP),
we show instance mask projection can improve mIOU by
3 points over a state-of-the-art Panoptic FPN segmentation approach. On the ModaNet clothing parsing dataset,
we show a dramatic improvement of 20.4% compared to
existing baseline semantic segmentation results. In addition, the Instance Mask Projection operator works well on
other (non-clothing) datasets, providing an improvement in
mIOU of 3 points on “thing” classes of Cityscapes, a selfdriving dataset, over a state-of-the-art approach.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses producing pixel-accurate semantic
segmentations. This is relevant for a wide range of applications, from self-driving, where predicting accurate localizations of objects, buildings, people, etc, (as illustrated in
the Cityscapes dataset [9]), will be necessary for producing safe autonomous vehicles, to commerce, where accurate segmentations of the clothing items someone is wearing [43] will form a foundational building block for applications like visual search or virtual try-on. Many other potential applications can be envisioned, especially in real-world
scenarios where intelligent agents are using vision to perceive their surrounding environments, but for this paper we
focus on two areas, street scenes and fashion outfits, as two
widely differing settings to demonstrate the generality of
our method.
We propose combining top-down information from de-

Class
BBox

conv

Instance
Mask
Project

Conv +
4x up

conv Mask

ROIAlign
Extract Semantic Segmentation Features

concat

Semantic
Segmentation
Result

Figure 1: Example system flow: An Instance Mask Projection operator takes the instance mask as the input (Class,
Score, BBox, Mask) and projects the results as a feature
map for semantic segmentation prediction. In this example,
a “Dress” is detected in the instance detection pipeline, then
projected to the feature layer.
tection results, bounding box and instance mask prediction,
as in Mask R-CNN [18], with semantic segmentation. The
core of our approach is a new operator, Instance Mask Projection (IMP), that projects the predicted masks (with uncertainty) from Mask R-CNN for each detection into a feature
map to use as an auxiliary input for semantic segmentation,
significantly increasing accuracy. Furthermore, in our implementations the semantic segmentation pipeline shares a
trunk with the detector, as in Panoptic FPN [21], resulting
in a fast solution.
This approach is most helpful for improving semantic
segmentation of objects for which detection works well,
movable foreground objects (things) as opposed to regions
like grass (stuff). Using the instance mask output from a detector allows the approach to make decisions about the presence/absence/category of an object as a unit, and to explicitly estimate and use the scale of a detected object for aggregating features (e.g. in roi-pooling). In contrast, standard
semantic segmentation must make the decision about object
type over and over again at each location using a fixed scale
for spatial context. Combining semantic segmentation prediction with Instance Mask Projection improves accuracy
for concave shapes, in addition to offering high-resolution
output.
As part of validating the effectiveness of this approach

5178

