SCSampler: Sampling Salient Clips from Video for Efficient Action Recognition
Bruno Korbar

Du Tran

Lorenzo Torresani

Facebook AI
{bkorbar, trandu, torresani}@fb.com

Abstract
While many action recognition datasets consist of collections of brief, trimmed videos each containing a relevant action, videos in the real-world (e.g., on YouTube) exhibit very
different properties: they are often several minutes long,
where brief relevant clips are often interleaved with segments of extended duration containing little change. Applying densely an action recognition system to every temporal
clip within such videos is prohibitively expensive. Furthermore, as we show in our experiments, this results in suboptimal recognition accuracy as informative predictions from
relevant clips are outnumbered by meaningless classification outputs over long uninformative sections of the video.
In this paper we introduce a lightweight “clip-sampling”
model that can efficiently identify the most salient temporal
clips within a long video. We demonstrate that the computational cost of action recognition on untrimmed videos
can be dramatically reduced by invoking recognition only
on these most salient clips. Furthermore, we show that this
yields significant gains in recognition accuracy compared
to analysis of all clips or randomly/uniformly selected clips.
On Sports1M, our clip sampling scheme elevates the accuracy of an already state-of-the-art action classifier by 7%
and reduces by more than 15 times its computational cost.

1. Introduction
Most modern action recognition models operate by applying a deep CNN over clips of fixed temporal length [40,
6, 44, 50, 11]. Video-level classification is obtained by aggregating the clip-level predictions over the entire video, either in the form of simple averaging or by means of more
sophisticated schemes modeling temporal structure [33, 45,
17]. Scoring a clip classifier densely over the entire sequence is a reasonable approach for short videos. However, it becomes computationally impractical for real-world
videos that may be up to an hour long, such as some of
the sequences in the Sports1M dataset [24]. In addition to
the issue of computational cost, long videos often include

segments of extended duration that provide irrelevant information for the recognition of the action class. Pooling information from all clips without consideration of their relevance may cause poor video-level classification, as informative clip predictions are outnumbered by uninformative
predictions over long unimportant segments.
In this work we propose a simple scheme to address these
problems (see Fig. 1 for a high-level illustration of the approach). It consists in training an extremely lightweight network to determine the saliency of a candidate clip. Because
the computational cost of this network is more than one order of magnitude lower than the cost of existing 3D CNNs
for action recognition [6, 44], it can be evaluated efficiently
over all clips of even long videos. We refer to our network as SCSampler (Salient Clip Sampler), as it samples
a reduced set of salient clips from the video for analysis
by the action classifier. We demonstrate that restricting the
costly action classifier to run only on the clips identified as
the most salient by SCSampler, yields not only significant
savings in runtime but also large improvements in video
classification accuracy: on Sports1M our scheme yields a
speedup of 15× and an accuracy gain of 7% over an already
state-of-the-art classifier.
Efficiency is a critical requirement in the design of SCSampler. We present two main variants of our sampler. The
first operates directly on compressed video [23, 52, 56], thus
eliminating the need for costly decoding. The second looks
only at the audio channel, which is low-dimensional and
can therefore be processed very efficiently. As in recent
multimedia work [2, 4, 15, 35], our audio-based sampler
exploits the inherent semantic correlation between the audio and the visual elements of a video. We also show that
combining our video-based sampler with the audio-based
sampler leads to further gains in recognition accuracy.
We propose and evaluate two distinct learning objectives
for salient clip sampling. One of them trains the sampler
to operate optimally with the given clip classifier, while the
second formulation is classifier-independent. We show that,
in some settings, the former leads to improved accuracy,
while the benefit of the latter is that it can be used without retraining with any clip classifier, making this model a
16232

