AMP: Adaptive Masked Proxies for Few-Shot Segmentation
Mennatullah Siam
University of Alberta

Boris N. Oreshkin
Element AI

Martin Jagersand
University of Alberta

mennatul@ualberta.ca

boris@elementai.com

jag@cs.ualberta.ca

Abstract
Deep learning has thrived by training on large-scale
datasets. However, in robotics applications sample efficiency is critical. We propose a novel adaptive masked
proxies method that constructs the final segmentation layer
weights from few labelled samples. It utilizes multiresolution average pooling on base embeddings masked
with the label to act as a positive proxy for the new class,
while fusing it with the previously learned class signatures.
Our method is evaluated on PASCAL-5i dataset and outperforms the state-of-the-art in the few-shot semantic segmentation. Unlike previous methods, our approach does not require a second branch to estimate parameters or prototypes,
which enables it to be used with 2-stream motion and appearance based segmentation networks. We further propose
a novel setup for evaluating continual learning of object
segmentation which we name incremental PASCAL (iPASCAL) where our method outperforms the baseline method.
Our code is publicly available at https://github.
com/MSiam/AdaptiveMaskedProxies.

1. Introduction
Children are able to adapt their knowledge and learn
about their surrounding environment with limited samples
[18]. One of the main bottlenecks in the current deep learning methods is their dependency on the large-scale training
data. However, it is intractable to collect one large-scale
dataset that contains all the required object classes for different environments. This motivated the emergence of fewshot learning methods [12, 38, 32, 26, 27]. These early
works were primarily focused on solving few-shot image
classification tasks, where a support set consists of a few images and their class labels. The earliest attempt to solve the
few-shot segmentation task seems to be the approach proposed by Shaban et al. [28] that predicts the parameters of
the final segmentation layer. This and other previous methods require the training of an additional branch to guide the
backbone segmentation network. The additional network
introduces extra computational burden. On top of that, ex-

NMAP Layer

Masked
Proxies

Old
Weights

Adaptive Masked Proxies
FCN-8s
Multi-resolution
Imprinting

Figure 1: Multi-resolution adaptive imprinting in AMP.

isting approaches cannot be trivially extended to handle the
continuous stream of data containing annotations for both
novel and previously learned classes.
To address these shortcomings, we propose a novel sample efficient adaptive masked proxies method, which we
call AMP. It constructs weights of the final segmentation
layer via multi-resolution imprinting. AMP does not rely
on a second guidance branch, as shown in Figure 1. Following the terminology of [19], a proxy is a representative
signature of a given class. In the few-shot segmentation
setup, the support set contains pixel-wise class labels for
each support image. Therefore, the response of the backbone fully convolutional network (FCN) to a set of images
from a given class in the support set can be masked by segmentation labels and then average pooled to create a proxy
for this class. This forms what we call a normalized masked
average pooling layer (NMAP in Fig. 1). The computed
proxies are used to set the 1x1 convolutional filters for the
new classes, forming the process known as weight imprinting [23]. Multi-resolution weight imprinting is proposed to
improve the segmentation accuracy of our method.
We further consider the continual learning setup in which
a few-shot algorithm may be presented with a sequence of
support sets (continuous semantic segmentation scenario).
In connection with this scenario, we propose to adapt the
previously learned class weights with the new proxies from

5249

