Deep Self-Learning From Noisy Labels
1

Jiangfan Han1 Ping Luo2 Xiaogang Wang1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
The University of Hong Kong
{jiangfanhan@link., xgwang@ee.}cuhk.edu.hk

pluo@cs.hku.hk

Decision Boundary

Abstract
ConvNets achieve good results when training from clean
data, but learning from noisy labels significantly degrades
performances and remains challenging. Unlike previous
works constrained by many conditions, making them infeasible to real noisy cases, this work presents a novel deep
self-learning framework to train a robust network on the
real noisy datasets without extra supervision. The proposed
approach has several appealing benefits. (1) Different from
most existing work, it does not rely on any assumption on
the distribution of the noisy labels, making it robust to real
noises. (2) It does not need extra clean supervision or
accessorial network to help training. (3) A self-learning
framework is proposed to train the network in an iterative
end-to-end manner, which is effective and efficient. Extensive experiments in challenging benchmarks such as Clothing1M and Food101-N show that our approach outperforms
its counterparts in all empirical settings.

Prototype

Prototype

Prototypes

Prototypes
Decision Boundary

1. Introduction

Figure 1. An example of solving two classes classification problem
using different number of prototypes. Left: Original data distribution. Data points with the same color belong to the same class.
Upper Right: The decision boundary obtained by using a single
prototype for each class. Lower Right: The decision boundary
obtained by two prototypes for each class. Two prototypes for
each class leads to a better decision boundary.

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) achieve impressive results on many computer vision tasks such as image recognition [13, 33, 34], semantic segmentation [22, 40, 24], object detection [5, 30, 27, 18] and cross modality tasks [20,
21, 41]. However, many of these tasks require large-scale
datasets with reliable and clean annotations to train DNNs
such as ImageNet [2] and MS-COCO [19]. But collecting large-scale datasets with precise annotations is expensive and time-consuming, preventing DNNs from being employed in real-world noisy scenarios. Moreover, most of the
“ground truth annotations” are from human labelers, who
also make mistakes and increase biases of the data.
An alternative solution is to collect data from the Internet by using different image-level tags as queries. These
tags can be regarded as labels of the collected images. This
solution is cheaper and more time-efficient than human annotations, but the collected labels may contain noises. A
lot of previous work has shown that noisy labels lead to
an obvious decrease in performance of DNNs [38, 23, 26].
Therefore, attentions have been concentrated on how to im-

prove the robustness of DNNs against noisy labels.
Previous approaches tried to correct the noisy labels
by introducing a transition matrix [25, 9] into their loss
functions, or by adding additional layers to estimate the
noises [6, 32]. Most of these methods followed a simple
assumption to simplify the problem: There is a single transition probability between the noisy label and ground-truth
label, and this probability is independent of individual samples. But in real cases, the appearance of each sample has
much influence on whether it can be misclassified. Due
to this assumption, although these methods worked well
on hand-crafted noisy datasets such as CIFAR10 [12] with
manually flipped noisy labels, their performances were limited on real noisy datasets such as Clothing1M [38] and
Food101-N [15].
Also, noisy tolerance loss functions [35, 39] have been
developed to fight against label noises, but they had a similar assumption as the above noise correction approaches. So
they were also infeasible for real-world noisy datasets. Furthermore, many approaches [15, 17, 37] solved this prob-

5138

