Deep Learning for Seeing Through Window With Raindrops
Yuhui Quan1 , Shijie Deng1 , Yixin Chen1 , Hui Ji2
1

School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119076

{csyhquan@scut.edu.cn; shijie.deng.cs@foxmail.com; yx.chen.cs@foxmail.com; matjh@nus.edu.sg} ∗

Abstract
When taking pictures through glass window in rainy day,
the images are comprised and corrupted by the raindrops
adhered to glass surfaces. It is a challenging problem to
remove the effect of raindrops from an image. The key task
is how to accurately and robustly identify the raindrop regions in an image. This paper develops a convolutional
neural network (CNN) for removing the effect of raindrops
from an image. In the proposed CNN, we introduce a double attention mechanism that concurrently guides the CNN
using shape-driven attention and channel re-calibration.
The shape-driven attention exploits physical shape priors of
raindrops, i.e. convexness and contour closedness, to accurately locate raindrops, and the channel re-calibration improves the robustness when processing raindrops with varying appearances. The experimental results show that the
proposed CNN outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches
in terms of both quantitative metrics and visual quality.

systems, particularly the ones used in safety driving, outdoor surveillance, intelligent vehicle systems and camera
drones; see e.g. [12,23]. There is certainly a need for developing computational methods that can effectively remove
raindrops from an image, i.e. restore the visual distortions
caused by the raindrops on images.
The optical model of an image taken through window
with raindrops is quite complex. For our purpose, we consider a simple linear model [23]:
I = (1 − A) ⊙ L + A ⊙ R,

(1)

where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication, I, L, R ∈
RC×M ×N denote the image with raindrops, the latent
raindrop-free layer, and the raindrop layer respectively. The
matrix A ∈ [0, 1]C×M ×N denotes the transparency matrix.
Each entry of A represents the percentage of the light path
covered by raindrops for the corresponding pixel. As the
latent image layer L refers to the scene behind the glasses,
we also refer to L as background image/layer.

1. Introduction
In rainy weather, there are many situations that one need
to take pictures of outside scenes through glass windows or
window shields. As the glass window is covered by raindrops in such scenarios, the captured images are comprised
by the effect caused by these raindrops. The same phenomenon happens when camera lens are covered by raindrops when taking pictures outdoor in rainy day. The effect of raindrops on an image can significantly degrade its
visibility. See Fig. 1 for the illustration of real images
taken through windows with raindrops. In addition to visual quality degradation, the raindrops also have negative
impacts on the performance of outdoor computer vision
∗ This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foun-

dation of China (61602184, 61872151, U1611461, 61672241, 61702112),
Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2017A030313376),
Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities of China (x2jsD2181690), and Singapore MOE AcRF (R146000229114, MOE2017-T22-156).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Examples of images taken through windows with
raindrops.
Different values of A will lead to different types of vi-

2463

