Deep Meta Learning for Real-Time Target-Aware Visual Tracking
Janghoon Choi
ASRI, Department of ECE,
Seoul National University

Junseok Kwon
School of CSE,
Chung-Ang Univeristy

Kyoung Mu Lee
ASRI, Department of ECE,
Seoul National University

ultio791@snu.ac.kr

jskwon@cau.ac.kr

kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel on-line visual tracking framework based on the Siamese matching network and
meta-learner network, which run at real-time speeds. Conventional deep convolutional feature-based discriminative
visual tracking algorithms require continuous re-training of
classifiers or correlation filters, which involve solving complex optimization tasks to adapt to the new appearance of
a target object. To alleviate this complex process, our proposed algorithm incorporates and utilizes a meta-learner
network to provide the matching network with new appearance information of the target objects by adding targetaware feature space. The parameters for the target-specific
feature space are provided instantly from a single forwardpass of the meta-learner network. By eliminating the necessity of continuously solving complex optimization tasks
in the course of tracking, experimental results demonstrate
that our algorithm performs at a real-time speed while
maintaining competitive performance among other state-ofthe-art tracking algorithms.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is one of the fundamental and
practical problems among the fields of computer vision research, and it has seen applications in automated surveillance, image stabilization, robotics and more. Given the
initial bounding box annotation of an object, visual tracking algorithms aim to track the specified object throughout
the subsequent part of the video without losing the object
under various circumstances such as illumination change,
blur, deformation, fast motion, and occlusion.
Recently, with the increasing use of deep learning and
convolutional neural networks (CNN) [27] in computer vision applications for their rich representation power and
generalization capabilities [26, 40, 43], there have been
numerous studies on utilizing the rich and general feature representation of the CNNs for visual tracking task
[50, 31, 36, 48, 45]. Most algorithms incorporate the deep

Proposed Visual Tracking System
Matching network

Meta
Information

Target-Specific Feature Space

General Feature Space

𝝓

𝝓𝒂𝒅𝒂𝒑𝒕

Meta-learner network

Adaptive Feature Space

𝝓𝒂𝒅𝒂𝒑𝒕
Search

Context Patch

𝝓𝒕𝒂𝒓𝒈𝒆𝒕

𝝓𝒂𝒅𝒂𝒑𝒕

Target Patch

Figure 1: Motivation of the proposed visual tracker. Our
framework incorporates a meta-learner network along with
a matching network. The meta-learner network receives
meta information from the matching network and provides
the matching network with the adaptive target-specific feature space needed for robust matching and tracking.
convolutional features used in object recognition systems
[26, 43, 40]. On top of these feature representations, additional classifiers or correlation filters are trained for on-line
adaptation to the target object [36, 21, 48, 31, 9, 30, 7, 56].
While these methods were successful in obtaining
high performance metrics in well-known benchmarks and
datasets [4, 51] using deep representations, the majority of
these algorithms were not designed as an integrated structure, where two different systems (i.e. deep feature network
system and target classifier systems) are built and trained
separately, not being closely associated. This causes several problems when the framework is naively applied to the
problem of visual tracking, where the classifier system is in
constant need of being updated in order to adapt to the appearance changes of the target object, while the number of
positive samples are highly limited.
Since an update operation requires solving complex optimization problems for a given objective function using
methods such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [36],

911

