Live Face De-Identification in Video
Oran Gafni, Lior Wolf
Facebook AI Research and Tel-Aviv University

Yaniv Taigman
Facebook AI Research

{oran,wolf}@fb.com

yaniv@fb.com

Abstract
We propose a method for face de-identification that enables fully automatic video modification at high frame rates.
The goal is to maximally decorrelate the identity, while having the perception (pose, illumination and expression) fixed.
We achieve this by a novel feed-forward encoder-decoder
network architecture that is conditioned on the high-level
representation of a person’s facial image. The network is
global, in the sense that it does not need to be retrained for
a given video or for a given identity, and it creates natural
looking image sequences with little distortion in time.

1. Introduction
In consumer image and video applications, the face has
a unique importance that stands out from all other objects.
For example, face recognition (detection followed by identification) is perhaps much more widely applicable than any
other object recognition (categorization, detection, or instance identification) in consumer images. Similarly, putting
aside image processing operators that are applied to the entire frame, face filters remain the most popular filters for
consumer video. Since face technology is both useful and
impactful, it also raises many ethical concerns. Face recognition can lead to loss of privacy and face replacement technology may be misused to create misleading videos.
In this work, we focus on video de-identification, which is
a video filtering application that both requires a technological
leap over the current state-of-the-art, and is benign in nature.
This application requires the creation of a video of a similar
looking person, such that the perceived identity is changed.
This allows, for example, the user to leave a natural-looking
video message in a public forum in an anonymous way, that
would presumably prevent face recognition technology from
recognizing them.
Video de-identification is a challenging task. The video
needs to be modified in a seamless way, without causing
flickering or other visual artifacts and distortions, such that
the identity is changed, while all other factors remain identical, see Fig. 1. These factors include pose, expression, lip

Figure 1. De-identification video results demonstrated on a variety
of poses, expressions, illumination conditions and occlusions. Pairs
of the source frame (first row) and the output frame (second row)
are shown. The high-level features (e.g. nose, eyes, eyebrows
and mouth) are altered, while the pose, expression, lip articulation,
illumination, and skin tone are preserved.

positioning (for unaltered speech), occlusion, illumination
and shadow, and their dynamics.
In contrast to the literature methods, which are limited to
still images and often swap a given face with a dataset face,
our method handles video and generates de novo faces. Our
experiments show convincing performance for unconstrained
videos, producing natural looking videos. The person in the
rendered video has a similar appearance to the person in the
original video. However, a state-of-the-art face-recognition
network fails to identify the person. A similar experiment
shows that humans cannot identify the generated face, even
without time constraints.
Our results would not have been possible, without a host
of novelties. We introduce a novel encoder-decoder architecture, in which we concatenate to the latent space the
activations of the representation layer of a network trained
to perform face recognition. As far as we know, this is the
first time that a representation from an existing classifier
network is used to augment an autoencoder, which enables
the feed-forward treatment of new persons, unseen during
training. In addition, this is the first work to introduce a new
19378

