Image Aesthetic Assessment Based on Pairwise Comparison – A Unified
Approach to Score Regression, Binary Classification, and Personalization
Jun-Tae Lee† and Chang-Su Kim‡
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
jtlee@mcl.korea.ac.kr† and changsukim@korea.ac.kr‡

Abstract
We propose a unified approach to three tasks of aesthetic
score regression, binary aesthetic classification, and personalized aesthetics. First, we develop a comparator to estimate the ratio of aesthetic scores for two images. Then, we
construct a pairwise comparison matrix for multiple reference images and an input image, and predict the aesthetic
score of the input via the eigenvalue decomposition of the
matrix. By varying the reference images, the proposed algorithm can be used for binary aesthetic classification and
personalized aesthetics, as well as generic score regression.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed unified
algorithm provides the state-of-the-art performances in all
three tasks of image aesthetics.

1. Introduction
As the volume of visual data grows exponentially, the
capability of automatically distinguishing high quality images from low quality ones or judging aesthetic values of
images becomes increasingly important in image searching, retrieving, and enhancing applications. However, it is
challenging due to the subjectiveness and ambiguity of aesthetic criteria. For example, to take high quality images,
photographers use several aesthetic rules, including rule of
thirds and visual balance [22, 23]. Early assessment techniques [6, 27, 28, 40] adopted various handcrafted features
to describe these rules. The rule-based features, however,
are not sufficiently effective, and some aesthetic rules might
have not been discovered yet. Other approaches leveraged
generic image features, such as Fisher vectors [31, 33] and
bag-of-visual-words [38], yielding more promising results.
Recently, with the great success of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) in various vision tasks [10, 15, 16, 19, 36],
many CNN-based aesthetic assessment techniques have
been developed [18, 25, 26, 29, 30, 39]. As human beings
evaluate aesthetics based on their experience, these CNNbased techniques learn aesthetic criteria from massive data.

High quality
Low quality Binary classification
8.8
6.8
Input image

Generic score

Personalized score

Aesthetic assessment

Figure 1. Given an image, the proposed unified algorithm can classify it into either high or low quality class, regress a generic score,
and tailor the score to reflect personal preferences.

Although these techniques have made progress in aesthetic
assessment, most of them focus on dichotomizing an image
into either high or low quality class. However, in some applications, such as image recommendation, image enhancement [20], and personal album curation, it is necessary to
estimate a continuous aesthetic score of an image and also
tailor the score to meet personal preferences. Relatively little effort has been made for these aesthetic score regression [18] and personalized aesthetics [34], which are more
challenging than binary aesthetic classification.
In this paper, we propose a unified approach to the three
tasks of aesthetic score regression, binary aesthetic classification, and personalized aesthetics. We first develop an
aesthetic comparator, which is a Siamese network, to estimate the ratio of aesthetic scores for two images. Using the
comparator, we generate a pairwise comparison matrix for
multiple reference images and an input image. Then, via
the eigenvalue decomposition of the matrix, we obtain a regressed score of the input image. By modifying the pairwise
comparison matrix, the proposed algorithm can achieve
all three objectives of score regression, binary classification, and personalization successfully, as illustrated in Figure 1. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
unified algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art score regression [18], binary classification [29], and personalization [34] techniques.
To summarize, we make the following contributions:
• We propose the first unified approach to the three tasks
11191

