Toyota Smarthome: Real-World Activities of Daily Living
Srijan Das1,2 , Rui Dai1,2 , Michal Koperski1,2 , Luca Minciullo3 , Lorenzo Garattoni3 ,
Francois Bremond1,2 and Gianpiero Francesca3
1

Université Côte d’Azur

2

Abstract
The performance of deep neural networks is strongly
influenced by the quantity and quality of annotated data.
Most of the large activity recognition datasets consist of
data sourced from the web, which does not reflect challenges that exist in activities of daily living. In this paper,
we introduce a large real-world video dataset for activities
of daily living: Toyota Smarthome. The dataset consists of
16K RGB+D clips of 31 activity classes, performed by seniors in a smarthome. Unlike previous datasets, videos were
fully unscripted. As a result, the dataset poses several challenges: high intra-class variation, high class imbalance,
simple and composite activities, and activities with similar motion and variable duration. Activities were annotated
with both coarse and fine-grained labels. These characteristics differentiate Toyota Smarthome from other datasets
for activity recognition. As recent activity recognition approaches fail to address the challenges posed by Toyota
Smarthome, we present a novel activity recognition method
with attention mechanism. We propose a pose driven spatiotemporal attention mechanism through 3D ConvNets. We
show that our novel method outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on benchmark datasets, as well as on the Toyota
Smarthome dataset. We release the dataset for research
use1 .

1. Introduction
Recent studies show that improvements in recognition
methods are often paired with the availability of annotated
data. For instance, significant boosts in image recognition
accuracy on the AlexNet and VGG architectures [20, 37]
were possible thanks to ImageNet [9] dataset. Similarly,
the Inflated 3D Convolutional Networks (I3D) for activity recognition [4] largely benefited from the Kinetics [4]
dataset.
1 https://project.inria.fr/toyotasmarthome

3

Inria

Toyota Motor Europe

Most of the available activity recognition datasets such
as UCF101 [39], HMDB51 [21] , Kinetics [4] are gathered
from video web services (e.g. YouTube). Such datasets introduce data bias as they mainly contain activities concerning sports, outdoor activities and playing instruments. In
addition, these activities have a significant inter-class variance (e.g. bike riding vs. sword exercising), which usually
does not characterize daily living activities. Besides, most
video clips only last a few seconds.
ADL datasets proposed in the past years [33, 46, 45, 40]
were typically recorded using static cameras from a single viewpoint. The activities were performed in front of
cameras by actors (often voluntary students), who were instructed beforehand. As a consequence, activities were performed in a similar, somewhat unnatural way. Finally, most
of the datasets do not include complex, composite activities
as they focus only on short, atomic motions. Table 1 provides a list of the most popular ADL datasets, outlining their
key features along with the limitations mentioned above.
We introduce a new dataset that aims at addressing these
limitations: Toyota Smarthome. Toyota Smarthome, hereafter Smarthome, contains approx. 16.1K video clips with
31 activity classes performed by 18 subjects. The challenges of this dataset are characterized by the rich diversity of activity categories perfomed in a real-world domestic environment. The dataset contains fine-grained activities (e.g. drinking with a cup, bottle or a can) and composite activities (e.g. cooking). The activities were recorded in
3 different scenes from 7 camera viewpoints. Real-world
challenges comprise occlusion and high intra-class variation. Another unique feature of Smarthome is that activities
are performed by subjects who did not receive any information about how to perform them.
To address the real-world challenges in Smarthome,
we propose a novel attention mechanism on top of currently high-performing spatio-temporal convolutional networks [4] (3D ConvNet). Inspired by [11], our method uses
both spatial and temporal attention mechanisms. We dissociate the spatial and temporal attention mechanisms (instead

833

