Personalized Fashion Design
Cong Yu† , Yang Hu§ ,* Yan Chen§ , Bing Zeng§
School of Information and Communication Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
†

congyu@std.uestc.edu.cn, § {yanghu,eecyan,eezeng}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Fashion recommendation is the task of suggesting a fashion item that fits well with a given item. In this work, we
propose to automatically synthesis new items for recommendation. We jointly consider the two key issues for the
task, i.e., compatibility and personalization. We propose
a personalized fashion design framework with the help of
generative adversarial training. A convolutional network is
first used to map the query image into a latent vector representation. This latent representation, together with another
vector which characterizes user’s style preference, are taken
as the input to the generator network to generate the target
item image. Two discriminator networks are built to guide
the generation process. One is the classic real/fake discriminator. The other is a matching network which simultaneously models the compatibility between fashion items and
learns users’ preference representations. The performance
of the proposed method is evaluated on thousands of outfits
composited by online users. The experiments show that the
items generated by our model are quite realistic. They have
better visual quality and higher matching degree than those
generated by alternative methods.

1. Introduction
With the rapid evolution of the fashion industry toward
an online business, fashion related computer vision problems have attracted increasing attention nowadays. One
task that is of particular interest is fashion recommendation [4,7,9,10,16,21,35–37], which suggests clothing items
that fit well with a given item. The key to fashion recommendation is to model the compatibility between fashion items. Various methods such as distance metric learning [7,25,36], Siamese networks [37] and Recurrent Neural
Networks [4, 16] have been explored. Despite of their success in predicting the compatibility, there are still problems
* The corresponding author is Yang Hu. This work was supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61602090) and the 111
Project (B17008).

Top to Bottom

Bottom to Top

Figure 1. Example outfits our model designs. In the upper case,
we design bottoms (items in red box) to go with the given tops,
and in the lower case, we design tops (items in red box) to go with
the given bottoms. All these designs are user specific.

when applying them in real world scenarios. Note that these
methods only measure the compatibility between existing
items. When the given inventory is small or limited, it is
possible that there is no item good enough to complement
the query. On the other hand, when the inventory is large,
generating the recommendation may face some efficiency
problem since one needs to compute the compatibility for
each item, which is computational expensive due to the usage of deep neural networks by most methods.
In this work, instead of suggesting existing items, we
synthesize images of new items that are compatible to a
given one. This solves the deficit problem for small inventory. For large inventory, when targeting real items is necessary, we can just search items that are similar with the synthesized one. This is more efficient than exhaustive compatibility evaluation since similarity search can be very fast

9046

