Mask-Guided Attention Network for Occluded Pedestrian Detection
Yanwei Pang1 , Jin Xie1 , Muhammad Haris Khan2 , Rao Muhammad Anwer2 ,
Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,3 , Ling Shao2
1

Tianjin University

2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

3

CVL, Linköping University, Sweden

{pyw,jinxie}@tju.edu.cn, {muhammad.haris,rao.anwer,fahad.khan,ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
Pedestrian detection relying on deep convolution neural
networks has made significant progress. Though promising results have been achieved on standard pedestrians, the
performance on heavily occluded pedestrians remains far
from satisfactory. The main culprits are intra-class occlusions involving other pedestrians and inter-class occlusions
caused by other objects, such as cars and bicycles. These
result in a multitude of occlusion patterns. We propose an
approach for occluded pedestrian detection with the following contributions. First, we introduce a novel maskguided attention network that fits naturally into popular
pedestrian detection pipelines. Our attention network emphasizes on visible pedestrian regions while suppressing the
occluded ones by modulating full body features. Second, we
empirically demonstrate that coarse-level segmentation annotations provide reasonable approximation to their dense
pixel-wise counterparts. Experiments are performed on
CityPersons and Caltech datasets. Our approach sets a new
state-of-the-art on both datasets. Our approach obtains an
absolute gain of 9.5% in log-average miss rate, compared
to the best reported results [31] on the heavily occluded HO
pedestrian set of CityPersons test set. Further, on the HO
pedestrian set of Caltech dataset, our method achieves an
absolute gain of 5.0% in log-average miss rate, compared to
the best reported results [13]. Code and models are available at: https://github.com/Leotju/MGAN .

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is a challenging computer vision
problem with numerous real-world applications. Recently,
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have pervaded
many areas of computer vision ranging from object recognition [25, 10, 27, 22], to generic object detection [24, 15, 14],
to pedestrian detection [23, 16, 2, 17, 1, 29].
Despite the recent progress on standard benchmarks with
non-occluded or reasonably occluded pedestrians, state-ofthe-art approaches still struggle under severe occlusions.

Baseline

Ours

Ground-truth

Figure 1. Detection examples using our approach (top row) and the
baseline Faster R-CNN [24] (bottom row). For improved visualization, detection regions are cropped from images of CityPersons
val. set [31]. All results are obtained using the same false positive per image (FPPI) criterion. Our approach robustly handles
occlusions, yielding higher recall for occluded pedestrians.

For example, when walking in close proximity, a pedestrian
is likely to be obstructed by other pedestrians and/or other
objects like cars and bicycles. For illustration, Fig. 1 displays the performance of baseline Faster R-CNN pedestrian
detector [24] under heavy occlusions. Handling occlusions
is a key challenge; they occur frequently in real-world applications of pedestrian detection. Therefore, recent benchmarks specifically focus on heavily occluded pedestrian detection. For instance, CityPersons [31] dataset has around
70% of pedestrians depicting various degrees of occlusions.
Most existing approaches employ a holistic detection
strategy [23, 16, 2, 17] that assumes entirely visible pedestrians when trained using full body annotations. However,
such a strategy is sub-optimal under partial or heavy occlusions since most of the pedestrian’s body is invisible. This
deteriorates the performance by degrading the discriminative ability of the pedestrian model due to the inclusion of
background regions inside the full body detection window.
Lately, several pedestrian detection methods [20, 18, 28,

4967

