Adversarial Defense via Learning to Generate Diverse Attacks
Yunseok Jang1,∗, Tianchen Zhao1,∗ , Seunghoon Hong1,2 , Honglak Lee1
1
University of Michigan, 2 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
1 {yunseokj,

ericolon, honglak}@umich.edu, 2 {seunghoon.hong}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
With the remarkable success of deep learning, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been applied as dominant tools
to various machine learning domains. Despite this success, however, it has been found that DNNs are surprisingly
vulnerable to malicious attacks; adding a small, perceptually indistinguishable perturbations to the data can easily
degrade classification performance. Adversarial training
is an effective defense strategy to train a robust classifier.
In this work, we propose to utilize the generator to learn
how to create adversarial examples. Unlike the existing
approaches that create a one-shot perturbation by a deterministic generator, we propose a recursive and stochastic generator that produces much stronger and diverse perturbations that comprehensively reveal the vulnerability of
the target classifier. Our experiment results on MNIST and
CIFAR-10 datasets show that the classifier adversarially
trained with our method yields more robust performance
over various white-box and black-box attacks.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, deep learning has achieved great
breakthroughs in various domains of machine learning such
as computer vision [22, 26, 49], speech recognition [18],
and reinforcement learning [37, 48]. In parallel to these
successes, Szegedy et al. [52] discovered that deep learning models are vulnerable to maliciously designed perturbations added to the input data. It is shown that even a
small, perceptually indistinguishable perturbations can easily cause disastrous misprediction from the model. Later
study suggested that such perturbations exist over a wide
range of applications [27], and are even transferable across
different models [33, 41, 42].
To make deep learning models robust against such malicious perturbations, various defense mechanisms [14, 19,
20, 23, 28, 34, 43, 47, 54, 58] have been proposed recently.
Adversarial training [28] is one of the most effective strate∗ Equal Contribution

gies to defend against various attacks. The idea is to train
the target neural network (e.g. classifier) jointly with clean
data samples and their adversaries. Such a framework can
be interpreted as a game between adversarial attack and defense; the adversary constantly attacks the target model, and
the model learns to be robust against all attacks from the adversary. In this work, we address the attack mechanism in
adversarial training, since its effectiveness is closely related
to the method of generating adversarial data.
To generate adversarial data, early approaches formulate the task as a constrained optimization problem and
utilize first-order gradient to generate adversarial perturbations [6, 9, 17, 27, 43]. Despite its success, however, an
optimization in first-order methods is based on an oversimplified loss landscape [31]. The performance of the
adversarially trained classifier is not guaranteed when it is
challenged by more complicated, higher-order attacks.
More recently, approaches based on learning-to-learn
framework have been proposed to improve adversarial training [7, 38, 44, 54]. The main idea is to learn a neural network, or a generator, to seek adversarial examples that effectively fool the target neural network. With the expressive
power of DNNs, it is possible to discover attacks that cannot
be obtained with the first-order methods, which is also useful to enhance the robustness of the classifier against future
attacks.
However, the existing generator-based approaches employ a simple generator, or a naive scheme, that generates
the perturbation in a single shot, leading to sub-optimal solutions that are less valuable for adversarial training. Also,
such generators are often designed to produce deterministic
perturbations (i.e. one perturbation per data), which makes
adversarial training easily overfit to specific types of adversarial examples.
In this work, we propose a novel generator-based adversary to improve adversarial training. Based on recent
learning-to-learn (L2L) framework [7], we design a generator so that it can achieve stronger and diverse attacks that
lead to improving the robustness of the classifier. To build a
stronger attack, we design the generator to recursively construct adversarial perturbations, which allows it to discover

2740

