Moment Matching for Multi-Source Domain Adaptation
Xingchao Peng
Boston University

Qinxun Bai
Horizon Robotics

Xide Xia
Boston University

xpeng@bu.edu

qinxun.bai@horizon.ai

xidexia@bu.edu

Kate Saenko
Boston University

Vector Institute & Peter Munk Cardiac Center

zijun.huang@columbia.edu

saenko@bu.edu

bowang@vectorinstitute.ai

Conventional unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
assumes that training data are sampled from a single domain. This neglects the more practical scenario where
training data are collected from multiple sources, requiring multi-source domain adaptation. We make three major contributions towards addressing this problem. First,
we collect and annotate by far the largest UDA dataset,
called DomainNet, which contains six domains and about
0.6 million images distributed among 345 categories, addressing the gap in data availability for multi-source UDA
research. Second, we propose a new deep learning approach, Moment Matching for Multi-Source Domain Adaptation (M3 SDA), which aims to transfer knowledge learned
from multiple labeled source domains to an unlabeled target
domain by dynamically aligning moments of their feature
distributions. Third, we provide new theoretical insights
specifically for moment matching approaches in both single and multiple source domain adaptation. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the power of our
new dataset in benchmarking state-of-the-art multi-source
domain adaptation methods, as well as the advantage of
our proposed model. Dataset and Code are available at
http://ai.bu.edu/M3SDA/

1. Introduction
Generalizing models learned on one visual domain to
novel domains has been a major obstacle in the quest
for universal object recognition. The performance of the
learned models degrades significantly when testing on novel
domains due to the presence of domain shift [36].
Recently, transfer learning and domain adaptation methods have been proposed to mitigate the domain gap. For
example, several UDA methods [27, 41, 25] incorporate
Maximum Mean Discrepancy loss into a neural network to
diminish the domain discrepancy; other models introduce
different learning schema to align the source and target domains, including aligning second order correlation [39, 32],

sketch

Abstract

Bo Wang

real quickdraw painting infograph clipart

Zijun Huang
Columbia University

airplane clock

axe

ball

bicycle bird strawberry flower pizza butterfly

Figure 1. We address Multi-Source Domain Adaptation where
source images come from multiple domains. We collect a large
scale dataset, DomainNet, with six domains, 345 categories, and
∼0.6 million images and propose a model (M3 SDA) to transfer
knowledge from multiple source domains to an unlabeled target
domain.

moment matching [47], adversarial domain confusion [40,
8, 38] and GAN-based alignment [50, 15, 23]. However,
most of current UDA methods assume that source samples
are collected from a single domain. This assumption neglects the more practical scenarios where labeled images
are typically collected from multiple domains. For example, the training images can be taken under different weather
or lighting conditions, share different visual cues, and even
have different modalities (as shown in Figure 1).
In this paper, we consider multi-source domain adaptation (MSDA), a more difficult but practical problem of
knowledge transfer from multiple distinct domains to one
unlabeled target domain. The main challenges in the research of MSDA are that: (1) the source data has multiple
domains, which hampers the effectiveness of mainstream
single UDA method; (2) source domains also possess domain shift with each other; (3) the lack of large-scale multidomain dataset hinders the development of MSDA models.
In the context of MSDA, some theoretical analysis [1,
28, 4, 49, 14] has been proposed for multi-source domain
11406

