Semi-Supervised Pedestrian Instance Synthesis and Detection
with Mutual Reinforcement

1

Si Wu12 Sihao Lin1 Wenhao Wu1 Mohamed Azzam2 Hau-San Wong2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
cswusi@scut.edu.cn, linsihao6@gmail.com, wenhaowu.chn@gmail.com
m.azzam@my.cityu.edu.hk, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
We propose a GAN-based scene-specific instance synthesis and classification model for semi-supervised pedestrian detection. Instead of collecting unreliable detections from unlabeled data, we adopt a class-conditional GAN
for synthesizing pedestrian instances to alleviate the problem of insufficient labeled data. With the help of a base
detector, we integrate pedestrian instance synthesis and detection by including a post-refinement classifier (PRC) into
a minimax game. A generator and the PRC can mutually
reinforce each other by synthesizing high-fidelity pedestrian instances and providing more accurate categorical information. Both of them compete with a class-conditional
discriminator and a class-specific discriminator, such that
the four fundamental networks in our model can be jointly trained. In our experiments, we validate that the proposed model significantly improves the performance of the
base detector and achieves state-of-the-art results on multiple benchmarks. As shown in Figure 1, the result indicates
the possibility of using inexpensively synthesized instances
for improving semi-supervised detection models.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is a fundamental and critical step toward many real-world applications, such as surveillance and
autonomous driving. Recent progress [1] [48] in pedestrian
detection is mainly attributed to adapting deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to this task. However, there are
still various challenges. Collecting and manually annotating
a large amount of data for supervised learning requires lots
of time and considerable human effort. In this paper, we
limit our discussion to semi-supervised pedestrian detection. In our setting, there are a limited amount of labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data. It is critical for our
task to exploit the unlabeled data to facilitate learning on the

Figure 1. Pedestrian instance synthesis and detection on the
CUHK-Square dataset. In a semi-supervised setting (5% labeled
data), the proposed model generates high-fidelity pedestrian instances. When including the synthesized instances in the training
of the PRC, the resulting PRC surpasses a base detector even with
full supervision as shown in the right subfigure (lower is better).

labeled data. Although the state-of-the-art detection performance is promising, we found that it drops significantly as
the amount of labeled data reduces. For instance, the model
‘RPN+BF’ [47] achieves a log-average miss rate of 9.6% in
the FPPI (false positives per image) range [10−2 , 100 ] on the
Caltech1X benchmark [7], but the performance significantly degrades to 39.2% when only 5% of the total training data
was used. In many real-world applications, insufficiency of
labeled data often happens. Meanwhile, the performance of
semi-supervised pedestrian detection is still far from being
satisfactory.
Although some efforts have been made to combat the
problem of insufficient labeled data, e.g., [38] [40] [41],
most of them apply the current detector to collect new instances from unlabeled data and then re-train the detector. The main drawback of those methods is that the correctness of the collected instances cannot be guaranteed.
Other works of solving the same problem is synthesizing
pedestrian instances through rendering 3D human models [15] [4] [19]. However, the synthesized pedestrian in-

5057

