3D-RelNet: Joint Object and Relational Network for 3D Prediction
Nilesh Kulkarni1
Ishan Misra 1
1
Carnegie Mellon University

Shubham Tulsiani2
Abhinav Gupta1
University of California, Berkeley

2

https://nileshkulkarni.github.io/relative3d/

Per object

Image with detections
Object
Encoder

Final
Prediction
f

Relative
Encoder
Translation

Per pair

Rotation

Instance BBoxes

Scale

Union (pair) BBox

(a) Overview of our method

(b) Results

Figure 1: (a) Approach Overview: We study the problem of layout estimation in 3D by reasoning about relationships between objects. Given an image
and object detection boxes, we first predict the 3D pose (translation, rotation, scale) of each object and the relative pose between each pair of objects. We
combine these predictions and ensure consistent relationships between objects to predict the final 3D pose of each object. (b) Output: An example result of
our method that takes as input the 2D image and generates the 3D layout.

Abstract
We propose an approach to predict the 3D shape and pose
for the objects present in a scene. Existing learning based
methods that pursue this goal make independent predictions
per object, and do not leverage the relationships amongst
them. We argue that reasoning about these relationships
is crucial, and present an approach to incorporate these
in a 3D prediction framework. In addition to independent
per-object predictions, we predict pairwise relations in the
form of relative 3D pose, and demonstrate that these can
be easily incorporated to improve object level estimates.
We report performance across different datasets (SUNCG,
NYUv2), and show that our approach significantly improves
over independent prediction approaches while also outperforming alternate implicit reasoning methods.

1. Introduction
A single 2D image can induce a rich 3D perception. When
we look at an image, we can reason about its 3D layout, the
objects in the image, their shape, extent, relationships etc.
This is really surprising given that going from a 2D projection to a 3D model is inherently ill-posed. How are we able
to solve this problem? Humans rely on regularities in the
3D world in order to do so – this helps us discard many improbable solutions in 3D and reason about more likely ones.
This regularity exists at the scene level - indoor scenes have

roughly perpendicular walls; object level - chairs have similar shapes; and in local object relationships - chairs are close
to tables, monitors are on top of tables etc. A decade ago, a
lot of work in computer vision focused on using all the three
levels of regularities. For example, a lot of work focused
on object-centered 3D prediction [8], scene-level 3D prediction [19], and multi-object 3D reasoning [26]. However,
in recent years, since the advent of ConvNets, a vast majority of computer vision approaches do not leverage these
object-object relationships, and instead reason about each
object independently.
In this paper, we attempt to take a holistic view of the 3D
prediction problem and note that solving the 3D prediction problem would require incorporation of all the three
cues. We believe there are three fundamental questions that
need to be answered to design this holistic architecture: (a)
What is the right representation for object level 3D prediction?; (b) How do we represent object-object relationships
and how do we predict them from pixels?; (c) Finally, how
to incorporate object-object relationships with object-level
modules. This paper builds upon the recent success in (a)
and investigates how to model relationships and incorporate
them into our 3D prediction framework.
So, how do we model relationships and estimate them from
pixels? There is a whole spectrum of possible approaches.
On one end of the spectrum is a complete end-to-end approach. Some examples of these include Interaction Net-

2212

