U-CAM: Visual Explanation using Uncertainty based Class Activation Maps
Badri N. Patro

Mayank Lunayach Shivansh Patel Vinay P. Namboodiri
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur
{ badri,mayankl,shivp,vinaypn }@iitk.ac.in

Abstract
Understanding and explaining deep learning models is
an imperative task. Towards this, we propose a method that
obtains gradient-based certainty estimates that also provide visual attention maps. Particularly, we solve for visual
question answering task. We incorporate modern probabilistic deep learning methods that we further improve by
using the gradients for these estimates. These have twofold benefits: a) improvement in obtaining the certainty estimates that correlate better with misclassified samples and
b) improved attention maps that provide state-of-the-art results in terms of correlation with human attention regions.
The improved attention maps result in consistent improvement for various methods for visual question answering.
Therefore, the proposed technique can be thought of as a
recipe for obtaining improved certainty estimates and explanation for deep learning models. We provide detailed
empirical analysis for the visual question answering task
on all standard benchmarks and comparison with state of
the art methods.

1. Introduction
To interpret and explain the deep learning models, many
approaches have been proposed. One of the approaches
uses probabilistic techniques to obtain uncertainty estimates, [15, 16]. Other approaches aim at obtaining visual
explanations through methods such as Grad-CAM [9] or
by attending to specific regions using hard/soft attention.
With the recent probabilistic deep learning techniques by
Gal and Ghahramani [15], it became feasible to obtain uncertainty estimates in a computationally efficient manner.
This was further extended to data uncertainty and model uncertainty based estimates [23]. Through this work, we focus
on using gradients uncertainty losses to improve attention
maps while also enhancing the explainability leveraging the
Bayesian nature of our approach. The uncertainties that we
use are aleatoric and predictive [24].
For the estimated uncertainties, we calculate gradients
using the approach similar to gradient-based class activation
maps [9]. This provides “certainty maps” which helps in

Figure 1. The figure shows the activation maps for baseline
(MCB [13]) and our models (A-GCA and P-GCA). In the first example, the baseline model had predicted the wrong answer and had
high uncertainty in prediction. (σu denotes uncertainty, see Section 3). Our model gave a correct answer while also minimizing
the uncertainty (thus leading to an improved visual explanation).

attending to certain regions of the attention maps. Doing
this, we report an improvement in attention maps. This is
illustrated in the Figure 1.
Our method combines techniques from both the explanation [9] and uncertainty [23] estimation techniques to obtain improved results. We have provided an extensive evaluation. We show that the results obtained for uncertainty
estimates show a strong correlation with misclassification,
i.e., when the classifier is wrong, the model is usually uncertain. Further, the attention maps provide state of the art
correlation with human-annotated attention maps. We also
show that on various VQA datasets, our model provides results comparable to the state of the art while significantly
improving the performance of baseline methods on which
we incorporated our approach. Our method may be seen
as a generic way to obtain Bayesian uncertainty estimates,
visual explanation, and as a result, improved accuracy for
Visual Question Answering (VQA) task.
Our contributions, therefore, lie in, a) unifying approaches for understanding deep learning methods using
uncertainty estimate and explanation b) obtaining visual attention maps that correlate best with human attention regions and c) showing that the improved attention maps re17444

