Transferable Semi-Supervised 3D Object Detection From RGB-D Data
Yew Siang Tang
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{yewsiang.tang, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D object detection refers to the problem of classification and estimation of a tight oriented 3D bounding box for
each object in a 3D scene represented by a point cloud. It
plays an essential role in many real-world applications such
as home robotics, augmented reality and autonomous driving, where machines must actively interact and engage with
its surroundings. In the recent years, significant advances
in 3D object detection have been achieved with fully supervised deep learning-based approaches [4, 5, 6, 12, 16, 20, 31,
35,40]. However, these strongly supervised approaches rely
on 3D ground truth datasets [7, 25, 32, 33] that are tedious
and time consuming to label even with good customised 3D
annotation tools such as those in [7, 25]. In contrast, calculations based on [17] show that it can be ∼3-16 times
faster (depending on the annotation tool used) to label 2D
than 3D bounding boxes (details in supplementary). This

Strong Classes
Weak Classes

We investigate the direction of training a 3D object detector for new object classes from only 2D bounding box
labels of these new classes, while simultaneously transferring information from 3D bounding box labels of the existing classes. To this end, we propose a transferable semisupervised 3D object detection model that learns a 3D object detector network from training data with two disjoint
sets of object classes - a set of strong classes with both 2D
and 3D box labels, and another set of weak classes with
only 2D box labels. In particular, we suggest a relaxed reprojection loss, box prior loss and a Box-to-Point Cloud Fit
network that allow us to effectively transfer useful 3D information from the strong classes to the weak classes during
training, and consequently, enable the network to detect 3D
objects in the weak classes during inference. Experimental results show that our proposed algorithm outperforms
baseline approaches and achieves promising results compared to fully-supervised approaches on the SUN-RGBD
and KITTI datasets. Furthermore, we show that our Boxto-Point Cloud Fit network improves performances of the
fully-supervised approaches on both datasets.

Fully-supervised 3D object detection
Cross-category semi-supervised 3D object detection
Chair

Bed

Chair

Bed

Table

Night stand

Table

Night stand

Testing scenes

2D Bounding Box Labels

3D Bounding Box Labels

Figure 1. Illustration of fully-supervised 3D object detection
where 3D box labels of all classes (weak and strong classes)
are available, and cross-category semi-supervised 3D object detection where 3D box labels of inference classes (weak classes
e.g. Table and Night stand) are not available. Conventional
semi-supervised learning (which is in-category) requires strong
annotations from the inference classes (3D box labels in the case of
3D object detection) while cross-category semi-supervised learning requires only the weak annotations from the inference classes
(2D box labels in the case of 3D object detection).

observation inspires us to investigate the direction of training a 3D object detector for new object classes from only
2D bounding box labels of these new classes, while simultaneously transferring information from 3D bounding box
labels of the existing classes. We hope that this direction
of research leads to cost reductions, and improves the efficiency and practicality of learning 3D object detectors in
new applications with new classes.
More specifically, the objective of this paper is to train a
3D object detector network with data from two disjoint sets
of object classes - a set of classes with both 2D and 3D box
labels (strong classes), and another set of classes with only
2D box labels (weak classes). In other words, our goal is to
transfer useful 3D information from the strong classes to the
weak classes (the new classes of a new 3D object detection
application correspond to these weak classes) . We refer to
this as cross-category semi-supervised 3D object detection
as illustrated in Fig. 1.

1931

