Deep Reinforcement Active Learning for
Human-In-The-Loop Person Re-Identification
⋆

⋆

Zimo Liu† , Jingya Wang‡ , Shaogang Gong§ , Huchuan Lu† *, Dacheng Tao‡
† Dalian University of Technology, ‡ UBTECH Sydney AI Center, The University of Sydney, § Queen Mary University of London
lzm920316@gmail.com, jingya.wang@sydney.edu.au, s.gong@qmul.ac.uk, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Most existing person re-identification(Re-ID) approaches achieve superior results based on the assumption
that a large amount of pre-labelled data is usually available
and can be put into training phrase all at once. However,
this assumption is not applicable to most real-world
deployment of the Re-ID task. In this work, we propose
an alternative reinforcement learning based human-in-theloop model which releases the restriction of pre-labelling
and keeps model upgrading with progressively collected
data. The goal is to minimize human annotation efforts
while maximizing Re-ID performance. It works in an
iteratively updating framework by refining the RL policy
and CNN parameters alternately. In particular, we formulate a Deep Reinforcement Active Learning (DRAL)
method to guide an agent (a model in a reinforcement
learning process) in selecting training samples on-the-fly
by a human user/annotator. The reinforcement learning
reward is the uncertainty value of each human selected
sample. A binary feedback (positive or negative) labelled
by the human annotator is used to select the samples of
which are used to fine-tune a pre-trained CNN Re-ID
model. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of our DRAL method for deep reinforcement learning
based human-in-the-loop person Re-ID when compared to
existing unsupervised and transfer learning models as well
as active learning models.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is the problem of matching people across non-overlapping camera views distributed
at distinct locations. Most existing supervised person Re-ID
approaches employ a train-once-and-deploy scheme, that is,
pairwise training data are collected and annotated manually
* Corresponding Author
⋆ Equal Contribution

action !"
state reward
$"
#"

query
anchor

Agent

$"%&
#"%&

unlabeled gallery pool
query for label

Human annotator

Figure 1: An illustration of Deep Reinforcement Active
learning (DRAL). For each query anchor (probe), an agent
(reinforcement active learner) will select sequential instances from gallery pool for human annotation with binary
feedback (positive/negative) in an active learning process.
for every pair of cameras before learning a model. Based
on this assumption, supervised Re-ID methods have progressed on several benchmarks in recent years [21, 56, 35,
52, 25].
However, in practice this assumption is not easy to adapt
due to a few reasons: Firstly, pairwise pedestrian data is
prohibitive to be collected since it is unlikely that a large
amount of pedestrian may reappear in other camera views.
Secondly, the increasing number of camera views amplifies
the difficulties in searching the same person among multiple camera views. To address these difficulties, one solution is to design unsupervised learning algorithms. A few
works begin to focus on transfer learning or domain adaption technique for unsupervised Re-ID [11, 44, 28]. However, unsupervised learning based Re-ID models are inherently weaker compared to supervised learning based models, compromising Re-ID effectiveness in any practical deployment.
Another possible solution is following the semisupervised learning scheme that decreases the requirement
of data annotations. Successful researches have been done
on either dictionary learning [27] or self-paced learning [14]
based methods. These models are still based on a strong assumption that parts of the identities (e.g. one third of the

6122

