Pixel2Mesh++: Multi-View 3D Mesh Generation via Deformation
Chao Wen1∗
Yinda Zhang2∗
Zhuwen Li3∗
Yanwei Fu1†
1
2
3
Fudan University
Google LLC
Nuro, Inc.
Abstract
We study the problem of shape generation in 3D mesh
representation from a few color images with known camera
poses. While many previous works learn to hallucinate the
shape directly from priors, we resort to further improving
the shape quality by leveraging cross-view information with
a graph convolutional network. Instead of building a direct mapping function from images to 3D shape, our model
learns to predict series of deformations to improve a coarse
shape iteratively. Inspired by traditional multiple view geometry methods, our network samples nearby area around
the initial mesh’s vertex locations and reasons an optimal
deformation using perceptual feature statistics built from
multiple input images. Extensive experiments show that our
model produces accurate 3D shape that are not only visually plausible from the input perspectives, but also well
aligned to arbitrary viewpoints. With the help of physically
driven architecture, our model also exhibits generalization
capability across different semantic categories, number of
input images, and quality of mesh initialization.

1. Introduction
3D shape generation has become a popular research topic
recently. With the astonishing capability of deep learning,
lots of works have been demonstrated to successfully generate the 3D shape from merely a single color image. However, due to limited visual evidence from only one viewpoint, single image based approaches usually produce rough
geometry in the occluded area and do not perform well
when generalized to test cases from domains other than
training, e.g. cross semantic categories.
Adding a few more images (e.g. 3-5) of the object is an
effective way to provide the shape generation system with
more information about the 3D shape. On one hand, multiview images provide more visual appearance information,
and thus grant the system with more chance to build the
connection between 3D shape and image priors. On the
other hand, it is well-known that traditional multi-view ge∗ indicates equal contributions.
† indicates corresponding author. This work is supported by the STCSM
project (19ZR1471800), and Eastern Scholar (TP2017006).

Mesh Align to
Other View Images

Mesh

GT

Ours

MVP2M

P2M

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Multi-View Shape Generation. From multiple input
images, we produce shapes aligning well to input (c and d) and arbitrary random (e) camera viewpoint. Single view based approach,
e.g. Pixel2Mesh (P2M) [41], usually generates shape looking
good from the input viewpoint (c) but significantly worse from
others. Naive extension with multiple views (MVP2M, Sec. 4.2)
does not effectively improve the quality.

ometry methods [12] accurately infer 3D shape from correspondences across views, which is analytically well defined
and less vulnerable to the generalization problem. However,
these methods typically suffer from other problems, like
large baselines and poorly textured regions. Though typical multi-view methods are likely to break down with very
limited input images (e.g. less than 5), the cross-view connections might be implicitly encoded and learned by a deep
model. While well-motivated, there are very few works in
the literature exploiting in this direction, and a naive multiview extension of single image based model does not work
well as shown in Fig. 1.
In this work, we propose a deep learning model to generate the object shape from multiple color images. Especially, we focus on endowing the deep model with the capacity of improving shapes using cross-view information.
We resort to designing a new network architecture, named
Multi-View Deformation Network (MDN), which works in

1042

