Guided Image-to-Image Translation with Bi-Directional Feature Transformation
Badour AlBahar
Jia-Bin Huang
Virginia Tech

Upsampling Texture Transfer

Pose Transfer

{badour,jbhuang}@vt.edu

Input

Guide

Input

Ours

Guide

Ours

Figure 1. Applications of guided image-to-image translation. We present an algorithm that translates an input image into a corresponding output image while respecting the constraints specified in the provided guidance image. These controllable image-to-image translation
problems often require task-specific architectures and training objective functions as the guidance can take various different forms (e.g.,
color strokes, sketch, texture patch, image, and mask). We introduce a new conditioning scheme for controlling image synthesis using available guidance signals and demonstrate applicability to several sample applications, including person image synthesis guided by a given
pose (top), sketch-to-photo synthesis guided with a texture patch (middle), and depth upsampling guided with an RGB image (bottom).

Abstract
We address the problem of guided image-to-image translation where we translate an input image into another while
respecting the constraints provided by an external, userprovided guidance image. Various types of conditioning
mechanisms for leveraging the given guidance image have
been explored, including input concatenation, feature concatenation, and conditional affine transformation of feature
activations. All these conditioning mechanisms, however,
are uni-directional, i.e., no information flow from the input
image back to the guidance. To better utilize the constraints
of the guidance image, we present a bi-directional feature
transformation (bFT) scheme. We show that our novel bFT
scheme outperforms other conditioning schemes and has
comparable results to state-of-the-art methods on different

tasks.

1. Introduction
In an image-to-image translation problem [17], we aim
to translate an image from one domain to another. Many
problems in computer vision, graphics, and image processing can be formulated as image-to-image translation tasks,
including semantic image synthesis, style transfer, colorization, sketch to photos, to name a few. An extension to these
image-to-image translation problems involves an additional
guidance image that helps achieve controllable translation.
A guidance image typically reflects the desired visual effects or constraints specified by a user or provides additional
information via other modalities (color/depth, flash/non-

9016

