Disentangling Propagation and Generation for Video Prediction
Hang Gao∗1 Huazhe Xu∗1 Qi-Zhi Cai†2 Ruth Wang†3
UC Berkeley1 Sinovation Ventures AI Institute2

Fisher Yu1 Trevor Darrell1
Columbia University3

Abstract
A dynamic scene has two types of elements: those that
move fluidly and can be predicted from previous frames,
and those which are disoccluded (exposed) and cannot be
extrapolated. Prior approaches to video prediction typically learn either to warp or to hallucinate future pixels,
but not both. In this paper, we describe a computational
model for high-fidelity video prediction which disentangles
motion-specific propagation from motion-agnostic generation. We introduce a confidence-aware warping operator
which gates the output of pixel predictions from a flow predictor for non-occluded regions and from a context encoder
for occluded regions. Moreover, in contrast to prior works
where confidence is jointly learned with flow and appearance using a single network, we compute confidence after
a warping step, and employ a separate network to inpaint
exposed regions. Empirical results on both synthetic and
real datasets show that our disentangling approach provides better occlusion maps and produces both sharper and
more realistic predictions compared to strong baselines.

1. Introduction
Video prediction is a challenge due to the many varied
factors that combine to generate future appearance.
State-of-the-art approaches to video prediction are often purely pixel-based and generate each pixel from scratch
(Figure 2a) [20, 38, 36, 37, 6, 43, 4]. They rely on 3D
or recurrent convolutional networks to encode spatial contents over time, hoping to capture implicit motion representations. Another active line of purely motion-based approaches seeks pixel correspondence for explicit motion
propagation [28, 19]; in this approach standard networks are
augmented with an optical-flow representation and a warping function (Figure 2b). Because all pixels are copy-pasted
from the history image buffer, a degree of temporal consistency and spatial richness are automatically ensured. However, disocclusions—locations in the target frame to which
extrapolated optical flow has no projection—cause severe
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work was done while Q.C. and R.W. were at Berkeley DeepDrive.

(a) input frames

(b) extrapolated flow

(c) target frame

(d) warped result

(e) our occlusion map

(f) final result

Figure 1: Video prediction by extrapolating the motion and
hallucinating the pixels to be exposed. Given a video whose
last frame shown in (a), our model first extrapolates optic
flow (b) to its near future target (c). Direct motion propagation introduces ghosting effects (d) on pixels to be disoccluded (marked with the bounding box). Our disentangling
approach computes a sparse occlusion map (e) and uses an
contextual encoder to inpaint low-confidence patches, producing the final prediction (f).

errors with this family of models (Figure 1e).
We observe that humans can easily predict future appearance (e.g., in a scene such as shown in Figure 1) by tracking
an object’s past motion and extrapolating future pixel values, as well as imagine the appearance of disoccluded pixels (the background) based on prior knowledge of similar
scenes previously observed. We propose a compositional
approach that disentangles spatial and temporal prediction,
using a post-warp occlusion map to mediate between flowbased prediction and inpainting-based reconstruction of disoccluded regions.
Disentangling is different from the linear fusion approaches [9, 11] that use a single multi-task network to learn
pixel- and motion-based predictions at the same time. To
compose their results, the networks may also learn an extra occlusion map for weighted summation over each pixel
(Figure 2c). Though those approaches are effective in many
cases, it is unclear how much pixel and flow predictions
can benefit each other. As our experiments indicate on the
19006

