Accelerate CNN via Recursive Bayesian Pruning
Yuefu Zhou1,2 Ya Zhang1
Yanfeng Wang1 Qi Tian3
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MediaSmart Technology
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{remicongee, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Channel Pruning, widely used for accelerating Convolutional Neural Networks, is an NP-hard problem due to
the inter-layer dependency of channel redundancy. Existing methods generally ignored the above dependency for
computation simplicity. To solve the problem, under the
Bayesian framework, we here propose a layer-wise Recursive Bayesian Pruning method (RBP). A new dropout-based
measurement of redundancy, which facilitate the computation of posterior assuming inter-layer dependency, is introduced. Specifically, we model the noise across layers
as a Markov chain and target its posterior to reflect the
inter-layer dependency. Considering the closed form solution for posterior is intractable, we derive a sparsityinducing Dirac-like prior which regularizes the distribution of the designed noise to automatically approximate
the posterior. Compared with the existing methods, no additional overhead is required when the inter-layer dependency assumed. The redundant channels can be simply
identified by tiny dropout noise and directly pruned layer
by layer. Experiments on popular CNN architectures have
shown that the proposed method outperforms several stateof-the-arts. Particularly, we achieve up to 5.0×, 2.2× and
1.7× FLOPs reduction with little accuracy loss on the large
scale dataset ILSVRC2012 for VGG16, ResNet50 and MobileNetV2, respectively.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have recently
achieved great success in computer vision and pattern
recognition. However, this success is often accompanied
by massive computation which makes the model difficult to
deploy on resource-constrained devices. One popular solution, channel pruning [1, 35, 21], lowers computation cost
by reducing the number of feature maps. The key challenge
in channel pruning is to identify redundant channels. Recent
Bayesian methods transform variational dropout noise [15]

as a principled measurement for redundancy via Bayesian
inference from sparsity-inducing prior [20, 23]. Redundant
channels are considered either being multiplied by a noise
of large variance [20] or with low Signal-to-Noise Ratio and
thus less informative [23]. However, these methods assume
that the channels in different layers are completely independent and simultaneously infers the redundancy of all layers,
which leads to a sub-optimal solution. In fact, pruning certain channels of any layer is likely to change the distribution
of input for the following layer, which may further incite the
change of redundancy to fit new input there. This inter-layer
dependency has been considered in heuristics and proved to
make pruning more efficient [11, 22].
In this paper, we attempt to re-investigate the Bayesian
pruning framework assuming the inter-layer dependency
and propose a layer-wise Recursive Bayesian Pruning
method (RBP). Similar to existing Bayesian methods [23,
20], a Gaussian dropout noise, an indicator of channel redundancy, is multiplied on each channel. To take the interlayer dependency into consideration, we model the dropout
noise across layers as a Markov chain. The inter-layer dependency is then reflected by the posterior of dropout noise
given the dropout noise of the previous layer. However, the
closed form solution for the posterior is intractable. We
here derive a sparsity-inducing Dirac-like prior that regularizes the distribution of the dropout noise so as to automatically approximate the posterior. Compared to the existing
Bayesian methods, with the Dirac-like prior, RBP requires
no additional overhead when assuming the inter-layer dependency. In addition, the Dirac-like prior is shown to enforce the values of dropout noise to be close to 0 for redundant channels and close to 1 for important ones, a desired property of pruning. Thus, we only need to conduct
Bayesian inference and prune the channels associated with
tiny dropout noise layer by layer. Additionally, RBP is compatible with reparameterization tricks, which are proved to
improve data fitness [15]. Hence as a bonus, the performance of CNNs pruned can be recovered fast after a few
epochs of finetuning. In this way, RBP is designed as a

3306

