Convolutional Approximations to the
General Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging Operator
Byeongjoo Ahn1 Akshat Dave2 Ashok Veeraraghavan2
Ioannis Gkioulekas1 Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan1
1

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging aims to reconstruct
scenes outside the field of view of an imaging system. A
common approach is to measure the so-called light transients, which facilitates reconstructions through ellipsoidal
tomography that involves solving a linear least-squares.
Unfortunately, the corresponding linear operator is very
high-dimensional and lacks structures that facilitate fast
solvers, and so, the ensuing optimization is a computationally daunting task. We introduce a computationally
tractable framework for solving the ellipsoidal tomography problem. Our main observation is that the Gram of
the ellipsoidal tomography operator is convolutional, either exactly under certain idealized imaging conditions, or
approximately in practice. This, in turn, allows us to obtain the ellipsoidal tomography solution by using efficient
deconvolution procedures to solve a linear least-squares
problem involving the Gram operator. The computational
tractability of our approach also facilitates the use of various regularizers during the deconvolution procedure. We
demonstrate the advantages of our framework in a variety
of simulated and real experiments.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in sensor technology have enabled
high-speed imaging at picosecond timescales [32, 60]. This
has facilitated non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging [32, 59],
the ability of an imaging system to “look around corners”
— a capability that finds application in assisted and autonomous driving, endoscopy, and imaging in confined
spaces such as caves and debris.
The core ideas of NLOS imaging rely on measuring the
time of flight (ToF) and radiance of multi-bounce photons
that have interacted with the NLOS scene. The traditional
measurement pipeline is as follows: a pulsed laser illuminates a LOS scene point and the ToF of photons arriving
at a second LOS point is measured using a time-resolved
sensor; these photons are assumed to have bounced off the

2

Rice University

NLOS scene via the LOS scene points. Binning the arriving
photons based on their ToF provides a measurement of the
light transport transient associated with the specific pair of
LOS points. Repeating this process across multiple illumination and sensing points results in the measurement of the
so-called 5D light transport transient [43, 49]. The 5D light
transient provides a rich encoding of the geometry of the
NLOS scene, thereby facilitating the recover of its shape.
Algorithmically, the reconstruction of the NLOS scene,
modeled as a volumetric albedo map, from the 5D light
transient requires the solution to an ellipsoidal tomography
problem, which is usually computationally prohibitive to
solve. The high computational cost can be attributed to two
factors: first, the high-dimensionality of both the measurements and the NLOS scene voxelization; and second, the
lack of structures in the measurement operator that facilitate
fast implementations. Solving the linear inverse problem
to recover a volumetric albedo from the 5D light transient
measurements, with or without priors, is intractable.
Many existing methods avoid solving the inverse problem by relying on a pipeline adapted from computed tomography [28] called filtered backprojection. First, the
backprojection operator is applied to the measured transients [2, 10, 18, 35, 59]; this operator projects each light
transient measurement onto the voxels in the NLOS scene
that could have contributed to it. Next, the Laplacian operator is applied to mitigate the enhancement of low-frequency
components endemic to the backprojected result [10, 59].
Yet, this version of filtered backprojection as used in NLOS
imaging is a heuristic reconstruction procedure, as it does
not solve any specific formulation of the inverse problem.
Contributions. Our main technical result is to show that,
under certain assumptions on the imaging geometry, the
Gram1 of the NLOS measurement operator is a convolution
operator, as illustrated in Figure 1. This result advances
NLOS imaging in three important ways. First, it allows us
to efficiently obtain the ellipsoidal tomography reconstruction by solving an equivalent linear least-squares involving
1 The Gram of the matrix A is A⊤ A.

17889

