Multi-adversarial Faster-RCNN for Unrestricted Object Detection
Zhenwei He
Lei Zhang∗
School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University
Shazheng street No.174, Shapingba District, Chongqing 400044, China
{hzw,leizhang}@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
Conventional object detection methods essentially suppose that the training and testing data are collected from a
restricted target domain with expensive labeling cost. For
alleviating the problem of domain dependency and cumbersome labeling, this paper proposes to detect objects in
unrestricted environment by leveraging domain knowledge
trained from an auxiliary source domain with sufficient labels. Specifically, we propose a multi-adversarial FasterRCNN (MAF) framework for unrestricted object detection,
which inherently addresses domain disparity minimization
for domain adaptation in feature representation. The paper merits are in three-fold: 1) With the idea that object detectors often becomes domain incompatible when image distribution resulted domain disparity appears, we propose a hierarchical domain feature alignment module, in
which multiple adversarial domain classifier submodules
for layer-wise domain feature confusion are designed; 2)
An information invariant scale reduction module (SRM) for
hierarchical feature map resizing is proposed for promoting the training efficiency of adversarial domain adaptation; 3) In order to improve the domain adaptability, the
aggregated proposal features with detection results are feed
into a proposed weighted gradient reversal layer (WGRL)
for characterizing hard confused domain samples. We evaluate our MAF on unrestricted tasks including Cityscapes,
KITTI, Sim10k, etc. and the experiments show the state-ofthe-art performance over the existing detectors.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a computer vision task which draws
many researchers’ attentions. Inspired by the development
of CNN [14, 17, 34], object detection has witnessed a great
success in recent years [11, 21, 29, 28].
Although excellent results have been achieved, object detection in practical application still faces a bottleneck
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Examples of unrestricted object detection. The ﬁrst row
denotes the pictures from the Cityscapes [4], while pictures of the
last two rows are detected from the Foggy Cityscapes [32]. The
results of the ﬁrst two rows are detected by the traditional FasterRCNN [29] trained on Cityscapes, and we can see that many objects are missing on the domain shifted Foggy Cityscapes (the second row). The third row shows the results of our approach, and the
domain disparity between two datasets can be effectively removed.

challenge, i.e., detecting objects in the wild where domain
shifts always happen. Since the collected datasets [2, 6]
are still domain restricted, the trained detectors are difﬁcult to adapt to another domain due to the domain discrepancy between the training data and the testing data it will
apply to. Most of conventional detection methods do not
take into account the domain discrepancy, which leads to a
prominent performance degradation in practice. The inﬂuence of domain disparity can be observed in the Figure 1,
where we train a VGG16 based Faster-RCNN [29] with the
Cityscapes [4] and test the model on Foggy Cityscapes [32].
The results in the second row in Figure 1 verify our idea that
a considerable performance drop with many objects missing
when the domain disparity exists.
Generally, it’s difﬁcult to quantitatively remove the do16668

