Self-supervised Moving Vehicle Tracking with Stereo Sound
Chuang Gan2,3 , Hang Zhao1 , Peihao Chen3 , David Cox2,3 , Antonio Torralba1
1
MIT CSAIL, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 IBM Research AI

Abstract
Humans are able to localize objects in the environment
using both visual and auditory cues, integrating information
from multiple modalities into a common reference frame.
We introduce a system that can leverage unlabeled audiovisual data to learn to localize objects (moving vehicles) in a
visual reference frame, purely using stereo sound at inference time. Since it is labor-intensive to manually annotate
the correspondences between audio and object bounding
boxes, we achieve this goal by using the co-occurrence of visual and audio streams in unlabeled videos as a form of selfsupervision, without resorting to the collection of ground
truth annotations. In particular, we propose a framework
that consists of a vision “teacher” network and a stereosound “student” network. During training, knowledge embodied in a well-established visual vehicle detection model
is transferred to the audio domain using unlabeled videos
as a bridge. At test time, the stereo-sound student network
can work independently to perform object localization using just stereo audio and camera meta-data, without any
visual input. Experimental results on a newly collected Auditory Vehicle Tracking dataset verify that our proposed approach outperforms several baseline approaches. We also
demonstrate that our cross-modal auditory localization approach can assist in the visual localization of moving vehicles under poor lighting conditions.

1. Introduction
Sound conveys a wealth of information about the physical world around us, and humans are remarkably good at
interpreting sounds produced by nearby objects. We can often identify what an object is based on the sounds it makes
(e.g. a dog barking), and we can estimate properties of materials (e.g. if they are hard or soft) based on the sounds they
make when they interact with other objects.
In addition, our perception of sound allows us to localize
objects that are not in our line of sight (e.g. objects that are
behind us, or that are occluded), and sound plays an important role in allowing us to localize objects in poor lighting
conditions. Importantly, our senses of sight and hearing are

0.5

。
一0.5
0.5

0.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

1.0

1.5

2.0

。
一0.5

time (seconds)

Figure 1. Taking the stereo sounds as input, our proposed crossmodal auditory localization system can recover the coordinates of
moving vehicles in the reference frame purely from stereo sound
and camera meta-data, without any visual input.

fundamentally integrated and co-registered—for instance,
we can localize an object and accurately point to it, whether
we see it, or hear it with our eyes closed. This registration
of auditory and visual information into a common reference
frame gives us the ability to integrate audio and visual information together when both are present, or to rely on just
one when the other is absent.
Here, we seek to build a system that can learn auditoryvisual correspondences in a self-supervised way, allowing us to perform a classic visual object detection task—
drawing bounding boxes around target vehicles—using audio and camera meta-data information alone. Stereo audio
provides rich information about the location of objects, due
to arrival time and sound level differences between two spatially separated microphones. Figure 1 gives an example
to illustrate the setting of the problem. When we see that
a car is moving, we can hear the engine and road sounds
at the same time. The goal of our work is to learn to recover the coordinates of moving vehicles purely from stereo
sound, without any visual input. Such a system has a variety
of practical applications. For instance, a traffic monitoring
system could be deployed using just microphones, which
17053

