SemanticKITTI: A Dataset for Semantic Scene Understanding
of LiDAR Sequences
Jens Behley∗

Martin Garbade∗
Andres Milioto
Jan Quenzel
Sven Behnke
Cyrill Stachniss
Juergen Gall
University of Bonn, Germany
www.semantic-kitti.org

Figure 1: Our dataset provides dense annotations for each scan of all sequences from the KITTI Odometry Benchmark [19].
Here, we show multiple scans aggregated using pose information estimated by a SLAM approach.

Abstract
Semantic scene understanding is important for various
applications. In particular, self-driving cars need a finegrained understanding of the surfaces and objects in their
vicinity. Light detection and ranging (LiDAR) provides precise geometric information about the environment and is
thus a part of the sensor suites of almost all self-driving
cars. Despite the relevance of semantic scene understanding for this application, there is a lack of a large dataset for
this task which is based on an automotive LiDAR.
In this paper, we introduce a large dataset to propel research on laser-based semantic segmentation. We annotated all sequences of the KITTI Vision Odometry Benchmark and provide dense point-wise annotations for the complete 360o field-of-view of the employed automotive LiDAR.
We propose three benchmark tasks based on this dataset:
(i) semantic segmentation of point clouds using a single
scan, (ii) semantic segmentation using multiple past scans,
and (iii) semantic scene completion, which requires to anticipate the semantic scene in the future. We provide baseline experiments and show that there is a need for more
sophisticated models to efficiently tackle these tasks. Our
dataset opens the door for the development of more advanced methods, but also provides plentiful data to investigate new research directions.

1. Introduction
Semantic scene understanding is essential for many applications and an integral part of self-driving cars. Particularly, fine-grained understanding provided by semantic segmentation is necessary to distinguish drivable and
non-drivable surfaces and to reason about functional properties, like parking areas and sidewalks. Currently, such understanding, represented in so-called high definition maps,
is mainly generated in advance using surveying vehicles.
However, self-driving cars should also be able to drive
in unmapped areas and adapt their behavior if there are
changes in the environment.
Most self-driving cars currently use multiple different
sensors to perceive the environment. Complementary sensor modalities enable to cope with deficits or failures of particular sensors. Besides cameras, light detection and ranging (LiDAR) sensors are often used as they provide precise
distance measurements that are not affected by lighting.
Publicly available datasets and benchmarks are crucial
for empirical evaluation of research. They mainly fulfill three purposes: (i) they provide a basis to measure
progress, since they allow to provide results that are reproducible and comparable, (ii) they uncover shortcomings
of the current state of the art and therefore pave the way
for novel approaches and research directions, and (iii) they
make it possible to develop approaches without the need to
first painstakingly collect and label data. While multiple

∗ indicates equal contribution

19297

