Deep Constrained Dominant Sets for Person Re-Identification

1

Leulseged Tesfaye Alemu1 Marcello Pelillo 1, 2 Mubarak Shah 3
Ca’ Foscari University of Venice 2 ECLT, Venezia 3 CRCV, University of Central Florida
{leulseged.alemu, pelillo}@unive.it, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

DNN
Model

Abstract

A

P'
P$

*

%&

In this work, we propose an end-to-end constrained clustering scheme to tackle the person re-identification (reid) problem. Deep neural networks (DNN) have recently
proven to be effective on person re-identification task. In
particular, rather than leveraging solely a probe-gallery
similarity, diffusing the similarities among the gallery images in an end-to-end manner has proven to be effective
in yielding a robust probe-gallery affinity. However, existing methods do not apply probe image as a constraint, and
are prone to noise propagation during the similarity diffusion process. To overcome this, we propose an intriguing scheme which treats person-image retrieval problem
as a constrained clustering optimization problem, called
deep constrained dominant sets (DCDS). Given a probe
and gallery images, we re-formulate person re-id problem
as finding a constrained cluster, where the probe image is
taken as a constraint (seed) and each cluster corresponds to
a set of images corresponding to the same person. By optimizing the constrained clustering in an end-to-end manner,
we naturally leverage the contextual knowledge of a set of
images corresponding to the given person-images. We further enhance the performance by integrating an auxiliary
net alongside DCDS, which employs a multi-scale ResNet.
To validate the effectiveness of our method we present experiments on several benchmark datasets and show that the
proposed method can outperform state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification aims at retrieving the most similar images to the probe image, from a large-scale gallery set
captured by camera networks. Among the challenges which
hinder person re-id tasks, include background clutter, pose,
viewpoint and illumination variation can be mentioned.
Person re-id can be considered as a person retrieval problem based on the ranked similarity score, which is obtained from the pairwise affinities between the probe and
the dataset images. However, relying solely on the pairwise affinities of probe-gallery images, ignoring the underlying contextual information between the gallery images often leads to an undesirable similarity ranking. To tackle

P

*

P"

(a) Person classification network

P#

(d) Quadruplet loss based network

(

)

(b) Verification network

(e) Conventional diffusion based network
A
*

P

P

(c) Triplet loss based network

(f) Constrained clustering based network (DCDS)

Figure 1. Shows a variety of existing classification and similaritybased deep person re-id models. (a) Depicts a classification-based
deep person re-id model, where P i refers to the ith person. (b)
Illustrates a verification network whereby the similarity S and dissimilarity D for a pair of images is found. (c) A Triplet loss based
DNN, where A, P, N indicate anchor, positive, and negative samples, respectively. (d) A quadruplet based DNN (e) Conventional
diffusion-based DNN, which leverages the similarities among all
the images in the gallery to learn a better similarity. (f) The proposed deep constrained dominant sets (DCDS), where, P indicates
the constraint (probe-image); and, images in the constrained cluster, the enclosed area, indicates the positive samples to the probe
image.

this, several works have been reported, which employ similarity diffusion to estimate a second order similarity in order to capture the intrinsic manifold structure of the given
affinity matrix [3], [18], [11], [4]. Similarity diffusion is
a process of exploiting the contextual information between
all the gallery images to provide a context sensitive similarity. Nevertheless, all these methods do not leverage the
advantage of deep neural networks. Instead, they employ
the similarity diffusion process as a post-processing step
on the top of the DNN model. Only recently, some works
have incorporated a similarity diffusion process in an endto-end manner [20],[21],[7] in order to improve the discriminative power of a DNN model. Following [5], which applies a random walk in an end-to-end fashion for solving
semantic segmentation problem, authors in [20] proposed
a group-shuffling random walk network for fully utilizing
the affinity information between gallery images in both the
training and testing phases. Also, the authors of [21] pro19855

