Dilated Convolutional Neural Networks for Sequential Manifold-valued Data
Xingjian Zhen†∗ Rudrasis Chakraborty‡∗ Nicholas Vogt† Barbara B. Bendlin† Vikas Singh†
†
University of Wisconsin Madison ‡ University of California, Berkeley
∗

Equal contribution

Abstract
Efforts are underway to study ways via which the power
of deep neural networks can be extended to non-standard
data types such as structured data (e.g., graphs) or manifoldvalued data (e.g., unit vectors or special matrices). Often,
sizable empirical improvements are possible when the geometry of such data spaces are incorporated into the design
of the model, architecture, and the algorithms. Motivated
by neuroimaging applications, we study formulations where
the data are sequential manifold-valued measurements. This
case is common in brain imaging, where the samples correspond to symmetric positive definite matrices or orientation
distribution functions. Instead of a recurrent model which
poses computational/technical issues, and inspired by recent
results showing the viability of dilated convolutional models
for sequence prediction, we develop a dilated convolutional
neural network architecture for this task. On the technical
side, we show how the modules needed in our network can
be derived while explicitly taking the Riemannian manifold
structure into account. We show how the operations needed
can leverage known results for calculating the weighted
Fréchet Mean (wFM). Finally, we present scientific results
for group difference analysis in Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
where the groups are derived using AD pathology load: here
the model finds several brain fiber bundles that are related
to AD even when the subjects are all still cognitively healthy.

1. Introduction
The classical definition of convolution assumes that the
data are scalar or vector-valued and lie on discrete equally
spaced intervals. This assumption is ideal for natural images
and central to how we use convolutional filters in deep neural networks but is far less appropriate for other domains
where the data are structured such as meshes, graphs or measurements on a manifold. In computer vision and machine
learning, these problems that need deep learning models for
structured data are studied under the topic called geometric
deep learning [9], which has led to a number of elegant approaches including convolutional neural networks (CNN) on
non-Euclidean data [14, 33]. The reason this is important

is that mathematically, non-Euclidean data violates a number of key properties of Euclidean spaces such as a global
linear structure and coordinate system, as well as shift invariance/equivariance. As a result, the core operations we
use in classical statistics and machine learning as well as
within deep neural network architectures often need to be
tailored based on the geometry and specifics of the data at
hand. When such adjustments are made in modern deep
learning architectures, a number of authors have reported
sizable improvements in the performance of the learning
algorithms [11, 10, 34, 14, 27, 26, 15].
We should note that specializing learning methods to better respect or exploit the structure (or geometry) of the data
are not a new development. Time series data are common
in finance [49], and as a result, has been analyzed using
specialized methods in statistics for decades. Surface normal
vectors on the unit sphere have been widely used in graphics
[48], and probability density functions, as well as covariance matrices, are common in both machine learning and
computer vision [45, 16]. In neuroimaging, which is a key
focus of our paper, the structured measurement at a voxel of
an image may capture water diffusion [6, 53, 36, 31, 2, 13]
or local structural change [25, 59, 32]. The latter example is commonly known as the Cauchy deformation tensor
(CDT) [32] and has been utilized to achieve improvements
over brain imaging methods such as tensor-based morphometry [37, 43, 4]. When the mathematical properties of such
data are exploited, one often needs new loss functions and
specialized optimization schemes. This step often involves
first defining an intrinsic metric for the underlying geometry
(structure) of the data. It is important to note that within
geometric deep learning for manifolds, two types of settings
are often considered. The first case is where the data are
functions on a manifold. The second case corresponds to the
setting where data are sample points on a manifold, such as
a Riemannian manifold. In this paper, we study the second
setting, which is not covered in the form described here in
existing works including [9].
When the structure or geometry of the data informs the
formulation of the learning task (or algorithm), we obtain
differential geometry inspired algorithms where the role of
110621

