Disentangled Image Matting
Shaofan Cai1∗ , Xiaoshuai Zhang1,2∗, Haoqiang Fan1 , Haibin Huang1 ,
Jiangyu Liu1 , Jiaming Liu1 , Jiaying Liu2 , Jue Wang1 , and Jian Sun1
1
Megvii Technology
2
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
{caishaofan, fhq, huanghaibin, liujiangyu, liujiaming, wangjue, sunjian}@megvii.com
{jet, liujiaying}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Most previous image matting methods require a roughlyspecificed trimap as input, and estimate fractional alpha
values for all pixels that are in the unknown region of the
trimap. In this paper, we argue that directly estimating the
alpha matte from a coarse trimap is a major limitation of
previous methods, as this practice tries to address two difficult and inherently different problems at the same time:
identifying true blending pixels inside the trimap region,
and estimate accurate alpha values for them. We propose
AdaMatting, a new end-to-end matting framework that disentangles this problem into two sub-tasks: trimap adaptation and alpha estimation. Trimap adaptation is a pixelwise classification problem that infers the global structure
of the input image by identifying definite foreground, background, and semi-transparent image regions. Alpha estimation is a regression problem that calculates the opacity value of each blended pixel. Our method separately
handles these two sub-tasks within a single deep convolutional neural network (CNN). Extensive experiments show
that AdaMatting has additional structure awareness and
trimap fault-tolerance. Our method achieves the state-ofthe-art performance on Adobe Composition-1k dataset both
qualitatively and quantitatively. It is also the current bestperforming method on the alphamatting.com online
evaluation for all commonly-used metrics.

1. Introduction
Image matting refers to the problem of accurately estimating the foreground object opacity in images and video
sequences. It serves as a prerequisite for a broad set of
applications, including film production and digital image
editing. Formally, the input image I is modeled as a linear combination of the foreground and background colors
∗ Equal Contributors. This work is supported in part by NSFC under
grant #61271269 and #61321061.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) Input image, (b) Input trimap, (c) Our matting results,
(d) Corresponding trimap adaptation results. Row 1: the input
trimap (b) from low-quality user labelling contains errors. Row
2: the input trimap (b) is a failure case of the Graphcut algorithm
where all pixels are marked unknown. In both cases, the proposed
method can produce reliable alpha mattes.

as follows [10]:
Ii = αi Fi + (1 − αi )Bi , αi ∈ [0, 1],

(1)

where Fi , Bi and αi denote the foreground, background
color and alpha matte estimation at pixel i respectively.
Given an input image I, image matting aims to solve F ,
B, and α simultaneously. The problem is highly ill-posed,
as according to Eq. 1, for an RGB image, 7 values are to
be solved but only 3 values are known for each pixel. For
most existing matting algorithms, the essential input that
constrains the solution space is the trimap, a rough segmentation indicating the opaque and unknown regions. The
trimap is generated either interactively by user scribbles, or
automatically from binary image segmentation results. In
either case, the input trimap is usually coarse, i.e., its unknown region (the gray region in Fig. 1b) contains both
real semi-transparent pixels as well as a large amount of
opaque ones. This is because providing an accurate trimap
is tedious for manual labeling, and is difficult to achieve using existing image segmentation methods that run on lowresolution images.
Unfortunately, previous image matting methods often ignore the inaccuracy of the input trimap, and try to directly
18819

