Towards Photorealistic Reconstruction of Highly Multiplexed Lensless Images
Salman S. Khan1 , Adarsh V. R.1 , Vivek Boominathan2 , Jasper Tan2 , Ashok Veeraraghavan2 , and
Kaushik Mitra1
1

2

IIT Madras, India
Rice University, USA

Abstract
Recent advancements in fields like Internet of Things
(IoT), augmented reality, etc. have led to an unprecedented
demand for miniature cameras with low cost that can be integrated anywhere and can be used for distributed monitoring. Mask-based lensless imaging systems make such inexpensive and compact models realizable. However, reduction
in the size and cost of these imagers comes at the expense
of their image quality due to the high degree of multiplexing
inherent in their design. In this paper, we present a method
to obtain image reconstructions from mask-based lensless
measurements that are more photorealistic than those currently available in the literature. We particularly focus on
FlatCam [2], a lensless imager consisting of a coded mask
placed over a bare CMOS sensor. Existing techniques for
reconstructing FlatCam measurements suffer from several
drawbacks including lower resolution and dynamic range
than lens-based cameras. Our approach overcomes these
drawbacks using a fully trainable non-iterative deep learning based model. Our approach is based on two stages: an
inversion stage that maps the measurement into the space of
intermediate reconstruction and a perceptual enhancement
stage that improves this intermediate reconstruction based
on perceptual and signal distortion metrics. Our proposed
method is fast and produces photo-realistic reconstruction
as demonstrated on many real and challenging scenes.

1. Introduction
Cameras have become ubiquitous in the present world.
Devices ranging from consumer products to high-end scientific tools use cameras in one form or another. With the
proliferation of applications like augmented reality (AR),
surveillance, Internet of Things, etc., the purpose of cameras has changed from merely taking photographs to also
being sensors for inferential inputs. Some of these novel
imaging applications impose stringent constraints in the

Figure 1. The FlatCam framework: The FlatCam is a thin lensless camera that captures a globally multiplexed measurement of
the scene and requires a reconstruction step to recover the true
scene. In this work, we propose a novel reconstruction algorithm
that gives higher resolution images with improved dynamic range
and robustness to noise than current methods.

size of the cameras. Consider, for example, the integration
of cameras into wearables like AR glasses or smartwatches.
This has resulted in a growing need for the miniaturization
of cameras. However, reduction in size and cost is possible
only to a certain extent for lens-based cameras. Lensless
cameras come to the rescue in such scenarios.
Recent advancements in sensor technologies and computational imaging techniques have resulted in the emergence
of lensless imaging systems. These imaging systems differ from the conventional imaging system in the sense that
they encode the incoming light to the sensor (instead of directly focusing it) [2, 1]. A reconstruction algorithm is then
required to decode the scene from the measurements.
Lensless imaging systems provide numerous benefits
over lens-based cameras. First, lensless imaging systems
eliminate the need for a lens, which is the major contribu-

7860

