Larger Norm More Transferable: An Adaptive Feature Norm Approach for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Ruijia Xu1
Guanbin Li1∗
Jihan Yang1
Liang Lin1,2
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
DarkMatter AI Research
xurj3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn jihanyang13@gmail.com linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Domain adaptation enables the learner to safely generalize into novel environments by mitigating domain shifts
across distributions. Previous works may not effectively uncover the underlying reasons that would lead to the drastic model degradation on the target task. In this paper,
we empirically reveal that the erratic discrimination of the
target domain mainly stems from its much smaller feature
norms with respect to that of the source domain. To this
end, we propose a novel parameter-free Adaptive Feature
Norm approach. We demonstrate that progressively adapting the feature norms of the two domains to a large range
of values can result in significant transfer gains, implying
that those task-specific features with larger norms are more
transferable. Our method successfully unifies the computation of both standard and partial domain adaptation with
more robustness against the negative transfer issue. Without bells and whistles but a few lines of code, our method
substantially lifts the performance on the target task and exceeds state-of-the-arts by a large margin (11.5% on OfficeHome [45] and 17.1% on VisDA2017 [31]). We hope our
simple yet effective approach will shed some light on the
future research of transfer learning. Code is available
at https://github.com/jihanyang/AFN .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks, driven by numerous labeled samples, have made remarkable progress in a wide range of
computer vision tasks. However, those models are very vulnerable to generalize into new application scenarios. Even a
subtle deviation from the training regime can lead to a drastic degradation of the model [43, 49]. Therefore, with the
strong motivation to safely transfer knowledge from a labelrich source domain to an unlabeled target domain, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) attempts to train a classi∗ Corresponding author is Guanbin Li.

plane

bcycl

bus

car

horse

knife

mcycl person

plant

sktbrd

train

truck

Figure 1: Feature visualization of source and target samples
on the Source Only model. This technique is widely used to
characterize the feature embeddings under the softmax-related
objectives [47, 21, 51]. Speciﬁcally, we set the task-speciﬁc
features to be two-dimensional and retrain the model. Unlike
t-SNE [27] whose size of empty space does not account for
the similarity between the two data points, this visualization
map enables us to interpret the size of feature norms as well
as inter-class and intra-class variances. As illustrated, target
samples tend to collide in the small-norm (i.e., low-radius) regions which are vulnerable to slight angular variations of the
decision boundaries and lead to erratic discrimination.
ﬁer using source samples that can generalize well to the target domain while mitigating the domain shift between the
two underlying distributions.
Under the guidance of the theoretical upper bound in [1],
the key idea of most existing DA algorithms is to capture not
only the task-discriminative but the domain-invariant representations by simultaneously minimizing the source error
and some speciﬁc statistical discrepancy across the two domains, e.g., H-divergence [1, 9, 43], H∆H-divergence [1,
35], Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [3, 44, 23], correlation distance [39, 40] and etc.
Adversarial domain adaptation [9, 43, 35, 17, 36, 20, 5,

1426

