TASK 2V EC : Task Embedding for Meta-Learning
Alessandro Achille1,2
Subhransu Maji1,3
achille@cs.ucla.edu
1

AWS

2

Michael Lam1 Rahul Tewari1 Avinash Ravichandran1
Charless Fowlkes1,4 Stefano Soatto1,2 Pietro Perona1,5

{michlam,tewarir,ravinash,smmaji,fowlkec,soattos,peronapp}@amazon.com

University of California, Los Angeles

3

University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Abstract
We introduce a method to generate vectorial representations of visual classification tasks which can be used to
reason about the nature of those tasks and their relations.
Given a dataset with ground-truth labels and a loss function, we process images through a “probe network” and
compute an embedding based on estimates of the Fisher information matrix associated with the probe network parameters. This provides a fixed-dimensional embedding of the
task that is independent of details such as the number of
classes and requires no understanding of the class label semantics. We demonstrate that this embedding is capable of
predicting task similarities that match our intuition about
semantic and taxonomic relations between different visual
tasks. We demonstrate the practical value of this framework
for the meta-task of selecting a pre-trained feature extractor
for a novel task. We present a simple meta-learning framework for learning a metric on embeddings that is capable
of predicting which feature extractors will perform well on
which task without actually fine-tuning the model. Selecting
a feature extractor with task embedding yields performance
close to the best available feature extractor, with substantially less computational effort than exhaustively training
and evaluating all available models.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning in computer vision is due
in part to the fact that models trained for one task can often
be used on related tasks. Yet, no general framework exists
to describe and reason about relations between tasks. We
introduce the TASK 2 VEC embedding, a technique to represent tasks as elements of a vector space based on the Fisher
Information Matrix. The norm of the embedding correlates
with the complexity of the task, while the distance between
embeddings captures semantic similarities between tasks
(Fig. 1). When other natural distances are available, such as
the taxonomic distance in biological classification, we find
they correlate well with the embedding distance (Fig. 2).
We also introduce an asymmetric distance on the embed-

4

University of California, Irvine

5

Caltech

ding space that correlates with transferability between tasks.
Computation of the embedding leverages a duality between parameters (weights) and outputs (activations) in a
deep neural network (DNN). Just as the activations of a
DNN trained on a complex visual recognition task are a
rich representation of the input images, we show that the
gradients of the weights relative to a task-specific loss are
a rich representation of the task itself. Given a task defined
by a dataset D = {(xi , yi )}N
i=1 of labeled samples, we feed
the data through a pre-trained reference convolutional neural network which we call a “probe network”, and compute
the diagonal Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) of the network filter parameters to capture the structure of the task
(Sect. 3). Since the architecture and weights of the probe
network are fixed, the FIM provides a fixed-dimensional
representation of the task which is independent of, e.g., how
many categories there are. We show that this embedding simultaneously encodes the “difficulty” of the task, statistics
of the input domain, and which features extracted by the
probe network are discriminative for the task (Sect. 3.2).
Our task embedding can be used to reason about the
space of tasks and solve meta-tasks. As a motivating example, we study the problem of selecting the best pre-trained
feature extractor to solve a new task (Sect. 4). This is particularly valuable when there is insufficient data to train or
fine-tune a generic model, and transfer of knowledge is essential. To select an appropriate pre-trained model, we design a joint embedding of models and tasks in the same vector space, which we call MODEL 2 VEC. We formulate this
as a meta-learning problem where the objective is to find
an embedding such that that models whose embeddings are
close to a task exhibit good performance on that task.
We present large-scale experiments on a library of 1,460
fine-grained classification tasks constructed from existing
computer vision datasets. These tasks vary in the level of
difficulty and have orders of magnitude variation in training set size, mimicking the heavy-tailed distribution of realworld tasks. Our experiments show that using TASK 2 VEC to
select an expert from a collection of 156 feature extractors
outperforms the standard practice of fine-tuning a generic
16430

