RelGAN: Multi-Domain Image-to-Image Translation via Relative Attributes
Po-Wei Wu1 Yu-Jing Lin1 Che-Han Chang2 Edward Y. Chang2,3 Shih-Wei Liao1
1
National Taiwan University 2 HTC Research & Healthcare 3 Stanford University
maya6282@gmail.com

r06922068@ntu.edu.tw

chehan chang@htc.com

1. Introduction
Multi-domain image-to-image translation aims to translate an image from one domain into another. A domain is
characterized by a set of attributes, where each attribute is
a meaningful property of an image. Recently, this imageto-image translation problem received considerable attention following the emergence of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [5] and its conditional variants [20]. While
most existing methods [10, 27, 31, 16] focus on imageto-image translation between two domains, several multidomain methods are proposed recently [4, 7, 30], which are
capable of changing multiple attributes simultaneously. For
example, in the application of facial attribute editing, one
can change hair color and expression simultaneously.
Despite the impressive results of recent multi-domain
methods [4, 7], they have two limitations. First, these methods assume binary attributes and therefore are not designed
for attribute interpolation. Although we can feed realvalued attributes into their generators, we found that their

liao@csie.ntu.edu.tw

(a) StarGAN

Abstract
Multi-domain image-to-image translation has gained increasing attention recently. Previous methods take an image and some target attributes as inputs and generate an
output image with the desired attributes. However, such
methods have two limitations. First, these methods assume
binary-valued attributes and thus cannot yield satisfactory
results for fine-grained control. Second, these methods require specifying the entire set of target attributes, even if
most of the attributes would not be changed. To address
these limitations, we propose RelGAN, a new method for
multi-domain image-to-image translation. The key idea is to
use relative attributes, which describes the desired change
on selected attributes. Our method is capable of modifying images by changing particular attributes of interest in
a continuous manner while preserving the other attributes.
Experimental results demonstrate both the quantitative and
qualitative effectiveness of our method on the tasks of facial
attribute transfer and interpolation.

echang@cs.stanford.edu

Input image

Target attributes
010001
(b) RelGAN

001001
Hair Color

0 1 -1 0 0 0
Relative attributes

Age

Gender

Smile

00¼0

00½0

00¾0

0010

000¼

000½

000¾

0001

1000
Hair

Smile

Age

Figure 1. Top: Comparing facial attribute transfer via relative and
target attributes. (a) Existing target-attribute-based methods do
not know whether each attribute is required to change or not, thus
could over-emphasize some attributes. In this example, StarGAN
changes the hair color but strengthens the degree of smile. (b)
RelGAN only modifies the hair color and preserves the other attributes (including smile) because their relative attributes are zero.
Bottom: By adjusting the relative attributes in a continuous manner, RelGAN provides a realistic interpolation between before and
after attribute transfer.

interpolation quality is unsatisfactory because their models trained on binary-valued attributes. (Our model remedies this shortcoming by training on real-valued relative attributes with additional discriminators.) A smooth and realistic interpolation between before and after editing is important because it enables fine-grained control over the strength
of each attribute (e.g., the percentage of brown vs. blond
hair color, or the degree of smile/happiness).
Second, these methods require a complete attribute representation to specify the target domain, even if only a subset of attributes is manipulated. In other words, a user has to
15914

