Tex2Shape: Detailed Full Human Body Geometry From a Single Image
Thiemo Alldieck1,2

Gerard Pons-Moll2

Christian Theobalt2

Marcus Magnor1

1

2

Computer Graphics Lab, TU Braunschweig, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
{alldieck,magnor}@cg.cs.tu-bs.de {gpons,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Figure 1: We present an image-to-image translation model for detailed full human body geometry reconstruction from a single image. An
input image is transformed into an incomplete texture, then our Tex2Shape network translates the texture into normal and displacement
maps. The maps augment a smooth body model with details, hair, and clothing. Result visualized in ground truth pose.

Abstract
We present a simple yet effective method to infer detailed
full human body shape from only a single photograph. Our
model can infer full-body shape including face, hair, and
clothing including wrinkles at interactive frame-rates. Results feature details even on parts that are occluded in the
input image. Our main idea is to turn shape regression
into an aligned image-to-image translation problem. The
input to our method is a partial texture map of the visible
region obtained from off-the-shelf methods. From a partial texture, we estimate detailed normal and vector displacement maps, which can be applied to a low-resolution
smooth body model to add detail and clothing. Despite
being trained purely with synthetic data, our model generalizes well to real-world photographs. Numerous results
demonstrate the versatility and robustness of our method.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we address the problem of automatic
detailed full-body human shape reconstruction from a single image. Human shape reconstruction has many applications in virtual and augmented reality, scene analysis, and
virtual try-on. For most applications, acquisition should
be quick and easy, and visual fidelity is important. Reconstructed geometry is most useful if it shows hair, face, and
clothing folds and wrinkles at sufficient detail – what we re-

fer to as detailed shape. Detail adds realism, allows people
to feel identified with their self-avatar and their interlocutors, and often carries crucial information.
While a large number of papers focus on recovering
pose, and rough body shape from a single image [35, 25, 36,
9], much fewer papers focus on recovering detailed shapes.
Some recent methods recover pose and non-rigid deformation from monocular video [57], even in real-time [15].
However, they require a pre-captured static template of
each subject. Other recent works [4, 2] recover static body
shape, and clothing as displacements on top of the SMPL
body model [32] (model-based), or use a voxel representation [50, 33]. Voxel-based methods [50, 33] often produce
errors at the limbs of the body and require fitting a model
post-hoc [50]. Model-based methods are more robust, but
results tend to lack fine detail. We hypothesize there are
three reasons for this. Firstly, they rely mostly on silhouettes for either fitting [4], or CNN-based regression plus
fitting [2], ignoring the rich illumination and shading information contained in RGB values. Secondly, the regression from image pixels directly to 3D mesh displacements
is hard because inputs and outputs are not aligned. Furthermore, prediction of high-resolution meshes requires meshbased neural networks, which are very promising but are
harder to train than standard 2D CNNs. Finally, they rely
on 3D pose estimation, which is hard to obtain accurately.
Based on these observations, our idea is to turn the shape
regression into an aligned image-to-image translation prob-

2293

