Defending Against Universal Perturbations With Shared Adversarial Training
Chaithanya Kumar Mummadi
University of Freiburg
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany

Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg
brox@cs.uni-freiburg.de

ChaithanyaKumar.Mummadi@de.bosch.com

Jan Hendrik Metzen
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany
janhendrik.metzen@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Classifiers such as deep neural networks have been
shown to be vulnerable against adversarial perturbations
on problems with high-dimensional input space. While adversarial training improves the robustness of image classifiers against such adversarial perturbations, it leaves them
sensitive to perturbations on a non-negligible fraction of the
inputs. In this work, we show that adversarial training is
more effective in preventing universal perturbations, where
the same perturbation needs to fool a classifier on many
inputs. Moreover, we investigate the trade-off between robustness against universal perturbations and performance
on unperturbed data and propose an extension of adversarial training that handles this trade-off more gracefully.
We present results for image classification and semantic
segmentation to showcase that universal perturbations that
fool a model hardened with adversarial training become
clearly perceptible and show patterns of the target scene.

1. Introduction
While deep learning is relatively robust to random noise
[11], it can be easily fooled by adversarial perturbations
[44]. These perturbations are generated by adversarial attacks [15, 31, 5] that generate perturbed versions of the input which are misclassified by a classifier and remain quasiimperceptible for humans. There have been different approaches for explaining properties of adversarial examples
and provide rationale for their existence in the first place
[15, 45, 12, 13]. Moreover, these perturbations have been
shown to be relatively robust against various kinds of image transformations and are even successful when placed as
artifacts in the physical world [21, 43, 10, 4]. Thus, adversarial perturbations might pose a safety and security risk for

Clean image

Adv.image undefended model Adv.image defended model

Figure 1. Effectiveness of shared adversarial training against universal perturbations: the top row shows an ImageNet example
and the bottom row an example from Cityscapes. Adversarial images perturbed by universal perturbations generated for both the
undefended models and models defended by our proposed method
shared adversarial training are shown. The classification accuracy of the defended models deteriorates no more than 5% but robustness to universal adversarial attacks increases by 3x and 5x
on image classification and semantic segmentation, respectively.
Moreover, universal perturbations become clearly perceptible.

autonomous systems and also reduce trust on the models
that are in principle vulnerable to these perturbations.
Several methods have been proposed for increasing the
robustness of deep networks against adversarial examples,
such as adversarial training [15, 22], virtual adversarial
training [28], ensemble adversarial training [46], defensive
distillation [36, 35], stability training [50], robust optimization [25], Parseval networks [7] and alternatively detecting
and rejecting them as malicious [26]. While some of these
approaches improve robustness against adversarial examples to some extent, the classifier remains vulnerable against
adversarial perturbations on a non-negligible fraction of the
inputs for all defenses [3, 47].
Most work has focused on increasing robustness in image classification tasks, where the adversary can choose a

4928

