End-to-End CAD Model Retrieval and 9DoF Alignment in 3D Scans
Armen Avetisyan

Angela Dai

Matthias Nießner

Technical University of Munich

Figure 1: From a 3D scan and a set of CAD models, our method learns to predict 9DoF CAD model alignments to the objects
of the scan in a fully-convolutional, end-to-end fashion. Our proposed 3D CNN first detects objects in the scan, then uses
the regressed object bounding boxes to establish symmetry-aware object correspondences between a scan object and CAD
model, which inform our differentiable Procrustes alignment loss, enabling learning of alignment-informed correspondences
and producing CAD model alignment to a scan in a single forward pass.

Abstract
We present a novel, end-to-end approach to align CAD
models to an 3D scan of a scene, enabling transformation of
a noisy, incomplete 3D scan to a compact, CAD reconstruction with clean, complete object geometry. Our main contribution lies in formulating a differentiable Procrustes alignment that is paired with a symmetry-aware dense object correspondence prediction. To simultaneously align CAD models to all the objects of a scanned scene, our approach detects object locations, then predicts symmetry-aware dense
object correspondences between scan and CAD geometry in
a unified object space, as well as a nearest neighbor CAD
model, both of which are then used to inform a differentiable
Procrustes alignment. Our approach operates in a fullyconvolutional fashion, enabling alignment of CAD models
to the objects of a scan in a single forward pass. This enables our method to outperform state-of-the-art approaches
by 19.04% for CAD model alignment to scans, with ≈ 250×
faster runtime than previous data-driven approaches.

1. Introduction
In recent years, RGB-D scanning and reconstruction has
seen significant advances, driven by the increasing availability of commodity range sensors such as the Microsoft
Kinect, Intel RealSense, or Google Tango. State-of-theart 3D reconstruction approaches can now achieve impressive capture and reconstruction of real-world environments [19, 26, 27, 38, 38, 5, 8], spurring forth many potential applications of this digitization, such as content creation, or augmented or virtual reality.
Such advances in 3D scan reconstruction have nonetheless remained limited towards these use scenarios, due to
geometric incompleteness, noise and oversmoothing, and
lack of fine-scale sharp detail. In particular, there is a notable contrast in such reconstructed scan geometry in comparison to the clean, sharp 3D models created by artists for
visual and graphics applications.
With the increasing availability of synthetic CAD models [4], we have the opportunity to reconstruct a 3D scan
12551

