Correlation Congruence for Knowledge Distillation
Baoyun Peng1∗†, Xiao Jin2∗, Jiaheng Liu3 , Dongsheng Li1‡,
Yichao Wu2 , Yu Liu4 , Shunfeng Zhou2 , Zhaoning Zhang1
1
2
Natioan University of Defense Technology,
Sensetime Group Limited,
3
4
Beihang University,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
{pengbaoyun13,dsli}@nudt.edu.cnom
{zhoushunfeng,wuyichao}@sensetime.com

liujiaheng@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Most teacher-student frameworks based on knowledge
distillation (KD) depend on a strong congruent constraint
on instance level. However, they usually ignore the correlation between multiple instances, which is also valuable for
knowledge transfer. In this work, we propose a new framework named correlation congruence for knowledge distillation (CCKD), which transfers not only the instance-level information but also the correlation between instances. Furthermore, a generalized kernel method based on Taylor series expansion is proposed to better capture the correlation between instances. Empirical experiments and ablation
studies on image classification tasks (including CIFAR-100,
ImageNet-1K) and metric learning tasks (including ReID
and Face Recognition) show that the proposed CCKD substantially outperforms the original KD and other SOTA KDbased methods. The CCKD can be easily deployed in the
majority of the teacher-student framework such as KD and
hint-based learning methods.

1. Introduction
Over the past few decades, various deep neural network
(DNN) models have achieved state-of-the-art performance
in many vision tasks [28, 29, 8]. Generally, networks with
many parameters and computations perform superior to
those with fewer parameters and computations when trained
on the same dataset. Nevertheless, it’s difficult to deploy
such large networks on resource-limited embedded systems.
Along with the increasing demands for low-cost networks
running on embedded systems, there is an urgency for getting a minor network with less computation and memory
consumptions, while narrowing the gap of performance be∗ Equal contribution.
† This work was done while Baoyun Peng was an intern at SenseTime.
‡ Corresponding author.

{jinxiaocuhk,zzningxp}@gmail.com
yuliu@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

tween a minor network and a large network.

Teacher
Student: Instance Congruence

Student: Correlation Congruence

Figure 1: The difference between instance congruence and correlation congruence. When focusing on only instance congruence,
the correlation between instances of the student may be much different from the teacher’s, and the cohesiveness of intra-class would
be worse. CCKD solve the problem by adding a correlation congruence when transferring knowledge.

Several techniques have been proposed to address this
issue, e.g. parameter pruning and sharing [11, 24], compact convolutional filters [38, 16], low-rank factorization
[18, 6] and knowledge distillation [15]. Among these approaches, knowledge distillation has been proved to be an
effective way to promote the performance of a small network by mimicking the behavior of a high-capacity network. It works by adding a strong congruent constraint on
outputs of teacher and student for each input instance to encourage the student to mimic teacher’s behavior, e.g., minimizing the KullbackLeibler divergence of predictions [15]
or minimizing the euclidean distance of feature representations [21] between teacher and student.

5007

