What Is Wrong With Scene Text Recognition Model Comparisons?
Dataset and Model Analysis
Jeonghun Baek1
Geewook Kim2∗
Junyeop Lee1
Sungrae Park1
1
1
1
Dongyoon Han
Sangdoo Yun
Seong Joon Oh
Hwalsuk Lee1†
1
2
Clova AI Research, NAVER/LINE Corp.
Kyoto University
{jh.baek,junyeop.lee,sungrae.park,dongyoon.han,sangdoo.yun,hwalsuk.lee}@navercorp.com
geewook@sys.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Many new proposals for scene text recognition (STR)
models have been introduced in recent years. While each
claim to have pushed the boundary of the technology, a
holistic and fair comparison has been largely missing in the
field due to the inconsistent choices of training and evaluation datasets. This paper addresses this difficulty with three
major contributions. First, we examine the inconsistencies
of training and evaluation datasets, and the performance
gap results from inconsistencies. Second, we introduce a
unified four-stage STR framework that most existing STR
models fit into. Using this framework allows for the extensive evaluation of previously proposed STR modules and the
discovery of previously unexplored module combinations.
Third, we analyze the module-wise contributions to performance in terms of accuracy, speed, and memory demand,
under one consistent set of training and evaluation datasets.
Such analyses clean up the hindrance on the current comparisons to understand the performance gain of the existing
modules. Our code is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Reading text in natural scenes, referred to as scene text
recognition (STR), has been an important task in a wide
range of industrial applications. The maturity of Optical
Character Recognition (OCR) systems has led to its successful application on cleaned documents, but most traditional OCR methods have failed to be as effective on
STR tasks due to the diverse text appearances that occur in
the real world and the imperfect conditions in which these
scenes are captured.
To address these challenges, prior works [23, 24, 15,
∗ Work performed as an intern in Clova AI Research.
† Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/clovaai/
deep-text-recognition-benchmark

coallaoh@linecorp.com

17, 26, 28, 4, 16, 5, 2, 3, 18] have proposed multi-stage
pipelines, where each stage is a deep neural network addressing a specific challenge. For example, Shi et al. [23]
have suggested using a recurrent neural network to address
the varying number of characters in a given input, and a
connectionist temporal classification loss [6] to identify the
number of characters. Shi et al. [24] have proposed a transformation module that normalizes the input into a straight
text image to reduce the representational burden for downstream modules to handle curved texts.
However, it is hard to assess whether and how a newly
proposed module improves upon the current art, as some
papers have come up with different evaluation and testing
environments, making it difficult to compare reported numbers at face value (Table 1). We observed that 1) the training
datasets and 2) the evaluation datasets deviate amongst various methods, as well. For example, different works use a
different subset of the IC13 dataset as part of their evaluation set, which may cause a performance disparity of more
than 15%. This kind of discrepancy hinders the fair comparison of performance between different models.
Our paper addresses these types of issues with the following main contributions. First, we analyze all training
and evaluation datasets commonly used in STR papers. Our
analysis reveals the inconsistency of using the STR datasets
and its causes. For instance, we found 7 missing examples
in IC03 dataset and 158 missing examples in IC13 dataset
as well. We investigate several previous works on the STR
datasets and show that the inconsistency causes incomparable results as shown in Table 1. Second, we introduce a
unifying framework for STR that provides a common perspective for existing methods. Specifically, we divide the
STR model into four different consecutive stages of operations: transformation (Trans.), feature extraction (Feat.), sequence modeling (Seq.), and prediction (Pred.). The framework provides not only existing methods but their possible
variants toward an extensive analysis of module-wise con-

4715

