Understanding Generalized Whitening and Coloring Transform for Universal
Style Transfer
Tai-Yin Chiu
University of Texas as Austin
chiu.taiyin@utexas.edu

Abstract
Style transfer is a task of rendering images in the styles
of other images. In the past few years, neural style transfer
has achieved a great success in this task, yet suffers from
either the inability to generalize to unseen style images or
fast style transfer. Recently, an universal style transfer technique that applies zero-phase component analysis (ZCA) for
whitening and coloring image features realizes fast and arbitrary style transfer. However, using ZCA for style transfer
is empirical and does not have any theoretical support. In
addition, other whitening and coloring transforms (WCT)
than ZCA have not been investigated. In this report, we
generalize ZCA to the general form of WCT, provide an analytical performance analysis from the angle of neural style
transfer, and show why ZCA is a good choice for style transfer among different WCTs and why some WCTs are not well
applicable for style transfer.

1. Introduction
Style transfer is a task of synthesizing an image whose
content comes from a target content image and style comes
from another texture image. At the early stage, one successful method for style transfer is image quilting [4], which
considers spatial maps of certain quantities (such as image
intensity and local image orientation) over both the texture
image and the content image. Another method [8] makes
style transfer possible by making analogy between images
and their artistically filtered version. Though these methods
produce good results, they suffer from only using low level
image features.
Later a seminal work of neural style transfer [5] leverages the power of convolutional neural network to extract
features of an image that decouple and well represent visual styles and contents. Style transfer [6] is then achieved
by jointly minimizing the feature loss [17] and the style
loss formulated as the difference of Gram matrices. This
optimization is solved by iteration [6, 12, 16, 18]. Thus,

while having remarkable results, it suffers from computational inefficiency. To overcome this issue, a few methods
[10, 13, 20] that use pre-computed neural networks to accelerate the style transfer were proposed. However, these
methods are limited by only one transferrable style and cannot generalize to other unseen styles. StyleBank [1] addresses this limit by controlling the transferred style with
style filters. Whenever a new style is needed, it can be
learned into filters while holding the neural network fixed.
Another method [3] proposes to train a conditional style
transfer network that uses conditional instance normalization for multiple styles. Besides these two, more methods
[2, 7, 21] to achieve arbitrary style transfer are proposed.
However, they partly solve the problem and are still not able
to generalize to every unseen style.
More recently, several methods exploring the secondorder statistics of content image features and style image
features came up for universal style transfer. AdaIN [9]
tries to match up the variances of the stylized image feature and the style image feature. A method [14] that uses
zero-phase component analysis (ZCA), a special kind of
whitening and coloring transform (WCT), for feature transformation further focuses on covariances of image features.
While AdaIN enjoys more computational efficiency and
ZCA method synthesizes images visually closer to a considered style, Avatar-Net [19] aims to find a balance between
them.
Even though the ZCA method for feature transformation
produces good stylized images, it still remains an empirical
method and lacks any theoretical analyses. Also, the report
[14] does not mention the performance of other WCT methods. Here we generalize ZCA to the general form of WCT
for style transfer. Furthermore, we incorporate the idea of
neural style transfer to analytically discuss the performance
of WCT on style transfer. From the analysis, we explain
why ZCA is good for style transfer among different WCTs
and show that not every WCT is well applicable to style
transfer. In experiments, we study five natural WCT methods [11] associated with ZCA, principal component analysis (PCA), Cholesky decomposition, standardized ZCA,
14452

