Human Motion Prediction via Spatio-Temporal Inpainting
A. Hernandez Ruiz1
J. Gall2
F. Moreno-Noguer1
1
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
2
Computer Vision Group, University of Bonn, Germany

Ground Truth

Abstract
We propose a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) to
forecast 3D human motion given a sequence of past 3D
skeleton poses. While recent GANs have shown promising results, they can only forecast plausible motion over
relatively short periods of time (few hundred milliseconds)
and typically ignore the absolute position of the skeleton
w.r.t. the camera. Our scheme provides long term predictions (two seconds or more) for both the body pose and its
absolute position. Our approach builds upon three main
contributions. First, we represent the data using a spatiotemporal tensor of 3D skeleton coordinates which allows
formulating the prediction problem as an inpainting one, for
which GANs work particularly well. Secondly, we design an
architecture to learn the joint distribution of body poses and
global motion, capable to hypothesize large chunks of the
input 3D tensor with missing data. And finally, we argue
that the L2 metric, considered so far by most approaches,
fails to capture the actual distribution of long-term human
motion. We propose two alternative metrics, based on the
distribution of frequencies, that are able to capture more realistic motion patterns. Extensive experiments demonstrate
our approach to significantly improve the state of the art,
while also handling situations in which past observations
are corrupted by occlusions, noise and missing frames.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in motion capture technologies, combined with large scale datasets such as Human3.6M [16],
have spurred the interest for new deep learning algorithms
able to forecast 3D human motion from past skeleton data.
State-of-the-art approaches formulate the problem as a sequence generation task, and solve it using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [8, 17], sequence-to-sequence models [24] or encoder-decoder predictors [5, 11]. While
promising results, these works suffer from three fundamental limitations. First, they address a simplified version of the
problem in which global body positioning is disregarded,
either by parameterizing 3D body joints using position ag-

Generated

Figure 1. Example result. Our approach is the first in generating
full body pose, including skeleton motion and absolute position in
space. The predicted sequence starts from the skeleton marked in
black. Note that the generated motion is somewhat different but
semantically indistinguishable from the ground truth.

nostic angles [8, 17, 24] or body centered coordinates [5].
Second, current methods require additional supervision in
terms of action labels during training and inference, which
limits their generalization capabilities. And third, most
approaches aim to minimize the L2 distance between the
ground truth and generated motions. The L2 distance, however, is known to be an inaccurate metric, specially to compare long motion sequences. In particular, the use of this
metric to train a deep network favors motion predictions that
converge to a static mean pose. Even though this issue has
been raised in [11, 17] and is partially solved during training
using other metrics (e.g. geodesic loss), the L2 distance is
still being used as a common practice when benchmarking
different methodologies. To our understanding, this practice compromises the progress in this field.
In this paper we tackle all three issues. Specifically,
we design a novel GAN architecture that is conditioned on
past observations and is able to jointly forecast non-rigid
body pose and its absolute position in space. For this purpose we represent the observed skeleton poses (expressed
in the camera reference frame) using a spatio-temporal tensor and formulate the prediction problem as an inpainting
task, in which a part of the spatio-temporal volume needs
17134

