Generative Modeling for Small-Data Object Detection
Lanlan Liu1,2∗ Michael Muelly2 Jia Deng3 Tomas Pfister2† Jia Li4
1
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Google Cloud AI 3 Princeton University 4 Stanford University
llanlan@umich.edu mmuelly@google.com jiadeng@cs.princeton.edu tpfister@google.com lijiali@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper explores object detection in the small data
regime, where only a limited number of annotated bounding boxes are available due to data rarity and annotation
expense. This is a common challenge today with machine
learning being applied to many new tasks where obtaining training data is more challenging, e.g. in medical images with rare diseases that doctors sometimes only see
once in their life-time. In this work we explore this problem from a generative modeling perspective by learning to
generate new images with associated bounding boxes, and
using these for training an object detector. We show that
simply training previously proposed generative models does
not yield satisfactory performance due to them optimizing
for image realism rather than object detection accuracy. To
this end we develop a new model with a novel unrolling
mechanism that jointly optimizes the generative model and
a detector such that the generated images improve the performance of the detector. We show this method outperforms
the state of the art on two challenging datasets, disease detection and small data pedestrian detection, improving the
average precision on NIH Chest X-ray by a relative 20%
and localization accuracy by a relative 50%.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [6] have recently advanced significantly, with the latest models [3, 12]
being able to generate high quality photo-realistic images
that are almost indistinguishable from real images. A natural question that has recently started being explored [17, 24,
26] is whether these generated images are useful in some
other ways; for example, could they be useful training data
for downstream tasks?
One common computer vision task that could benefit
from generated data is object detection [21, 25] which currently requires a large amount of training data to obtain
good performance. But for many object detection tasks,
∗ This work was conducted when Lanlan Liu was an intern at Google.
† Corresponding author.

DetectorGAN

Synthesized Data

Discriminator
Generator
Detector

Clean Images
and Masks

Real Data

Improved Detection

Figure 1. DetectorGAN generates object-inserted images as synthesized data to improve the detection performance. DetectorGAN
integrates a detector into the generator-discriminator loop.

large datasets are difficult to obtain due to rare objects and
difficulties in obtaining object location annotations. One
common example is with medical images – disease detection has very little labeled object bounding box data because the diseases by nature are rare, and annotations can
only be done by professionals, and thus are costly. Solving such rare data object detection problems is valuable: for
example, for disease localization, a good disease detector
can help provide assistance to radiologists to accelerate the
analysis process and reduce the chance of missing tumors,
or even provide a medical report directly if a radiologist is
not available.
In this paper we explore using generative models to improve the performance in small-data object detection. Directly applying existing generative models is problematic.
First, previous work on object insertion for generative models often needs segmentation masks, which are often not
available e.g. in disease detection tasks. Second, GANs
are designed to produce realistic images (indistinguishable
from real images), but realism does not guarantee that it
can help with the downstream object detection task. In particular, there is no direct feedback from the detector to the
generator; which means the generator cannot be trained explicitly to improve the detector.

6073

