Large-scale Tag-based Font Retrieval with Generative Feature Learning
Tianlang Chen1∗, Zhaowen Wang2 , Ning Xu2 , Hailin Jin2 and Jiebo Luo1
1
University of Rochester 2 Adobe Research
{tchen45, jluo}@cs.rochester.edu, {zhawang, nxu, hljin}@adobe.com

Tag List Query

Abstract
Font selection is one of the most important steps in a
design workflow. Traditional methods rely on ordered lists
which require significant domain knowledge and are often
difficult to use even for trained professionals. In this paper, we address the problem of large-scale tag-based font
retrieval which aims to bring semantics to the font selection process and enable people without expert knowledge to
use fonts effectively. We collect a large-scale font tagging
dataset of high-quality professional fonts. The dataset contains nearly 20,000 fonts, 2,000 tags, and hundreds of thousands of font-tag relations. We propose a novel generative
feature learning algorithm that leverages the unique characteristics of fonts. The key idea is that font images are synthetic and can therefore be controlled by the learning algorithm. We design an integrated rendering and learning process so that the visual feature from one image can be used
to reconstruct another image with different text. The resulting feature captures important font design details while is
robust to nuisance factors such as text. We propose a novel
attention mechanism to re-weight the visual feature for joint
visual-text modeling. We combine the feature and the attention mechanism in a novel recognition-retrieval model. Experimental results show that our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art for the important problem of
large-scale tag-based font retrieval.

1. Introduction
Font is one of the most important elements in digital design. Designers carefully choose fonts to convey design
ideas. Since digital fonts were invented in the 1950s, millions of fonts have been created to help designers create engaging and effective designs. For instance, MyFonts.com1 ,
one of the many font websites, offers over 130,000 fonts
with diverse designs, such as script, handwritten, decorative, just to name a few categories. With the vast number of fonts available, font selection becomes a challenge.
∗ Work was done while Tianlang Chen was an Intern at Adobe.
1 www.myfonts.com

Retrieval Result

script,
thin,
elegant

Font Database

Figure 1. Overview of large-scale tag-based font retrieval.

Aspiring designers would take months to learn typography
and font selection as part of their design curriculum. However, an average person who uses Microsoft Word will not
have time to learn typography but may have an intuitive idea
about what she wants to create. In this work, we study the
problem of large-scale tag-based font retrieval (illustrated
in Figure 1), which we believe is an important step toward
developing intuitive font selection tools for average users.
Machine Learning approaches for tag-based font retrieval are first studied by O’Donovan et al. in [21] where
they collect a tag-based font dataset and use Gradient
Boosted Regression Trees [4]. However, this dataset only
contains 1,278 fonts and 37 tags, which significantly limits its applicability. In this work, we are interested in a
broad range of tags that a user can choose to express her design needs including properties, functionalities, attributes,
to subjective descriptions, emotions, etc. To this end, we
collect a large-scale font dataset from MyFonts.com, which
contains nearly 20,000 high-quality professional fonts and
2,000 unique user tags. This dataset will be released as a
benchmark dataset for tag-based font retrieval.
Feature plays a critical role in learning-based retrieval
algorithms. The state-of-the-art image retrieval methods
use convolutional neural networks to obtain image features
which are typically pre-trained on large-scale image classification datasets such as ImageNet [11]. One may attempt to
follow this paradigm for font retrieval. For instance, she can

9116

