Probabilistic Face Embeddings
Yichun Shi and Anil K. Jain
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
shiyichu@msu.edu, jain@cse.msu.edu

Abstract
Embedding methods have achieved success in face
recognition by comparing facial features in a latent semantic space. However, in a fully unconstrained face setting,
the facial features learned by the embedding model could
be ambiguous or may not even be present in the input face,
leading to noisy representations. We propose Probabilistic
Face Embeddings (PFEs), which represent each face image
as a Gaussian distribution in the latent space. The mean
of the distribution estimates the most likely feature values
while the variance shows the uncertainty in the feature values. Probabilistic solutions can then be naturally derived
for matching and fusing PFEs using the uncertainty information. Empirical evaluation on different baseline models,
training datasets and benchmarks show that the proposed
method can improve the face recognition performance of
deterministic embeddings by converting them into PFEs.
The uncertainties estimated by PFEs also serve as good indicators of the potential matching accuracy, which are important for a risk-controlled recognition system.

1. Introduction
When humans are asked to describe a face image, they
not only give the description of the facial attributes, but also
the confidence associated with them. For example, if the
eyes are blurred in the image, a person will keep the eye
size as an uncertain information and focus on other features.
Furthermore, if the image is completely corrupted and no
attributes can be discerned, the subject may respond that
he/her cannot identify this face. This kind of uncertainty (or
confidence) estimation is common and important in human
decision making.
On the other hand, the representations used in state-ofthe-art face recognition systems are generally confidenceagnostic. These methods depend on an embedding model
(e.g. Deep Neural Networks) to give a deterministic point
representation for each face image in the latent feature
space [27, 35, 20, 34, 4]. A point in the latent space represents the model’s estimation of the facial features in the
given image. If the error in the estimation is somehow

distinguishable
face

ambiguous
face

distinguishable
face

𝐳 = 𝑓(𝐱)

(a) deterministic embedding

ambiguous
face

𝑝(𝐳|𝐱)

(b) probabilistic embedding

Figure 1: Difference between deterministic face embeddings and probabilistic face embeddings (PFEs). Deterministic embeddings represent every face as a point in the latent space without regards to its feature ambiguity. Probabilistic face embedding (PFE) gives a distributional estimation
of features in the latent space instead. Best viewed in color.

bounded, the distance between two points can effectively
measure the semantic similarity between the corresponding
face images. But given a low-quality input, where the expected facial features are ambiguous or absent in the image,
a large shift in the embedded points is inevitable, leading to
false recognition (Figure 1a).
Given that face recognition systems have already
achieved high recognition accuracies on relatively constrained face recognition benchmarks, e.g. LFW [10] and
YTF [37], where most facial attributes can be clearly observed, recent face recognition challenges have moved on
to more unconstrained scenarios, including surveillance
videos [18, 23, 12] (See Figure 2). In these tasks, any type
and degree of variation could exist in the face image, where
most of the desired facial features learned by the representation model could be absent. Given this lack of information,
it is unlikely to find a feature set that could always match
these faces accurately. Hence state-of-the-art face recognition systems which obtained over 99% accuracy on LFW
have suffered from a large performance drop on IARPA
Janus benchmarks [18, 23, 12].
To address the above problems, we propose Probabilistic
Face Embeddings (PFEs), which give a distributional estimation instead of a point estimation in the latent space for
each input face image (Figure 1b). The mean of the distribution can be interpreted as the most likely latent feature
values while the span of the distribution represents the un16902

