Explaining Neural Networks Semantically and Quantitatively
Runjin Chen∗ , Hao Chen∗, Jie Ren, Ge Huang, and Quanshi Zhang†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
(a) Input

This paper presents a method to pursue a semantic and
quantitative explanation for the knowledge encoded in a
convolutional neural network (CNN). The estimation of the
specific rationale of each prediction made by the CNN
presents a key issue of understanding neural networks, and
it is of significant values in real applications. In this study,
we propose to distill knowledge from the CNN into an explainable additive model, which explains the CNN prediction quantitatively. We discuss the problem of the biased
interpretation of CNN predictions. To overcome the biased
interpretation, we develop prior losses to guide the learning of the explainable additive model. Experimental results
have demonstrated the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20, 18, 13] have
achieved superior performance in various tasks. Besides the
discrimination power of neural networks, the interpretability of networks has received an increasing attention in recent
years. The network interpretability is directly related to the
trustworthiness of a CNN, which is crucial in critical applications. As discussed in [42], a high testing accuracy cannot
fully ensure that the CNN encodes correct logic. Instead, a
CNN may make predictions using unreliable reasons.
In this paper, we focus on the post-hoc explanation of
a well trained CNN, instead of learning a new model with
interpretable representations. Previous studies usually interpreted neural networks at the pixel level, such as the network visualization [40, 25, 30, 8, 10, 28] and the extraction
of pixel-level attribution/importance maps [17, 26, 23].
In contrast to above qualitative explanation of CNNs,
semantically and quantitatively clarifying the decisionmaking logic of each network prediction presents a more
trustworthy way to diagnose neural networks. Fig. 1 com∗ Ruijin Chen, Jie Ren, Ge Huang, and Quanshi Zhang are with the
John Hopcroft Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. This research was
done when Hao Chen was an internship student at the Shanghai Jiao Tong
University. Runjin Chen and Hao Chen contribute equally to this research.
† Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author.

(d) Our explanations

Abstract

(b) grad-CAM

(c) Visualization of filters

Ordinary CNN Interpretable CNN

Conv5-2

Conv3-3

Head contributes 17.8%
Joint of head & torso contribute 15.1%
Torso contributes 47.4%
Joint of body & tail contribute 10.1%
Joint of legs & feet contribute 2.5%
Wing contributes 7.1%

Figure 1. Different types of explanations for CNNs. We compare
(d) our task of quantitatively and semantically explaining CNN
predictions with previous studies of interpreting CNNs, such as
(b) the grad-CAM [28] and (c) CNN visualization [25]. Given an
input image (a) Our method generates a report, which quantitatively explains which object parts activate the CNN and how much
these parts contribute to the prediction.

pares our explanation with previous studies.
• Semantic explanations: This study aims to explain the
logic of each network prediction using clear visual concepts, instead of using intermediate-layer features without clear
meanings or using raw pixels. For example, our method estimates the numerical contribution of specific attributes or
object parts to each prediction. Semantic explanations satisfy specific demands in real applications.
• Quantitative explanations: Unlike qualitative explanations or visualization of neural networks [40, 25, 8, 28], our
method decomposes the overall prediction score into scores
of compositional visual concepts, which ensures strict quantitative explanations of the prediction.
Quantitative explanations enable people to accurately diagnose feature representations inside neural networks and
help neural networks earn trust from people. As shown in
Figs. 5 and 7, we analyze the quantitative rationale of each
prediction, i.e. clarifying which visual concepts activate the
CNN and how much they contribute to the prediction. Abnormal explanations, which conflict with people’s common
sense, usually reflect problematic feature representations.
Above “semantic explanations” and “quantitative explanations” are of considerable values in real applications.
Quantitatively decomposing the prediction score into val-

9187

