Rethinking Zero-Shot Learning: A Conditional Visual Classification Perspective
Kai Li1 , Martin Renqiang Min2 , Yun Fu1,3
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
2
NEC Laboratories America
3
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
kaili@ece.neu.edu, renqiang@nec-labs.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to recognize instances of
unseen classes solely based on the semantic descriptions of
the classes. Existing algorithms usually formulate it as a
semantic-visual correspondence problem, by learning mappings from one feature space to the other. Despite being reasonable, previous approaches essentially discard the highly
precious discriminative power of visual features in an implicit way, and thus produce undesirable results. We instead reformulate ZSL as a conditioned visual classification problem, i.e., classifying visual features based on the
classifiers learned from the semantic descriptions. With
this reformulation, we develop algorithms targeting various ZSL settings: For the conventional setting, we propose
to train a deep neural network that directly generates visual feature classifiers from the semantic attributes with an
episode-based training scheme; For the generalized setting,
we concatenate the learned highly discriminative classifiers
for seen classes and the generated classifiers for unseen
classes to classify visual features of all classes; For the
transductive setting, we exploit unlabeled data to effectively
calibrate the classifier generator using a novel learningwithout-forgetting self-training mechanism and guide the
process by a robust generalized cross-entropy loss. Extensive experiments show that our proposed algorithms significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods by large margins on most benchmark datasets in all the ZSL settings.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have achieved revolutionary successes on many tasks in computer vision owing to the
availability of abundant labeled training data [45, 44, 17,
20, 19, 21]. However, labeling large-scale training data
for each task is both labor-intensive and unscalable. Inspired by human’s remarkable abilities to recognize instances of unseen classes solely based on class descriptions without seeing any visual example of such classes, re-

searchers have extensively studied an image classification
setting similar to the human learning called zero-shot learning (ZSL) [41, 31, 22, 33], in which labeled training images of seen classes and semantic descriptions of both seen
classes and unseen classes are given and the task is to classify test images into seen and unseen classes.
Existing approaches usually formulate ZSL as a visualsemantic correspondence problem and learn the visualsemantic relationship from seen classes and apply it to unseen classes, considering that the seen and unseen classes
are related in the semantic space [1, 43, 13]. These methods
usually project either visual features or semantic features
from one space to the other, or alternatively project both
types of features to an intermediate embedding space. In
the shared embedding space, the associations between the
two types of features are utilized to guide the learning of
the projection functions.
However, these methods fail to recognize the tremendous
efforts in obtaining these discriminative visual features over
a large number of classes through training powerful deep
neural network classifiers with a huge amount of computational and data resources, and thus essentially discard the
highly precious discriminative power of visual features in
an implicit way. In details, on one hand, the visual features
used in most ZSL methods are extracted by some powerful
deep neural networks (e.g., ResNet101) trained on largescale datasets (e.g., ImageNet) [40]. These visual features
are already highly discriminative; reprojecting them to any
space shall impair the discriminability, especially to a lower
dimensional space, because the dimension reduction usually significantly shrinks data variance. It is surprising that
the majority of existing ZSL approaches try to transform the
visual feature vectors in various ways [22, 33, 13]. On the
other hand, by nature of classification problems, the competition information among different classes are crucial for
classification performance. But many ZSL approaches ignore the class separation information during training due to
focusing on learning the associations between visual and semantic features, and fail to realize that ZSL is essentially a

3583

