Conditional Coupled Generative Adversarial Networks for Zero-Shot Domain
Adaptation
Jinghua Wang and Jianmin Jiang
Research Institute for Future Media Computing,
College of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
wang.jh@szu.edu.cn, jianmin.jiang@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Machine learning models trained in one domain perform
poorly in the other domains due to the existence of domain
shift. Domain adaptation techniques solve this problem by
training transferable models from the label-rich source domain to the label-scarce target domain. Unfortunately, a
majority of the existing domain adaptation techniques rely
on the availability of target-domain data, and thus limit
their applications to a small community across few computer vision problems. In this paper, we tackle the challenging zero-shot domain adaptation (ZSDA) problem, where
target-domain data is non-available in the training stage.
For this purpose, we propose conditional coupled generative adversarial networks (CoCoGAN) by extending the
coupled generative adversarial networks (CoGAN) into a
conditioning model. Compared with the existing state of
the arts, our proposed CoCoGAN is able to capture the
joint distribution of dual-domain samples in two different
tasks, i.e. the relevant task (RT) and an irrelevant task
(IRT). We train CoCoGAN with both source-domain samples in RT and dual-domain samples in IRT to complete
the domain adaptation. While the former provide high-level
concepts of the non-available target-domain data, the latter
carry the sharing correlation between the two domains in
RT and IRT. To train CoCoGAN in the absence of targetdomain data for RT, we propose a new supervisory signal,
i.e. the alignment between representations across tasks. Extensive experiments carried out demonstrate that our proposed CoCoGAN outperforms existing state of the arts in
image classifications.

1. Introduction
Most machine learning techniques assume that the training and testing data are from the same domain and follow
the same distribution. In the real world, however, data samples often originate from different domains. For example,

the image of an object can be captured by either a RGB sensor or a depth sensor. Though the data in two domains may
share the high-level concepts, they are significantly different from each other due to the existence of domain shift. As
a result, the models learned in one domain perform poorly
in the other [15]. Domain adaptation aims to overcome
this problem by learning transferable knowledge from the
source domain to the target domain.
In general, domain adaptation techniques assume that
the labels of data samples are shared by the source domain and the target domain [7]. Under such an assumption, many different strategies can be made applicable for
domain adaptation. Motivated by the theoretical analysis
[2], some researchers reduce the domain divergence and
improve the performance in target domain either by minimizing the discrepancy of representations between domains
[44, 28, 29] or by adversarial training [10, 41, 43, 38, 27].
Self-ensembling techniques are proposed to obtain consistent predictions in two different domains [24, 8, 42]. The
encoder-decoder frameworks are also reported in the literature for many domain adaptation tasks [4, 13].
Although the above methods are successful in various
tasks, none of them is applicable in zero-shot domain adaptation (ZSDA) cases where the target-domain data for the
task of interest are non-available. A typical ZSDA example
is the personalization procedure of a spam filter before the
user start to use the email system, where the target-domain
represents a unique distribution of emails received by the
user. In present, the challenging ZSDA receives increasing
attentions over recent years, and the existing methods either
learn domain-invariant features [33, 12, 26, 35] or represent
the unseen target domain parametrically [52, 23].
To achieve more effective ZSDA, we propose a new
method to learn target-domain models not only based on
the source-domain samples for the task of interest, but also
gain supervision from the dual-domain samples in an irrelevant task. For simplicity, we denote the relevant task (task
of interest) as RT and the irrelevant task as IRT. We also denote the source-domain sample set as Xsr in RT and Xsir in

3375

