Grouped Spatial-Temporal Aggregation for Efficient Action Recognition
Chenxu Luo
Alan Yuille
Department of Computer Science, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
{chenxuluo,ayuille1}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Temporal reasoning is an important aspect of video
analysis. 3D CNN shows good performance by exploring
spatial-temporal features jointly in an unconstrained way,
but it also increases the computational cost a lot. Previous
works try to reduce the complexity by decoupling the spatial
and temporal filters. In this paper, we propose a novel decomposition method that decomposes the feature channels
into spatial and temporal groups in parallel. This decomposition can make two groups focus on static and dynamic
cues separately. We call this grouped spatial-temporal aggregation (GST). This decomposition is more parameterefficient and enables us to quantitatively analyze the contributions of spatial and temporal features in different layers.
We verify our model on several action recognition tasks that
require temporal reasoning and show its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
With the success of convolutional neural networks
in image classification [20, 10], action recognition has
also shifted from traditional hand-crafted features (e.g.
IDT [27]) to deep learning based methods. With the introduction of large scale datasets [19, 3, 8] and more powerful
models [3, 29], deep network based methods have become
standard for video classification tasks.
Temporal reasoning plays an important role in video
analysis. However, common video datasets used for action
recognition, such as UCF101 [21] and Kinetics [3], do not
require much temporal reasoning. Most of the classes in
the datasets can be recognized based only on static scenes
or objects [13]. Furthermore, some works even show that
shuffling the temporal ordering, the accuracy remains almost the same [33]. This suggests that models trained on
those datasets may not necessarily exploit temporal cues.
Recently, several datasets [8, 4, 13] have been released
which require temporal modeling. For example, Figure
1 shows two examples from the Something-Something
dataset [8]. Seeing only a single frame is not sufficient to
determine the class. The two examples are similar at the

Figure 1. Examples from the something-something dataset [8].
The groundtruth for the two videos are “throwing something in
the air and catching it” and “throwing something in the air and
letting it fall”. This requires temporal information to correctly differentiate these two classes.

beginning (the first column) but have different results at the
end (see the second column). These datasets emphasizes on
the temporal aspects in action recognition.
However, this does not mean that the static information
in each frame is not helpful. Appearance encodes rich cues
for temporal reasoning. For example, in Figure 1, we can
narrow down the possible interpretations by only seeing a
single frame. And we can infer the action from the sparsely
sampled frames by observing the state changes.
Existing spatial-temporal networks, such as C3D [25]
and I3D [3], learn spatial and temporal features jointly in
an unconstrained way. Although they can achieve good
performance, they also introduce a large number of parameters that results in computational burdens. Some
works [23, 17, 26, 33] try to reduce the cost by decomposing a 3D convolutional kernel into spatial and temporal part
separately. However, it remains unsure how spatial and temporal information is utilized in a network.
In this paper, we propose to decompose along the channel dimension instead and show that it is more parameterefficient than previous methods. Our method is inspired
by the widely used group convolutions. The intuition here
is that some channels may be more related to spatial features and some channels focus more on motion features,
15512

