Dynamic Graph Attention for Referring Expression Comprehension
Sibei Yang1
1

Guanbin Li2∗

Yizhou Yu1,3

2
3
The University of Hong Kong
Sun Yat-sen University
Deepwise AI Lab
sbyang9@hku.hk, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract

initial objects
input

identifying compound objects

umbrella
person
pink hat

Referring expression comprehension aims to locate the
object instance described by a natural language referring
expression in an image. This task is compositional and inherently requires visual reasoning on top of the relationships among the objects in the image. Meanwhile, the visual reasoning process is guided by the linguistic structure
of the referring expression. However, existing approaches
treat the objects in isolation or only explore the first-order
relationships between objects without being aligned with
the potential complexity of the expression. Thus it is hard
for them to adapt to the grounding of complex referring
expressions. In this paper, we explore the problem of referring expression comprehension from the perspective of
language-driven visual reasoning, and propose a dynamic
graph attention network to perform multi-step reasoning by
modeling both the relationships among the objects in the
image and the linguistic structure of the expression. In particular, we construct a graph for the image with the nodes
and edges corresponding to the objects and their relationships respectively, propose a differential analyzer to predict
a language-guided visual reasoning process, and perform
stepwise reasoning on top of the graph to update the compound object representation at every node. Experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed method can not only
significantly surpass all existing state-of-the-art algorithms
across three common benchmark datasets, but also generate interpretable visual evidences for stepwisely locating
the objects referred to in complex language descriptions.

1. Introduction
A referring expression is a natural language description
of a particular object in an image. Referring expression
∗ Corresponding author is Guanbin Li. This work was partially supported by the Hong Kong PhD Fellowship, State Key Development Program under Grant No.2016YFB1001004, the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No.61976250 and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant No.18lgpy63.

pink hat

Static
Attention

in

Dynamic
Attention

person in the pink hat

held by
structure
expression: the umbrella held
by the person in the pink hat

Analyzer

T = 0 in the pink hat
T = 1 held by the person
the umbrella
T=2

The umbrella held by
the person in the pink hat

Figure 1. Visual reasoning by Dynamic Graph Attention Network
for identifying compound objects. Given an expression and image, the static attention module constructs the multi-modal relation
graph; the linguistic structure analyzer prescribes a visual reasoning process based on the expression; the dynamic graph attention
module performs visual reasoning on top of the graph by following
the prescribed visual reasoning process to identify the compound
objects step by step.

comprehension thus requires locating the object instance in
the image according to a given referring expression. It is
one of the core tasks in the field of artificial intelligence to
realize human-computer communication.
The core of referring expression comprehension lies in
joint understanding of high-level semantics of co-occurring
language and visual contents, which inherently involves
reasoning. For example, the grounding of the referring expression “the umbrella held by the person in the pink hat”
requires three-step reasoning (shown in Figure 1), first locating the pink hat in the image under the guidance of the
phrase “the pink hat”, next identifying the person who is
“in the pink hat”, and finally locating the umbrella which
is “held by” “the person in the pink hat”. However, almost
all the existing approaches for referring expression comprehension do not introduce reasoning or only support singlestep reasoning. Meanwhile, the models trained with those
approaches have poor interpretability. Among them, the
most classic work [13, 16, 21, 25] encodes an expression
with an LSTM model [5], extracts features of visual objects in the image using CNNs [24, 20], and adopts matching loss functions to learn a common feature space for the
expression and the visual objects. There also exists work

4644

