Cross View Fusion for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Haibo Qiu ∗
University of Science and Technology of China

Chunyu Wang
Microsoft Research Asia

haibo-qiu@outlook.com

chnuwa@microsoft.com

Jingdong Wang
Microsoft Research Asia

Naiyan Wang
TuSimple

Wenjun Zeng
Microsoft Research Asia

jingdw@microsoft.com

winsty@gmail.com

wezeng@microsoft.com

Abstract

blur occurs in images. This poses a big challenge for the
final 3D estimation.

We present an approach to recover absolute 3D human
poses from multi-view images by incorporating multi-view
geometric priors in our model. It consists of two separate
steps: (1) estimating the 2D poses in multi-view images and
(2) recovering the 3D poses from the multi-view 2D poses.
First, we introduce a cross-view fusion scheme into CNN to
jointly estimate 2D poses for multiple views. Consequently,
the 2D pose estimation for each view already benefits from
other views. Second, we present a recursive Pictorial Structure Model to recover the 3D pose from the multi-view 2D
poses. It gradually improves the accuracy of 3D pose with
affordable computational cost. We test our method on two
public datasets H36M and Total Capture. The Mean Per
Joint Position Errors on the two datasets are 26mm and
29mm, which outperforms the state-of-the-arts remarkably
(26mm vs 52mm, 29mm vs 35mm).

On the other hand, using the Pictorial Structure Model
(PSM) [14, 18, 3] for 3D pose estimation can alleviate the
influence of inaccurate 2D joints by considering their spatial
dependence. It discretizes the space around the root joint by
an N × N × N grid and assigns each joint to one of the N 3
bins (hypotheses). It jointly minimizes the projection error
between the estimated 3D pose and the 2D pose, along with
the discrepancy of the spatial configuration of joints and its
prior structures. However, the space discretization causes
large quantization errors. For example, when the space surrounding the human is of size 2000mm and N is 32, the
quantization error is as large as 30mm. We could reduce the
error by increasing N , but the inference cost also increases
at O(N 6 ), which is usually intractable.

1. Introduction
The task of 3D pose estimation has made significant
progress due to the introduction of deep neural networks.
Most efforts [16, 13, 33, 17, 23, 19, 29, 28, 6] have been devoted to estimating relative 3D poses from monocular images. The estimated poses are centered around the pelvis
joint thus do not know their absolute locations in the environment (world coordinate system).
In this paper, we tackle the problem of estimating absolute 3D poses in the world coordinate system from multiple
cameras [1, 15, 4, 18, 3, 20]. Most works follow the pipeline
of first estimating 2D poses and then recovering 3D pose
from them. However, the latter step usually depends on the
performance of the first step which unfortunately often has
large errors in practice especially when occlusion or motion
∗ This work is done when Haibo Qiu is an intern at Microsoft Research
Asia.

Our work aims to address the above challenges. First, we
obtain more accurate 2D poses by jointly estimating them
from multiple views using a CNN based approach. It elegantly addresses the challenge of finding the corresponding
locations between different views for 2D pose heatmap fusion. We implement this idea by a fusion neural network as
shown in Figure 1. The fusion network can be integrated
with any CNN based 2D pose estimators in an end-to-end
manner without intermediate supervision.
Second, we present Recursive Pictorial Structure Model
(RPSM), to recover the 3D pose from the estimated multiview 2D pose heatmaps. Different from PSM which directly
discretizes the space into a large number of bins in order to
control the quantization error, RPSM recursively discretizes
the space around each joint location (estimated in the previous iteration) into a finer-grained grid using a small number of bins. As a result, the estimated 3D pose is refined step
by step. Since N in each step is usually small, the inference
speed is very fast for a single iteration. In our experiments,
RPSM decreases the error by at least 50% compared to PSM
with little increase of inference time.
14342

