Hilbert-based Generative Defense for Adversarial Examples
Yang Bai⋄∗ Yan Feng‡∗ Yisen Wang§† Tao Dai‡ Shu-Tao Xia‡ Yong Jiang⋄‡†
⋄
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
§
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
‡
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University
{y-bai17, y-feng18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; eewangyisen@gmail.com

Abstract

(a) Raster scan

(b) Hilbert scan

Figure 1: The scan order of (a) Raster scan (row by row and
column by column), and (b) Hilbert scan.

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

truck
ship
horse
frog
dog
deer
cat
bird
automobile
airplane

1.0

truck
ship
horse
frog
dog
deer
cat
bird
automobile
airplane

Adversarial perturbations of clean images are usually
imperceptible for human eyes, but can confidently fool deep
neural networks (DNNs) to make incorrect predictions.
Such vulnerability of DNNs raises serious security concerns about their practicability in security-sensitive applications. To defend against such adversarial perturbations,
recently developed PixelDefend purifies a perturbed image
based on PixelCNN in a raster scan order (row/column by
row/column). However, such scan mode insufficiently exploits the correlations between pixels, which further limits
its robustness performance. Therefore, we propose a more
advanced Hilbert curve scan order to model the pixel dependencies in this paper. Hilbert curve could well preserve
local consistency when mapping from 2-D image to 1-D
vector, thus the local features in neighboring pixels can be
more effectively modeled. Moreover, the defensive power
can be further improved via ensembles of Hilbert curve with
different orientations. Experimental results demonstrate the
superiority of our method over the state-of-the-art defenses
against various adversarial attacks.

(a) PixelDefend (Raster scan) (b) PixelDefend (Hilbert scan)

1. Introduction
Recent work has shown that the input images with small
and carefully designed perturbations (a.k.a., adversarial examples) can cause deep neural network classifier to produce
confidently wrong predictions [28, 8]. Since the differences
between adversarial examples and corresponding clean images are usually imperceptible, the existence of DNN vulnerability to such adversarial examples exposes a serious
concern about their great popularity and widespread applications [9, 6, 17]. Thus, it is highly demanded to defend
against such adversarial examples.
∗ Equal contribution.
† Correspondence to: Yisen Wang and Yong Jiang.

Figure 2: The defend performance of PixelDefend with (a)
Raster scan, and (b) Hilbert scan. The top images are adversarial example while the bottom images are heatmaps
of the purified images by PixelDefend. The Hilbert-based
method classifies the ”truck” adversarial example correctly
while Raster-based one fails to do that.

There already exist some works to defend against adversarial examples, including pre-processing the inputs
[10], gradient regularization [22], and adversarial training
[18, 31]. Among them, pre-processing the inputs directly
may be more practical due to its model- and attack-annostic
property, such as Defense-GAN [25], PixelDefend [27] and

4784

