Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Hints
Jamie Watson1

Michael Firman1

Gabriel J. Brostow1,2
Daniyar Turmukhambetov1
1
2
Niantic
UCL
www.github.com/nianticlabs/depth-hints

Abstract
Monocular depth estimators can be trained with various forms of self-supervision from binocular-stereo data to
circumvent the need for high-quality laser-scans or other
ground-truth data. The disadvantage, however, is that the
photometric reprojection losses used with self-supervised
learning typically have multiple local minima. These
plausible-looking alternatives to ground-truth can restrict
what a regression network learns, causing it to predict depth
maps of limited quality. As one prominent example, depth
discontinuities around thin structures are often incorrectly
estimated by current state-of-the-art methods.
Here, we study the problem of ambiguous reprojections
in depth-prediction from stereo-based self-supervision, and
introduce Depth Hints to alleviate their effects. Depth Hints
are complementary depth-suggestions obtained from simple
off-the-shelf stereo algorithms. These hints enhance an existing photometric loss function, and are used to guide a
network to learn better weights. They require no additional
data, and are assumed to be right only sometimes. We show
that using our Depth Hints gives a substantial boost when
training several leading self-supervised-from-stereo models, not just our own. Further, combined with other good
practices, we produce state-of-the-art depth predictions on
the KITTI benchmark.

that reference viewpoint. Depth regression is optimized
and relative poses come from stereo camera calibration in
a training-from-stereo setting [9, 7, 25, 27, 26], while depth
values and camera poses can be optimized jointly when
training on videos [42, 20, 37, 22, 38, 32, 44, 36, 28].
The photometric distance between the reference and
depth-reprojected images could be measured with L1 or
L2 distance, more complicated structural dissimilarity distances (DSSIM [34]), or a combination of DSSIM+L1 distances [41, 9] used in state-of-the-art methods. A drawback of self-supervision is that finding the optimal depth
value is normally difficult, especially where the photometric loss can be low for multiple depth values (e.g. due to
repeating structures and uniformly textures areas). Consequently, training is harder, which leads to lower accuracy
predictions.
When training depth-from-color models, our Depth
Hints offer a specific alternative to the model’s current depth
predictions. Where the alternative’s reprojection is better,
the training proceeds in following the “hint.” Surprisingly,
simply using our Depth Hints as labels for direct supervision already gives a nearly state of the art baseline. Overall,
our contributions are:
1. We show that existing self-supervised regression methods can struggle during training to find the global optimum when minimizing photometric reprojection loss.

1. Introduction
2. We demonstrate that our selective training using Depth
Hints is a general enhancement that can improve multiple leading self-supervised training algorithms, allowing our implementations to reach better minima. The
Depth Hints can come from the same stereo image
data, via, e.g. OpenCV’s stereo estimates [13, 14].

As the accuracy of depth-from-color algorithms improves, new opportunities are unlocked in augmented reality, robotics, and autonomous driving. Per-pixel, ground
truth depth supervision is difficult to acquire, requiring
cumbersome and expensive depth-sensing devices [8]. As
an alternative, there is an active search for self-supervised
depth-estimation models, where a training signal is derived
from data captured using commodity color cameras. In such
self-supervised settings, training involves adjusting a network’s depth predictions to minimize a photometric loss.
This loss is usually the distance between a reference image and the depth-guided reprojection of other views into

3. We show that our selective training with Depth Hints,
coupled with sensible network design choices, leads
us to outperform most other algorithms. We achieve
state-of-the-art results on the KITTI dataset [8], outperforming both our baseline model and previously
published results.
12162

