Liquid Warping GAN: A Unified Framework for Human Motion Imitation,
Appearance Transfer and Novel View Synthesis
Wen Liu1∗ Zhixin Piao1∗ Jie Min1 Wenhan Luo2 Lin Ma2
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 Tencent AI Lab

Shenghua Gao1

{liuwen,piaozhx,minjie,gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
{whluo.china,forest.linma}@gmail.com

Abstract
We tackle the human motion imitation, appearance
transfer, and novel view synthesis within a unified framework, which means that the model once being trained
can be used to handle all these tasks. The existing taskspecific methods mainly use 2D keypoints (pose) to estimate the human body structure. However, they only expresses the position information with no abilities to characterize the personalized shape of the individual person and
model the limbs rotations. In this paper, we propose to
use a 3D body mesh recovery module to disentangle the
pose and shape, which can not only model the joint location and rotation but also characterize the personalized
body shape. To preserve the source information, such as
texture, style, color, and face identity, we propose a Liquid Warping GAN with Liquid Warping Block (LWB) that
propagates the source information in both image and feature spaces, and synthesizes an image with respect to the
reference. Specifically, the source features are extracted
by a denoising convolutional auto-encoder for characterizing the source identity well. Furthermore, our proposed
method is able to support a more flexible warping from
multiple sources. In addition, we build a new dataset,
namely Impersonator (iPER) dataset, for the evaluation of
human motion imitation, appearance transfer, and novel
view synthesis. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in several aspects, such as robustness in occlusion case and preserving face identity, shape
consistency and clothes details. All codes and datasets
are available on https://svip-lab.github.io/
project/impersonator.html.

1. Introduction
Human image synthesis, including human motion imitation [1, 19, 31], appearance transfer [26, 37] and novel
∗ Contributed equally and work done while Wen Liu was a Research
Intern with Tencent AI Lab.

Motion Imitation

+
Source Image

Reference Pose

Synthesized Image

Novel View

Synthesized Image

Reference Appearance

Synthesized Image

Novel View Synthesis

+
Source Image

Appearance Transfer

+
Source Image

Figure 1. Illustration of human motion imitation, appearance transfer and novel view synthesis. The first column is the source image
and the second column is reference condition, such as image or
novel view of camera. The third column is the synthesized results.

view synthesis [40, 42], has huge potential applications in
re-enactment, character animation, virtual clothes try-on,
movie or game making and so on. The definition is that
given a source human image and a reference human image,
i) the goal of motion imitation is to generate an image with
texture from source human and pose from reference human,
as depicted in the top of Fig. 1; ii) human novel view synthesis aims to synthesize new images of the human body, captured from different viewpoints, as illustrated in the middle
of Fig. 1; iii) the goal of appearance transfer is to generate a
human image preserving reference identity with clothes, as
shown in the bottom of Fig. 1 where different parts might
come from different people.
In the realm of human image synthesis, previous works
separately handle these tasks [19, 26, 42] with task-specific

5904

