SplitNet: Sim2Sim and Task2Task Transfer
for Embodied Visual Navigation
Daniel Gordon1∗ Abhishek Kadian2
1

Devi Parikh2,3

Judy Hoffman2,3

Dhruv Batra2,3

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington
2
Facebook AI Research 3 Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract

Initial Training Phase
MP3D Point-Nav

We propose SplitNet, a method for decoupling visual perception and policy learning. By incorporating auxiliary
tasks and selective learning of portions of the model, we
explicitly decompose the learning objectives for visual navigation into perceiving the world and acting on that perception. We show improvements over baseline models on
transferring between simulators, an encouraging step towards Sim2Real. Additionally, SplitNet generalizes better
to unseen environments from the same simulator and transfers faster and more effectively to novel embodied navigation tasks. Further, given only a small sample from a target
domain, SplitNet can match the performance of traditional
end-to-end pipelines which receive the entire dataset 1

1. Introduction
A longstanding goal of computer vision is to enable
robots to understand their surroundings, navigate efficiently
and safely, and perform a large variety of tasks in complex
environments. A practical application of the recent successes in Deep Reinforcement Learning is to train robots
with minimal supervision to perform these tasks. Yet
poorly-trained agents can easily injure themselves, the environment, or others. These concerns, as well as the difficulty in parallelizing and reproducing experiments at a low
cost, have drawn research interest towards simulation environments [3, 15, 35, 36, 28].
However no simulator perfectly replicates reality, and
agents trained in simulation often fail to generalize to the
real-world. Transferring learned policies from simulation to
the real-world (Sim2Real) has become an area of broad interest [24, 26, 33] yet there still exists a sizable performance
gap for most algorithms. Furthermore, Sim2Real transfer
reintroduces safety and reproducibility concerns. To mitigate this, we explore the related task of Sim2Sim, transferring policies between simulators, for embodied visual navigation (Figure 1). Transferring between simulators incurs a
∗ Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.
1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/splitnet

Task
Point-Nav
Goal
Go to
(2,5)

Sim2Sim Transfer
MP3D  GIBSON

Task
Point-Nav
Goal
Go to
(10,8)

Task2Task Transfer
Point-Nav  Explore

Task
Explore
Goal
Maximize
visited locs

Figure 1. We decompose learning of visual navigation tasks into
learning of a visual encoder and learning of an embodied task decoder. Through this decomposition we enable fast transfer to new
visual environments and transfer to new embodied tasks.

similar “reality gap” as between simulation and reality, due
to differences in data collection and rendering. Learning to
transfer between simulation environments serves as an encouraging preliminary step towards true Sim2Real transfer.
To enable Sim2Sim transfer we propose SplitNet, a composable model for embodied visual tasks which allows for
the sharing and reuse of information between different visual environments. SplitNet enables transfer across different embodied tasks (Task2Task), meaning our model can
learn new skills quickly and adapt to the ever-changing requirements of end users. Our key insight is to observe that
embodied visual tasks are naturally decomposable into visual representation learning to extract task agnostic salient
information from the visual input, and policy learning to
interpret the visual representation and determine a proper
action for the agent. Rather than learning these components
solely independently or completely tied, we introduce an
algorithm for learning these embodied visual tasks which
benefits both from the scalability and strong in-domain, ontask performance of an end-to-end system and from the generalization and fast adaptability of modular systems.
SplitNet incorporates auxiliary visual tasks, such as

1022

