Leveraging Long-Range Temporal Relationships Between Proposals for Video
Object Detection
Mykhailo Shvets
UNC at Chapel Hill

Wei Liu
Nuro Inc

Alexander C. Berg
UNC at Chapel Hill

mshvets@cs.unc.edu

w@nuro.ai

aberg@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Single-frame object detectors perform well on videos
sometimes, even without temporal context. However, challenges such as occlusion, motion blur, and rare poses of objects are hard to resolve without temporal awareness. Thus,
there is a strong need to improve video object detection by
considering long-range temporal dependencies. In this paper, we present a light-weight modification to a single-frame
detector that accounts for arbitrary long dependencies in
a video. It improves the accuracy of a single-frame detector significantly with negligible compute overhead. The
key component of our approach is a novel temporal relation
module, operating on object proposals, that learns the similarities between proposals from different frames and selects
proposals from past and/or future to support current proposals. Our final “causal” model, without any offline postprocessing steps, runs at a similar speed as a single-frame
detector and achieves state-of-the-art video object detection
on ImageNet VID dataset.

1. Introduction
Modern single-frame detectors [5, 13, 14, 15] sometimes
perform well on the task of object detection in video even
without any temporal information. However, some challenges still exist which a single-frame detector cannot resolve without looking at temporal context. Those include
occlusion, motion blur, rare poses of object, etc. Thus,
it is a natural desire to modify the single-frame detector
to consider information from more than one frame. Recently, many methods try to use image level information
from nearby frames to help detection. It is important to note
that such methods usually assume that the scene and objects do not move drastically. For instance, FGFA [26] and
MANet [19] use optical flow from nearby images, STSN [1]
applies deformable convolutions, and D&T [3] computes
dense correlation between frames. Performance of the key
components of these methods (flow field, deformation field,

and correlation, respectively) degrades with time dramatically, making it hard to leverage the relations between
frames that are far apart in time. In those methods, longterm dependencies are only considered with extra offline
post-processing steps, such as SeqNMS [4]. Moreover, even
for the online mode of those methods, there is a significant
degrade of speed. For example, FGFA and MANet report
2.5 – 3 times slowdown compared to a single-frame detector. To speed up, many other methods either use a lighter
backbone network such as MobileNet [8] or run a singleframe detector only at key frames and propagate imagelevel features using optical flow [7, 25]. These approaches
usually suffer in accuracy because information is not directly computed from each frame. By leveraging longrange temporal relationships between proposals from different frames in a video, we show that we can include longterm dependencies even without any post-processing steps,
while running online at a similar speed as a single-frame
detector and still achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on ImageNet VID dataset.
Our approach is based on aggregating features from related parts of a video in order to make a better decision
about whether a putative detection is in fact correct. This
involves determining which parts of a video are related to
a potential detection, weighted averaging of the features for
those parts, and the final detection decision on those updated new features. Our approach is trained end to end, so
the features are learned in order to facilitate both identifying
related parts and to perform detection after related features
are averaged together. We consider region proposals (from
FPN detector [12]) as both potential detections and as potential related parts of a video. It is also possible to use
detector outputs, e.g. from a fast high-recall single-stage
detector. In any case, a significant challenge for considering long-range temporal relationships is that there are many
possibilities. One key aspect of our approach is that we
decompose the problem of which proposals should support
detections in a frame into computations on small sets (2-3)
of frames, and aggregate the results.
The main component of our method is a novel proposal-

9756

