Guided Super-Resolution as Pixel-to-Pixel Transformation

Riccardo de Lutio, Stefano D’Aronco, Jan Dirk Wegner, and Konrad Schindler
EcoVision Lab, Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zürich

Abstract
Guided super-resolution is a unifying framework for several computer vision tasks where the inputs are a lowresolution source image of some target quantity (e.g., perspective depth acquired with a time-of-flight camera) and a
high-resolution guide image from a different domain (e.g., a
grey-scale image from a conventional camera); and the target output is a high-resolution version of the source (in our
example, a high-res depth map). The standard way of looking at this problem is to formulate it as a super-resolution
task, i.e., the source image is upsampled to the target resolution, while transferring the missing high-frequency details
from the guide. Here, we propose to turn that interpretation
on its head and instead see it as a pixel-to-pixel mapping
of the guide image to the domain of the source image. The
pixel-wise mapping is parametrised as a multi-layer perceptron, whose weights are learned by minimising the discrepancies between the source image and the downsampled
target image. Importantly, our formulation makes it possible to regularise only the mapping function, while avoiding
regularisation of the outputs; thus producing crisp, naturallooking images. The proposed method is unsupervised, using only the specific source and guide images to fit the mapping. We evaluate our method on two different tasks, superresolution of depth maps and of tree height maps. In both
cases we clearly outperform recent baselines in quantitative comparisons, while delivering visually much sharper
outputs.

1. Introduction
A number of computer vision tasks can be seen as instances of guided super-resolution. For instance, many
robots are equipped with a conventional camera as well
as a time-of-flight camera (or a laser scanner). The latter
acquires depth maps of low spatial resolution, respectively
large pixel footprint in object space, and it is a natural question whether one can enhance its resolution by transferring
details from the camera image – see Figure 1. Another ex-

Figure 1: Guided super-resolution: given a low-resolution
depth map and a high-resolution guide image, our method
predicts a high-resolution depth map. The figure shows an
example output of the proposed method, for an upsampling
factor of 16×.

ample is environmental mapping, where maps of parameters like tree height or biomass are available at a mapping
resolution that is significantly lower than the ground sampling distance of modern earth observation satellites.
An alternative view of guided super-resolution is as a
generalisation of guided filtering [8], widely used in image
processing and analysis. A guided filter maps a source image to a target image of the same size by computing, at each
pixel, a function that depends on the local neighbourhood
in both the source and the guide image (which can be the
source itself, as in the popular bilateral filter [27]). Guided
super-resolution does the same, except that the source image has a lower spatial resolution and must additionally be
upsampled in the process.
The standard way to model guided super-resolution is as
an inverse problem: the source image is understood as the

8829

