Neural Turtle Graphics for Modeling City Road Layouts
Hang Chu1,2,4 Daiqing Li4 David Acuna1,2,4 Amlan Kar1,2,4 Maria Shugrina1,2,4 Xinkai Wei1,4
Ming-Yu Liu4 Antonio Torralba3 Sanja Fidler1,2,4
1
2
3
4
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
MIT
NVIDIA
{chuhang1122,davidj,amlan}@cs.toronto.edu, {daiqingl,mshugrina,xinkaiw,mingyul,sfidler}@nvidia.com, torralba@mit.edu

Figure 1: We introduce Neural Turtle Graphics (NTG), a deep generative model for planar graphs. In the Figure, we show NTG’s
applications to (interactive) city road layout generation and parsing.

Abstract
We propose Neural Turtle Graphics (NTG), a novel generative model for spatial graphs, and demonstrate its applications in modeling city road layouts. Specifically, we
represent the road layout using a graph where nodes in the
graph represent control points and edges in the graph represents road segments. NTG is a sequential generative model
parameterized by a neural network. It iteratively generates
a new node and an edge connecting to an existing node conditioned on the current graph. We train NTG on Open Street
Map data and show that it outperforms existing approaches
using a set of diverse performance metrics. Moreover, our
method allows users to control styles of generated road layouts mimicking existing cities as well as to sketch parts of the
city road layout to be synthesized. In addition to synthesis,
the proposed NTG finds uses in an analytical task of aerial
road parsing. Experimental results show that it achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the SpaceNet dataset.

1. Introduction
City road layout modeling is an important problem with
applications in various fields. In urban planning, extensive
simulation of city layouts are required for ensuring that the
final construction leads to effective traffic flow and connectivity. Further demand comes from the gaming industry
where on-the-fly generation of new environments enhances
user interest and engagement. Road layout generation also

plays an important role for self-driving cars, where diverse
virtual city blocks are created for testing autonomous agents.
Although the data-driven end-to-end learning paradigm
has revolutionized various computer vision fields, the leading
approaches [32] (e.g., the foundation piece in the commercially available CityEngine software) for city layout generation are still largely based on procedural modeling with
hand-designed features. While these methods guarantee
valid road topologies with user specified attribute inputs, the
attributes are all hand-engineered and inflexible to use. For
example, if one wishes to generate a synthetic city that resembles e.g. London, tedious manual tuning of the attributes
is required in order to get plausible results. Moreover, these
methods cannot trivially be used in aerial road parsing.
In this paper, we propose a novel generative model for
city road layouts that learns from available map data. Our
model, referred to as Neural Turtle Graphics (NTG) is inspired by the classical turtle graphics methodology 1 that
progressively grows road graphs based on local statistics.
We model the city road layout using a graph. A node in the
graph represents a spatial control point of the road layout,
while the edge represents a road segment. The proposed
NTG is realized as an encoder-decoder architecture where
the encoder is an RNN that encodes local incoming paths
into a node and the decoder is another RNN that generates
Project page: https://nv-tlabs.github.io/NTG
1 Turtle graphics is a technique for vector drawing, where a relative

cursor (turtle) receives motion commands and leave traces on the canvas.

14522

