Efficient and Robust Registration on the 3D Special Euclidean Group
Uttaran Bhattacharya∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20740, USA

Venu Madhav Govindu†
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru 560012, INDIA

uttaranb@cs.umd.edu

venug@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We present a robust, fast and accurate method for registration of 3D scans. Using correspondences, our method
optimizes a robust cost function on the intrinsic representation of rigid motions, i.e., the Special Euclidean group
SE(3). We exploit the geometric properties of Lie groups as
well as the robustness afforded by an iteratively reweighted
least squares optimization. We also generalize our approach to a joint multiview method that simultaneously
solves for the registration of a set of scans. Our approach
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art robust 3D registration method based on a line process in terms of both
speed and accuracy. We show that this line process method
is a special case of our principled geometric solution. Finally, we also present scenarios where global registration
based on feature correspondences fails but multiview ICP
based on our robust motion estimation is successful.

1. Introduction
The availability of consumer depth cameras has allowed the easy and reliable scanning of a 3D scene or
object [32, 42, 51]. To build a geometrically consistent 3D reconstruction, we need to solve the key problem of aligning or registering all scans in a global frame
of reference [40, 44, 20, 30]. There is a wide variety
of solutions to the 3D registration problem in the literature [17, 28, 24, 11, 52]. All of these methods involve a
trade-off between speed and accuracy. Recently, [52] has
presented a method for fast global registration (henceforth
denoted FGR) of 3D scans based on the robustness of a line
process. This method has been shown to outperform existing methods in terms of both speed and accuracy.
∗ This work was done while the author was a student at the Indian Institute of Science. Supported in part by a research grant from Science
and Engineering Research Board, Department of Science and Technology,
Government of India.
† Corresponding author.

As in [52], given a set of 3D feature correspondences,
we pose the registration problem as one of solving for the
rigid Euclidean motion that minimizes a robust cost function. However, unlike their approach, our solution systematically utilises the rich geometric structure of the underlying
Lie group representation for 3D motion, i.e., the Special Euclidean group SE(3). In this context, we achieve robustness
via the iteratively reweighted least squares (IRLS) method.
The key observation of our paper is that our specific combination of geometry of rigid Euclidean motion and the robustness of IRLS allows our method to significantly outperform the fast global registration method of [52] without having to take recourse to tuning of parameters. Additionally,
we show that the solution proposed in [52] is a special case
of our more general solution. In the process, we demonstrate that we can gain both theoretical insight as well as
improved performance by utilizing the rich structure of the
underlying geometric representation of rigid Euclidean motions.
Furthermore, our work also addresses two important
considerations. Firstly, in order to achieve robustness, some
loss functions used for optimization have parameters that
need to be either provided a priori or estimated in situ. This
is the case with [52] which uses the Geman-McClure loss
function. We argue that for the problem of 3D registration
the statistical efficiency (i.e. accuracy) trade-off inherent to
all robust estimators can be addressed using loss functions
that are parameter free. This obviates the need to estimate
any parameter during the course of optimization. Secondly,
we argue that 3D registration using 3D point feature correspondences has certain limitations. While such feature
correspondences can be reliably obtained when the camera
motion is small (equivalently there is significant overlap between scans), there are certain scenarios where the feature
correspondences break down. For such cases, we demonstrate that accurate joint registration of multiple 3D scans
can be achieved by incorporating our robust motion estimation method into local methods such as ICP.

5885

