Improving Pedestrian Attribute Recognition With
Weakly-Supervised Multi-Scale Attribute-Specific Localization
Chufeng Tang1 Lu Sheng2 Zhaoxiang Zhang3 Xiaolin Hu1∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
College of Software, Beihang University 3 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{tcf18@mails,xlhu@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn

lsheng@buaa.edu.cn

zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Pedestrian attribute recognition has been an emerging
research topic in the area of video surveillance. To predict the existence of a particular attribute, it is demanded
to localize the regions related to the attribute. However, in
this task, the region annotations are not available. How
to carve out these attribute-related regions remains challenging. Existing methods applied attribute-agnostic visual attention or heuristic body-part localization mechanisms to enhance the local feature representations, while
neglecting to employ attributes to define local feature areas.
We propose a flexible Attribute Localization Module (ALM)
to adaptively discover the most discriminative regions and
learns the regional features for each attribute at multiple
levels. Moreover, a feature pyramid architecture is also
introduced to enhance the attribute-specific localization at
low-levels with high-level semantic guidance. The proposed
framework does not require additional region annotations
and can be trained end-to-end with multi-level deep supervision. Extensive experiments show that the proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art results on three pedestrian
attribute datasets, including PETA, RAP, and PA-100K.

1. Introduction
Recognition of pedestrian attributes, e.g. gender, age,
and clothing style, has drawn extensive attention because of
its great potential in video surveillance applications, such as
face verification [10], person retrieval [2, 27], and person reidentification [11, 22, 30]. Recently, methods based on the
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [6, 8] achieve great
success in pedestrian attribute recognition by learning powerful features from images. Some existing works [13, 28]
∗ Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Attentive regions generated by different methods when
recognizing the attribute Longhair. (a) The original input image. (b) Attribute-specific region generated by our proposed
method, which is indeed localized into a head-related region. (c)
Attention mask generated by attribute-agnostic attention methods [20, 24, 37], which covers a broad region but not specific
to Longhair. (d) Body parts generated by part-based methods
[15, 19, 34, 35], which extract features from these body parts.

treat pedestrian attribute recognition as a multi-label classification problem and extract feature representations only
from the whole input images. These holistic methods usually rely on global features, but regional features are more
significant for fine-grained attribute classification.
Intuitively, attributes can be localized into some relevant
regions in a pedestrian image. As illustrated in Figure 1 (b),
when recognizing Longhair, it is reasonable to focus on the
head-related regions. Recent methods attempt to leverage
the attention localization to promote learning discriminative features for attribute recognition. A popular solution
[20, 24, 37] is to employ the visual attention mechanism to
capture the most relevant features. These methods usually
generate attention masks from certain layers and then multiply them to corresponded feature maps so as to extract the
attentive features. However, it is ambiguous which mask
encodes a given attribute’s location, and there is no specific
mechanism that guarantees the correspondences between
attributes and attention masks. As shown in Figure 1 (c),
the learned attention mask attends to a broad region which

4997

