Deep Contextual Attention for Human-Object Interaction Detection
Tiancai Wang1∗†, Rao Muhammad Anwer2∗ , Muhammad Haris Khan2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2 ,
Yanwei Pang1 , Ling Shao2 , Jorma Laaksonen3
1
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), UAE
3
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University School of Science, Finland
1 {wangtc,

pyw}@tju.edu.cn, 2 {rao.anwer, muhammad.haris, fahad.khan, ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org
3

{jorma.laaksonen}@aalto.fi

Abstract
Human-object interaction detection is an important and
relatively new class of visual relationship detection tasks,
essential for deeper scene understanding. Most existing
approaches decompose the problem into object localization and interaction recognition. Despite showing progress,
these approaches only rely on the appearances of humans
and objects and overlook the available context information,
crucial for capturing subtle interactions between them. We
propose a contextual attention framework for human-object
interaction detection. Our approach leverages context by
learning contextually-aware appearance features for human and object instances. The proposed attention module then adaptively selects relevant instance-centric context information to highlight image regions likely to contain
human-object interactions. Experiments are performed on
three benchmarks: V-COCO, HICO-DET and HCVRD. Our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art on all datasets.
On the V-COCO dataset, our method achieves a relative
gain of 4.4% in terms of role mean average precision
(mAProle ), compared to the existing best approach.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed tremendous progress in various instance-level recognition tasks, including object detection and segmentation. These instance-level problems
have numerous applications in robotics, autonomous driving and surveillance. However, such applications demand a
deeper knowledge of scene semantics beyond instance-level
recognition, such as the inference of visual relationships
between object pairs. Detecting human-object interactions
(HOI) is a class of visual relationship detection. Given an
image, the task is to not only localize a human and an object,
∗ Equal contribution
† Work done at IIAI during Tiancai’s internship.

but also recognize the interaction between them. Specifically, it boils down to detecting hhuman, action, objecti
triplets. The problem is challenging as it focuses on both
human-centric interactions with fine-grained actions (i.e.,
riding a horse vs. feeding a horse) and involves multiple cooccurring actions (i.e., eating a donut and interacting with a
computer while sitting on a chair).
Most existing HOI detection approaches typically tackle
the problem by decomposing it into two parts: object localization and interaction recognition [1, 10, 11, 13, 20, 26].
In the first part, off-the-shelf two-stage object detectors
[7, 22, 8] localize both human and object instances in an image. In the second part, detected human and object instances
and the pairwise interaction between them are treated separately in a multi-stream network architecture. Recent works
have attempted to improve HOI detection by integrating,
e.g., structural information [20], gaze and pose cues [26].
Despite these recent advances, the HOI detection performance is still far from satisfactory compared to other vision
tasks, such as object detection and instance segmentation.
Current HOI detection approaches tend to focus on appearance features of human and object instances (boundingboxes) that are central to scoring human-object interactions,
and thereby identifying triplets. However, the readily available auxiliary information, such as context, at various levels
of image granularity is overlooked. Context information is
known to play a crucial role in improving the performance
of several computer vision tasks [4, 27, 18, 2]. However,
it is relatively underexplored for the high-level task of HOI
detection, where context around each candidate detection
is likely to provide complementary information to standard
bounding-box appearance features. Global context provides
valuable image-level information by determining the presence or absence of a specific object category. For instance,
when detecting driving a boat interaction category, person,
boat and water are likely to co-occur in an image. However for drive a car category, interaction (drive) remains the

5694

