Hierarchy Parsing for Image Captioning
Ting Yao, Yingwei Pan, Yehao Li, and Tao Mei
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
{tingyao.ustc, panyw.ustc, yehaoli.sysu}@gmail.com, tmei@jd.com

Image

Abstract

Hat

Dog

Man

Glasses
Boat

Region level

Man

It is always well believed that parsing an image into constituent visual patterns would be helpful for understanding
and representing an image. Nevertheless, there has not been
evidence in support of the idea on describing an image with
a natural-language utterance. In this paper, we introduce a
new design to model a hierarchy from instance level (segmentation), region level (detection) to the whole image to
delve into a thorough image understanding for captioning.
Specifically, we present a HIerarchy Parsing (HIP) architecture that novelly integrates hierarchical structure into
image encoder. Technically, an image decomposes into a
set of regions and some of the regions are resolved into finer
ones. Each region then regresses to an instance, i.e., foreground of the region. Such process naturally builds a hierarchal tree. A tree-structured Long Short-Term Memory
(Tree-LSTM) network is then employed to interpret the hierarchal structure and enhance all the instance-level, regionlevel and image-level features. Our HIP is appealing in
view that it is pluggable to any neural captioning models.
Extensive experiments on COCO image captioning dataset
demonstrate the superiority of HIP. More remarkably, HIP
plus a top-down attention-based LSTM decoder increases CIDEr-D performance from 120.1% to 127.2% on COCO Karpathy test split. When further endowing instancelevel and region-level features from HIP with semantic relation learnt through Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN),
CIDEr-D is boosted up to 130.6%.

1. Introduction
Automatic image captioning is the task of generating a
natural sentence that correctly reflects the visual content of
an image. Practical automatic image description systems
have a great potential impact for instance on robotic vision,
or helping visually impaired people by transforming visual signals into information that can be communicated via
text-to-speech technology. The recent state-of-the-art image captioning methods use to perform “encoder-decoder”
translation [6, 14, 29]. A Convolutional Neural Network (C-

Dog
Boat

(b) Regions
Glasses

Hat

Instance level

(a) Hierarchal structure

(c) Instances

Figure 1. Examples of (a) the hierarchal tree structure in an image,
(b) regions and (c) instances in the image.

NN) first encodes an image into a feature vector, and a caption is then decoded from this vector, one word at each time
step using a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Network.
There are variants of approaches arisen from this methodology, for instance, conducting attention on the feature map
[32] or leveraging attributes to augment image features [35].
Regardless of these different versions, today’s neural captioning models tend to leverage correlations from training
data and produce generic plausible captions, but lack visual
understanding on the compositional patterns in images.
We propose to mitigate the problem from the viewpoint
of parsing an image into a hierarchical structure of constituent visual patterns to better represent the image. The
key idea is to build a top-down hierarchical tree from the
root of the whole image to the middle layers of regions and
the leaf layer of instances. Each instance in the leaf layer
emphasizes the discriminative foreground of a region. Figure 1 (a) conceptualizes the typical development of a tree
structure on an image. Figure 1 (b) and (c) illustrates the
regions and foreground/instances in the image, respectively. In this case, we could strengthen visual interpretations of
image structure in a bottom-up manner and the learning of
all the image-level, region-level and instance-level features
does benefit from tree-structured topologies. We expect our
design to be a feature refiner or bank, that outputs rich and
multi-level representations of the image. Such multi-level
representations could be utilized separately or jointly, depending on the particular task. It is also flexible to further
integrate the reasoning of semantic relation between regions
or instances to further endow region-level or instance-level
features with more power.

2621

