Image2StyleGAN: How to Embed Images Into the StyleGAN Latent Space?
Rameen Abdal
KAUST

Yipeng Qin
KAUST

Peter Wonka
KAUST

rameen.abdal@kaust.edu.sa

yipeng.qin@kaust.edu.sa

pwonka@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose an efficient algorithm to embed a given image into the latent space of StyleGAN. This embedding enables semantic image editing operations that can be applied
to existing photographs. Taking the StyleGAN trained on
the FFHD dataset as an example, we show results for image
morphing, style transfer, and expression transfer. Studying
the results of the embedding algorithm provides valuable
insights into the structure of the StyleGAN latent space. We
propose a set of experiments to test what class of images can
be embedded, how they are embedded, what latent space is
suitable for embedding, and if the embedding is semantically meaningful.

is not only able to embed human face images, but also successfully embeds non-face images from different classes.
Therefore, we continue our investigation by analyzing the
quality of the embedding to see if the embedding is semantically meaningful. To this end, we propose to use three basic
operations on vectors in the latent space: linear interpolation, crossover, and adding a vector and a scaled difference
vector. These operations correspond to three semantic image processing applications: morphing, style transfer, and
expression transfer. As a result, we gain more insight into
the structure of the latent space and can solve the mystery
why even instances of non-face images such as cars can be
embedded.
Our contributions include:
• An efficient embedding algorithm which can map a
given image into the extended latent space W + of a
pre-trained StyleGAN.

1. Introduction
Generative Adverserial Networks (GANs) are very successfully applied in various computer vision applications,
e.g. texture synthesis [18, 33, 28], video generation [31, 30],
image-to-image translation [11, 36, 1, 24] and object detection [19]. In the few past years, the quality of images
synthesized by GANs has increased rapidly. Compared to
the seminal DCGAN framework [25] in 2015, the current
state-of-the-art GANs [13, 3, 14, 36, 37] can synthesize at a
much higher resolution and produce significantly more realistic images. Among them, StyleGAN [14] makes use of
an intermediate W latent space that holds the promise of
enabling some controlled image modifications. We believe
that image modifications are a lot more exciting when it becomes possible to modify a given image rather than a randomly GAN generated one. This leads to the natural question if it is possible to embed a given photograph into the
GAN latent space.
To tackle this question, we build an embedding algorithm that can map a given image I in the latent space of
StyleGAN pre-trained on the FFHQ dataset. One of our
important insights is that the generalization ability of the
pre-trained StyleGAN is significantly enhanced when using
an extended latent space W + (See Sec. 3.3). As a consequence, somewhat surprisingly, our embedding algorithm

• We study multiple questions providing insight into the
structure of the StyleGAN latent space, e.g.: What type
of images can be embedded? What type of faces can
be embedded? What latent space can be used for the
embedding?
• We propose to use three basic operations on vectors
to study the quality of the embedding. As a result,
we can better understand the latent space and how different classes of images are embedded. As a byproduct, we obtain excellent results on multiple face image
editing applications including morphing, style transfer,
and expression transfer.

2. Related Work
High-quality GANs Starting from the groundbreaking
work by Goodfellow et al. [8] in 2014, the entire computer
vision community has witnessed the fast-paced improvements on GANs in the past years. For image generation
tasks, DCGAN [25] is the first milestone that lays down
the foundation of GAN architectures as fully-convolutional
neural networks. Since then, various efforts have been made
14432

