Semantic Stereo Matching with Pyramid Cost Volumes
Zhenyao Wu1 , Xinyi Wu1 , Xiaoping Zhang2 , Song Wang1,3,∗ , Lili Ju1,3,∗
1
University of South Carolina, USA 2 Wuhan University, China 3 Farsee2 Technology Ltd, China
{zhenyao, xinyiw}@email.sc.edu, xpzhang.math@whu.edu.cn, songwang@cec.sc.edu, ju@math.sc.edu

Abstract
The accuracy of stereo matching has been greatly improved by using deep learning with convolutional neural
networks. To further capture the details of disparity maps,
in this paper, we propose a novel semantic stereo network
named SSPCV-Net, which includes newly designed pyramid cost volumes for describing semantic and spatial information on multiple levels. The semantic features are
inferred by a semantic segmentation subnetwork while the
spatial features are derived by hierarchical spatial pooling.
In the end, we design a 3D multi-cost aggregation module
to integrate the extracted multilevel features and perform
regression for accurate disparity maps. We conduct comprehensive experiments and comparisons with some recent
stereo matching networks on Scene Flow, KITTI 2015 and
2012, and Cityscapes benchmark datasets, and the results
show that the proposed SSPCV-Net significantly promotes
the state-of-the-art stereo-matching performance.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching is indispensable for many computer vision applications, such as autonomous driving [5], 3D reconstruction [42], augmented realities [8], and robot navigation [1]. By finding pixel-level correspondence between
two images, stereo algorithms aim to construct a disparity
map from a pair of rectified stereo images. In traditional
methods, hand-crafted reliable features are used to identify
cross-image matching pixels or patches for computing the
disparity map [3, 33]. Recently, as in many other computer
vision tasks, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been applied to stereo matching with significant success.
When applying CNNs for stereo matching, many of the
existing works construct a cost volume for computing the
correspondence cost at each position by traversing a set of
possible disparity values. A regression layer is then used to
infer the optimal disparity map based on the cost volume.
While early works calculate the cost in the original image
∗ Co-corresponding authors.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. (a)&(b) the input stereo pairs (left and right images) from
KITTI dataset; (c) the semantic segmentation; (d) the predicted
disparity by the proposed SSPCV-Net; (e) the ground-truth of the
disparity estimation; (f) the 3px-error map of the SSPCV-Net prediction.

domain [17, 18, 37], recent works construct the cost volume using the deep features extracted by the respective networks [22, 30, 35, 4]. For these prior works, the cost volume
is constructed at a single level without considering multiscale spatial information separately underlying the stereo
image pairs. However, for the considered feature map, a
single-scale cost volume may not be sufficient to capture
the spatial relationship between stereo images. One of our
major ideas in this paper is to develop a new CNN network
with multilevel cost volumes, which we call pyramid cost
volumes, for better capturing the disparity details in stereo
matching.
Our work is also partly inspired by the recent work
of SegStereo [38] that integrates semantic information to
stereo matching through joint learning. As shown in Figure 1, semantic segmentation captures different objects and
their boundaries in images and shows much spatial and intensity correlation with the disparity map. In particular, an
accurate semantic segmentation can help rectify the disparity values along the object boundaries, which are usually
more prone to error in stereo matching [2, 15]. Thus, our
network will also integrate both the semantic and the spatial information in multiple levels for constructing pyramid

7484

