Chinese Street View Text: Large-scale Chinese Text Reading with Partially
Supervised Learning
Yipeng Sun1 Jiaming Liu1 Wei Liu2∗ Junyu Han1 Errui Ding1 Jingtuo Liu1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong2
{sunyipeng,liujiaming03,hanjunyu,dingerrui,liujingtuo}@baidu.com
wliu@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Most existing text reading benchmarks make it difficult
to evaluate the performance of more advanced deep learning models in large vocabularies due to the limited amount
of training data. To address this issue, we introduce a new
large-scale text reading benchmark dataset named Chinese
Street View Text (C-SVT) with 430, 000 street view images, which is at least 14 times as large as the existing
Chinese text reading benchmarks. To recognize Chinese
text in the wild while keeping large-scale datasets labeling
cost-effective, we propose to annotate one part of the CSVT dataset (30,000 images) in locations and text labels as
full annotations and add 400, 000 more images, where only
the corresponding text-of-interest in the regions is given as
weak annotations. To exploit the rich information from the
weakly annotated data, we design a text reading network in
a partially supervised learning framework, which enables
to localize and recognize text, learn from fully and weakly
annotated data simultaneously. To localize the best matched
text proposals from weakly labeled images, we propose an
online proposal matching module incorporated in the whole
model, spotting the keyword regions by sharing parameters
for end-to-end training. Compared with fully supervised
training algorithms, this model can improve the end-to-end
recognition performance remarkably by 4.03% in F-score
at the same labeling cost. The proposed model can also
achieve state-of-the-art results on the ICDAR 2017-RCTW
dataset, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed partially supervised learning framework.

1. Introduction
Reading text from images has received much attention
in recent years due to its numerous applications, e.g., document analysis, image-based translation, product image re∗ This work is done when Wei Liu is an intern at Baidu Inc.

trieval, visual geo-location and license plate recognition,
etc. Benefitting from the advances in deep learning algorithms [13, 31, 27, 11, 4], the performance of text detection and recognition on standard benchmarks has increased
dramatically over the past three years [1] . Thanks to the

ෛชই఺ྍ‫ݴ‬ᐣ

ႎეᴁ

‫޾ڥ‬ᴁ





ኞᜓ岉จრଫӱ ෛชই఺ग़‫ݴ‬ᐣ

֯ᜓଘਞႲ੄ᩃ

Figure 1: End-to-end Chinese text reading: fully supervised (left) vs. partially supervised (right). Note that the
characters recognized incorrectly are marked in red.
carefully designed deep learning based text reading models,
remarkable success has been achieved in terms of detecting [46, 33, 15] and recognizing text [34, 35, 21, 9] on ICDAR benchmarks [19, 20], which mainly focus on English
text in the wild.
However, previous approaches have rarely paid attention
to reading Chinese text in the wild. There is a considerable
drop in performance when applying the state-of-the-art text
detection and recognition algorithms to Chinese text reading, which is more challenging to solve. Since the category
number of Chinese characters in real-world images is much
larger than those of Latin languages, the number of training
samples of most current datasets is still limited per category
and the distribution of characters is relatively unbalanced.
Therefore, reading Chinese text in the wild requires more
well annotated training samples, however, it is difficult for
the existing benchmarks [36][43] to satisfy the requirements
mainly due to the high cost of data collections and location
annotations of text regions.
To address this issue, we establish a new large-scale Chi-

9086

