Crowd Counting with Deep Structured Scale Integration Network
Lingbo Liu1 , Zhilin Qiu1 , Guanbin Li1 , Shufan Liu3 , Wanli Ouyang3 and Liang Lin1,2∗
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 DarkMatter AI Research
3
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia

Abstract
Automatic estimation of the number of people in unconstrained crowded scenes is a challenging task and one major difficulty stems from the huge scale variation of people.
In this paper, we propose a novel Deep Structured Scale
Integration Network (DSSINet) for crowd counting, which
addresses the scale variation of people by using structured
feature representation learning and hierarchically structured loss function optimization. Unlike conventional methods which directly fuse multiple features with weighted average or concatenation, we first introduce a Structured Feature Enhancement Module based on conditional random
fields (CRFs) to refine multiscale features mutually with a
message passing mechanism. In this module, each scalespecific feature is considered as a continuous random variable and passes complementary information to refine the
features at other scales. Second, we utilize a Dilated Multiscale Structural Similarity loss to enforce our DSSINet to
learn the local correlation of people’s scales within regions
of various size, thus yielding high-quality density maps. Extensive experiments on four challenging benchmarks well
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Specifically,
our DSSINet achieves improvements of 9.5% error reduction on Shanghaitech dataset and 24.9% on UCF-QNRF
dataset against the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting, which aims to automatically generate
crowd density maps and estimate the number of people in
unconstrained scenes, is a crucial research topic in computer vision. Recently, it has received increasing interests in
both academic and industrial communities, due to its wide
range of practical applications, such as video surveillance
∗ Corresponding author is Liang Lin. This work was supported in part
by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.2018YFC0830103, in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No.U1811463 and No.61976250, in part
by National High Level Talents Special Support Plan (Ten Thousand Talents Program). This work was also sponsored by SenseTime Research
Fund.

Figure 1. Visualization of people with various scales in unconstrained crowded scenes. The huge scale variation of people is a
major challenge limiting the performance of crowd counting.

[40], traffic management [46] and traffic forecast [21].
Although numerous models [8, 11] have been proposed,
crowd counting remains a very challenging problem and
one major difficulty originates from the huge scale variation of people. As shown in Fig. 1, the scales of people
vary greatly in different crowded scenes and capturing such
huge scale variation is non-trivial. Recently, deep neural
networks have been widely used in crowd counting and have
made substantial progress [43, 25, 42, 24, 45, 22, 27]. To
address scale variation, most previous works utilized multicolumn CNN [47] or stacked multi-branch blocks [4] to extract multiple features with different receptive fields, and
then fused them with weighted average or concatenation.
However, the scale variation of people in diverse scenarios
is still far from being fully solved.
In order to address scale variation, our motivations are
two-fold. First, features of different scales contain different information and are highly complementary. For instance,
the features at deeper layers encode high-level semantic information, while the features at shallower layers contain
more low-level appearance details. Some related researches [41, 44] have shown that these complementary features
can be mutually refined and thereby become more robust to
scale variation. However, most existing methods use simple
strategies (e.g., weighted average and concatenation) to fuse
multiple features, and can not well capture the complementary information. Therefore, it is very necessary to propose

1774

