Attentional Neural Fields for Crowd Counting
Anran Zhang1∗, Lei Yue1∗, Jiayi Shen1 , Fan Zhu4 , Xiantong Zhen4 , Xianbin Cao1,2,3†, Ling Shao4
1
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology of Near Space Information System (Beihang University),
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Beijing, China
4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
zhanganran@buaa.edu.cn, yuelei@buaa.edu.cn, shenjiayi@buaa.edu.cn,
fan.zhu@inceptioniai.org, zhenxt@gmail.com, xbcao@buaa.edu.cn, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Crowd counting has recently generated huge popularity
in computer vision, and is extremely challenging due to the
huge scale variations of objects. In this paper, we propose
the Attentional Neural Field (ANF) for crowd counting via
density estimation. Within the encoder-decoder network,
we introduce conditional random fields (CRFs) to aggregate
multi-scale features, which can build more informative representations. To better model pair-wise potentials in CRFs,
we incorperate non-local attention mechanism implemented
as inter- and intra-layer attentions to expand the receptive
field to the entire image respectively within the same layer
and across different layers, which captures long-range dependencies to conquer huge scale variations. The CRFs
coupled with the attention mechanism are seamlessly integrated into the encoder-decoder network, establishing an
ANF that can be optimized end-to-end by back propagation.
We conduct extensive experiments on four public datasets,
including ShanghaiTech, WorldEXPO 10, UCF-CC-50 and
UCF-QNRF. The results show that our ANF achieves high
counting performance, surpassing most previous methods.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting, which aims to predict an accurate number of individuals in a scene, has recently generated great
popularity in computer vision due to its extensive real-world
applications, such video surveillance and urban planning.
However, crowd counting for real-life applications faces
many challenges. Some of the most common include occlusion, low image quality/resolution, severe perspective dis∗ These authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Density estimation results. Top Left: Input image. Top
right: Ground truth. Bottom Left: The best previous method
(SANet [3]). Bottom Right: ANF. We can easily observe the
huge scale variations in the input image, where the spatial scales
of pedestrians with large vertical pair-wise distances are diverse.

tortion, huge scale variation and the model inefficiency at
the inference stage [24, 25]. Prior works [28, 41] have made
great attempts to address these issues, and deep learning
models have been ubiquitously employed in existing crowd
counting methods. For instance, [21] iteratively incorporates the convolutional features and the predicted multiresolution density maps in various stages, and [28] combines global and local contextual information from multiple
estimators.
In most crowd counting tasks, the input data comes from
surveillance cameras that are mounted above the crowd as
illustrated in Fig. 1. This means that the scale variation normally takes place in regions with large vertical distances
on input surveillance images. Thus, how to handle scale
variations while utilizing multi-scale features becomes the
15714

