What Would You Expect? Anticipating Egocentric Actions With
Rolling-Unrolling LSTMs and Modality Attention
Antonino Furnari Giovanni Maria Farinella
University of Catania - Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
http://iplab.dmi.unict.it/fpv/ - {furnari,gfarinella}@dmi.unict.it

PAST FRAMES (observed)

Abstract
Egocentric action anticipation consists in understanding which objects the camera wearer will interact with in
the near future and which actions they will perform. We
tackle the problem proposing an architecture able to anticipate actions at multiple temporal scales using two LSTMs to
1) summarize the past, and 2) formulate predictions about
the future. The input video is processed considering three
complimentary modalities: appearance (RGB), motion (optical flow) and objects (object-based features). Modalityspecific predictions are fused using a novel Modality ATTention (MATT) mechanism which learns to weigh modalities in an adaptive fashion. Extensive evaluations on two
large-scale benchmark datasets show that our method outperforms prior art by up to +7% on the challenging EPICKitchens dataset including more than 2500 actions, and
generalizes to EGTEA Gaze+. Our approach is also shown
to generalize to the tasks of early action recognition and
action recognition. Our method is ranked first in the public
leaderboard of the EPIC-Kitchens egocentric action anticipation challenge 2019. Please see the project web page for
code and additional details: http://iplab.dmi.unict.it/rulstm.

1. Introduction
Anticipating the near future is a natural task for humans
and a fundamental one for intelligent systems when it is
necessary to react before an action is completed (e.g., to anticipate a pedestrian crossing the street from an autonomous
vehicle [9]) or even before it starts (e.g., to notify a user who
is performing the wrong action in a known workflow [49]).
Additionally, tasks such as action anticipation [18, 29, 54]
and early action recognition [2, 9, 36] pose a series of key
challenges from a computational perspective. Indeed, methods addressing these tasks need to model the relationships
between past, future events and incomplete observations.
First Person (Egocentric) Vision [26], in particular, offers an
interesting scenario to study anticipation problems. On one
hand, whilst being a natural task for humans, anticipating

𝜏𝑠 − (𝜏𝑜 + 𝜏𝑎 )

BEFORE THE ACTION
(observed)

MODEL

𝜏 𝑠 − 𝜏𝑎

FUTURE FRAMES (unobserved)

𝜏𝑠 :action start

ANTICIPATION TIME 𝜏𝑎
(unobserved)
Top-3 anticipated actions

"PUT-DOWN CONTAINER" ACTION
(unobserved)

PUT-DOWN CONTAINER
CLOSE TAP
TAKE SPOON

Figure 1. Egocentric Action Anticipation. See text for notation.

the future from egocentric video is computationally challenging due to the ability of wearable cameras to acquire
long videos of complex activities involving many objects
and actions performed by a user from their unique point of
view. On the other hand, investigating these tasks is fundamental for the construction of intelligent wearable systems
able to anticipate the user’s goal and assist them [26].
In this paper, we address the problem of egocentric action anticipation. As defined in [8] and illustrated in Figure 1, the task consists in recognizing an action starting at
time τs by observing a video segment preceding the action
starting at time τs − (τo + τa ) and ending at time τs − τa ,
where the “observation time” τo indicates the length of the
observed segment, whereas the “anticipation time” τa denotes how many seconds in advance actions are to be anticipated. While action anticipation has been investigated in
classic third person vision [1, 18, 22, 29, 54, 25], less attention has been devoted to the egocentric scenario [8, 16, 43].
We observe that egocentric action anticipation methods need to address two sub-tasks: 1) summarizing what
has been observed in the past (e.g., “a container has been
washed” in the observed segment in Figure 1), and 2) making hypotheses about what will happen in the future (e.g.,

6252

