Resource Constrained Neural Network Architecture Search:
Will a Submodularity Assumption Help?
Yunyang Xiong Ronak Mehta Vikas Singh
University of Wisconsin Madison
yxiong43@wisc.edu

ronakrm@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
The design of neural network architectures is frequently
either based on human expertise using trial/error and empirical feedback or tackled via large scale reinforcement
learning strategies performed over distinct discrete architecture choices. In the latter case, the optimization is often
non-differentiable and also not very amenable to derivativefree optimization methods. Most methods in use today require sizable computational resources. And if we want
networks that additionally satisfy resource constraints, the
above challenges are exacerbated because the search must
now balance accuracy with certain budget constraints on
resources. We formulate this problem as the optimization
of a set function – we find that the empirical behavior of
this set function often (but not always) satisfies marginal
gain and monotonicity principles – properties central to the
idea of submodularity. Based on this observation, we adapt
algorithms within discrete optimization to obtain heuristic
schemes for neural network architecture search, where we
have resource constraints on the architecture. This simple scheme when applied on CIFAR-100 and ImageNet,
identifies resource-constrained architectures with quantifiably better performance than current state-of-the-art models designed for mobile devices. Specifically, we find highperforming architectures with fewer parameters and computations by a search method that is much faster.

1. Introduction
The design of state-of-the-art neural network architectures for a given learning task typically involves extensive effort: human expertise as well as significant compute
power. It is well accepted that the trial-and-error process
is tedious, often requiring iterative adjustment of models
based on empirical feedback – until one discovers the “best”
structure, often based on overall accuracy. In other cases it
may also be a function of the model’s memory footprint or
speed at test time. This architecture search process becomes

vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

more challenging when we seek resource-constrained networks to eventually deploy on small form factor devices:
accuracy and resource-efficiency need to be carefully balanced. Further, each type of mobile device has its own
hardware idiosyncrasies and may require different architectures for the best accuracy-efficiency trade-off. Motivated
by these considerations, researchers are devoting effort into
the development of algorithms that automate the process
of architecture search and design. Many of the models
that have been identified via a judicious use of such architecture search schemes (often together with human expertise) currently provide excellent performance in classification [3, 31, 44] and object detection [31].
The superior performance of the architectures identified
via the above process notwithstanding, it is well known that
those search algorithms are time consuming and computeintensive. For reference, even for a smaller dataset such as
CIFAR-10, [44] requires 3150 GPU days for a reinforcement learning (RL) model. A number of approaches have
been proposed to speed up architecture search algorithms.
Some of the strategies include adding a specific structure
to the search space to reduce search time [25, 36], sharing
weights across various architectures [5, 30], and imposing
weight or performance prediction constraints for each distinct architecture [3, 4, 26]. These ideas all help in various
specific cases, but the inherent issue of a large search space
and the associated difficulties of scalability still exists.
Notice that one reason why many search methods based
on RL, evolutionary schemes, MCTS [28], SMBO [25] or
Bayesian optimization [18] are compute intensive in general is because architecture search is often set up as a blackbox optimization problem over a large discrete domain,
thus leading to a large number of architecture evaluations
during search. Further, many architecture search methods
[8, 25, 44] do not directly take into account certain resource
bounds (e.g., # of FLOPs) although the search space can be
pre-processed to filter out those regions of the search space.
As a result, few methods have been widely used for identifying deployment-ready architectures for mobile/embedded
devices. When the resource of interest is memory, one
11901

