Variational Few-Shot Learning
Jian Zhang1

Chenglong Zhao1 Bingbing Ni1∗ Minghao Xu1 Xiaokang Yang2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{stevenash0822,cl-zhao,nibingbing,xuminghao118,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Relying on substantial labelled data, deep learning [27,
41, 20] based approaches have led a series of breakthroughs
in computer vision community. However, collecting and
annotating such a scale of data are both labor-intensive, seriously restricting their practicability in actual applications.
Inspired by human visual system, which has the instinct to
recognize novel objects by learning with only a few examples, few-shot learning [9] is proposed to mimic this ability.
More explicitly, we consider a common few-shot learning scenario where a learning agent, acquiring decisionmaking strategy with substantial data during training, is exerted on previously unseen classes with limited auxiliary supervision during test. Many prior works [25, 45, 7, 6] stress
on learning a well-organized matching mechanism. This
mechanism attempts to seek a best match between support
set (scarce labelled data) and target set (unlabelled data),
via parametric [35, 18] or non-parametric [45, 42] methods as measurement. While non-parametric methods utilize
designated metric, its counterpart parametric methods leverage neural network to measure the similarity. The essence
∗ Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni

…

We propose a variational Bayesian framework for enhancing few-shot learning performance. This idea is motivated by the fact that single point based metric learning
approaches are inherently noise-vulnerable and easy-to-bebiased. In a nutshell, stochastic variational inference is invoked to approximate bias-eliminated class specific sample distributions. In the meantime, a classifier-free prediction is attained by leveraging the distribution statistics
on novel samples. Extensive experimental results on several benchmarks well demonstrate the effectiveness of our
distribution-driven few-shot learning framework over previous point estimates based methods, in terms of superior
classification accuracy and robustness.

(a) Point Estimate

……

Support Set

(b) Our Method

Target Set

Figure 1. Variational few-shot learning: (a) Prior works choose
a specific point to represent each class. (b) Our method estimates
the distributions of each class. Best viewed in color.

of both methods is to search for the nearest support class of
target data within an embedding space.
As mentioned above, points of the same class scatter in
a certain range of embedding space. A common manner is
that choosing a specific point (e.g. central point) to represent
the same class points, which can be represented as point
estimates. Despite their favorable performance in public
datasets, there exists two issues: 1) Estimating such a specific point is difficult when limited support points distribute
unevenly in embedding space. For instance, prototypebased methods [42, 15, 1] compute the mean of embedded support examples for each class, which is vulnerable
to noise since data is severely limited. 2) They are lack of
interpretability since a single embedding is insufficient for
indicating a class. We consider that each point of the same
class is not isolated in embedding space, but is sampled
from a high-dimensional distribution. As shown in Figure
1, it is obvious that the distributions of each class have superior descriptive power than several points.
To explicitly address the issues caused by point estimate methods, we propose a distribution estimate framework via variational inference. While exact inference is
computationally intractable, variational inference is a theoretically attractive method and suitable for computation.

1685

