Enriched Feature Guided Refinement Network for Object Detection
Jing Nie1∗†, Rao Muhammad Anwer2∗ , Hisham Cholakkal2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2
Yanwei Pang1‡, Ling Shao2
1
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), UAE
1 {jingnie,pyw}@tju.edu.cn, 2 {rao.anwer,

hisham.cholakkal, fahad.khan, ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
We propose a single-stage detection framework that
jointly tackles the problem of multi-scale object detection
and class imbalance. Rather than designing deeper networks, we introduce a simple yet effective feature enrichment scheme to produce multi-scale contextual features.
We further introduce a cascaded refinement scheme which
first instills multi-scale contextual features into the prediction layers of the single-stage detector in order to enrich
their discriminative power for multi-scale detection. Second, the cascaded refinement scheme counters the class imbalance problem by refining the anchors and enriched features to improve classification and regression. Experiments
are performed on two benchmarks: PASCAL VOC and MS
COCO. For a 320×320 input on the MS COCO test-dev,
our detector achieves state-of-the-art single-stage detection
accuracy with a COCO AP of 33.2 in the case of singlescale inference, while operating at 21 milliseconds on a
Titan XP GPU. For a 512×512 input on the MS COCO
test-dev, our approach obtains an absolute gain of 1.6% in
terms of COCO AP, compared to the best reported singlestage results [5]. Source code and models are available at:
https://github.com/Ranchentx/EFGRNet.

1. Introduction
Object detection is an active research problem with numerous real-world applications. Modern object detection
methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
can be divided into two categories: (1) the two-stage methods [33, 23], and (2) the single-stage approaches [27, 32].
Two-stage methods first generate object proposals and then
these proposals are classified and regressed. Single-stage
methods directly localize objects by regular and dense sampling grids on the input image. Generally, two-stage ob∗ Equal contribution
† Work done at IIAI during Jing’s internship
‡ Corresponding author

ject detectors have the advantage of being more accurate
compared to single-stage methods. Single-stage methods,
on the other hand, have time computational efficiency but
compromise on performance compared to the two-stage detectors [19]. In this work, we investigate the problem of
generic object detection in a single-stage framework.
In recent years, a variety of single-stage object detection methods have been introduced [27, 32, 41, 24]. Among
existing single-stage object detectors, the single shot multibox detector (SSD) [27] has recently gained popularity due
to its combined advantage of improved detection performance and high speed. The standard SSD framework utilizes a base network (e.g., VGG) and adds a series of convolutional layers at the end of the truncated base network.
Both the added convolutional layers and some of the earlier
base network layers, of varying resolutions, are employed to
conduct independent predictions. In the standard SSD, each
prediction layer focuses on predicting objects of a specific
scale. It adopts a pyramidal feature hierarchy in which shallow or former layers target small objects whereas deep or
later layers aim at detecting large objects. While achieving
high computational efficiency, SSD still lags behind most
modern two-stage detectors in terms of detection accuracy.
In this work, we distinguish two key obstacles impeding the standard SSD detector from achieving state-of-theart accuracy while maintaining its hallmark speed. First,
the standard SSD struggles to handle large scale variations [1]. This is likely due to fixed contextual information
in the SSD prediction layers. Existing approaches tackle
this issue by e.g., adding contextual information along with
deeper backbone model [13] and feature pyramid representations [41, 24, 4, 30]. Most approaches [41, 24, 4] adopt a
top-down pyramid representation where low-resolution feature maps of deep layers are first up-sampled and then combined with high-resolution feature maps of shallow layers
to inject high-level semantic information. While such a feature pyramid representation helps tackle large scale variation, the performance is still far from satisfactory.
The second key issue is the foreground-background class

9537

