Meta-Sim: Learning to Generate Synthetic Datasets
http://nv-tlabs.github.io/meta-sim

Amlan Kar1,2,3
Aayush Prakash1
Ming-Yu Liu1
Eric Cameracci1
Justin Yuan1
Matt Rusiniak1
David Acuna1,2,3
Antonio Torralba4
Sanja Fidler1,2,3∗
1

NVIDIA

2

3

University of Toronto

Vector Institute

Abstract
Training models to high-end performance requires availability of large labeled datasets, which are expensive to get.
The goal of our work is to automatically synthesize labeled
datasets that are relevant for a downstream task. We propose Meta-Sim, which learns a generative model of synthetic scenes, and obtain images as well as its corresponding ground-truth via a graphics engine. We parametrize
our dataset generator with a neural network, which learns
to modify attributes of scene graphs obtained from probabilistic scene grammars, so as to minimize the distribution
gap between its rendered outputs and target data. If the
real dataset comes with a small labeled validation set, we
additionally aim to optimize a meta-objective, i.e. downstream task performance. Experiments show that the proposed method can greatly improve content generation quality over a human-engineered probabilistic scene grammar,
both qualitatively and quantitatively as measured by performance on a downstream task.

1. Introduction
Data collection and labeling is a laborious, costly and
time consuming venture, and represents a major bottleneck
in most current machine learning pipelines. To this end,
synthetic content generation [6, 36, 11, 34] has emerged as
a promising solution since all ground-truth comes for free
– via the graphics engine. It further enables us to train and
test our models in virtual environments [38, 8, 48, 22, 41]
before deploying to the real world, which is crucial for both
scalability and safety. Unfortunately, an important performance issue arises due to the domain gap existing between
the synthetic and real-world domains.
Addressing the domain gap issue has led to a plethora
of work on synthetic-to-real domain adaptation [17, 27, 54,
10, 43, 34, 45]. These techniques aim to learn domaininvariant features and thus more transferrable models. One
of the mainstream approaches is to learn to stylize syn∗ Correspondence to amlan@cs.toronto.edu, sfidler@nvidia.com

Meta-Sim
Probabilistic
road
grammar

MIT

Use my trained network on real data!

Need a labeled
dataset to train
my network!

Distribution
Transformer

lane

lane

4

Real dataset
sidewalk

tree

car

person location
height
pose

car

∼ distribution ???

Generated synthetic dataset

Scientist

Figure 1. Meta-Sim is a method to generate synthetic datasets that
bridge the distribution gap between real and synthetic data and are
optimized for downstream task performance

thetic images to look more like those captured in the realworld [17, 27, 51, 30, 18]. As such, these models address
the appearance gap between the synthetic and real-world
domains. They share the assumption that the domain gap is
due to the differences that are fairly low level.
Here, we argue that domain gap is also due to a content
gap, arising from the fact that the synthetic content (e.g.
layout and types of objects) mimics a limited set of scenes,
not necessarily reflecting the diversity and distribution of
objects of those captured in the real world. For example,
the Virtual KITTI [11] dataset was created by a group of
engineers and artists, to match object locations and poses
in KITTI [13] which was recorded in Karlsruhe, Germany.
But what if the target city changes to Tokyo, Japan, which
has much heavier traffic and many more high-rise buildings? Moreover, what if the downstream task that we want
to solve changes from object detection to lane estimation or
rain drop removal? Creating synthetic worlds that ensure
realism and diversity for any desired task requires significant effort by highly-qualified experts and does not scale to
the fast demand of various commercial applications.
In this paper, we aim to learn a generative model of synthetic scenes that, by exploiting a graphics engine, produces
labeled datasets with a content distribution matching that of
imagery captured in the desired real-world datasets. Our
Meta-Sim builds on top of probabilistic scene grammars
which are commonly used in gaming and graphics to create diverse and valid virtual environments. In particular, we
assume that the structure of the scenes sampled from the
14551

