Single-Stage Multi-Person Pose Machines
Xuecheng Nie1
1

Jiashi Feng1

Jianfeng Zhang1

Shuicheng Yan1,2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2

Yitu Technology

niexuecheng@u.nus.edu elefjia@nus.edu.sg

elezji@nus.edu.sg

shuicheng.yan@yitu-inc.cn

Abstract
Multi-person pose estimation is a challenging problem.
Existing methods are mostly two-stage based—one stage
for proposal generation and the other for allocating poses
to corresponding persons. However, such two-stage methods generally suffer low efficiency. In this work, we present
the first single-stage model, Single-stage multi-person Pose
Machine (SPM), to simplify the pipeline and lift the efficiency for multi-person pose estimation. To achieve this,
we propose a novel Structured Pose Representation (SPR)
that unifies person instance and body joint position representations. Based on SPR, we develop the SPM model that
can directly predict structured poses for multiple persons in
a single stage, and thus offer a more compact pipeline and
attractive efficiency advantage over two-stage methods. In
particular, SPR introduces the root joints to indicate different person instances and human body joint positions are
encoded into their displacements w.r.t. the roots. To better
predict long-range displacements for some joints, SPR is
further extended to hierarchical representations. Based on
SPR, SPM can efficiently perform multi-person poses estimation by simultaneously predicting root joints (location of
instances) and body joint displacements via CNNs. Moreover, to demonstrate the generality of SPM, we also apply
it to multi-person 3D pose estimation. Comprehensive experiments on benchmarks MPII, extended PASCAL-PersonPart, MSCOCO and CMU Panoptic clearly demonstrate the
state-of-the-art efficiency of SPM for multi-person 2D/3D
pose estimation, together with outstanding accuracy.

1. Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation from a single monocular
RGB image aims to simultaneously isolate and locate body
joints of multiple person instances. It is a fundamental yet
challenging task with broad applications in action recognition [7], person Re-ID [32], pedestrian tracking [2], etc.
Existing methods typically adopt two-stage solutions.
As shown in Figure 1 (b), they either follow the top-

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) our single-stage solution and (b)
existing two-stage solution to multi-person pose estimation. The
proposed SPM model directly predicts structured poses of multiple
persons in a single stage, offering a more compact pipeline and
attractive efficiency advantages over two-stage based top-down or
bottom-up strategies. See more details in the main text.

down strategy [12, 35, 17, 9, 8, 34] that employs off-theshelf detectors to localize person instances at first and then
locates their joints individually; or the bottom-up strategy [3, 16, 26, 31, 25] that locates all the body joints at first
and then assigns them to the corresponding person. Though
with high accuracy, these methods are not efficient as they
require two-stage processing to predict human poses with
computational redundancy. We observe that such a requirement mainly comes from the conventional pose representation they adopt. As shown in Figure 2 (b), absolute positions of allocated body joints separate the position information w.r.t. person instances and body joints, each of which
requires a stage to process, leading to low efficiency.

6951

