Real Image Denoising with Feature Attention
Saeed Anwar ∗, Nick Barnes †
Data61, CSIRO and The Australian National University, Australia.

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks perform better
on images containing spatially invariant noise (synthetic
noise); however, their performance is limited on real-noisy
photographs and requires multiple stage network modeling. To advance the practicability of denoising algorithms,
this paper proposes a novel single-stage blind real image
denoising network (RIDNet) by employing a modular architecture. We use a residual on the residual structure to
ease the flow of low-frequency information and apply feature attention to exploit the channel dependencies. Furthermore, the evaluation in terms of quantitative metrics and visual quality on three synthetic and four real noisy datasets
against 19 state-of-the-art algorithms demonstrate the superiority of our RIDNet.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is a low-level vision task that is essential in a number of ways. First of all, during image acquisition, some noise corruption is inevitable and can downgrade the visual quality considerably; therefore, removing
noise from the acquired image is a key step for many computer vision and image analysis applications [28]. Secondly, denoising is a unique testing ground for evaluating image prior and optimization methods from a Bayesian
perspective [30, 67]. Furthermore, many image restoration tasks can be solved in the unrolled inference through
variable splitting methods by a set of denoising subtasks,
which further widens the applicability of image denoising [3, 33, 51, 64].
Generally, denoising algorithms can be categorized as
model-based and learning-based. Model-based algorithms
include non-local self-similarity (NSS) [18, 13, 20], sparsity [30, 48], gradient methods [46, 56, 54], Markov random
field models [52], and external denoising priors [9, 61, 42].
The model-based algorithms are computationally expensive, time-consuming, unable to suppress the spatially variant noise directly and characterize complex image textures.

Noisy

CBDNet [31]

RIDNet (Ours)

Figure 1. A real noisy face image from RNI15 dataset [38]. Unlike CBDNet [31], RIDNet does not have over-smoothing or overcontrasting artifacts (Best viewed in color on high-resolution display)

On the other hand, discriminative learning aims to model
the image prior from a set of noisy and ground-truth image
sets. One technique is to learn the prior in steps in the context of truncated inference [17] while another approach is
to employ brute force learning, for example, MLP [14] and
CNN methods [63, 64]. CNN models [65, 31] improved
denoising performance, due to their modeling capacity, network training, and design. However, the performance of the
current learning models is limited and tailored for a specific
level of noise.
A practical denoising algorithm should be efficient, flexible, perform denoising using a single model and handle
both spatially variant and invariant noise when the noise
standard-deviation is known or unknown. Unfortunately,
the current state-of-the-art algorithms are far from achieving all of these aims. We present a CNN model which is
efficient and capable of handling synthetic as well as realnoise present in images. We summarize the contributions of
this work in the following paragraphs.

1.1. Contributions
• Present CNN based approaches for real image denoising employ two-stage models; we present the first
model that provides state-of-the-art results using only
one stage.
• To best of our knowledge, our model is the first to incorporate feature attention in denoising.
• Most current models connect the weight layers consecutively; and so increasing the depth will not help
improve performance [21, 41]. Also, such networks

∗ B: saeed.anwar@csiro.au
† B: nick.barnes@csiro.au

13155

