Flare in Interference-Based Hyperspectral Cameras
Eden Sassoon, Yoav Y. Schechner
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

Tali Treibitz
Charney School of Marine Sciences
University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel

eden.sas8@gmail.com, yoav@ee.technion.ac.il

ttreibitz@univ.haifa.ac.il

Abstract
Stray light (flare) is formed inside cameras by internal reflections between optical elements. We point out
a flare effect of significant magnitude and implication to
snapshot hyperspectral imagers. Recent technologies enable placing interference-based filters on individual pixels
in imaging sensors. These filters have narrow transmission
bands around custom wavelengths and high transmission
efficiency. Cameras using arrays of such filters are compact, robust and fast. However, as opposed to traditional
broad-band filters, which often absorb unwanted light, narrow band-pass interference filters reflect non-transmitted
light. This is a source of very significant flare which biases
hyperspectral measurements. The bias in any pixel depends
on spectral content in other pixels. We present a theoretical image formation model for this effect, and quantify it
through simulations and experiments. In addition, we test
deflaring of signals affected by such flare.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imagers are increasingly used in computer vision [3, 5, 6, 14, 20, 25, 27, 29], as in other
imaging domains, e.g. remote sensing [15], ecology [21,
30] and biomedical imaging. Various architectures of
hyperspectral cameras have different tradesoffs of spatial/spectral/temporal resolutions and light gathering efficiency (i.e., signal to noise ratio). For example, RGB cameras have high spatiotemporal resolution but poor spectral
resolution (only three wide bands). Line-scan hyperspectral cameras have high spatio-spectral resolution but scanning slows acquisition, hence limiting temporal resolution.
Recent technological developments enable snapshot hyperspectral cameras (SHYCs) which are fast, compact, robust
and especially suitable for autonomous vehicles. They are
based on a set of pixel-sized narrow-band interference filters that are mounted directly over high-resolution sensors,
behind a lens [1, 11, 17, 23, 28]. SHYCs sacrifice some

Figure 1. An example of 16 narrow-band interference filters [26]
mounted onto a detector array in the Imec SNm4x4 VIS sensor.
Each batch of 16 filters is mounted in a mosaic of 4 × 4 pixels,
which generalizes the 2 × 2 Bayer pattern of RGB cameras. Such
a sensor trades off spatial resolution for increased spectral resolution. However, interference filters are highly reflective. [Insert]
The XIMEA MQ022HG-IM-SM4X4-VIS C-mount camera that
features this sensor, used in our experiments.

spatial resolution for spectral resolution, as shown in Fig. 1.
In this paper we show that such sensors bear a significant
degradation (see Fig. 2): stray light (flare), which is much
stronger than lens-flare encountered in traditional technologies. Hyperspectral cameras generally seek to resolve well
defined, narrow spectral bands. However, the transmitted
signal energy decreases as a pass-band narrows. Hence,
there is an important need for efficiency of light transfer,
minimizing energy loss in the spectral band that passes to
the detector. Meeting these two needs can be engineered
using established theory and tools, based on interference.
Interference filters have very efficient optical transfer, and
can yield very narrow bands. These filters are sometimes
termed Fabry-Pérot (FP) etalons [7]. However, we point
out a caveat in the context of imaging: FP filters in use have
very high reflectivity. This leads to very strong flare.
Flare also exists in everyday RGB cameras and has been
studied both in the computer vision and graphics communi110174

