ClothFlow: A Flow-Based Model for Clothed Person Generation
Xintong Han

Xiaojun Hu Weilin Huang∗ Matthew R. Scott
Malong Technologies, Shenzhen, China
Shenzhen Malong Artificial Intelligence Research Center, Shenzhen, China
{xinhan,xiahu,whuang,mscott}@malong.com

Abstract
We present ClothFlow, an appearance-flow-based generative model to synthesize clothed persons for posedguided person image generation and virtual try-on. By estimating a dense flow between source and target clothing regions, ClothFlow effectively models the geometric changes
and naturally transfers the appearance to synthesize novel
images as shown in Figure 1. We achieve this with a threestage framework: 1) Conditioned on a target pose, we first
estimate a person semantic layout to provide richer guidance to the generation process. 2) Built on two feature pyramid networks, a cascaded flow estimation network then accurately estimates the appearance matching between corresponding clothing regions. The resulting dense flow warps
the source image to flexibly account for deformations. 3)
Finally, a generative network takes the warped clothing regions as inputs and renders the target view. We conduct
extensive experiments on the DeepFashion dataset for poseguided person image generation and on the VITON dataset
for the virtual try-on task. Strong qualitative and quantitative results validate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Pose-guided person generation [28] is of great importance in a plethora of real-world applications, especially for
fashion industry where customers or stylists wish to transfer clothing from one person to another. Recent advances
in generative networks for image-to-image translation inspired researchers to tackle this problem by feeding a source
image and a target pose as input, and then synthesizing
the target image [28, 31, 29]. Yet, the non-rigid nature of
clothes might cause drastic deformations and severe occlusions which cannot be properly handled [18], thus limiting
their performance on rendering clothing details (e.g., patterns, graphics, logos) in the target view.
To overcome this issue, methods of two different
*Weilin Huang is the corresponding author.

paradigms are used to take the geometric deformation
into consideration for better appearance transfer, namely
deformation-based methods and DensePose-based methods. Deformation-based methods [14, 39, 36, 4] estimate
a transformation, either affine or thin plate spine (TPS),
to deform the source image pixels or CNN feature maps
to deal with the misalignment introduced by pose differences. However, despite great improvements have been
achieved by these two geometric modeling techniques, they
only have limited degrees of freedom (e.g., 6 for affine and
2 × 5 × 5 for TPS as in [39]), which leads to inaccurate and
unnatural transformation estimations when large geometric
changes occur.
Recently, a few approaches [30, 12, 42] take DensePose
[1] descriptor as inputs instead of tradition 2D keypoints for
pose-guided person generation. DensePose is able to map
human pixels of a 2D image to the 3D human body surface, allowing it to convey 3D geometry information of the
body. This makes it much easier to obtain the texture correspondence between source and target images even with
large spatial deformation. However, warping 2D image textures to the predefined surface-based coordinate system further introduces artifacts. For example, holes can be produced in positions that are invisible in the source image,
which need to be addressed by complicated texture inpainting algorithms. At the same time, as estimating DensePose
is highly challenging, the synthesized results are usually affected by the performance of a DensePose estimator. Thus
the DensePose transferred results might look less photorealistic than the deformation-based methods [30] .
To address the problems in existing methods, we propose
ClothFlow, a flow-based generative model to accurately estimate the clothing deformation between source and target
images for better synthesizing clothed person. Specifically,
ClothFlow consists of 3 stages as shown in Figure 2:
(1) A conditional layout generator first predicts the target human body segmentation layout conditioned on the
target pose. This disentangles the generation of shape and
appearance, allowing ClothFlow to generate more spatially
coherent results.
110471

