Embedded Block Residual Network: A Recursive Restoration Model for
Single-Image Super-Resolution
Yajun Qiu ∗
Yunnan University

Ruxin Wang ∗
Union Vision Innovation

Dapeng Tao †
Yunnan University

qyjyun@gmail.com

rosinwang@gmail.com

dapeng.tao@gmail.com

Jun Cheng
SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences
jun.cheng@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Single-image super-resolution restores the lost structures and textures from low-resolved images, which has
achieved extensive attention from the research community.
The top performers in this field include deep or wide convolutional neural networks, or recurrent neural networks.
However, the methods enforce a single model to process all
kinds of textures and structures. A typical operation is that a
certain layer restores the textures based on the ones recovered by the preceding layers, ignoring the characteristics
of image textures. In this paper, we believe that the lowerfrequency and higher-frequency information in images have
different levels of complexity and should be restored by
models of different representational capacity. Inspired by
this, we propose a novel embedded block residual network
(EBRN) which is an incremental recovering progress for
texture super-resolution. Specifically, different modules in
the model restores information of different frequencies. For
lower-frequency information, we use shallower modules of
the network to recover; for higher-frequency information,
we use deeper modules to restore. Extensive experiments
indicate that the proposed EBRN model achieves superior
performance and visual improvements against the state-ofthe-arts.

1. Introduction
Single-image super-resolution (SISR) has attracted extensive attention in both academia and industry. This technique aims at recovering a high-resolved (HR) image from
a single low-resolved (LR) one, which offers an opportunity of overcoming resolution limitations in various computer
∗ These authors contributed equally to the work.
† D.Tao is the corresponding author.

(a) HR

(b) EDSR

(c) Ours

Figure 1. The Barbara image from the Set14 dataset with an upscaling factor 4.

vision applications, such as security, medical imaging [37],
and object recognition [3]. The problem of SISR is ill-posed
since there exist multiple HR solutions for any LR input. To
overcome this issue, most methods such as those based on
deep convolutional neural networks constrain the solution
space by learning a mapping function from external lowand high-resolution exemplar pairs or by involving a priori
knowledge on the HR feature space.
Learning-based methods are placed in the top performers in literatures, especially deep or wide convolutional neural networks because of their high representational capacity.
With extensive parameters and a good learning process, the
models have the ability of fitting on a large number of training data and that of exploiting the underlying structures of
natural images. Most methods advocate to design an endto-end learning process that facilitates both training and inference. The performance improvement in such a design
comes from an increase of the parameter number and the
elaboration of neural connection. However, the resultant
complex models usually raise high consumption of computation and memory, which hinders their real-world applications.
The reason of the above issue is that the deep modelbased methods fail to consider the frequency characteristics
of images which is, however, widely used in conventional image processing techniques. The characteristics state

4180

