Cross-Dataset Person Re-Identification
via Unsupervised Pose Disentanglement and Adaptation
Yu-Jhe Li1,2,3 , Ci-Siang Lin1,2 , Yan-Bo Lin1 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2,3
1
National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare, Taiwan
3
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services, Taiwan
{d08942008, d08942011, r06942048, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims at recognizing the
same person from images taken across different cameras.
On the other hand, cross-dataset/domain re-ID focuses on
leveraging labeled image data from source to target domains, while target-domain training data are without label information. In order to introduce discriminative ability
and to generalize the re-ID model to the unsupervised target
domain, our proposed Pose Disentanglement and Adaptation Network (PDA-Net) learns deep image representation
with pose and domain information properly disentangled.
Our model allows pose-guided image recovery and translation by observing images from either domain, without predefined pose category nor identity supervision. Our qualitative and quantitative results on two benchmark datasets
confirm the effectiveness of our approach and its superiority
over state-of-the-art cross-dataset re-ID approaches.

1. Introduction
Given a query image containing a person (e.g., pedestrian, suspect, etc.), person re-identification (re-ID) [59]
aims at matching images with the same identity across nonoverlapping camera views. Person re-ID has been among
active research topics in computer vision due to its practical applications to smart cities and large-scale surveillance
systems. In order to tackle the challenges like visual appearance changes or occlusion in practical re-ID scenarios,
several works have been proposed [4, 23, 36, 45, 46, 62].
However, such approaches require a large amount of labeled
data for training, and this might not be applicable for realwork applications.
Since it might be computationally expensive to collect
identity labels for the dataset of interest, one popular solution is to utilize an additional yet distinct source-domain
dataset. This dataset contains fully labeled images (but

Figure 1: Existing cross-dataset re-ID methods like [12]
perform style transfer followed by feature extraction for
re-ID, which might limit image variants to be observed.
We choose to perform pose disentanglement and adaption
with domain-invariant features jointly learned, alleviating
the above issue with improved image representation.
with different identities) captured by a different set of cameras. Thus, the goal of cross-domain/dataset person re-ID is
to extract and adapt useful information from source to the
target-domain data of interest, so that re-ID at the targetdomain can be addressed accordingly. Since no label is observed for the target-domain data during training, one typically views the aforementioned setting as a unsupervised
learning task.
Several methods for cross-dataset re-ID have been proposed [13, 15, 42, 49, 54, 58, 61]. For example, Deng et
al. [13] employ CycleGAN to covert labeled images from
source to target domains, followed by performing re-ID at
the target domain. Similarly, Zhong et al. [61] utilize StarGAN [11] to learn camera invariance and domain connectedness simultaneously. On the other hand, Lin et al. [35]
employ Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) for learning
mid-level feature alignment across data domains for cross-

7919

