Cross-X Learning for Fine-Grained Visual Categorization
Wei Luo1,2

Xitong Yang2 Xianjie Mo1 Yuheng Lu2,5 Larry S. Davis2
Jun Li3 Jian Yang4 Ser-Nam Lim5
1
South China Agricultural University 2 University of Maryland, College Park
3
MIT 4 Nanjing University of Science and Technology 5 Facebook AI
{cswluo,yangxitongbob,cedricmo.cs,junl.mldl,sernam}@gmail.com
{ylu,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Recognizing objects from subcategories with very subtle differences remains a challenging task due to the large
intra-class and small inter-class variation. Recent work
tackles this problem in a weakly-supervised manner: object
parts are first detected and the corresponding part-specific
features are extracted for fine-grained classification. However, these methods typically treat the part-specific features
of each image in isolation while neglecting their relationships between different images. In this paper, we propose
Cross-X learning, a simple yet effective approach that exploits the relationships between different images and between different network layers for robust multi-scale feature learning. Our approach involves two novel components: (i) a cross-category cross-semantic regularizer that
guides the extracted features to represent semantic parts
and, (ii) a cross-layer regularizer that improves the robustness of multi-scale features by matching the prediction distribution across multiple layers. Our approach can be easily trained end-to-end and is scalable to large datasets like
NABirds. We empirically analyze the contributions of different components of our approach and demonstrate its robustness, effectiveness and state-of-the-art performance on
five benchmark datasets. Code is available at https:
//github.com/cswluo/CrossX.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) aims at classifying objects from very similar categories, e.g. subcategories of birds [30, 10], dogs [14] and cars [16]. It has
long been considered as a challenging task due to the large
intra-class and small inter-class variation, as well as the deficiency of annotated data. Benefiting from the progress
of deep neural networks [17, 27, 29, 9], the recognition
performance of FGVC has improved steadily in recent

csjyang@njust.edu.cn

years and the community has more recently focused on
weakly-supervised FGVC that obviates the need of laborintensive part-based annotation. There are two main approaches to weakly-supervised FGVC, namely, exploiting
relationships between fine-grained labels to regularize feature learning [31, 35] and localizing discriminative parts for
part-specific feature extraction [6, 37]. Compared to labelrelationship based methods, the localization-based methods have the advantages of extracting fine-grained features
from local regions where subtle differences between subcategories usually exist.
Early work on localization-based methods typically
adopts a multi-stage learning framework: part detectors are
first obtained by training on DCNN features [36] or exploiting the hidden representations in DCNNs [34, 26, 40], and
then used to extract part-specific features for fine-grained
classification. More recent work merges these two stages
into an end-to-end learning framework that utilizes the final
objective to optimize both part localization and fine-grained
classification at the same time [6, 42, 37, 32]. These methods localize semantic parts independently on each image
while neglecting the relationships between the part-specific
features from different images. [28] explores the relationships between object parts by proposing a soft attentionbased model. The model first generates attention region
features of each input image via multiple excitation modules and then guides the attention features to have semantic
meaning by adopting a metric learning framework. However, the improvement from their model is limited as optimizing such a metric learning loss is challenging and involves a non-trivial sample selection procedure [33].
We propose Cross-X learning, a simple but effective approach that leverages the relationships between different
images and between different network layers for robust finegrained recognition. Similar to [28], our approach first generates attention region features via multiple excitation modules, but it further involves two novel components: a crosscategory cross-semantic regularizer (C 3 S) and a cross-layer

8242

