A2J: Anchor-to-Joint Regression Network for 3D Articulated Pose Estimation
from a Single Depth Image
Fu Xiong1∗ , Boshen Zhang1∗ , Yang Xiao1† , Zhiguo Cao1 , Taidong Yu1 , Joey Tianyi Zhou2 , and
Junsong Yuan3
1
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multi-Spectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
3
IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore
CSE Department, State University of New York at Buffalo
xiongfu, zhangbs, Yang_Xiao, zgcao, taidongyu@hust.edu.cn,
joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com, jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Index tip

Abstract
For 3D hand and body pose estimation task in depth
image, a novel anchor-based approach termed Anchor-toJoint regression network (A2J) with the end-to-end learning ability is proposed. Within A2J, anchor points able to
capture global-local spatial context information are densely set on depth image as local regressors for the joints. They
contribute to predict the positions of the joints in ensemble
way to enhance generalization ability. The proposed 3D
articulated pose estimation paradigm is different from the
state-of-the-art encoder-decoder based FCN, 3D CNN and
point-set based manners. To discover informative anchor
points towards certain joint, anchor proposal procedure is
also proposed for A2J. Meanwhile 2D CNN (i.e., ResNet50) is used as backbone network to drive A2J, without using
time-consuming 3D convolutional or deconvolutional layers. The experiments on 3 hand datasets and 2 body datasets
verify A2J’s superiority. Meanwhile, A2J is of high running
speed around 100 FPS on single NVIDIA 1080Ti GPU.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of low-cost depth camera, 3D
hand and body pose estimation from a single depth image draws much attention from computer vision community with wide-range application scenarios (e.g., HCI and
AR) [32, 33]. Despite recent remarkable progress [20, 42,
26, 18, 19, 7, 33, 50, 41, 3], it is still a challenging task
due to the issues of dramatic pose variation, high similarity
among the different joints, self-occlusion, etc [20, 42, 37].
Most of state-of-the-art 3D hand and body pose estimation approaches rely on deep learning technology. Never*Fu Xiong and Boshen Zhang devote the equal contribution.
†Yang Xiao is the corresponding author (Yang_Xiao@hust.edu.cn).

Index mid

Depth image

Palm

Anchor point
Predicted offset

Informative anchor point
Ground-truth joint

Figure 1. The main idea of anchor-based 3D pose estimation
paradigm within A2J. The densely set anchor points predict the
positions of joints with weighted aggregation. The different joints
possess the different informative anchor points of high weights
(i.e., > 0.02), which reveals A2J’s adaptive characteristics.

theless, they still suffer from some defects. First, encoderdecoder based FCN manners [2, 43, 27, 4, 42, 41, 26] are
generally trained with non-adaptive ground-truth Gaussian
heatmap for different joints and with relatively high computational burden. Meanwhile, most of them cannot be fully
end-to-end trained towards 3D pose estimation task [35].
Secondly, 3D CNN models [16, 10, 26] are difficult to train
with costly voxelizing procedure, due to the large number of
convolutional parameters. Additionally, point-set based approaches [14, 17] require some extra time-consuming preprocessing treatments (e.g., point sampling).
Thus, we attempt to address 3D hand and body pose
estimation problem using a novel anchor-based approach
termed Anchor-to-Joint regression network (A2J). The pro-

793

