Free-Form Image Inpainting with Gated Convolution
Jiahui Yu1

Zhe Lin2
1

Jimei Yang2

Xiaohui Shen3

Xin Lu2

Thomas Huang1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Adobe Research
3
ByteDance AI Lab

Figure 1: Free-form image inpainting results by our system built on gated convolution. Each triad shows original image,
free-form input and our result from left to right. The system supports free-form mask and guidance like user sketch. It helps
user remove distracting objects, modify image layouts and edit faces in images.

Abstract
We present a generative image inpainting system to complete images with free-form mask and guidance. The system is based on gated convolutions learned from millions of
images without additional labelling efforts. The proposed
gated convolution solves the issue of vanilla convolution
that treats all input pixels as valid ones, generalizes partial
convolution by providing a learnable dynamic feature selection mechanism for each channel at each spatial location
across all layers. Moreover, as free-form masks may appear
anywhere in images with any shape, global and local GANs
designed for a single rectangular mask are not applicable.
Thus, we also present a patch-based GAN loss, named SNPatchGAN, by applying spectral-normalized discriminator
on dense image patches. SN-PatchGAN is simple in formulation, fast and stable in training. Results on automatic
image inpainting and user-guided extension demonstrate
that our system generates higher-quality and more flexible results than previous methods. Our system helps user
quickly remove distracting objects, modify image layouts,
clear watermarks and edit faces. Code, demo and models
are available at: https://github.com/JiahuiYu/

generative_inpainting.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting (a.k.a. image completion or image
hole-filling) is a task of synthesizing alternative contents in
missing regions such that the modification is visually realistic and semantically correct. It allows to remove distracting
objects or retouch undesired regions in photos. It can also
be extended to tasks including image/video un-cropping, rotation, stitching, re-targeting, re-composition, compression,
super-resolution, harmonization and many others.
In computer vision, two broad approaches to image inpainting exist: patch matching using low-level image features and feed-forward generative models with deep convolutional networks. The former approach [3, 8, 9] can synthesize plausible stationary textures, but usually makes critical failures in non-stationary cases like complicated scenes,
faces and objects. The latter approach [15, 49, 45, 46, 38,
37, 48, 26, 52, 33, 35, 19] can exploit semantics learned
from large scale datasets to synthesize contents in nonstationary images in an end-to-end fashion.
However, deep generative models based on vanilla con-

4471

