Weakly Supervised Temporal Action Localization through Contrast based
Evaluation Networks
Ziyi Liu1 Le Wang1∗ Qilin Zhang2 Zhanning Gao3 Zhenxing Niu4 Nanning Zheng1 Gang Hua5
1
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
HERE Technologies 3 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
4
Machine Intelligence Israel Lab, Alibaba Group 5 Wormpex AI Research
Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WSTAL) is a promising but challenging task with only videolevel action categorical labels available during training.
Without requiring temporal action boundary annotations in
training data, WS-TAL could possibly exploit automatically retrieved video tags as video-level labels. However, such
coarse video-level supervision inevitably incurs confusions, especially in untrimmed videos containing multiple action instances. To address this challenge, we propose the
Contrast-based Localization EvaluAtioN Network (CleanNet) with our new action proposal evaluator, which provides
pseudo-supervision by leveraging the temporal contrast in
snippet-level action classification predictions. Essentially,
the new action proposal evaluator enforces an additional
temporal contrast constraint so that high-evaluation-score
action proposals are more likely to coincide with true action
instances. Moreover, the new action localization module
is an integral part of CleanNet which enables end-to-end
training. This is in contrast to many existing WS-TAL methods where action localization is merely a post-processing
step. Experiments on THUMOS14 and ActivityNet datasets
validate the efficacy of CleanNet against existing state-ofthe-art WS-TAL algorithms.

1. Introduction
Temporal Action Localization (TAL) involves the localization of temporal starts and ends of speciﬁc categories of
actions. Thanks to its numerous potential applications such
as action retrieval, surveillance, and summary [1, 6, 18, 29],
TAL has drawn increasing attention from the research community recently.
However, it could still be time-consuming and prohibitively expensive to manually label the temporal ranges
of all action instances in untrimmed videos for a large-scale
∗ Corresponding author.

dataset. A more cost-effective alternative setting could be
the weakly supervised temporal action localization (WSTAL) that only relies on video-level categorical labels for
training. The advantage of WS-TAL is in its training data
collection, video-level labels are much easier to collect than
temporal action boundaries. It might even be possible to
automatically retrieve corresponding hashtags from video
sharing website as labels. However, to be more focused and
less ambitious, we limit the scope of our investigation to
manually annotated video-level labels.
Currently, many existing WS-TAL methods [21, 23, 32,
37] localize actions by directly thresholding the classiﬁcation score of each snippet. Therefore, those snippets are independently treated and their temporal relations are neglected. However, true action boundaries often depend heavily
on the temporal contrast among those snippets, such as temporal discontinuities and sudden changes.
We propose a Contrast-based Localization EvaluAtioN
Network (CleanNet) for WS-TAL, which leverages the temporal contrast cue among action classiﬁcation predictions
of snippets for action proposal evaluation. As illustrated in
Figure 1, CleanNet consists of a feature embedding, an action classiﬁcation, and an action localization module.
Given an untrimmed video input, snippet-level features
are ﬁrst extracted by the feature embedding. Subsequently, action classiﬁcation produces Snippet-level Classiﬁcation Predictions (SCP) and Snippet-level Attention Predictions (SAP), which are fused to get a video-level prediction
by weighted summation multiplication. With the obtained
video-level prediction and the video-level categorical label,
the classiﬁcation loss is calculated and the action classiﬁcation is trained by minimizing it.
Meanwhile, after acquiring SCP and SAP, action localization proceeds to compute the “contrast score” for each
action proposal provided by the action proposal generator.
Then, only action proposals with higher contrast scores are
kept and action localization is trained by maximizing the
average contrast score of these survival proposals. During
testing, after scoring all action proposals, duplicated action
13899

