DSIC: Deep Stereo Image Compression
Jerry Liu ‡, Shenlong Wang, and Raquel Urtasun
Uber ATG
jerryl@uber.com, slwang@uber.com, urtasun@uber.com

Abstract
In this paper we tackle the problem of stereo image
compression, and leverage the fact that the two images
have overlapping fields of view to further compress the
representations. Our approach leverages state-of-the-art
single-image compression autoencoders and enhances the
compression with novel parametric skip functions to feed
fully differentiable, disparity-warped features at all levels
to the encoder/decoder of the second image. Moreover,
we model the probabilistic dependence between the image
codes using a conditional entropy model. Our experiments
show an impressive 30 - 50% reduction in the second image
bitrate at low bitrates compared to deep single-image
compression, and a 10 - 20% reduction at higher bitrates.

1. Introduction
Many applications such as autonomous vehicles and 3D
movies involve the use of stereo camera pairs. These
arrays of cameras oftentimes capture and store massive
quantities of data per day, which require good image
compression algorithms to ensure an efficient use of space.
A naive approach to image compression would be to
compress the image streams from each camera separately.
However, this ignores the shared information given by the
overlapping fields of view between the cameras. Hence,
there is a need for compression methods that can efficiently
compress a stereo image pair further by utilizing the shared
information.
Stereo image compression can be seen as in-between
the work of image and video compression. While we
get to utilize shared information between two images, we
are not able to exploit the spatial-temporal redundancies
within a tightly coupled image sequence. There has been
an abundance of work on traditional multi-view and stereo
compression [12, 14] as well as deep-learning based image
and video compression [5, 33, 36, 49]. However, the space
of deep multi-view compression is relatively unexplored.
‡ Work done as part of the Uber AI Residency program.

In this work, we present a novel end-to-end deep
architecture for stereo image compression.
Our
contributions revolve around trying to extract as much
information out of the first image in order to reduce the
bitrate of the second. Towards this goal we leverage
state-of-the-art single-image compression autoencoders,
and enhance them with novel parametric skip functions to
feed fully differentiable, disparity-warped features at all
levels to the encoder/decoder of the second image. This
allow us to store fewer bits for the second image code
since multi-level information is being passed from the
encoder/decoder of the first image. Moreover, we model
the probabilistic dependence between the image codes
using a conditional entropy model. Since the codes of a
stereo pair are highly correlated with each other, a model
that can capture this dependence will help reduce the joint
entropy, and hence the joint bitrate, of the two latent codes.
We demonstrate a 30 - 50% reduction in the second
image bitrate at low bitrates compared to deep singleimage compression, and a 10 - 20% reduction at higher
bitrates, when evaluated over an internal self-driving
dataset (NorthAmerica), as well as stereo images from
Cityscapes. Our experiments additionally demonstrate
that we outperform all image codecs and motioncompensation+residual coding baselines on MS-SSIM, a
perceptual metric capturing the structural quality of an
image.

2. Background and Related Work
We start this section with a brief overview of deep image
compression algorithms, including the general formulation
and previous works. We then discuss related work on deep
video compression, multi-view compression and stereo
estimation, respectively.

2.1. A Review on Deep Image Compression
There has been a plethora of work on learned, singleimage, lossy image compression [44, 45, 4, 5, 43, 31, 35,
33, 24]. These works generally use nonlinear transforms
through convolutional neural network (CNN) layers to
encode an image into a latent space, which is then quantized

3136

