Exploiting Spatial-temporal Relationships for 3D Pose Estimation via
Graph Convolutional Networks ∗
Yujun Cai1 , Liuhao Ge1 , Jun Liu1 , Jianfei Cai1,2 , Tat-Jen Cham1 , Junsong Yuan3 , Nadia Magnenat Thalmann1
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Monash University, Australia
3
State University of New York at Buffalo University, Buffalo, NY, USA
{yujun001, ge0001ao, jliu029}@e.ntu.edu.sg
{asjfcai, astjcham}@ntu.edu.sg, jsyuan@buffalo.edu, nadiathalmann@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Despite great progress in 3D pose estimation from
single-view images or videos, it remains a challenging task
due to the substantial depth ambiguity and severe selfocclusions. Motivated by the effectiveness of incorporating
spatial dependencies and temporal consistencies to alleviate these issues, we propose a novel graph-based method
to tackle the problem of 3D human body and 3D hand
pose estimation from a short sequence of 2D joint detections. Particularly, domain knowledge about the human
hand (body) configurations is explicitly incorporated into
the graph convolutional operations to meet the specific demand of the 3D pose estimation. Furthermore, we introduce
a local-to-global network architecture, which is capable of
learning multi-scale features for the graph-based representations. We evaluate the proposed method on challenging
benchmark datasets for both 3D hand pose estimation and
3D body pose estimation. Experimental results show that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on both
tasks.

1. Introduction
3D pose estimation that involves estimating 3D joint locations of a human hand or body from single-view images
or videos is a fast-growing research area and has aroused
long-standing research attention in the past decades[11, 47,
48], since it plays a significant role in numerous appli∗ This research is supported by the BeingTogether Centre, a collaboration between Nanyang Technological University (NTU) Singapore and
University of North Carolina (UNC) at Chapel Hill. The BeingTogether
Centre is supported by the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under its International Research Centres in Singapore Funding Initiative. This research is also supported in part by Singapore MoE Tier-2 Grant (MOE2016-T2-2-065) and start-up funds from
University at Buffalo.

Figure 1. Graphical spatial-temporal dependencies between different joints of (a) full human body, and (b) human hand. The temporal edges connect the same joints between consecutive frames and
the spatial edges represent the natural connections of each frame.
For easy illustration, we only plot the whole spatial connections on
the front frame of the spatial-temporal graph, including the direct
physical connections (solid line) and the indirect “symmetrical”
relations (dashed curve). We color-code the joints to show different parts of the human body (hand).

cations such as gesture recognition, robotics and humancomputer interactions. Despite the tremendous success
achieved in recent years [8, 27, 28, 38, 44, 5, 16, 49, 25, 13],
it remains a challenging problem due to the frequent selfocclusions and substantial depth ambiguity in 2D representations.
Many existing works [3, 12, 17, 29, 54, 53, 15, 14] rely
on effective 2D pose estimation frameworks to first localize
the 2D keypoints on the image plane, and then lift 3D poses
from the estimated 2D joint positions. Additionally, recent
works [12, 17, 29] have shown that well-designed deep networks can achieve competitive performance in 3D pose estimation using only 2D joint detections as input. However, it
is worth noting that estimating 3D poses from 2D representations is inherently an ill-posed problem, since there may
exist multiple valid 3D interpretations for a single 2D skele-

2272

