Taking a HINT: Leveraging Explanations to Make
Vision and Language Models More Grounded
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju1
Stefan Lee1,4
Yilin Shen2
Hongxia Jin2
Shalini Ghosh2
Larry Heck2
Dhruv Batra1,3
Devi Parikh1,3
1
2
3
Georgia Institute of Technology, Samsung Research, Facebook AI Research, 4 Oregon State University
{ramprs, steflee, dbatra, parikh}@gatech.edu
{yilin.shen, hongxia.jin, shalini.ghosh, larry.h}@samsung.com

Abstract
Many vision and language models suffer from poor visual grounding – often falling back on easy-to-learn language priors rather than basing their decisions on visual
concepts in the image. In this work, we propose a generic
approach called Human Importance-aware Network Tuning
(HINT) that effectively leverages human demonstrations to
improve visual grounding. HINT encourages deep networks
to be sensitive to the same input regions as humans. Our
approach optimizes the alignment between human attention
maps and gradient-based network importances – ensuring
that models learn not just to look at but rather rely on visual concepts that humans found relevant for a task when
making predictions. We apply HINT to Visual Question Answering and Image Captioning tasks, outperforming top approaches on splits that penalize over-reliance on language
priors (VQA-CP and robust captioning) using human attention demonstrations for just 6% of the training data.

1. Introduction
Many popular and well-performing models for multimodal, vision-and-language tasks exhibit poor visual
grounding – failing to appropriately associate words or
phrases with the image regions they denote and relying instead on superficial linguistic correlations [2, 1, 39, 11, 13].
For example, answering the question ‘What color are the
bananas?’ with yellow regardless of their ripeness evident
in the image. When challenged with datasets that penalize reliance on these sort of biases [2, 11], state-of-the-art
models demonstrate significant drops in performance despite there being no change to the set of visual and linguistic
concepts about which models must reason.
In addition to these diagnostic datasets, another powerful class of tools for observing this shortcoming has
been gradient-based explanation techniques [30, 38, 29, 25]
which allow researchers to examine which portions of the

Figure 1: Our approach, HINT, aligns visual explanations for
output decisions of a pretrained model with spatial input regions
deemed important by human annotators – forcing models to base
their decisions on these same region and reducing model bias.

input models rely on when making decisions. Application of these techniques has shown that vision-and-language
models often focus on seemingly irrelevant image regions
that differ significantly from where human subjects fixate
when asked to perform the same tasks [7, 26] – e.g. focusing
on a produce stand rather than the bananas in our example.
While somewhat dissatisfying, these findings are not entirely surprising – after all, standard training protocols do
not provide any guidance for visual grounding. Instead,
models are trained on input-output pairs and must resolve
grounding from co-occurrences – a challenging task, especially in the presence of more direct and easier to learn correlations in language. Consider our previous example question, the words ‘color’, ‘banana’, and ‘yellow’ are given as
discrete tokens that will trivially match in every occurrence
when these underlying concepts are referenced. In contrast,
actually grounding this question requires dealing with all visual variations of bananas and learning the common feature
of things described as ‘yellow’. To address this, we explore
if giving a small hint in the form of human attention demonstrations can help improve grounding and reliability.
For the dominant paradigm of vision-and-language models that compute an explicit question-guided attention over
image regions [28, 33, 14, 35, 20, 3], a seemingly straight12591

