CARAFE: Content-Aware ReAssembly of FEatures
Jiaqi Wang1 Kai Chen1 Rui Xu1 Ziwei Liu1 Chen Change Loy2 Dahua Lin1
1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Nanyang Technological University
{wj017,ck015,xr018,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

zwliu.hust@gmail.com

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Feature upsampling is a key operation in a number of
modern convolutional network architectures, e.g. feature
pyramids. Its design is critical for dense prediction tasks
such as object detection and semantic/instance segmentation. In this work, we propose Content-Aware ReAssembly
of FEatures (CARAFE), a universal, lightweight and highly
effective operator to fulfill this goal. CARAFE has several
appealing properties: (1) Large field of view. Unlike previous works (e.g. bilinear interpolation) that only exploit subpixel neighborhood, CARAFE can aggregate contextual information within a large receptive field. (2) Content-aware
handling. Instead of using a fixed kernel for all samples
(e.g. deconvolution), CARAFE enables instance-specific
content-aware handling, which generates adaptive kernels
on-the-fly. (3) Lightweight and fast to compute. CARAFE
introduces little computational overhead and can be readily integrated into modern network architectures. We conduct comprehensive evaluations on standard benchmarks
in object detection, instance/semantic segmentation and inpainting. CARAFE shows consistent and substantial gains
across all the tasks (1.2% AP, 1.3% AP, 1.8% mIoU, 1.1dB
respectively) with negligible computational overhead. It
has great potential to serve as a strong building block for
future research. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection.

1. Introduction
Feature upsampling is one of the most fundamental operations in deep neural networks. On the one hand, for
the decoders in dense prediction tasks (e.g. super resolution [6, 17], inpainting [11, 29] and semantic segmentation [39, 4]), the high-level/low-res feature map is upsampled to match the high-resolution supervision. On the other
hand, feature upsampling is also involved in fusing a highlevel/low-res feature map with a low-level/high-res feature
map, which is widely adopted in many state-of-the-art architectures, e.g., Feature Pyramid Network [18], U-Net [31]

Reassembly Center

Reassembled Region

Upsample

Figure 1: Illustration of CARAFE working mechanism. Left:
Multi-level FPN features from Mask R-CNN (left to dotted line)
and Right: Mask R-CNN with CARAFE (right to dotted line). For
sampled locations, this figure shows the accumulated reassembled
regions in the top-down pathway of FPN. Information inside such
a region is reassembled into the corresponding reassembly center.
and Stacked Hourglass [26]. Therefore, designing effective
feature upsampling operator becomes a critical issue.
The most widely used feature upsampling operators
are the nearest neighbor and bilinear interpolations, which
adopt spatial distance between pixels to guide the upsampling process. However, nearest neighbor and bilinear interpolations only consider sub-pixel neighborhood, failing
to capture the rich semantic information required by dense
prediction tasks. Another route toward adaptive upsampling
is deconvolution [27]. A deconvolution layer works as an
inverse operator of a convolution layer, which learns a set
of instance-agnostic upsampling kernels. However, it has
two major drawbacks. Firstly, a deconvolution operator applies the same kernel across the entire image, regardless of
the underlying content. This restricts its capability of responding to local variations. Second, it comes with a large

3007

