Algebraic Characterization of Essential Matrices and Their Averaging
in Multiview Settings
Yoni Kasten*

Amnon Geifman*
Meirav Galun
Weizmann Institute of Science

Ronen Basri

{yoni.kasten,amnon.geifman,meirav.galun,ronen.basri}@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Essential matrix averaging, i.e., the task of recovering
camera locations and orientations in calibrated, multiview
settings, is a first step in global approaches to Euclidean
structure from motion. A common approach to essential matrix averaging is to separately solve for camera orientations
and subsequently for camera positions. This paper presents
a novel approach that solves simultaneously for both camera orientations and positions. We offer a complete characterization of the algebraic conditions that enable a unique
Euclidean reconstruction of n cameras from a collection
of (n2 ) essential matrices. We next use these conditions to
formulate essential matrix averaging as a constrained optimization problem, allowing us to recover a consistent set
of essential matrices given a (possibly partial) set of measured essential matrices computed independently for pairs
of images. We finally use the recovered essential matrices
to determine the global positions and orientations of the n
cameras. We test our method on common SfM datasets,
demonstrating high accuracy while maintaining efficiency
and robustness, compared to existing methods.

1. Introduction

What algebraic conditions make a collection of n2 essential matrices consistent, in the sense that there exist n
Euclidean camera matrices that produce them? This fundamental question has not yet been answered in the literature.
It is well known that 32 = 3 fundamental matrices are consistent if, and only if, the epipole of the third view is transferred correctly between each pair of views, i.e., for every
1 ≤ i, j, k ≤ 3, eTik Fij ejk = 0. Recent work [15] presented a set of
 sufficient and necessary algebraic conditions
that make n2 fundamental matrices in general position consistent. One could expect that essential matrices that fulfill
those same conditions would be consistent with respect to
Euclidean camera matrices. However, these conditions are
*Equal contributors

not sufficient and can be contradicted by a counter example,
see one such construction in the supplementary material.
Establishing consistency constraints for essential matrices is an important step toward producing essential matrix
averaging algorithms. Given n images I1 , .., In , a common
approach for global Structure from Motion (SfM) begins
by robustly estimating essential matrices between pairs of
views, {Eij }, from which an estimate of the relative pairwise rotations {Rij } and translations {tij } are extracted.
Motion averaging then is performed typically in two steps:
first the absolute camera orientations {Ri } are solved by averaging the relative rotations. Then, using the relative translations and the recovered absolute orientations, the absolute
camera positions {ti } are recovered. Finally, the obtained
solution is refined by bundle adjustment.
Our goal in this paper is to establish a complete set of
necessary and sufficient conditions for the consistency of
essential matrices and to use these conditions to formulate
a one-step algorithm for averaging essential matrices. To
achieve this goal we investigate an object called the n-views

essential matrix, which is obtained by stacking the n2 essential matrices into a 3n × 3n matrix whose i, j’th 3 × 3
block is the essential matrix Eij relating the i’th and the j’th
frames. We prove that, in addition to projective consistency
(introduced in [15]), this matrix must have three pairs of
eigenvalues each of the same magnitude but opposite signs,
and its eigenvectors directly encode camera parameters.
We use these results to introduce the first (to the best
of our knowledge) essential matrix averaging
algorithm.

Given a noisy estimate of a subset of n2 essential matrices,
our algorithm seeks to find the nearest consistent set of essential matrices. We formulate this problem as constrained
optimization and solve it using ADMM. We then incorporate this algorithm in a global SfM pipeline and evaluate
our pipeline on the datasets of [25], showing superior accuracies relative to state of the art methods on almost all image
collections while also maintaining efficiency.
15895

