LayoutVAE: Stochastic Scene Layout Generation From a Label Set
Akash Abdu Jyothi1,3 , Thibaut Durand1,3 , Jiawei He1,3 , Leonid Sigal2,3 , Greg Mori1,3
1
2
3
Simon Fraser University
University of British Columbia
Borealis AI
{aabdujyo, tdurand, jha203}@sfu.ca

lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
Recently there is an increasing interest in scene generation within the research community. However, models used for generating scene layouts from textual description largely ignore plausible visual variations within the
structure dictated by the text. We propose LayoutVAE, a
variational autoencoder based framework for generating
stochastic scene layouts. LayoutVAE is a versatile modeling framework that allows for generating full image layouts
given a label set, or per label layouts for an existing image given a new label. In addition, it is also capable of
detecting unusual layouts, potentially providing a way to
evaluate layout generation problem. Extensive experiments
on MNIST-Layouts and challenging COCO 2017 Panoptic dataset verifies the effectiveness of our proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Scene generation, which usually consists of realistic generation of multiple objects under a semantic layout, remains
one of the core frontiers of computer vision. Despite the
rapid progress and recent successes in object generation
(e.g., celebrity face, animals, etc.) [1, 9, 13] and scene generation [4, 11, 12, 19, 22, 30, 31], little attention has been
paid to frameworks designed for stochastic semantic layout
generation. Having a robust model for layout generation
will not only allow us to generate reliable scene layouts,
but also provide priors and means to infer latent relationships between objects, advancing progress in the scene understanding domain.
A plausible semantic layout calls for reasonable spatial
and count relationships (relationships between the number
of instances of different labels) between objects in a scene
[5, 27]. For example, a person would either ride (on top of )
a horse, or stand next to a horse, but seldom would he be under a horse. Another example would be that the number of
ties would very likely be smaller than or equal to the number
of people in an image. The first example shows an instance
of a plausible spatial relationship and the second shows a

Figure 1: Several images from COCO that have the same
label set: person, surfboard and sea. Given this simple label
set, we observe that a large and diverse set of layouts is
plausible.

case of a generic count relationship. Such intrinsic relationships buried in high-dimensional visual data are usually
learned implicitly by mapping the textual description to visual data. However, since the textual description can always
be treated as an abstraction of the visual data, the process
becomes a one-to-many mapping. In other words, given the
same text information as a condition, a good model should
be able to generate multiple plausible images all of which
satisfy the semantic description.
Previous works focused on a popular simplified instance
of the problem described above: scene generation based on
sentence description [6, 11, 12, 19, 24, 25, 30]. A typical
sentence description includes partial information on both
the background and objects, along with details of the objects’ appearances and scene layout. These frameworks rely
heavily on the extra relational information provided by the
sentence. As a result, although these methods manage to
generate realistic scenes, they tend to ignore learning the
intrinsic relationships between the objects, prohibiting the
wide adoption of such models where weaker descriptions
are provided.
In this work, we consider a more sophisticated problem:

9895

