Deep End-to-End Alignment and Refinement for Time-of-Flight RGB-D Module
Di Qiu1,2∗
Jiahao Pang1∗
Wenxiu Sun1
Chengxi Yang1
1
2
SenseTime Research
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
sylvesterqiu@gmail.com, jpang@connect.ust.hk, {sunwenxiu,yangchengxi}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Recently, it is increasingly popular to equip mobile RGB
cameras with Time-of-Flight (ToF) sensors for active depth
sensing. However, for off-the-shelf ToF sensors, one must
tackle two problems in order to obtain high-quality depth
with respect to the RGB camera, namely 1) online calibration and alignment; and 2) complicated error correction
for ToF depth sensing. In this work, we propose a framework for jointly alignment and refinement via deep learning.
First, a cross-modal optical flow between the RGB image
and the ToF amplitude image is estimated for alignment.
The aligned depth is then refined via an improved kernel
predicting network that performs kernel normalization and
applies the bias prior to the dynamic convolution. To enrich
our data for end-to-end training, we have also synthesized
a dataset using tools from computer graphics. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach,
achieving state-of-the-art for ToF refinement.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, RGB-D camera modules based on Timeof-Flight (ToF) sensors are becoming increasingly popular for mobile devices. At an affordable cost, it provides
portable active depth measurements. In general, compared
to monocular or stereo camera modules [12, 18, 22, 29, 30],
ToF sensors provide higher precision depth values for shortrange distance sensing [16]. However, off-the-shelf ToF
RGB-D camera modules have two problems:
(i) Perspective difference: The depth measurements are
initially defined from the perspective of the ToF sensor, thus alignment between the depth images and
RGB images is necessary;
(ii) Erroneous measurements: depth measurements of
ToF sensors suffer from different types of error such
as multi-path interference, noise, etc.
∗ Both authors contributed equally. Jiahao Pang is the corresponding
author, this work was done while he was with SenseTime.

(a) Unaligned erroneous depth image.

(b) Our result.

Figure 1: Proposed framework of alignment and refinement of
ToF depth images for weakly calibrated ToF RGB-D module. The
scene is chosen from our synthetic ToF-FlyingThings3D dataset.

These two problems hamper the direct usage of ToF RGBD camera modules for applications such as computational
photography, augmented reality and video entertainment.
Multi-view geometry sheds light on the first problem. In
fact, pixel correspondences between the RGB image and the
ToF amplitude image can be computed given the true depth
from the perspective of either of the images accompanied
with the full set of camera parameters [17]. However, under dynamic changes during deployment, mobile ToF RGBD camera parameters can seldom be calibrated once and for
all. In fact, modern RGB cameras are often equipped with
optical image stabilization (OIS) systems which dynamically changes the principal points, alongside with other mild
calibration degradation to the ToF RGB-D camera module.
These impacts can be sufficiently modeled by the changes
of the principal point cx , cy of the RGB camera, and the
relative translation parameters tx , ty [7, 37]; while the rest
of the parameters can be viewed as unchanged. Hence, it
brings the need of performing online calibration and alignment for ToF RGB-D camera modules.
With the above practical setup, we assume the ToF
sensor and the RGB camera have already been calibrated
with standard procedure, e.g., with [38], and therefore having known initial camera parameters. However, the set
of parameters {cx , cy , tx , ty } changes during deployment.
We call such ToF RGB-D camera modules weakly calibrated. As a result, in the following we also assume both
the ToF amplitude images and the ToF depth images pro-

9994

