Learnable Triangulation of Human Pose
Karim Iskakov 1
1

Egor Burkov 1,2

Samsung AI Center, Moscow

2

Victor Lempitsky 1,2

Yury Malkov 1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow

{k.iskakov, e.burkov, v.lempitsky, y.malkov}@samsung.com

Abstract
We present two novel solutions for multi-view 3D human
pose estimation based on new learnable triangulation methods that combine 3D information from multiple 2D views.
The first (baseline) solution is a basic differentiable algebraic triangulation with an addition of confidence weights
estimated from the input images. The second solution is
based on a novel method of volumetric aggregation from
intermediate 2D backbone feature maps. The aggregated
volume is then refined via 3D convolutions that produce final 3D joint heatmaps and allow implicit modelling a human pose prior. Crucially, both approaches are end-toend differentiable, which allows us to directly optimize the
target metric. We demonstrate transferability of the solutions across datasets and considerably improve the multiview state of the art on the Human3.6M dataset. Video
demonstration, annotations and additional materials will
be posted on our project page1 .

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision, with applications in
sports, action recognition, computer-assisted living, humancomputer interfaces, special effects, and telepresence. To
date, most of the efforts in the community are focused on
monocular 3D pose estimation. Despite a lot of recent
progress, the problem of in-the-wild monocular 3D human
pose estimation is far from being solved. Here, we consider
a simpler yet still challenging problem of multi-view 3D
human pose estimation.
There are at least two reasons why multi-view human
pose estimation is interesting. First, multi-view pose estimation is arguably the best way to obtain ground truth
for monocular 3D pose estimation [5, 27] in-the-wild. This
is because the competing techniques such as marker-based
motion capture [13] and visual-inertial methods [24] have
1 https://saic-violet.github.io/
learnable-triangulation

certain limitations such as inability to capture rich pose
representations (e.g. to estimate hands pose and face pose
alongside limb pose) as well as various clothing limitations.
The downside is, previous works that used multi-view triangulation for constructing datasets relied on excessive, almost impractical number of views to get the 3D ground truth
of sufficient quality [5, 27]. This makes the collection of
new in-the-wild datasets for 3D pose estimation very challenging and calls for the reduction of the number of views
needed for accurate triangulation.
The second motivation to study multi-view human pose
estimation is that, in some cases, it can be used directly to
track human pose in real-time for the practical end purpose.
This is because multi-camera setups are becoming progressively available in the context of various applications, such
as sports or computer-assisted living. Such practical multiview setups rarely go beyond having just a few views. At
the same time, in such a regime, modern multi-view methods have accuracy comparable to well-developed monocular methods [22, 15, 6, 20, 16]. Thus, improving the accuracy of multi-view pose estimation from few views is an
important challenge with direct practical applications.
In this work, we argue that given its importance, the task
of multi-view pose estimation has received disproportionately little attention. We propose and investigate two simple and related methods for multi-view human pose estimation. Behind both of them lies the idea of learnable triangulation, which allows us to dramatically reduce the number of views needed for accurate estimation of 3D pose.
During learning, we either use marker based motion capture ground truth or “meta”-ground truth obtained from the
excessive number of views. The methods themselves are
as follows: (1) a simpler approach based on algebraic triangulation with learnable camera-joint confidence weights,
and (2) a more complex volumetric triangulation approach
based on dense geometric aggregation of information from
different views that allows implicitly modelling a human
pose prior. Crucially, both of the proposed solutions are
fully differentiable, which permits end-to-end training.
Below, we review related work in monocular and multiview human pose estimation, and then discuss the details

7718

