SpatialSense: An Adversarially Crowdsourced Benchmark for
Spatial Relation Recognition
Kaiyu Yang
Princeton University

Olga Russakovsky
Princeton University

Jia Deng
Princeton University

kaiyuy@cs.princeton.edu

olgarus@cs.princeton.edu

jiadeng@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Understanding the spatial relations between objects in
images is a surprisingly challenging task (Fig. 1). A chair
may be “behind” a person even if it appears to the left of the
person in the image (depending on which way the person is
facing). Two students that appear close to each other in the
image may not in fact be “next to” each other if there is a
third student between them.
We introduce SpatialSense, a dataset specializing in spatial relation recognition which captures a broad spectrum
of such challenges, allowing for proper benchmarking of
computer vision techniques. SpatialSense is constructed
through adversarial crowdsourcing, in which human annotators are tasked with finding spatial relations that are
difficult to predict using simple cues such as 2D spatial
configuration or language priors. Adversarial crowdsourcing significantly reduces dataset bias and samples more
interesting relations in the long tail compared to existing datasets. On SpatialSense, state-of-the-art recognition models perform comparably to simple baselines, suggesting that they rely on straightforward cues instead of
fully reasoning about this complex task. The SpatialSense
benchmark provides a path forward to advancing the spatial reasoning capabilities of computer vision systems. The
dataset and code are available at https://github.
com/princeton-vl/SpatialSense.

1. Introduction
Visual understanding of space is essential for an intelligent agent. Such an understanding is the basis for describing scenes and referring to objects [7]; it is also the foundation required for tasks such as navigation and manipulation [32]. To understand space it is important to understand
spatial relations, that is, how different spatial entities are
configured relative to each other to compose a scene. Consider the following description: “Inside the living room, under the window next to the wall is a table, on top of which
lies a vase with flowers”. The sentence may be structured in

dog in water

ball in front of kid

glasses on man

truck on chair

cloud above mountain

soldier above forest

Figure 1: Spatial relation recognition in images is a challenging task which requires a deep understanding of all the
objects in the image, their 3D configuration, and their interactions. Understanding that the dog is not in the water
(top left) requires reasoning about the pier in addition to the
dog and the water. Understanding that the ball is in fact in
front of the kid despite being off to the right in the image
space (top center) requires inferring the 3D spatial configuration. Properly evaluating computer vision abilities on this
task is difficult because it requires collecting a benchmark
covering the full spectrum of such challenges. We introduce
SpatialSense, a novel dataset collected through adversarial
crowdsourcing, which provides a diverse and challenging
testbed for the task of spatial relation recognition.
many different ways, but its meaning is determined by the
objects (room, window, table, vase, flowers) and their spatial relations (table in room, table under window, table next
to wall, vase on table, flowers in vase).
This raises the problem of spatial relation recognition:
given two objects in a scene, what is their spatial relation?
This problem is important, interesting, and challenging because the semantics of spatial relations are rich and complex. The spatial semantics between objects depend not
only on geometric properties such as location, pose, and
shape, but also the frame of reference (e.g. “left of the car”
can be relative to the observer or the car) and object-specific
common sense knowledge (e.g. “hand over bed” does not

2051

