Calibration of Axial Fisheye Cameras Through Generic Virtual Central Models
Pierre-André Brousseau and Sébastien Roy
Département d’informatique et de recherche opérationnelle
Université de Montréal
pierre-andre.brousseau@umontreal.ca, roys@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract
Fisheye cameras are notoriously hard to calibrate using traditional plane-based methods. This paper proposes
a new calibration method for large field of view cameras.
Similarly to planar calibration, it relies on multiple images
of a planar calibration grid with dense correspondences,
typically obtained using structured light. By relying on the
grids themselves instead of the distorted image plane, we
can build a rectilinear Generic Virtual Central (GVC) camera. Instead of relying on a single GVC camera, our method
proposes a selection of multiple GVC cameras which can
cover any field of view and be trivially aligned to provide
a very accurate generic central model. We demonstrate that
this approach can directly model axial cameras, assuming
the distortion center is located on the camera axis. Experimental validation is provided on both synthetic and real
fisheye cameras featuring up to a 280◦ field of view. To our
knowledge, this is one of the only practical methods to calibrate axial cameras.

1. Introduction
Fisheye lens calibration is a type of calibration which
is becoming very common since the emergence of low
cost high quality fisheye lenses for applications such as
immersive imaging as well as industrial and automotive
applications. These lenses can feature very large fields of
view (FoV). Modern fisheyes can see as much as 280◦ (see
Fig. 7), with large amount of radial distortion and significant axial displacement of the optical center, essentially
making them non-single viewpoint, which do not comply with standard lens models [5, 16]. Simple OpenCv
tools fail completely at calibrating these kinds of cameras
and current methods are either planar and limited to 180◦
or non-planar which makes them impractical. This paper proposes a calibration method adapted to these kinds
of lenses, which are described as generic axial cameras.
We tackle a slightly more constrained version of the axial
model, which we identify as Generic Quasi-Central cam-

z
v

z

α

α

r
u
dz
x

x

Figure 1: Central and Axial models. In the fisheye image (left), points at increased radius r correspond to increased ray angles α in a central camera (middle) as well
as increased center displacement dz in a quasi-central
camera (right).

era.
Similarly to traditional planar calibration, the new
method makes use of multiple dense correspondences of
planar grids. It is known that a grid can be used as a
virtual image to build a Generic Virtual Central cameras,
which is free of distortion [2]. We propose to build multiple such virtual cameras, then calibrate and align them
to provide an accurate solution to the full central camera
model.
In order to recover the axial displacement of the optical center, an approach is presented for the generalization
of the generic central model into the quasi-central model.
This approach also relies on multiple GVC models, confirming their high accuracy. The paper is organized as
follows. In Section 2, previous work and generic camera
models are presented. The Generic Quasi-Central camera
model is presented in Section 3. The calibration method
for multiple Generic Virtual Central cameras is presented
in Section 4, followed by experimental validation and results in Section 5.

2. Previous Work
There has been a lot of work on the calibration of fisheye lenses [7, 18]. Most of this work relies on global
single viewpoint models. In this paper, the focus is on

4040

