Goal-Driven Sequential Data Abstraction
Umar Riaz Muhammad1

Yongxin Yang1 Timothy M. Hospedales2 Tao Xiang1
1
2
University of Surrey
University of Edinburgh

Yi-Zhe Song1

{u.muhammad, yongxin.yang, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Automatic data abstraction is an important capability
for both benchmarking machine intelligence and supporting summarization applications. In the former one asks
whether a machine can ‘understand’ enough about the
meaning of input data to produce a meaningful but more
compact abstraction. In the latter this capability is exploited for saving space or human time by summarizing the
essence of input data. In this paper we study a general reinforcement learning based framework for learning to abstract sequential data in a goal-driven way. The ability to
define different abstraction goals uniquely allows different
aspects of the input data to be preserved according to the ultimate purpose of the abstraction. Our reinforcement learning objective does not require human-defined examples of
ideal abstraction. Importantly our model processes the input sequence holistically without being constrained by the
original input order. Our framework is also domain agnostic – we demonstrate applications to sketch, video and text
data and achieve promising results in all domains.

1. Introduction
Abstraction is generally defined in the context of specific applications [5, 20, 39, 7, 23, 27]. In most cases it
refers to elimination of redundant elements, and preservation of the most salient and important aspects of the data.
It is an important capability for various reasons: compression [12] and saving human time in viewing the data [29];
but also improving downstream data analysis tasks such as
information retrieval [2], and synthesis [14, 27].
We present a novel goal-driven abstraction task for sequential data (see Fig. 1). Sequential refers to data with
temporal order – we consider video, sequentially drawn
sketches, and text. Goal-driven refers to preservation of a
certain aspect of the input according to a specific abstraction objective or goal. The same input may lead to different abstracted outputs depending on the abstraction goal.
For example, prioritizing preserving sentiment vs. helpfulness in product review text could lead to different sum-

Sequential data input

I love that the inside is set up like shelves. My son loves to
organize his trains in it. I don't like how thin the metal is. It
dents as easy as a cola can.
If it were made better, it would
be worth the money. Save your money on this.
AU: atomic unit

AU

AU

AU

AU

AU

AU

Goal-driven abstraction

Goal - category (parade)

Goal - category (owl/rabbit)

Goal - sentiment (negative)

Goal - attribute (humans)

Goal - attribute (eyes/tail)

Goal - category (toys)

Videos

Sketch

Text

Figure 1. An illustration of our goal-driven abstraction task. Each
input (video, sketch or text) consists of a sequence of atomic units
(AUs) corresponding to video-segments, strokes and sentences for
the three input domains, respectively. The AUs are color coded.
Depending on the abstraction goal, different AUs are preserved in
each abstracted output.

maries. It is important not to confuse our new goal-driven
abstraction setting with traditional video/text summarization [15, 16, 42, 51, 37, 6, 28, 30, 46]. The aims are different: the latter produces a single compact but diverse and
representative summary, often guided by human annotations, while ours yields various goal-conditional compact
summaries. Our problem setting is also more amenable
to training without ground-truth labels (i.e., manual goldstandard but subjective summaries) commonly required by
contemporary video/text summarization methods.
To tackle this novel problem, new approaches are
needed. To this end, we propose a goal-driven sequential data abstraction model with the following key properties: (1) It processes the input sequence holistically rather
than being constrained by the original input order. (2) It is
trained by reinforcement learning (RL), rather than supervised learning. This means that expensively annotated data
in the form of target abstractions are not required. (3) Different goals are introduced via RL reward functions. Besides eliminating the annotation requirement, this enables

71

