Cluster Alignment with a Teacher for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Zhijie Deng, Yucen Luo, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Lab, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University
{dzj17, luoyc15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Existing methods

Abstract
Deep learning methods have shown promise in unsupervised domain adaptation, which aims to leverage a labeled
source domain to learn a classifier for the unlabeled target
domain with a different distribution. However, such methods typically learn a domain-invariant representation space
to match the marginal distributions of the source and target
domains, while ignoring their fine-level structures. In this
paper, we propose Cluster Alignment with a Teacher (CAT)
for unsupervised domain adaptation, which can effectively
incorporate the discriminative clustering structures in both
domains for better adaptation. Technically, CAT leverages
an implicit ensembling teacher model to reliably discover
the class-conditional structure in the feature space for the
unlabeled target domain. Then CAT forces the features of
both the source and the target domains to form discriminative class-conditional clusters and aligns the corresponding clusters across domains. Empirical results demonstrate
that CAT achieves state-of-the-art results in several unsupervised domain adaptation scenarios.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable performance in a
wide variety of computer vision tasks, such as image recognition [15] and object detection [33]. However, classifiers
trained on specific datasets cannot always generalize effectively to new datasets owing to the well-known domain
shift problem [5, 43]. Enabling models to generalize from
a source domain to a target domain is usually referred to
as domain adaptation (DA) [1]. In many cases, it is expensive or difficult to collect annotations on the target domain. Learning algorithms attempting to tackle the transferring problem from a fully labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain is called unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [10]. UDA is particularly challenging because
the target domain cannot provide explicit information to facilitate the adaptation of classifiers.
∗ Corresponding author.

Existing methods

Adapted

Adapted

Source

Source

CAT

CAT

Target

Target
Source

Target

Classiﬁer

Figure 1: (Best viewed in color.) Left: The two domains
have diverse modes. Right: The two domains have different class imbalance ratios. Existing methods aligning the
marginal distributions while ignoring the class-conditional
structures cannot perform well in these cases. However,
CAT incorporates the discriminative clustering structures
in both domains for better adaptation, thus delivers a more
reasonable domain-invariant cluster-structure feature space
with enhanced discriminative power. See Fig. 3 and Appendix. A for the learned feature space of real data.
Recently, deep models have been developed with
promise in unsupervised domain adaptation to learn expressive features [45, 7, 22, 20, 44, 23, 37, 39, 36]. These deep
UDA methods mainly focus on matching the source and target domains via adversarial training [7, 44, 2, 20, 23, 49, 37,
13] or kernelized training [22, 23, 24]. The main hypothesis behind them is that the marginal distributions of the two
domains can be aligned in some feature space learned by
optimizing a deep network, and thus the classifier trained
with source data tends to perform well on the target domain.
Theoretical analysis [1] also shows that minimizing the divergence between the marginal distributions in the learned
feature space is beneficial to reduce the classifier’s error.
However, these methods are not problemless. In classification, as the classes correspond to different semantics
and different characteristics, the marginal distribution of the
data naturally has a class-conditional multi-modal structure.
Moreover, the modes corresponding to the same class in different domains are not always geometrically similar. Thus,
it is not sufficient for existing deep UDA methods to only
minimize the discrepancy between the marginal distributions while neglecting their structures, and such methods
tend to fail in challenging cases, such as those in Fig. 1.

9944

