Deep Multiple-Attribute-Perceived Network for Real-world Texture Recognition
Wei Zhai , Yang Cao , Jing Zhang , Zheng-Jun Zha
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China
UBTECH Sydney Artiﬁcial Intelligence Centre, The University of Sydney
wzhai056@mail.ustc.edu.cn, forrest,zhazj@ustc.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Texture recognition is a challenging visual task as multiple perceptual attributes may be perceived from the same
texture image when combined with different spatial context. Some recent works building upon Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) incorporate feature encoding with orderless aggregating to provide invariance to spatial layouts. However, these existing methods ignore visual texture attributes, which are important cues for describing the
real-world texture images, resulting in incomplete description and inaccurate recognition. To address this problem,
we propose a novel deep Multiple-Attribute-Perceived Network (MAP-Net) by progressively learning visual texture
attributes in a mutually reinforced manner. Speciﬁcally, a
multi-branch network architecture is devised, in which cascaded global contexts are learned by introducing similarity constraint at each branch, and leveraged as guidance
of spatial feature encoding at next branch through an attribute transfer scheme. To enhance the modeling capability of spatial transformation, a deformable pooling strategy
is introduced to augment the spatial sampling with adaptive offsets to the global context, leading to perceive new
visual attributes. An attribute fusion module is then introduced to jointly utilize the perceived visual attributes and
the abstracted semantic concepts at each branch. Experimental results on the ﬁve most challenging texture recognition datasets have demonstrated the superiority of the proposed model against the state-of-the-arts.

Figure 1. The part
shows that textures usually have multiple
shows that the images with
visual texture attributes. The part
different concepts may have the same visual texture attribute. The
word above the image represents the concept to which the image
belongs, and the words below the image represent the visual texture attributes contained in the image. All of the above images are
from DTD datasets [2]

tant mid-level image representation for natural scene understanding. The remarkable robustness of texture representation to local image deformations, variable illumination and
occlusions, as well as its describable attributes for characterizing object, make it beneﬁcial for many applications,
such as image retrieval, terrain classiﬁcation and industrial visual inspection [19, 35, 27].
Texture recognition has been widely studied in the past
years [19]. The classic approaches, such as texton histograms [6, 16, 22, 33], or bag-of-words [4, 15] usually
apply a set of handcrafted ﬁlter banks to transform texture
image into local features, and then aggregate them into a
global representation. Recently, signiﬁcant progresses on
texture recognition have been achieved by deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs). M. Cimpoi et al. [3]
ﬁrstly introduce pre-trained CNNs into texture feature encoding for robust representation. Lin et al. [18] use a bilinear module instead of fully connected layers to capture the
second-order variation of texture feature. To achieve spa-

1. Introduction
Texture refers to the fundamental microstructure of natural images and a preattentive visual cue of human perception [34, 10]. Since textural properties summarize not only
the ﬁne-scale details (e.g. leaf veins) but also describe the
rough semantic concepts (e.g. leaf), they forms an imporco-ﬁrst author
corresponding author

3613

