PANet: Few-Shot Image Semantic Segmentation with Prototype Alignment
Kaixin Wang 1
Jun Hao Liew 2
Yingtian Zou 2
Daquan Zhou 1
Jiashi Feng 2
1
NGS, National University of Singapore 2 ECE Department, National University of Singapore
{kaixin.wang, liewjunhao}@u.nus.edu

{elezouy, elefjia}@nus.edu.sg

zhoudaquan21@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite the great progress made by deep CNNs in image
semantic segmentation, they typically require a large number of densely-annotated images for training and are difficult to generalize to unseen object categories. Few-shot segmentation has thus been developed to learn to perform segmentation from only a few annotated examples. In this paper, we tackle the challenging few-shot segmentation problem from a metric learning perspective and present PANet,
a novel prototype alignment network to better utilize the
information of the support set. Our PANet learns classspecific prototype representations from a few support images within an embedding space and then performs segmentation over the query images through matching each pixel to
the learned prototypes. With non-parametric metric learning, PANet offers high-quality prototypes that are representative for each semantic class and meanwhile discriminative
for different classes. Moreover, PANet introduces a prototype alignment regularization between support and query.
With this, PANet fully exploits knowledge from the support
and provides better generalization on few-shot segmentation. Significantly, our model achieves the mIoU score of
48.1% and 55.7% on PASCAL-5i for 1-shot and 5-shot settings respectively, surpassing the state-of-the-art method by
1.8% and 8.6%.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has greatly advanced the development of
semantic segmentation with a number of CNN based architectures like FCN [13], SegNet [1], DeepLab [2] and
PSPNet [29]. However, training these models typically
requires large numbers of images with pixel-level annotations which are expensive to obtain. Semi- and weaklysupervised learning methods [26, 3, 9, 15] alleviate such
requirements but still need many weakly annotated training
images. Besides their hunger for training data, these models
also suffer rather poor generalizability to unseen classes. To
deal with the aforementioned challenges, few-shot learning,
which learns new concepts from a few annotated examples,
has been actively explored, mostly concentrating on image

Figure 1: Overview of our model (PANet) for few-shot segmentation. PANet first maps the support and query images
into embedding features (circles and triangles respectively)
and learns prototypes for each class (blue and yellow solid
circles). Segmentation over the query is then performed by
matching its features to a nearest prototype within the embedding space (dashed lines). PANet further introduces a
prototype alignment regularization during training to align
the prototypes from support and query images within the
embedding space by performing few-shot segmentation reversely from query to support (right panel). Segmentation
masks with dashed border denote ground truth annotations.
classification [25, 23, 24, 18, 6, 20, 12, 14] and a few targeting at segmentation tasks [21, 17, 4, 28, 4, 8].
Existing few-shot segmentation methods generally learn
from a handful of support images and then feed learned
knowledge into a parametric module for segmenting the
query. However, such schemes have two drawbacks and
thus generalize unsatisfactorily. First, they do not differentiate the knowledge extraction and segmentation process,
which may be problematic since the segmentation model
representation is mixed with the semantic features of the
support. We therefore propose to separate these two parts
as prototype extraction and non-parametric metric learning.
The prototypes are optimized to be compact and robust representations for each semantic class and the non-parametric
metric learning performs segmentation through pixel-level
matching within the embedding space. Moreover, instead
of using the annotations of the support only for masking as
in previous methods, we propose to leverage them also for

9197

