Semantic-Aware Knowledge Preservation for
Zero-Shot Sketch-Based Image Retrieval

1

Qing Liu1 , Lingxi Xie1,2, , Huiyu Wang1 , Alan L. Yuille1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Inc.

qingliu@jhu.edu, 198808xc@gmail.com, huiyu@jhu.edu, alan.l.yuille@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) is an important,
application-driven problem in computer vision [7, 14, 6,
15]. Given a hand-drawn sketch image as the query and a
large database of photo images as the gallery, the goal is to
find relevant images, i.e., those with similar visual contents
or the same object category, from the gallery. The most important issue of this task lies in finding a shared feature embedding for cross-modality data, which requires mapping
each sketch and photo image to a high-dimensional vector
in the feature space. In recent years, with the rapid devel-

Train
Forgotten

Taxi

race car

✗

car

Truck

SUV (unseen)
car

Minibus

car
Limousine

Ambulance

Previous
methods SBIR

Query

✗

Test

Query

Sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) is widely recognized as an important vision problem which implies a wide
range of real-world applications. Recently, research interests arise in solving this problem under the more realistic
and challenging setting of zero-shot learning. In this paper,
we investigate this problem from the viewpoint of domain
adaptation which we show is critical in improving feature
embedding in the zero-shot scenario. Based on a framework
which starts with a pre-trained model on ImageNet and finetunes it on the training set of SBIR benchmark, we advocate
the importance of preserving previously acquired knowledge, e.g., the rich discriminative features learned from ImageNet, to improve the model’s transfer ability. For this
purpose, we design an approach named Semantic-Aware
Knowledge prEservation (SAKE), which fine-tunes the pretrained model in an economical way and leverages semantic information, e.g., inter-class relationship, to achieve the
goal of knowledge preservation. Zero-shot experiments on
two extended SBIR datasets, TU-Berlin and Sketchy, verify the superior performance of our approach. Extensive
diagnostic experiments validate that knowledge preserved
benefits SBIR in zero-shot settings, as a large fraction of
the performance gain is from the more properly structured
feature embedding for photo images.

Pretrain
(ImageNet)

✓

Preserved

SUV

✓

Our
SAKE SBIR

Figure 1: An illustration of the ZS-SBIR task and our model.
Catastrophic forgetting is harmful, especially in zero-shot settings.
Our Semantic-Aware Knowledge prEservation (SAKE) preserves
original domain knowledge of rich visual features (e.g., visual details of different subtypes of cars) which helps distinguishing the
right photo candidates (e.g., SUV) from distractors (e.g., race car)
in the unseen classes.

opment of deep learning, researchers have introduced deep
neural networks into this field [22, 45, 21, 43, 37, 33, 30,
44, 42, 39]. In the conventional setting, it is assumed that
training and testing images are from the same set of object
categories, in which scenario existing approaches achieved
satisfying performance [22]. However, in real-world applications, there is no guarantee that the training set covers all
object categories in the gallery at the application stage.
This paper investigates this more challenging setting
in an extreme case. This setting is named zero-shot
sketch-based image retrieval (ZS-SBIR), which assumes
that classes in the target domain are unseen during the training stage. The goal of this setting is to test the model’s
ability to adapt learned knowledge to an unknown domain.
Experiments show that existing SBIR models generally produce low accuracy in this challenging setting [4, 35, 16],
possibly because they over-fitted the source domain and
meanwhile being unaware of the unseen categories. To
tackle this problem, we call for a model to simultaneously solve the problems of object recognition, cross-modal
13662

