Cross-View Policy Learning for Street Navigation
Ang Li1∗ Huiyi Hu1∗ Piotr Mirowski2 Mehrdad Farajtabar1
1
DeepMind, Mountain View, CA
2
DeepMind, London, UK
{anglili, clarahu, piotrmirowski, farajtabar}@google.com

Abstract
The ability to navigate from visual observations in unfamiliar environments is a core component of intelligent
agents and an ongoing challenge for Deep Reinforcement
Learning (RL). Street View can be a sensible testbed for
such RL agents, because it provides real-world photographic imagery at ground level, with diverse street appearances; it has been made into an interactive environment called StreetLearn and used for research on navigation. However, goal-driven street navigation agents have
not so far been able to transfer to unseen areas without extensive retraining, and relying on simulation is not a scalable solution. Since aerial images are easily and globally
accessible, we propose instead to train a multi-modal policy
on ground and aerial views, then transfer the ground view
policy to unseen (target) parts of the city by utilizing aerial
view observations. Our core idea is to pair the ground view
with an aerial view and to learn a joint policy that is transferable across views. We achieve this by learning a similar
embedding space for both views, distilling the policy across
views and dropping out visual modalities. We further reformulate the transfer learning paradigm into three stages:
1) cross-modal training, when the agent is initially trained
on multiple city regions, 2) aerial view-only adaptation to
a new area, when the agent is adapted to a held-out region
using only the easily obtainable aerial view, and 3) ground
view-only transfer, when the agent is tested on navigation
tasks on unseen ground views, without aerial imagery. Experimental results suggest that the proposed cross-view policy learning enables better generalization of the agent and
allows for more effective transfer to unseen environments.

1. Introduction
Stranded on Elephant Island after the shipwreck of the
Endurance expedition, Ernest Shackleton, Frank Worsley
and their crew attempted, on 24 April 1916, a risky 720∗ Equal contribution

aerial
view

ground
view

train

aerial
view

ground
view

adapt

transfer

Figure 1. The street navigation agent observes both ground and
aerial views in the training phase. The agent learns a viewinvariant policy to associate the two views. Once the policy is
learned, the agent becomes capable of continual training with interchangeable viewpoints. When being transferred to an unseen
area, the agent is adapted using only the aerial view observations,
which are easily accessible. The agent is then transferred to the
ground view environment (without access to aerial-view images)
for testing. Images: Google Maps and Street View.

mile open-boat journey to South Georgia. They had duly
studied the trajectory using nautical maps, but the latter
froze and became illegible. It is only through their extraordinary navigation skills, memory, and by transferring
knowledge derived from a top-view representation to visual and compass observations as they sailed, that they ultimately reached the shores of South Georgia two weeks later.
Such a feat has been cited as a prime example of complex
human spatial navigation in unknown environments [10]:
having gained expertise in navigating using both maps and
sea-level observations, they could adapt to an unknown environment by studying maps and then transfer that knowledge on their new journey.
The ability to navigate in familiar and unfamiliar environments is a core component of animal and artificial intelligence. The research on artificial agent navigation can be applied to real world domains ranging from the neuroscience
of grid and place cells in mammals [3, 9] to the autonomy
of indoor and outdoor mobile robots [49, 39, 31, 38, 45, 32].

8100

