Counting with Focus for Free
Zenglin Shi, Pascal Mettes, and Cees G. M. Snoek
University of Amsterdam
Image

Abstract
This paper aims to count arbitrary objects in images.
The leading counting approaches start from point annotations per object from which they construct density maps.
Then, their training objective transforms input images to
density maps through deep convolutional networks. We
posit that the point annotations serve more supervision purposes than just constructing density maps. We introduce
ways to repurpose the points for free. First, we propose
supervised focus from segmentation, where points are converted into binary maps. The binary maps are combined
with a network branch and accompanying loss function to
focus on areas of interest. Second, we propose supervised
focus from global density, where the ratio of point annotations to image pixels is used in another branch to regularize
the overall density estimation. To assist both the density
estimation and the focus from segmentation, we also introduce an improved kernel size estimator for the point annotations. Experiments on six datasets show that all our contributions reduce the counting error, regardless of the base
network, resulting in state-of-the-art accuracy using only a
single network. Finally, we are the first to count on WIDER
FACE, allowing us to show the benefits of our approach in
handling varying object scales and crowding levels. Code is
available at https://github.com/shizenglin/
Counting-with-Focus-for-Free

1. Introduction
This paper strives to count objects in images, whether
they are people in crowds [10,35,40], cars in traffic jams [7]
or cells in petri dishes [22]. The leading approaches for
this challenging problem count by summing the pixels in a
density map [13] as estimated with a convolutional neural
network, e.g. [3, 11, 14, 22]. While this line of work has
shown to be effective, the rich source of supervision from
the point annotations is only used to construct the density
maps for training. The premise of this work is that point
annotations can be repurposed to further supervise counting
optimization in deep networks, for free.
The main contribution of this paper is summarized in

Focus from segmentation

Point annotations

Non-uniform density map

Focus from global density

Figure 1: Focus for free in counting. From point supervision, we learn to obtain a focus from segmentation, a focus
from global density, and an improved density maps. Combined, they result in better counting estimation irrespective
of the base network.
Figure 1. Besides creating density maps, we show that
points can be exploited as free supervision signal in two
other ways. The first is focus from segmentation. From
point annotations, we construct binary segmentation maps
and use them in a separate network branch with an accompanying segmentation loss to focus on areas of interest only. The second is focus from global density. The
relative amount of point annotations in images is used to
focus on the global image density through another branch
and loss function. Both forms of focus are integrated with
the density estimation in a single network trained end-toend with a multi-level loss. In standard attention mechanisms [9, 12, 19, 33], the weighing map is indirectly learned
from a task-specific objective, e.g.image classification or
object counting. We also rely on task-specific supervision,
but we explicitly add novel supervised network branches
for the segment and density weighting maps. We derive the
necessary supervision from provided point annotations and
name it focus for free.
Overall, we make three contributions in this paper: (i)
We propose supervised focus from segmentation, a network
branch which guides the counting network to focus on areas of interest. The supervision is obtained from the already provided point annotations. (ii) We propose supervised focus from global density, a branch which regularizes the counting network to learn a matching global den14200

