Unsupervised Deep Learning for Structured Shape Matching
Jean-Michel Roufosse
LIX, École Polytechnique

Abhishek Sharma
LIX, École Polytechnique

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, École Polytechnique

jm.roufosse@gmail.com

kein.iitian@gmail.com

maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
We present a novel method for computing correspondences across 3D shapes using unsupervised learning. Our
method computes a non-linear transformation of given descriptor functions, while optimizing for global structural
properties of the resulting maps, such as their bijectivity
or approximate isometry. To this end, we use the functional maps framework, and build upon the recent FMNet
architecture for descriptor learning. Unlike that approach,
however, we show that learning can be done in a purely
unsupervised setting, without having access to any ground
truth correspondences. This results in a very general shape
matching method that we call SURFMNet for Spectral Unsupervised FMNet, and which can be used to establish correspondences within 3D shape collections without any prior
information. We demonstrate on a wide range of challenging benchmarks, that our approach leads to state-of-the-art
results compared to the existing unsupervised methods and
achieves results that are comparable even to the supervised
learning techniques. Moreover, our framework is an order
of magnitude faster, and does not rely on geodesic distance
computation or expensive post-processing.

Source descriptor before

Target descriptor before

1. Introduction
Shape matching is a fundamental problem in computer
vision and geometric data analysis, with applications in deformation transfer [42] and statistical shape modeling [6]
among other domains. During the past decades, a large
number of techniques have been proposed for both rigid
and non-rigid shape matching [44]. The latter case is both
more general and more challenging since the shapes can
potentially undergo arbitrary deformations (See Figure 1),
which are not easy to characterize by purely axiomatic approaches. As a result, several recent learning-based techniques have been proposed for addressing the shape correspondence problem, e.g. [10, 25, 26, 51] among many
others. Most of these approaches are based on the idea
that the underlying correspondence model can be learned
from data, typically given in the form of ground truth corre-

Source descriptor after

Target descriptor after

Figure 1: Given a pair of shapes with noisy descriptors
(top), our approach makes them more consistent (bottom)
without the knowledge of the underlying map, and automatically computes an accurate pointwise correspondence.
spondences between some shape pairs. In the simplest case,
this can be formulated as a labeling problem, where different points, e.g., in a template shape, correspond to labels
to be predicted [51, 27]. More recently, several methods
have been proposed for structured map prediction, aiming
to infer an entire map, rather than labeling each point in11617

