Spectral Regularization for Combating Mode Collapse in GANs
Kanglin Liu1,2,3 , Wenming Tang1,2,3 , Fei Zhou1,2,3 , Guoping Qiu1,2,3,4
1
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen, China
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, Shenzhen, China
4
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom
max.liu.426@gmail.com, guoping.qiu@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
Despite excellent progress in recent years, mode collapse
remains a major unsolved problem in generative adversarial networks (GANs). In this paper, we present spectral regularization for GANs (SR-GANs), a new and robust method
for combating the mode collapse problem in GANs. Theoretical analysis shows that the optimal solution to the discriminator has a strong relationship to the spectral distributions of the weight matrix. Therefore, we monitor the spectral distribution in the discriminator of spectral normalized
GANs (SN-GANs), and discover a phenomenon which we
refer to as spectral collapse, where a large number of singular values of the weight matrices drop dramatically when
mode collapse occurs. We show that there are strong evidence linking mode collapse to spectral collapse; and based
on this link, we set out to tackle spectral collapse as a surrogate of mode collapse. We have developed a spectral regularization method where we compensate the spectral distributions of the weight matrices to prevent them from collapsing, which in turn successfully prevents mode collapse
in GANs. We provide theoretical explanations for why SRGANs are more stable and can provide better performances
than SN-GANs. We also present extensive experimental results and analysis to show that SR-GANs not only always
outperform SN-GANs but also always succeed in combating mode collapse where SN-GANs fail.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [5] are one of
the most significant developments in machine learning research of the past decade. Since their first introduction,
GANs have attracted intensive interest in the machine learning community not only for their ability to learn highly
structured probability distributions but also for their theoretically implications [5, 13, 2, 17]. Essentially, GANs are

constructed around two functions [3, 9]: the generator G,
which maps a sample z to the data distribution, and the discriminator D, which is trained to distinguish real samples
of a dataset from fake samples produced by the generator.
With the goal of reducing the difference between the distributions of generated and real samples, a GAN training
algorithm trains G and D in tandem.
GAN training is dynamic and sensitive to nearly every
aspect of its setup, from optimization parameters to model
architecture [1]. Training instability, or mode collapse, is
one of the major obstacles in developing applications. Despite excellent progresses in recent years [6, 12, 10, 15, 7],
the mode collapse problem still persists. For example, one
of the most impressive works to emerge recently is BigGANs [1], which is the largest published GAN system
based on the state of the art Spectral Normalization (SNGAN)[10]. However, BigGANs can still suffer from the
training instability problem, especially when the batch size
is scaled up. Although implementing training stabilization measures such as employing R1 zero-centred gradient
penalty term [1] in the loss metric of the discriminator to
prevent spectral noise can improve stability, this can cause
severe degradation in performance, resulting in a 45% reduction in Inception Score.
In this paper, we present Spectral Regularization, a robust method for combating the mode collapse problem in
GANs. Theoretically, we analyze the optimal solution to
a linear discriminator function constrained by 1-Lipschitz
continuity, and find the optimal solution is taken when all
singular values of weight matrix are 1. Even though, in
the implementation of GAN models, D is non-linear, we
reason that the spectral distributions in D may also have
a strong relation to its performance. Through comprehensive analysis of spectral distributions in a large number of
GAN models trained with the state of the art SN-GAN algorithm, we discover that when mode collapse occurs to a
model, spectral distributions of W SN (W ) in D also collapse, where W SN (W ) is spectral normalized weight ma-

6382

