ForkNet: Multi-branch Volumetric Semantic Completion
from a Single Depth Image
Yida Wang1 , David Joseph Tan2 , Nassir Navab1 , Federico Tombari1,2
1
2
Technische Universität München
Google Inc.

(a) Depth Image (NYU)
Ceiling

Floor

(b) Ground Truth
Wall

Window

Chair

(d) Proposed Method

(c) SSCNet
Bed

Sofa

Table

TVs

Furniture

Objects

Figure 1: Our 3D semantic completion model (right-most) generates realistic yet accurate volumetric scene representations
from a single depth image (left-most) affected by occlusion and noise, even if acquired from a real depth sensor.

Abstract
We propose a novel model for 3D semantic completion
from a single depth image, based on a single encoder and
three separate generators used to reconstruct different geometric and semantic representations of the original and
completed scene, all sharing the same latent space. To
transfer information between the geometric and semantic
branches of the network, we introduce paths between them
concatenating features at corresponding network layers.
Motivated by the limited amount of training samples from
real scenes, an interesting attribute of our architecture is
the capacity to supplement the existing dataset by generating a new training dataset with high quality, realistic scenes
that even includes occlusion and real noise. We build the
new dataset by sampling the features directly from latent
space which generates a pair of partial volumetric surface
and completed volumetric semantic surface. Moreover, we
utilize multiple discriminators to increase the accuracy and
realism of the reconstructions. We demonstrate the benefits
of our approach on standard benchmarks for the two most
common completion tasks: semantic 3D scene completion
and 3D object completion.

1. Introduction
The increasing abundance of depth data, thanks to the
widespread presence of depth sensors on devices such as

robots and smartphones, has recently fostered big advancements in 3D processing for augmented reality, robotics and
scene understanding, unfolding new applications and technology that relies on the geometric rather than just the appearance information. Since 3D devices sense the environment from one specific viewpoint, the geometry that can be
captured in one shot is only partial due to occlusion caused
by foreground objects as well as self-occlusion from the
same object.
As for many applications, this partial 3D information is
insufficient to robustly carry-out 3D tasks such as object detection and tracking or scene understanding. A recent research direction has emerged that leverages deep learning
to “complete” the depth images acquired by a 3D sensor,
i.e. filling in the missing geometry that the sensor could not
capture due to occlusion. The capability of deep learning
to determine a latent space that captures the global context
from the training samples proved useful in regressing completed 3D scenes and 3D shapes even when big portion of
the geometry are missing [3, 4, 28, 30, 39]. Also, some of
these approaches have been extended to jointly learn how
to infer geometry and semantic information, in what is referred to as semantic 3D scene completion [4, 30, 34]. Nevertheless, current approaches are still limited by different
factors, including the difficulty of regressing fine and sharp
details of the completed geometry, as well as to generalize to shapes that significantly differ from those seen during
training.

8608

