Towards Adversarially Robust Object Detection
Haichao Zhang

Jianyu Wang

Baidu Research, Sunnyvale USA
hczhang1@gmail.com wjyouch@gmail.com
standard detector

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have been widely applied to many
vision tasks such as classification [45, 47, 19] and object
detection [15, 14, 29, 40, 42, 3], leading to state-of-theart performance. However, one impeding factor of deep
learning models is their issues with robustness. It has been
shown that deep net-based classifiers are vulnerable to adversarial attack [49, 16], i.e., there exist adversarial examples that are slightly modified but visually indistinguishable version of the original images that cause the classifier to generate incorrect predictions [36, 4]. Many efforts
have been devoted to improving the robustness of classifiers [35, 34, 56, 17, 25, 44, 46, 38, 30].
Object detection is a computer vision technique that
deals with detecting instances of semantic objects in images [54, 8, 12]. It is a natural generalization of the vanilla
classification task as it outputs not only the object label as in
classification but also the location. Many successful object
detection approaches have been developed during the past
several years [15, 14, 42, 29, 40] and object detectors pow-

adversarial

Object detection is an important vision task and has
emerged as an indispensable component in many vision system, rendering its robustness as an increasingly important
performance factor for practical applications. While object
detection models have been demonstrated to be vulnerable
against adversarial attacks by many recent works, very few
efforts have been devoted to improving their robustness. In
this work, we take an initial attempt towards this direction.
We first revisit and systematically analyze object detectors
and many recently developed attacks from the perspective
of model robustness. We then present a multi-task learning
perspective of object detection and identify an asymmetric
role of task losses. We further develop an adversarial training approach which can leverage the multiple sources of attacks for improving the robustness of detection models. Extensive experiments on PASCAL-VOC and MS-COCO verified the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

robust detector

clean

Abstract

Figure 1. Standard v.s. robust detectors on clean and adversarial images. The adversarial image is produced using PDG-based
detector attacks [23, 33] with perturbation budget 8 (out of 256).
The standard model [29] fails completely on the adversarial image
while the robust model can produce reasonable detection results.

ered by deep nets have emerged as an indispensable component in many vision systems of real-world applications.
Recently, it has been shown that object detectors can also
be attacked by maliciously crafted inputs [57, 32, 23, 6, 55,
11, 31, 22] (c.f . Figure 1). Given its critical role in applications such as surveillance and autonomous driving, it is
important to investigate approaches for defending object detectors against various adversarial attacks. However, while
many works have shown it is possible to attack a detector,
it remains largely unclear whether it is possible to improve
the robustness of the detectors and what is the practical approach for that. This work servers as an initial attempt to
bridge this gap towards this direction. We show that it is
possible to improve the robustness of the object detector
w.r.t.various types of attacks and propose a practical approach for achieving this, by generalizing the adversarial
training framework from classification to detection.

421

