Asynchronous Single-Photon 3D Imaging
Anant Gupta* Atul Ingle*

Mohit Gupta

{anant,ingle,mohitg}@cs.wisc.edu

University of Wisconsin-Madison
www.SinglePhoton3DImaging.com

Abstract
Single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) are becoming
popular in time-of-flight depth-ranging due to their unique
ability to capture individual photons with picosecond timing
resolution. However, ambient light (e.g., sunlight) incident
on a SPAD-based 3D camera leads to severe non-linear
distortions (pileup) in the measured waveform, resulting in
large depth errors. We propose asynchronous single-photon
3D imaging, a family of acquisition schemes to mitigate
pileup during data acquisition itself. Asynchronous acquisition temporally misaligns SPAD measurement windows and
the laser cycles through deterministically predefined or randomized offsets. Our key insight is that pileup distortions
can be “averaged out” by choosing a sequence of offsets
that span the entire depth range. We develop a generalized
image formation model and perform theoretical analysis to
explore the space of asynchronous acquisition schemes and
design high-performance schemes. Our simulations and experiments demonstrate an improvement in depth accuracy
of up to an order of magnitude as compared to the state-ofthe-art, across a wide range of imaging scenarios, including
those with high ambient flux.

1. Single-Photon Cameras
Light is fundamentally quantized; any camera records incoming light not continuously, but in discrete packets called
photons. A conventional camera typically captures hundreds to thousands of photons per pixel to create an image.
What if cameras could record individual photons, and, precisely measure their time-of-arrival? Not only would such
cameras have extremely high sensitivity, but the captured
data will have an additional time-dimension, a rich source
of information inaccessible to conventional cameras.
There is an emerging class of sensors, called singlephoton avalanche diodes (SPADs) [30] that promise singlephoton sensitivity (Fig. 1(a)) and the ability to time-tag photons with picosecond precision. Due to these capabilities,
SPADs are driving novel functionalities such as non-lineof-sight (NLOS) imaging [7, 22] and microscopy of bio∗ Equal contribution
† This

research was supported by ONR grant N00014-16-1-2995,
DARPA REVEAL program and Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation.

Figure 1. Single-photon cameras and 3D imaging. (a) A singlephoton camera pixel is sensitive to individual photons and can
capture photon arrival times with picosecond resolution. (b) The
extreme sensitivity and resolution makes single-photon cameras
promising candidates for several applications. (c) A single-photon
3D camera based on time-of-flight consists of a pulsed laser and
a single-photon detector that timestamps returning photons. (d)
Single-photon 3D cameras have the potential to provide extremely
high depth resolution, even at long ranges.

phenomena at nano time-scales [4]. However, so far, SPADs
are considered specialized devices suitable only for photonstarved (dark) scenarios, and thus, restricted to a limited
set of niche applications. This raises the following questions: Can SPADs operate not just in low-light, but across
the entire gamut of imaging conditions, including high-flux
scenes [15]? In general, is it possible to leverage the exciting capabilities of SPADs for a broader set of mainstream
computer vision applications (Fig. 1(b))?
In this paper, we address the above questions in the context of 3D imaging. Consider a single-photon 3D camera
based on time-of-flight (ToF). It consists of a pulsed laser

7909

