Hierarchical Point-Edge Interaction Network
for Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation
Li Jiang1

Hengshuang Zhao1 Shu Liu2 Xiaoyong Shen2 Chi-Wing Fu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent YouTu Lab

{lijiang, hszhao, cwfu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

{shawnshuliu, dylanshen}@tencent.com

Abstract
We achieve 3D semantic scene labeling by exploring
semantic relation between each point and its contextual
neighbors through edges. Besides an encoder-decoder
branch for predicting point labels, we construct an edge
branch to hierarchically integrate point features and
generate edge features. To incorporate point features in the
edge branch, we establish a hierarchical graph framework,
where the graph is initialized from a coarse layer and
gradually enriched along the point decoding process.
For each edge in the final graph, we predict a label to
indicate the semantic consistency of the two connected
points to enhance point prediction. At different layers, edge
features are also fed into the corresponding point module
to integrate contextual information for message passing
enhancement in local regions. The two branches interact
with each other and cooperate in segmentation. Decent
experimental results on several 3D semantic labeling
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our work.

1. Introduction
With increasing capability of 3D sensing hardware, it is
now easy to capture 3D data in many scenarios. Compared
with 2D images, 3D data provides richer information about
the environment. 3D data is in general view-independent
and captures 3D structure, making it possible to incorporate
geometry information in scene understanding tasks.
Learning-based approaches [28, 3, 10, 12, 25, 30, 15]
were proposed to solve various 3D vision problems, e.g.,
shape classification, scene semantic/instance segmentation,
and 3D object detection. Unlike 2D images, in which
pixel grids are regular with object color information, 3D
object data scatters, with most space actually not occupied.
Therefore, directly voxelizing 3D scenes and extending
deep neural network operations from 2D to 3D is inefficient.
Several voxel-based methods, such as Submanifold Sparse
Convolution [3] and O-CNN [23], improve the 3D convolution efficiency. However, since voxelization is accom-

Jiaya Jia1,2

Point
Prediction

Point Branch
Layer 0

Layer 1

⋯

Layer L

Edge Branch

⋯
Edge
Prediction

Figure 1. Simple illustration of our framework. The point and
edge branches work together to predict the semantic labels. Selfconnected edges and edge directions are omitted.

panied by loss of information, high-resolution 3D models
are needed to uphold the data precision, even though it
unavoidably costs large memory and computation resource.
From another perspective, PointNet [10] directly processes 3D points in a network, only considering regions
covered by the 3D points. PointNet++ [12] further adopts
a hierarchical encoder-decoder structure to consider local
regions, which downsamples point clouds in layers first
and gradually interpolates them to the original resolution.
This framework just utilizes weak connection between each
point and its local context, since point features are extracted
independently by the multi-layer perceptrons (MLP). In
segmentation tasks, it is commonly known that local context
is crucial for labeling the semantic categories. This motivates us to further explore the semantic relation between
points and their local contextual neighbors to extract more
discriminative features for 3D semantic scene labeling.
Our Contributions To explore the semantic relation between points in a local region and utilize the contextual
information, we explicitly build edges between points and
their contextual neighbors and establish a hierarchical edge
branch with an auxiliary edge loss, as shown in Figure 1.
Specifically, besides the encoder-decoder point branch as
in PointNet++, our new edge branch accepts point features
from different layers and progressively produces edge features, which are then fed to point branch for fusing information in local graphs. For each point, the corresponding
edge features provide local intrinsic geometric and regional
semantic information to enhance point representation.
Instead of building isolated graphs for points in each

10433

