Learning Filter Basis for Convolutional Neural Network Compression
Yawei Li1∗, Shuhang Gu1∗, Luc Van Gool1,2 , Radu Timofte1
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, 2 KU Leuven, Belgium
{yawei.li, shuhang.gu, vangool, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based solutions
have achieved state-of-the-art performances for many computer vision tasks, including classification and superresolution of images. Usually the success of these methods
comes with a cost of millions of parameters due to stacking
deep convolutional layers. Moreover, quite a large number of filters are also used for a single convolutional layer,
which exaggerates the parameter burden of current methods. Thus, in this paper, we try to reduce the number of
parameters of CNNs by learning a basis of the filters in
convolutional layers. For the forward pass, the learned
basis is used to approximate the original filters and then
used as parameters for the convolutional layers. We validate our proposed solution for multiple CNN architectures
on image classification and image super-resolution benchmarks and compare favorably to the existing state-of-theart in terms of reduction of parameters and preservation of
accuracy. Code is available at https://github.com/
ofsoundof/learning_filter_basis.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep convolutional neural network (CNN)
based approaches have been setting new state-of-the-art results not only for high-level computer vision tasks such as
image classification [25, 44, 15, 18], segmentation [11, 35],
and object detection [11, 10, 43, 42], but also for low-level
tasks such as image super-resolution (SR) [9, 22, 33, 30, 51,
32], denoising [49, 50, 12], and deburring [38, 28]. However, most of the advances are achieved at the expense of relying on deeper architectures, millions of optimization parameters and resource-intensive computations. This hampers the application of deep neural networks under resource
constrained environments, e.g., mobile phones.
To overcome the above mentioned problem, one research
direction is to design efficient architectures. For example, in comparison with VGG [44], both ResNet [15] and
∗ Equal contribution

DenseNet [18] reduce the number of parameters in their
CNN by one magnitude of order while achieving comparable or even more accurate image classification results. Despite being more compact, there are still redundancies in
those networks, making it possible for further compression.
In the meanwhile, network compression promises to alleviate the model complexity without losing much accuracy
of the original network. Many network compression methods have been proposed. They mainly fall into three categories including network quantization [41, 29, 7, 53], network pruning [13, 14, 17], and filter decomposition [20, 52,
46, 45, 40]. In this paper, we focus on filter decomposition.
Filter decomposition approximates the original filter
with a lightweight convolution and a linear projection. Current methods either operate directly on the channel-wise
2D w × h filters [20, 46, 45] or decompose the intact 3D
c × w × h filters [52, 40]. For those working on 2D filters,
considering that the kernel size is usually small (e.g., 3 × 3)
and a couple of new parameters are introduced to represent
the 2D kernel, the compression ratio in terms of reduction
of parameters is not impressive [46, 45]. The other filter
decomposition methods [52] consider a 3D kernel as an intact element making impossible the reduction of the number
of input channels [17]. This prevents the application of the
method to narrow networks with much fewer output channels but more input channels. For example, in DenseNet12-40, there are only 12 output channels which makes it not
economic to decompose the 3D filters.
The aforementioned methods either collapse or maintain
the 3D filters during decomposition, which can be regarded
as ’hard’ decomposition. They are only coarse-grained configurations on the two boundary operating points. The motivation of this paper is to provide the missing in-between
fine-grained operating points and to balance the parameter distribution between the two decomposed convolutions.
Thus, we propose a novel filter basis learning method that
circumvents the limitation of the ’hard’ filter decomposition
methods. We split the 3D filters along the input channel dimension and each split is considered as a basic element. We
assume that the ensemble of those basic elements within one
convolutional layer can be represented by the linear combi15623

