Co-Mining: Deep Face Recognition with Noisy Labels
Xiaobo Wang∗ , Shuo Wang∗ , Jun Wang, Hailin Shi, Tao Mei
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
{wangxiaobo8,wangjun492,shihailin,tmei}@jd.com, cudaconvnet@gmail.com

Abstract
Face recognition has achieved significant progress with
the growing scale of collected datasets, which empowers
us to train strong convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
While a variety of CNN architectures and loss functions
have been devised recently, we still have a limited understanding of how to train the CNN models with the label
noise inherent in existing face recognition datasets. To
address this issue, this paper develops a novel co-mining
strategy to effectively train on the datasets with noisy labels. Specifically, we simultaneously use the loss values as the cue to detect noisy labels, exchange the highconfidence clean faces to alleviate the errors accumulated
issue caused by the sample-selection bias, and re-weight
the predicted clean faces to make them dominate the discriminative model training in a mini-batch fashion. Extensive experiments by training on three popular datasets
(i.e., CASIA-WebFace, MS-Celeb-1M and VggFace2) and
testing on several benchmarks, including LFW, CALFW,
CPLFW, AgeDB, CFP, RFW, and MegaFace, have demonstrated the effectiveness of our new approach over the stateof-the-art alternatives. Our code is available at http:
//www.cbsr.ia.ac.cn/users/xiaobowang/.

1. Introduction
Datasets are of crucial to the development of face recognition. From the early CASIA-WebFace [45] to the more
recent VggFace [27], MS-Celeb-1M [11], VggFace2 [5]
and IMDb [36], face recognition datasets play a main role
in driving the development of new techniques. Not only
face recognition datasets become more diverse, but also the
scale of data is growing tremendously. For instance, MSCeleb-1M [11] contains about 10M images of 100K identities, far exceeding CASIA-WebFace [45] that only has
0.5M images from 10,575 individuals. Large-scale datasets
together with the emergence of deep convolutional neural
networks technique have led to the immense success of face
recognition in recent years. However, these public large∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

濃濩濨濠濝濙濦濧
澻瀂瀃濸瀁激瀆濸瀇澼
濡澢澤澨濠濛濥濪澬

激濕濖濙濠澔澺濠濝濤濧
澻濶濿瀂瀆濸濷激瀆濸瀇澼

Figure 1. An illustration of deep face recognition with noisy labels
in MS-Celeb-1M [11]. ”Label Flips” means that the faces have erroneously been given the label of another class within the dataset.
”Outlier” means that faces do not belong to any of the classes under consideration, but mistakenly have one of their labels.

scale datasets probably contain noisy faces because most of
them are automatically collected via image search engines
or from movies. Figure 1 gives an example of noisy faces
in MS-Celeb-1M [11]. Detailedly, we refer to the samples whose identities are mislabeled/incorrectly annotated
as noisy faces and denote their labels as noisy labels. Such
noisy labels can fall into two types, ”Label Flips (closedset)” and ”Outliers (open-set)”. More specifically, a label
flip (close-set) noisy label occurs when a noisy face possesses a true class that is contained within the set of known
classes in the training data (e.g., face in the blue box of Figure 1). In contrast, an outlier (open-set) noisy label occurs
when a noisy face possesses a true class that is not contained within the set of known classes in the training data
(e.g., faces in the red box of Figure 1).
It is well-known that noisy labels inevitably degenerate
the robustness of learned models, especially for deep CNNs.
Wu et al. [43] adopt a semantic bootstrapping rule to select the clean samples via the prediction consistency. Deng
et al. [8] resort to the feature dis-similarities to drop the
noisy faces and further manually check the unreliable ones.
The trillion-pairs consortium [1] has published a relatively
clean version of MS-Celeb-1M. These methods try to clean

9358

