Hierarchical Encoding of Sequential Data with Compact and Sub-linear Storage Cost
Huu Le1 , Ming Xu1 , Tuan Hoang2 , and Michael Milford1
1
2

Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Australia

Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD), Singapore

Abstract
Snapshot-based visual localization is an important problem in several computer vision and robotics applications
such as Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM).
To achieve real-time performance in very large-scale environments with massive amounts of training and map data,
techniques such as approximate nearest neighbor search
(ANN) algorithms are used. While several state-of-the-art
variants of quantization and indexing techniques have been
demonstrated to be efficient in practice, their theoretical
memory cost still scales at least linearly with the training
data (i.e., O(n) where n is the number of observations in
the database), since each observation must be associated
with at least one code vector. To address these limitations,
we present a novel hierarchical encoding approach that enables sub-linear storage for sequential data, e.g. ordered
frames in a video sequence commonly used in visual localization datasets. The algorithm exploits the widespread sequential nature of sensor information streams in robotics
and autonomous vehicle applications and achieves, both
theoretically and experimentally, sub-linear scalability in
storage required for a given environment size. Furthermore, the associated query time of our algorithm is also of
sub-linear complexity. We benchmark the performance of
the proposed algorithm on several real-world benchmark
datasets and experimentally validate the sub-linearity of
our approach, while also showing that our approach yields
competitive absolute storage performance as well.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a rapidly growing demand
for improved capabilities underlying autonomous robot and
vehicle applications, such as Simultaneous Localization
And Mapping (SLAM). This demand has inspired a large
body of work that address the visual place recognition problem, a key component of SLAM systems, with encouraging results [12, 22]. Among the existing approaches,

snapshot-based methods, which primarily rely on image retrieval [33, 31, 11], still play a significant role since they are
widely used not only for direct localization but also as an
intermediate step that bootstrap large-scale structure-based
systems. Generally, the underlying mechanism behind most
retrieval-based variants is the utilization of global image descriptors [18, 1, 35, 16] to characterize locations. A query
image can then be localized by searching for representations
in a database that have similar descriptor values. It has been
shown in recent work that the use of source coding techniques, represented by well-known algorithms such as vector quantization [14] and variants such as Product Quantization [17], Optimized Product Quantization [13], together
with indexing techniques such as Inverted Index [19, 2]
have enabled efficient approximate nearest neighbor search.
As a consequence, several techniques have been proposed
that can handle datasets containing billions of observations
with real-time performance [4, 6].
In parallel to the development of snapshot-based algorithms, structure-based approaches have also attracted much
attention from researchers [32]. Unlike their counterparts
that provide only a rough location estimate, structuredbased algorithms yield precise localization up to six
degrees-of-freedom (6-DoF). The maps are represented by
3D point clouds, which can be obtained from registering depth sensor output, or built from the training images using common Structure-from-Motion (SfM) frameworks [34, 37]. Apart from the location information, each
point in the 3D map also stores the associated local descriptors, so that a query image can be localized by conducting
2D-3D matching to identify the camera location and orientation. However, in order to achieve satisfactory real-time
results, the input data must be of small or moderate size, as
searching over very large point clouds is often computationally expensive.
Although many indexing algorithms in the literature
have achieved sub-linear query time, most approaches require storing one code vector per image descriptor. Theoretically, no matter how short this code vector, for n observations in the dataset, existing algorithms require O(n) stor19824

