Visual Semantic Reasoning for Image-Text Matching
Kunpeng Li1 , Yulun Zhang1 , Kai Li1 , Yuanyuan Li1 and Yun Fu1,2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA

Abstract
Image-text matching has been a hot research topic bridging the vision and language areas. It remains challenging
because the current representation of image usually lacks
global semantic concepts as in its corresponding text caption. To address this issue, we propose a simple and interpretable reasoning model to generate visual representation that captures key objects and semantic concepts of a
scene. Specifically, we first build up connections between
image regions and perform reasoning with Graph Convolutional Networks to generate features with semantic relationships. Then, we propose to use the gate and memory mechanism to perform global semantic reasoning on
these relationship-enhanced features, select the discriminative information and gradually generate the representation
for the whole scene. Experiments validate that our method
achieves a new state-of-the-art for the image-text matching
on MS-COCO [28] and Flickr30K [40] datasets. It outperforms the current best method by 6.8% relatively for image retrieval and 4.8% relatively for caption retrieval on
MS-COCO (Recall@1 using 1K test set). On Flickr30K,
our model improves image retrieval by 12.6% relatively and
caption retrieval by 5.8% relatively (Recall@1).

1. Introduction
Vision and language are two important aspects of human
intelligence to understand the real world. A large amount
of research [5, 9, 23] has been done to bridge these two
modalities. Image-text matching is one of the fundamental
topics in this field, which refers to measuring the visualsemantic similarity between a sentence and an image. It
has been widely adopted to various applications such as the
retrieval of text descriptions from image queries or image
search for given sentences.
Although a lot of progress has been achieved in this area,
it is still a challenge problem due to the huge visual semantic discrepancy. When people describe what they see in the
picture using natural language, it can be observed that the
descriptions will not only include the objects, salient stuff,

Image with BottomUp Attention

Visual Semantic
Reasoning

Final Representation

Text Caption

Matching

A snowboarder in mid-air with another person
watching in the background.

Figure 1. The proposed Visual Semantic Reasoning Network
(VSRN) performs reasoning on the image regions to generate representation for an image. The representation captures key objects
(boxes in the caption) and semantic concepts (highlight parts in
the caption) of a scene as in the corresponding text caption.

but also will organize their interactions, relative positions
and other high-level semantic concepts (such as “in mid-air”
and “watching in the background” in the Figure 1). Visual
reasoning about objects and semantics is crucial for humans
during this process. However, the current existing visualtext matching systems lack such kind of reasoning mechanism. Most of them [5] represent concepts in an image
by Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) features extracted
by convolutions with a specific receptive field, which only
perform local pixel-level analysis. It is hard for them to
recognize the high-level semantic concepts. More recently,
[23] make use of region-level features from object detectors and discover alignments between image regions and
words. Although grasping some local semantic concepts
within regions including multiple objects, these methods
still lack the global reasoning mechanism that allows information communication between regions farther away.
To address this issue, we propose Visual Semantic Reasoning Network (VSRN) to generate visual representation
that captures both objects and their semantic relationships.
We start from identifying salient regions in images by following [1, 23]. In this way, salient region detection at
stuff/object level can be analogized to the bottom-up attention that is consistent with human vision system [16].
Practically, the bottom-up attention module is implemented

4654

