Unsupervised Graph Association for Person Re-identification
Jinlin Wu∗1,2 , Yang Yang∗1,2 , Hao Liu1,2 , Shengcai Liao3 , Zhen Lei †1,2 , and Stan Z. Li1,2
1

CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE,
{ jinlin.wu, yang.yang, hao.liu2016, zlei, szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, scliao@ieee.org

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised graph association (UGA) to learn the underlying view-invariant representations from the video pedestrian tracklets. The core
points of it are mining the cross-view relationships and reducing the damage of noisy associations. To this end, UGA
adopts a two-stage training strategy: (1) intra-camera
learning stage and (2) inter-camera learning stage. The
former is to learn representations of a person with regards
to camera information, which helps to reduce false crossview associations in the second stage. Compared with existing tracklet-based methods, ours can build more accurate cross-view associations and require lower GPU memory. Extensive experiments and ablation studies on seven
RE-ID datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
UGA over most state-of-the-art unsupervised and domain
adaptation RE-ID methods. Code is available at github1 .

1. Introduction
Person Re-identification (RE-ID) aims to match the same
pedestrian across non-overlapping camera views, which has
potential applications like longterm multi-camera tracking
and forensic search. Benefiting from the advance of deep
learning, especially the deep convolution network [14, 10],
the performance of RE-ID has obtained significant improvements [19, 42, 30, 32, 29, 31, 48]. In supervised learning,
the deep CNN learns view-invariant representations from
the pair-wise labelled data. Since deep CNN is a data-driven
method, it requires a large number of pair-wise labelled data
in training. Figure 1 show some pair-wise labelled tracklets
∗ Equal Contribution
† Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/yichuan9527/Unsupervised-Graph-Associationfor-Person-Re-identification

Figure 1: Examples of the pair-wise labelled tracklets. Pairwise labelled tracklets refer the images belonging to the
same person under different cameras.

from different cameras. However, labelling sufficient pairwise RE-ID data is expensive and time-consuming. How to
improve the performance and scalability of deep RE-ID algorithm without pair-wise labelled data (i.e., unsupervised
learning) is a great challenge in recent person RE-ID research.
There have been a series of unsupervised image based
methods to address this problem, which can be roughly
divided into three categories: 1) image-to-image translation, 2) domain adaptation, 3) unsupervised clustering.
The image-to-image translation methods [51, 49, 4, 1, 38]
transfer the source domain images to the target domain by
GAN [9] network. The domain adaptation methods [21, 36]
aim to transfer the source domain trained model to the target
domain in an unsupervised manner. Unsupervised clustering methods [5, 16] obtain the pseudo labels of target domain data through the unsupervised clustering algorithms

8321

