Depth from Videos in the Wild:
Unsupervised Monocular Depth Learning from Unknown Cameras
Ariel Gordon1 2 , Hanhan Li2 , Rico Jonschkowski1 2 , Anelia Angelova1 2
1
Robotics at Google, 2 Google AI
{gariel, uniqueness, rjon, anelia}@google.com

Abstract
We present a novel method for simultaneously learning depth, egomotion, object motion, and camera intrinsics from monocular videos, using only consistency across
neighboring video frames as a supervision signal. Similarly to prior work, our method learns by applying differentiable warping to frames and comparing the result to adjacent ones, but it provides several improvements: We address occlusions geometrically and differentiably, directly
using the depth maps as predicted during training. We introduce randomized layer normalization, a novel regularizer, and we account for object motion relative to the scene.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to learn
the camera intrinsic parameters, including lens distortion,
from video in an unsupervised manner, thereby allowing us
to extract accurate depth and motion from arbitrary videos
of unknown origin at scale. We evaluate our results on
the Cityscapes, KITTI, and EuRoC MAV datasets, establishing new state of the art on depth prediction and odometry,
and demonstrate qualitatively that depth prediction can be
learned from a collection of YouTube videos. The code is
publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D structure and camera motion from video
is a key problem in computer vision. Traditional approaches
to this problem rely on identifying the same points in the
scene in multiple consecutive frames, then solving for a 3D
structure and camera motion that is maximally consistent
across those frames [23]. But such correspondences between frames can only be established for a subset of all
pixels, which leaves the problem of estimating depth underdetermined. As commonly done with inverse problems,
the gaps are filled based on assumptions of continuity, planarity, etc.
1 github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/
depth from video in the wild

Figure 1. Qualitative results of our approach for learning depth
from videos of unknown sources, which is enabled by simultaneously learning the camera extrinsic and intrinsic parameters.
Since our method does not require knowing the camera parameters, it can be applied to any set of videos. All depth maps (visualized on the right, as disparity) were learned from raw videos
without using any camera intrinsics groundtruth. From top to bottom: frames from YouTube8M [1], from EuRoC MAV dataset [5],
from Cityscapes [7] and from KITTI [11].

Rather than specifying these assumptions manually, deep
learning is able to obtain them from data. Wherever information is insufficient to resolve ambiguities, deep networks can produce depth maps and flow fields by generalizing from prior examples they have seen. Unsupervised approaches allow learning from raw videos alone, using similar consistency losses as traditional methods but optimizing
them during training. At inference, the trained networks are
able to predict depth from a single image and egomotion
from pairs or longer sequences of images.
18977

