Presence-Only Geographical Priors for Fine-Grained Image Classification
Oisin Mac Aodha

Elijah Cole
Pietro Perona
Caltech
www.vision.caltech.edu/˜macaodha/projects/geopriors
Abstract
Appearance information alone is often not sufficient to
accurately differentiate between fine-grained visual categories. Human experts make use of additional cues such
as where, and when, a given image was taken in order to
inform their final decision. This contextual information is
readily available in many online image collections but has
been underutilized by existing image classifiers that focus
solely on making predictions based on the image contents.
We propose an efficient spatio-temporal prior, that when
conditioned on a geographical location and time, estimates
the probability that a given object category occurs at that
location. Our prior is trained from presence-only observation data and jointly models object categories, their spatiotemporal distributions, and photographer biases. Experiments performed on multiple challenging image classification datasets show that combining our prior with the predictions from image classifiers results in a large improvement
in final classification performance.

1. Introduction
Correctly classifying objects into different fine-grained
visual categories is a challenging problem. In contrast to
generic object recognition, it can require knowledge of subtle features that are essential for differentiating between visually similar categories. However, without having access
to additional information that may not be present in an image, many categories can be visually indistinguishable. For
example, the two toad species in Fig. 1 are similar in appearance but tend to be found in very different locations in
Europe. Knowing where a given image was taken can provide a strong prior for what objects it may contain.
Most images that are captured and shared online today
also come with additional metadata in the form of where
they were taken, when they were taken, and who captured
them. This information not only offers the possibility of
helping to resolve ambiguous cases for image classification,
but can also enable us to generate predictions of where, and
when, different objects are likely to be observed.

Figure 1: Differentiating between two visually similar categories such as the European (left) and Spiny (right) Toad
can be challenging without additional context. To address
this problem, we propose a spatio-temporal prior that encodes where, and when, a given category is likely to occur.
For a known test location our prior predicts how likely it is
for each category to be present. Darker colors indicate locations that are more likely to contain the object of interest.
Existing work that uses location information to improve
classification performance either discretizes the input data
into spatio-temporal volumes [5], store the entire training
set in memory at inference time [64], or jointly train deep
images classifiers along with corresponding location information [55]. Methods that discretize or store the raw training data do not scale well in terms of memory, and jointly
training image classifiers with location information necessitates that location information is present at test time which may not always be the case. We take inspiration
from species distribution modeling (SDM) [20], and instead
model a separate geographical prior that can be combined
with the predictions of any image classifier. However, unlike many approaches to SDM that assume they have access to presence and absence information at training time
(e.g. [56]), we make a more general assumption that only
presence information is available i.e. we know where the
categories have been observed, but have no explicit data regarding where they are not found.
In this work we make the following contributions: (1) An
efficient spatio-temporal prior that jointly models the relationship between location, time of year, photographer, and
the presence of multiple different object categories. (2) A
novel presence-only training loss to capture these relation-

9596

