Fast Video Object Segmentation via Dynamic Targeting Network
Lu Zhang1 , Zhe Lin2 , Jianming Zhang2 , Huchuan Lu1∗, You He3
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Adobe Research, USA
3
Naval Aviation University, China
luzhang dut@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {zlin, jianmzha}@adobe.com, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, heyou f@126.com

Abstract

90
OnAVOS

DyeNet
CRN

85

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) aims to segment target
objects across video frames. It is a challenging task due to
the motion, occlusion and deformation of objects. Given
the first frame with mask annotations, our task is to track
the specific objects in the following video frames, which is
known as semi-supervised VOS.
Recently, semi-supervised VOS has achieved impressive
progress thanks to the advances of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs). Precise object segmentation is able to
facilitate the performance of various applications, such as
video object tracking, surveillance and interactive video
editing. Except for the demand of high accuracy, the processing efficiency of the algorithms is also required in timecritical applications. To achieve a well-performed model,
∗ Corresponding author

Ours
RGMP

mIoU(%)

We propose a new model for fast and accurate video
object segmentation. It consists of two convolutional neural networks, a Dynamic Targeting Network (DTN) and a
Mask Refinement Network (MRN). DTN locates the object
by dynamically focusing on regions of interest surrounding
the target object. The target region is predicted by DTN
via two sub-streams, Box Propagation (BP) and Box Reidentification (BR). The BP stream is faster but less effective at objects with large deformation or occlusion. The
BR stream performs better in difficult scenarios at a higher
computation cost. We propose a Decision Module (DM)
to adaptively determine which sub-stream to use for each
frame. Finally, MRN is exploited to predict segmentation
within the target region. Experimental results on two public datasets demonstrate that the proposed model significantly outperforms existing methods without online training in both accuracy and efficiency, and is comparable to
online training-based methods in accuracy with an order of
magnitude faster speed.

80

OSVOS

75

SegFlow

TrackPart
OSMN
VPN

70

PLM

65
BVS

60
55

10 -1

10 0

10 1

FPS

Figure 1: Comparison results with state-of-the-art methods
on the DAVIS 2016 dataset in terms of J Mean (mIoU) and
run time (fps).
existing CNN-based methods usually conduct online training, in which the pretrained models are finetuned on the first
frame of the given test video. The online training is effective at improving the model’s generalization to appearance
variations of target objects. However, it incurs a significant
computation overhead and thus limits the applications of the
existing VOS models in time-critical scenarios.
Some recent works [23, 2, 3, 5] combine the merits of
object re-identification and instance segmentation for video
object segmentation. Typically, the target RoI in the current
frame is re-identified by matching the box candidates with
the annotated object in the first frame. Then the mask is
further segmented out within the selected RoI. Such object
re-identification mechanism has shown promising effectiveness in dealing with object occlusion or drifting. However,
the matching process among hundreds of candidates often
brings large computation cost, thus limiting its use in realtime applications.
In this work, we propose a new model for fast and accurate video object segmentation. Our model consists of two
sub-networks with a shared backbone, which are Dynamic
Targeting Network (DTN) and Mask Refinement Network
(MRN). Specifically, we first exploit the DTN to automatically zoom in to the potential region of the target object.

5582

