M2 FPA: A Multi-Yaw Multi-Pitch High-Quality Dataset and Benchmark for
Facial Pose Analysis
Peipei Li1,2 , Xiang Wu1 , Yibo Hu1 , Ran He1,2˚, Zhenan Sun1,2
1

CRIPAC & NLPR & CEBSIT, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Email: {peipei.li, yibo.hu}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, alfredxiangwu@gmail.com, {rhe, znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Facial images in surveillance or mobile scenarios often have large view-point variations in terms of pitch and
yaw angles. These jointly occurred angle variations make
face recognition challenging. Current public face databases mainly consider the case of yaw variations. In this paper, a new large-scale Multi-yaw Multi-pitch high-quality
database is proposed for Facial Pose Analysis (M2 FPA),
including face frontalization, face rotation, facial pose estimation and pose-invariant face recognition. It contains
397,544 images of 229 subjects with yaw, pitch, attribute,
illumination and accessory. M2 FPA is the most comprehensive multi-view face database for facial pose analysis.
Further, we provide an effective benchmark for face frontalization and pose-invariant face recognition on M2 FPA with
several state-of-the-art methods, including DR-GAN[24],
TP-GAN[10] and CAPG-GAN[8]. We believe that the new
database and benchmark can significantly push forward the
advance of facial pose analysis in real-world applications.
Moreover, a simple yet effective parsing guided discriminator is introduced to capture the local consistency during
GAN optimization. Extensive quantitative and qualitative
results on M2 FPA and Multi-PIE demonstrate the superiority of our face frontalization method. Baseline results for
both face synthesis and face recognition from state-of-theart methods demonstrate the challenge offered by this new
database.

1. Introduction
With the development of deep learning, face recognition systems have achieved 99% accuracy [19, 3, 25] on
some popular databases [9, 14]. However, in some realworld surveillance or mobile scenarios, the captured face
images often contain extreme view-point variations so that
˚ corresponding author

face recognition performance is significantly affected. Recently, the great progress of face synthesis [8, 10, 30] has
pushed forward the development of recognition via generation. TP-GAN [10] and CAPG-GAN [8] perform face
frontalization to improve recognition accuracy under large
poses. DA-GAN [30] is proposed to simulate profile face
images, facilitating pose-invariant face recognition. However, their performance often depends on the diversity of
pose variations in the training databases.
The existing face databases with pose variations can be
categorized into two classes. The ones, such as LFW [9],
IJB-A [15] and VGGFace2 [3], are collected from the Internet, whose pose variations follow a long-tailed distribution.
Moreover, it is obvious that obtaining the accurate pose labels is difficult for these databases. The others, including CMU PIE [21], CAS-PEAL-R1 [5] and CMU Multi-PIE [7],
are captured under the constrained environment across accurate poses. These databases often pay attention to yaw
angles without considering pitch angles. However, facial
images captured in surveillance or mobile scenarios often
have large yaw and pitch variations simultaneously. Such
the face recognition across both yaw and pitch angles needs
to be extensively evaluated in order to ensure the robustness
of recognition system. Therefore, it is crucial to provide
researchers with a multi-yaw multi-pitch high-quality face
database for facial pose analysis, including face frontalization, face rotation, facial pose estimation and pose-invariant
face recognition.
In this paper, a Multi-yaw Multi-pitch high-quality
database for Facial Pose Analysis (M2 FPA) is proposed to
address this issue. The comparisons with the existing facial
pose analysis databases are summarized in Table 1. The
main advantages lie in the following aspects: (1) Largescale. M2 FPA includes totally 397,544 images of 229 subjects with 62 poses, 4 attributes and 7 illuminations. (2)
Accurate and diverse poses. We design an acquisition
system to simultaneously capture 62 poses, including 13

10043

