SPGNet: Semantic Prediction Guidance for Scene Parsing
Bowen Cheng1 , Liang-Chieh Chen, Yunchao Wei1,3 , Yukun Zhu, Zilong Huang1 ,
Jinjun Xiong2 , Thomas S. Huang1 , Wen-Mei Hwu1 , Honghui Shi2,1,4
1

UIUC, 2 IBM Research, 3 ReLER, UTS, 4 University of Oregon

Abstract

Identity Mapping

Multi-scale context module and single-stage encoderdecoder structure are commonly employed for semantic segmentation. Multi-scale context module aggregates feature
responses from a large spatial extent, while the single-stage
encoder-decoder structure encodes the high-level semantic
information in the encoder path and recovers the boundary
information in the decoder path. In contrast, multi-stage
encoder-decoder networks have been widely used in human pose estimation and shown superior performance than
their single-stage counterpart. However, few efforts have
been attempted to bring this effective design to semantic
segmentation. In this work, we propose a Semantic Prediction Guidance (SPG) module which learns to re-weight the
local features through the guidance from pixel-wise semantic prediction. We find that by carefully re-weighting features across stages, a two-stage encoder-decoder network
coupled with our proposed SPG module can significantly
outperform its one-stage counterpart with similar parameters and computations. Finally, we report experimental results on the semantic segmentation benchmark Cityscapes,
in which our SPGNet attains 81.1% on the test set using
only ‘fine’ annotations.

Excite
H

C

Squeeze

C
1x1

W

(a) Squeeze-and-Excite [25].
Identity Mapping

Excite
H’
H

C

Gather

W’

C

W

(b) Gather-and-Excite [24].
Identity Mapping
W

Excite

C
H

C Supervise
W
H

Guided
Attention

(c) Our proposed Supervise-and-Excite.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation [21], as a step towards scene understanding [30,53,54,67], is a challenging problem in computer vision. It refers to the task of assigning semantic labels, such as person and sky, to every pixel within an image. Recently, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) [29, 31] have significantly improved the performance
of semantic segmentation systems.
In particular, DCNNs, deployed in a fully convolutional
manner [39,48], have attained remarkable results on several
semantic segmentation benchmarks [14,16,75]. We observe
two key design components shared among state-of-the-art
semantic segmentation systems. First, multi-scale context
module, exploiting the large spatial information, enriches

Figure 1. Three different frameworks for re-weighting local features. Dotted square areas with lighter color in (a) and (b) denote
average pooling operations.

the local features. Typical examples include DeepLab [7]
which adopts several parallel atrous convolutions [22, 43]
with different rates and PSPNet [73] which performs pooling operations at different grid scales. Recently, SENets
[25] and GENets [24] employ the ‘squeeze-and-excite’
(Figure 1 (a)) or more general ‘gather-and-excite’ framework (Figure 1 (b)) and obtain remarkable results on image
classification task. Motivated by this, we propose a simple
yet effective attention module, called Semantic Prediction
Guidance (SPG), which learns to re-weight the local fea-

5218

