Online Model Distillation for Efficient Video Inference
Ravi Teja Mullapudi1
1

Steven Chen2

Keyi Zhang2

Deva Ramanan1
2

Carnegie Mellon University

Kayvon Fatahalian2

Stanford University

Abstract
High-quality computer vision models typically address
the problem of understanding the general distribution of
real-world images. However, most cameras observe only
a very small fraction of this distribution. This offers the
possibility of achieving more efficient inference by specializing compact, low-cost models to the specific distribution
of frames observed by a single camera. In this paper,
we employ the technique of model distillation (supervising
a low-cost student model using the output of a high-cost
teacher) to specialize accurate, low-cost semantic segmentation models to a target video stream. Rather than learn
a specialized student model on offline data from the video
stream, we train the student in an online fashion on the live
video, intermittently running the teacher to provide a target for learning. Online model distillation yields semantic
segmentation models that closely approximate their Mask
R-CNN teacher with 7 to 17× lower inference runtime cost
(11 to 26× in FLOPs), even when the target video’s distribution is non-stationary. Our method requires no offline
pretraining on the target video stream, achieves higher accuracy and lower cost than solutions based on flow or video
object segmentation, and can exhibit better temporal stability than the original teacher. We also provide a new video
dataset for evaluating the efficiency of inference over long
running video streams.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision algorithms focus on the problem
of understanding the most general distribution of real-world
images (often modeled by “Internet”-scale datasets such as
ImageNet [34] or COCO [24]). In contrast, most real-world
video cameras capture scenes that feature a much narrower
distribution of images, and this distribution can evolve continuously evolve over time. For example, stationary cameras observe scenes that evolve with time of day, changing
weather conditions, and as different subjects move through
the scene. TV cameras pan and zoom, most smartphone
videos are hand-held, and egocentric cameras on vehicles
or robots move through dynamic scenes.

Figure 1: Online model distillation overview: A low-cost student
model is tasked to generate a high-resolution, per-frame semantic
segmentation. To retain high accuracy, as new frames arrive, an expensive teacher model’s (MRCNN) output is periodically used as
a learning target to adapt the student and selecting the next frame
to request supervision. We call the student model “JITNet” since
is designed to be specialized “just-in-time” for future frames.

In this paper, we embrace this reality and move away
from attempting to pre-train a model on camera-specific
datasets curated in advance, and instead train models online
on a live video stream as new video frames arrive. Specifically, we apply this methodology to the task of realizing
high-accuracy and low-cost semantic segmentation models
that continuously adapt to the contents of a video stream.
We employ the technique of model distillation [2, 16],
training a lightweight “student” model to output the predictions of a larger, reliable high-capacity “teacher”, but do so
in an online fashion, intermittently running the teacher on a
live stream to provide a target for student learning. We find
that simple models can be accurate, provided they are continuously adapted to the specific contents of a video stream
as new frames arrive (i.e. models can learn to cheat—
segmenting people sitting on a park lawn might be as easy
as looking for shades of green!). To achieve high efficiency,
we require a new model architecture that simultaneously
supports low-cost inference and fast training, as well as judicious choice of when to periodically run the teacher to
obtain supervision.
We show that online model distillation yields semantic
segmentation models that closely approximate their Mask
R-CNN [13] teacher with 7 to 17× lower inference runtime
cost (11-26× when comparing FLOPs), even when the target video’s distribution is non-stationary over time. Our
method requires no offline pretraining on data from the tar13573

