GSLAM: A General SLAM Framework and Benchmark
Yong Zhao∗,1 , Shibiao Xu†,2 , Shuhui Bu1 , Hongkai Jiang1 , and Pengcheng Han1
1

2

Northwestern Polytechnical University
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
SLAM technology has recently seen many successes and
attracted the attention of high-technological companies.
However, how to unify the interface of existing or emerging
algorithms, and effectively perform benchmark about the
speed, robustness and portability are still problems. In this
paper, we propose a novel SLAM platform named GSLAM,
which not only provides evaluation functionality, but also
supplies useful toolkit for researchers to quickly develop
their SLAM systems. Our core contribution is an universal, cross-platform and full open-source SLAM interface
for both research and commercial usage, which is aimed
to handle interactions with input dataset, SLAM implementation, visualization and applications in an unified framework. Through this platform, users can implement their own
functions for better performance with plugin form and further boost the application to practical usage of the SLAM.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is a
hot research topic in computer vision and robotics for several decades since the 1980s [3, 10, 14]. SLAM provides fundamental function for many applications that need real-time
navigation like robotics, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),
autonomous driving, as well as virtual and augmented reality. In recent years, SLAM technology develops rapidly and
a variety of SLAM systems have been proposed, including
monocular SLAM system (key-point based [12, 37, 49], direct [15, 16, 53] and semi-direct methods [22, 23]), multisensor SLAM (RGBD [7, 36, 68], Stereo [17, 23, 51] and
inertial aided methods [45, 56, 66]), learning based SLAM
(supervised [6, 55, 67] and unsupervised methods [71, 72]).

However, with the rapidly developing SLAM technology, almost all the researchers focus on the theory and implementation of their own SLAM systems, which makes it
difficult to exchange ideas and not easy to port the implementation to other systems. This prevents the quick apply
to various industry fields. Currently, there exist many implementations of SLAM systems, how to effectively perform benchmark about the speed, robustness and portability
is still a problem. Recently, Nardi et al. [52] and Bodin et al. [4] proposed uniform SLAM benchmark systems
to perform quantitative, comparable and validatable experimental research for investigating trade-offs among various
SLAM systems. Through these systems, the evaluation experiments can be easily performed by using the dataset, and
metric evaluation modules.
As those systems only provide evaluation benchmarks,
we consider it is possible to build a platform to serve the
whole life-circle of SLAM algorithms including development, evaluation and application stages. In addition, deep
learning based SLAM has achieved remarkable progress in
recent years, it is necessary to create a platform which not
only supports C++ but also Python for better supporting
integration for geometric and deep learning based SLAM
system. Therefore, in this paper we introduce a novel SLAM platform which provides not only evaluation functionality, but also useful toolkit for researchers to quickly
develop their own SLAM systems. Through this platform,
frequently used functions are provided with plugin forms, therefore, users could implement their own projects with
directly using them or creating their own functions for better performance. We hope this platform could further boost
the SLAM systems to practical applications. In summary,
the main contributions of this work are as follows:
1. We presented an universal, cross-platform and full open-source SLAM platform for both research and
commercial usages, which is beyond that of previous benchmarks. The SLAM interface is consisted by
several lightweight, dependency-free headers, which
makes it easy to interact with different datasets, S-

∗ Yong Zhao and Shibiao Xu contributed equally to this work and share
the first authorship.
† Shibiao Xu and Shuhui Bu are joint corresponding authors (emails:
shibiao.xu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn; bushuhui@nwpu.edu.cn).

1110

