Closed-Form Optimal Two-View Triangulation Based on Angular Errors
Seong Hun Lee
Javier Civera
I3A, University of Zaragoza, Spain
{seonghunlee, jcivera}@unizar.es

Abstract
In this paper, we study closed-form optimal solutions to
two-view triangulation with known internal calibration and
pose. By formulating the triangulation problem as L1 and
L∞ minimization of angular reprojection errors, we derive
the exact closed-form solutions that guarantee global optimality under respective cost functions. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to present such solutions. Since
the angular error is rotationally invariant, our solutions can
be applied for any type of central cameras, be it perspective,
fisheye or omnidirectional. Our methods also require significantly less computation than the existing optimal methods.
Experimental results on synthetic and real datasets validate
our theoretical derivations.

1. Introduction
Recovering the position of a 3D point given its projections in two or more cameras is called triangulation. It constitutes a fundamental building block in stereo vision [33],
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [22] and
structure-from-motion (SfM) pipelines [29]. For large problems, reconstructing thousands (or millions) of points is not
uncommon, so achieving fast and accurate triangulation is
important for the performance of such systems.
If one assumes the exact knowledge of camera matrices
and noiseless feature measurements, triangulation amounts
to intersecting two backprojected rays that correspond to
the same 3D point. In practice, however, this assumption is
unrealistic, and the rays do not necessarily intersect. Therefore, a nontrivial method is required even for just two views.
The standard approach is to find the 3D point that minimizes a chosen cost function given the feature measurements. The most common are the L1 norm (sum of magnitude), L2 norm (sum of squares) and L∞ norm (maximum)
of image reprojection errors. While reasonable for perspective cameras, the image reprojection error does not generalize well to different camera types (e.g., omnidirectional
or fully spherical panoramic cameras). This motivates the
use of angular reprojection error, a rotationally invariant al-

ternative to the image reprojection error that is generic and
independent of the projection geometry [21, 24, 27].
In this work, we derive, for the first time to our knowledge, the exact closed-form solutions to the L1 and L∞ optimal triangulation from two views based on the angular reprojection error. Unlike iterative methods (e.g., [13, 17]),
the proposed methods guarantee global optimality without any iterations, and unlike polynomial methods (e.g.,
[10, 23, 32]), they do not involve finding the roots of a
higher-degree polynomial. Hence, our methods simultaneously provide the global optimality, speed and simplicity.
We also present our own derivation of the L2 optimal solution that is much more compact and geometrically intuitive than the existing one [24]. Since all three methods are
based on the angular error, they are not limited to standard
perspective cameras and can also be used for fisheye, omnidirectional and fully spherical panoramic cameras.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next three sections, we discuss the related work and preliminaries. Section 5, 6 and 7 respectively present the closed-form solutions to the L1 , L2 and L∞ optimal triangulation. To make
our paper compact and easily accessible, we separated the
proofs from our main findings and put them in the appendix.
Section 8 addresses the cheirality constraint. Finally, experimental results are provided in Section 9, followed by the
conclusions in Section 10.

2. Related Work
The most widespread approach to triangulation is to find
the 3D point that minimizes the L2 norm of image reprojection errors [8]. Assuming that image points are perturbed by
Gaussian noise, the L2 optimal solution gives the maximum
likelihood estimate (MLE). This can be obtained in closed
form by solving a polynomial of degree 6 for two views
[10] and degree 47 for three views [32]. Such polynomial
methods are, however, computationally expensive and susceptible to ill-conditioning [17]. Besides, an iterative search
for the roots may converge to a local minimum [10].
Another two-view method by Kanatani et al. [13] iteratively corrects the 2D projections of the points. Although
this method was shown to be faster than the one by Hartley

2681

