Knowledge Distillation via Route Constrained Optimization
Xiao Jin1∗, Baoyun Peng2∗, Yichao Wu1 , Yu Liu3 , Jiaheng Liu4 ,
Ding Liang1 , Junjie Yan1 , Xiaolin Hu5
1
2
SenseTime Group Limited
National University of Defense Technology
3
4
5
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Beihang University
Tsinghua University
jinxiaocuhk@gmail.com, pengbaoyun13@nudt.edu.cn, yuliu@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, liujiaheng@buaa.edu.cn
{wuyichao,liangding,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com, xlhu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Distillation-based learning boosts the performance of
the miniaturized neural network based on the hypothesis
that the representation of a teacher model can be used as
structured and relatively weak supervision, and thus would
be easily learned by a miniaturized model. However, we
find that the representation of a converged heavy model is
still a strong constraint for training a small student model,
which leads to a higher lower bound of congruence loss.
In this work, we consider the knowledge distillation from
the perspective of curriculum learning by teacher’s routing. Instead of supervising the student model with a converged teacher model, we supervised it with some anchor
points selected from the route in parameter space that the
teacher model passed by, as we called route constrained optimization (RCO). We experimentally demonstrate this simple operation greatly reduces the lower bound of congruence loss for knowledge distillation, hint and mimicking
learning. On close-set classification tasks like CIFAR and
ImageNet, RCO improves knowledge distillation by 2.14%
and 1.5% respectively. For the sake of evaluating the generalization, we also test RCO on the open-set face recognition
task MegaFace. RCO achieves 84.3% accuracy on one-tomillion task with only 0.8 M parameters, which push the
SOTA by a large margin.

1. Introduction
The performance of Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) can be significantly improved by the deeper and
wider design of network structure. Whereas, it is hard to
deploy these heavy networks on energetic consumption processor with limited memory. One way to deal with this situation is to make a trade-off between performance and speed
by designing a miniaturized model to reduce the compu∗ Equal contribution.

tational workload, at the cost of performance degradation.
Thus, narrowing the performance gap between heavy model
and miniaturized model becomes a research focus in recent
years. Many methods were proposed to tackle this problem,
such as model pruning [6, 15], quantization [12, 28] and
knowledge transfer [10, 24].

T

T
KD

L2

S

KD

S

(a) Knowledge Distillation

(a) Knowledge Distillation

T

(b) Hint Learning

(b) Hint Learning

Teacher model
S

Student model

T

T

Latent representation

T

Probability of classes

Hint

S

Hint

S

Hint

S

Training process for both teacher and student

(c) Route Constrained Hint Learning

(c) Route Constrained Hint Learning

Figure 1: Comparing to targeting only a converged teacher like
KD and Hint-based learning, RCO narrows the performance gap
by gradually mimicking the route sequence of teacher.

Among these approaches, knowledge distillation (KD)
performs as an essential way to optimize a static model by
mimicking the behavior (final predictions [10] or activations
of hidden layers [24]) of a powerful teacher network, as
shown in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(b). Guided by this softened knowledge, a student network could pay more attention to extra supervision such as the probability correlation
between classes rather than the one-hot label.
Previous methods only consider the final converged
teacher model to teach small student network, which may
result that the student stucks in approximating teacher’s performance along with the increasing gap (in capacity) between teacher and student [22]. We observe that student

1345

