Point-to-Point Video Generation
Tsun-Hsuan Wang∗, Yen-Chi Cheng∗ , Chieh Hubert Lin, Hwann-Tzong Chen, Min Sun
National Tsing Hua University
{johnsonwang0810, charlescheng0117, hubert052702}@gmail.com
htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw, sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw
Targeted start-frame of the next clip

3D Skeleton

Video

P2P Generation with Various Length

Figure 1: Point-to-Point (P2P) Video Generation. Given a pair of (orange) start- and (red) end-frames in the video and 3D
skeleton domains, our method generates videos with smooth transitional frames of various lengths. The superb controllability
of p2p generation naturally facilitates the modern video editing process.

Abstract
While image synthesis achieves tremendous breakthroughs (e.g., generating realistic faces), video generation is less explored and harder to control, which limits
its applications in the real world. For instance, video editing requires temporal coherence across multiple clips and
thus poses both start and end constraints within a video sequence. We introduce point-to-point video generation that
controls the generation process with two control points: the
targeted start- and end-frames. The task is challenging
since the model not only generates a smooth transition of
frames, but also plans ahead to ensure that the generated
end-frame conforms to the targeted end-frame for videos
of various lengths. We propose to maximize the modified
variational lower bound of conditional data likelihood under a skip-frame training strategy. Our model can generate
end-frame-consistent sequences without loss of quality and
diversity. We evaluate our method through extensive experiments on Stochastic Moving MNIST, Weizmann Action, Human3.6M, and BAIR Robot Pushing under a series of scenarios. The qualitative results showcase the effectiveness
and merits of point-to-point generation.
∗ indicates equal contribution

1. Introduction
The significant advancements in deep generative models bring impressive results in a wide range of domains
such as image synthesis, text generation, and video prediction. Despite the huge success, unconstrained generation
is still a few steps away from practical applications since it
lacks intuitive and handy mechanisms to incorporate human
manipulation into the generation process. In view of this
incapability, conditional and controllable generative models have received an increasing amount of attention. Most
existing work achieves controllability by conditioning the
generation on the attribute, text, user inputs, or scene graph
[17, 39, 43, 45]. However, regardless of the considerable
progress in still image generation, controllable video generation is yet to be well explored.
Typically, humans create a video through breaking down
the entire story into separate scenes, taking shots for each
scene individually, and finally merging every piece of
footage to form the final edit. This requires a smooth transition across not only frames but also different video clips,
posing constraints on both start- and end-frames within a
video sequence so as to align with the preceding and subsequent context. We introduce point-to-point video gener-

10491

