Tracking without bells and whistles
Philipp Bergmann∗

Tim Meinhardt∗

Laura Leal-Taixe

Technical University of Munich

Abstract
The problem of tracking multiple objects in a video sequence poses several challenging tasks. For tracking-bydetection, these include object re-identification, motion prediction and dealing with occlusions. We present a tracker
(without bells and whistles) that accomplishes tracking
without specifically targeting any of these tasks, in particular, we perform no training or optimization on tracking
data. To this end, we exploit the bounding box regression of
an object detector to predict the position of an object in the
next frame, thereby converting a detector into a Tracktor.
We demonstrate the potential of Tracktor and provide a new
state-of-the-art on three multi-object tracking benchmarks
by extending it with a straightforward re-identification and
camera motion compensation.
We then perform an analysis on the performance and
failure cases of several state-of-the-art tracking methods
in comparison to our Tracktor. Surprisingly, none of the
dedicated tracking methods are considerably better in dealing with complex tracking scenarios, namely, small and
occluded objects or missing detections. However, our approach tackles most of the easy tracking scenarios. Therefore, we motivate our approach as a new tracking paradigm
and point out promising future research directions. Overall, Tracktor yields superior tracking performance than any
current tracking method and our analysis exposes remaining and unsolved tracking challenges to inspire future research directions.

or data association, is a challenging task on its own, due
to missing and spurious detections, occlusions, and target
interactions in crowded environments. To address these issues, research in this area has produced increasingly complex models achieving only marginally better results, e.g.,
multiple object tracking accuracy has only improved 2.4%
in the last two years on the MOT16 [45] benchmark.
In this paper, we push tracking-by-detection to the limit
by using only an object detection method to perform tracking. We show that one can achieve state-of-the-art tracking
results by training a neural network only on the task of detection. As indicated by the blue arrows in Figure 1, the
regressor of an object detector such as Faster-RCNN [52]
is sufficient to construct object trajectories in a multitude
of challenging tracking scenarios. This raises an interesting question that we discuss in this paper: If a detector can
solve most of the tracking problems, what are the real situations where a dedicated tracking algorithm is necessary?
We hope our work and the presented Tracktor allows researchers to focus on the still unsolved critical challenges
of multi-object tracking.
This paper presents four main contributions:
• We introduce the Tracktor which tackles multi-object
tracking by exploiting the regression head of a detector
to perform temporal realignment of object bounding
boxes.
• We present two simple extensions to Tracktor, a reidentification Siamese network and a motion model.
The resulting tracker yields state-of-the-art performance in three challenging multi-object tracking
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding from video remains one of the big
challenges of computer vision. Humans are often the center
of attention in a scene, which leads to the fundamental problem of detecting and tracking them in a video. Tracking-bydetection has emerged as the preferred paradigm to solve
the problem of tracking multiple objects as it simplifies the
task by breaking it into two steps: (i) detecting object locations independently in each frame, (ii) form tracks by linking corresponding detections across time. The linking step,

• We conduct a detailed analysis on failure cases and
challenging tracking scenarios, and show none of the
dedicated tracking methods perform substantially better than our regression approach.
• We propose our method as a new tracking paradigm
which exploits the detector and allows researchers to
focus on the remaining complex tracking challenges.
This includes an extensive study on promising future
research directions.

∗ Contributed equally. Correspondence to: tim.meinhardt@tum.de

1941

