Unsupervised Pre-Training of Image Features on Non-Curated Data
Mathilde Caron1,2 , Piotr Bojanowski1 , Julien Mairal2 , and Armand Joulin1
1

Facebook AI Research
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France

Abstract

1. Introduction
Pre-trained convolutional neural networks, or convnets,
are important components of image recognition applications [7, 8, 38, 46]. They improve the generalization of
models trained on a limited amount of data [39] and speed
up the training on applications when annotated data is abundant [20]. Convnets produce good generic representations
when they are pre-trained on large supervised datasets like
ImageNet [11]. However, designing such fully-annotated
datasets has required a significant effort from the research
community in terms of data cleansing and manual labeling.

74

mAP

Pre-training general-purpose visual features with convolutional neural networks without relying on annotations
is a challenging and important task. Most recent efforts in
unsupervised feature learning have focused on either small
or highly curated datasets like ImageNet, whereas using
non-curated raw datasets was found to decrease the feature quality when evaluated on a transfer task. Our goal is
to bridge the performance gap between unsupervised methods trained on curated data, which are costly to obtain, and
massive raw datasets that are easily available. To that effect, we propose a new unsupervised approach which leverages self-supervision and clustering to capture complementary statistics from large-scale data. We validate our approach on 96 million images from YFCC100M [42], achieving state-of-the-art results among unsupervised methods on
standard benchmarks, which confirms the potential of unsupervised learning when only non-curated raw data are
available. We also show that pre-training a supervised
VGG-16 with our method achieves 74.9% top-1 classification accuracy on the validation set of ImageNet, which is an
improvement of +0.8% over the same network trained from
scratch. Our code is available at https://github.
com/facebookresearch/DeeperCluster.

76

72

70
1

76
DeeperCluster YFCC
DeeperCluster ImNet
RotNet YFCC
RotNet ImNet

74

mAP

2

4
20
100
size of dataset (x 10e6)

72

70
1

2
4
8
16
number of cluster (x 10e4)

Figure 1: Influence of amount of data (left) and number of
clusters (right) on the features quality. We report validation
mAP on Pascal VOC classification task (FC 68 setting).

Scaling up the annotation process to datasets that are orders
of magnitude bigger raises important difficulties. Using
raw metadata as an alternative has been shown to perform
comparatively well [23, 41], even surpassing ImageNet pretraining when trained on billions of images [30]. However,
metadata are not always available, and when they are, they
do not necessarily cover the full extent of a dataset. These
difficulties motivate the design of methods that learn transferable features without using any annotation.
Recent works describing unsupervised approaches have
reported performances that are closing the gap with their
supervised counterparts [6, 15, 51]. However, the best performing unsupervised methods are trained on ImageNet, a
curated dataset made of carefully selected images to form
well-balanced and diversified classes [11]. Simply discarding the labels does not undo this careful selection, as
it only removes part of the human supervision. Because
of that, previous works that have experimented with noncurated raw data report a degradation of the quality of features [6, 12]. In this work, we aim at learning good visual
representations from unlabeled and non-curated datasets.
We focus on the YFCC100M dataset [42], which contains
99 million images from the Flickr photo-sharing website.
This dataset is unbalanced, with a “long-tail” distribution of
12959

