Expectation-Maximization Attention Networks for Semantic Segmentation
Xia Li1,2 ,

Zhisheng Zhong2 ,
1

Jianlong Wu2,3 ,

Yibo Yang4 ,

Zhouchen Lin2 ,

Hong Liu1,

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
3

School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University

4

Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University

{ethanlee,zszhong,jlwu1992,ibo,zlin,hongliu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-attention mechanism has been widely used for various tasks. It is designed to compute the representation of
each position by a weighted sum of the features at all positions. Thus, it can capture long-range relations for computer vision tasks. However, it is computationally consuming. Since the attention maps are computed w.r.t all other
positions. In this paper, we formulate the attention mechanism into an expectation-maximization manner and iteratively estimate a much more compact set of bases upon
which the attention maps are computed. By a weighted
summation upon these bases, the resulting representation is
low-rank and deprecates noisy information from the input.
The proposed Expectation-Maximization Attention (EMA)
module is robust to the variance of input and is also friendly
in memory and computation. Moreover, we set up the
bases maintenance and normalization methods to stabilize
its training procedure. We conduct extensive experiments on
popular semantic segmentation benchmarks including PASCAL VOC, PASCAL Context and COCO Stuff, on which we
set new records1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental and challenging problem of computer vision, whose goal is to assign a
semantic category to each pixel of the image. It is critical
for various tasks such as autonomous driving, image editing
and robot sensing. In order to accomplish the semantic segmentation task effectively, we need to distinguish some confusing categories and take the appearance of different objects into account. For example, ‘grass’ and ‘ground’ have
similar color in some cases and ‘person’ may have various
scales, figures and clothes in different locations of the image. Meanwhile, the label space of the output is quite com1 Project address: https://xialipku.github.io/EMANet

Input feature maps
Input Feature maps

. . .. ... .. .. .
. ... ...... .........
.... . ... . ...
. .. . . ..
... .... . .. .. ..
. . . .. .

EM

Output feature maps
Output Feature maps

Bases
E

M

Attention Maps

Figure 1:
Pipeline of the proposed expectationmaximization attention method.
pact and the amount of the categories for a specific dataset
is limited. Therefore, this task can be treated as projecting
data points in a high-dimensional noisy space into a compact sub-space. The essence lies in de-noising these variation and capturing the most important semantic concepts.
Recently, many state-of-the-art methods based on fully
convolutional networks (FCNs) [22] have been proposed to
address the above issues. Due to the fixed geometric structures, they are inherently limited by local receptive fields
and short-range contextual information. To capture longrange dependencies, several works employ the multi-scale
context fusion [17], such as astrous convolution [4], spatial pyramid [37], large kernel convolution [25] and so on.
Moreover, to keep more detailed information, the encoderdecoder structures [34, 5] are proposed to fuse mid-level
and high-level semantic features. To aggregate information
from all spatial locations, attention mechanism [29, 38, 31]
is used, which enables the feature of a single pixel to fuse
information from all other positions. However, the original
attention-based methods need to generate a large attention
map, which has high computation complexity and occupies
a huge number of GPU memory. The bottleneck lies in that
both the generation of attention map and its usage are computed w.r.t all positions.
Towards the above issues, in this paper, we rethink the
attention mechanism from the view of expectationmaximization (EM) algorithm [7] and propose a
novel attention-based method, namely ExpectationMaximization Attention (EMA). Instead of treating all
pixels themselves as the reconstruction bases [38, 31], we

9167

