Extreme View Synthesis
Inchang Choi1,2

Orazio Gallo1
Alejandro Troccoli1
1
2
NVIDIA
KAIST

Min H. Kim2

Jan Kautz1

Z
Ours

Zhou et al.

30×
1×

Extrapolated Left

Input Cameras

Extrapolated Right

Figure 1: We propose a novel view synthesis method that can generate extreme views, i.e., images synthesized from a small
number of cameras (two in this example) and from significantly different viewpoints. In this comparison with the method
by Zhou et al. [34], we show the left view from the camera setup depicted above. Even at a 30× baseline magnification our
method produces sharper results.

Abstract
We present Extreme View Synthesis, a solution for novel
view extrapolation that works even when the number of input images is small—as few as two. In this context, occlusions and depth uncertainty are two of the most pressing
issues, and worsen as the degree of extrapolation increases.
We follow the traditional paradigm of performing depthbased warping and refinement, with a few key improvements. First, we estimate a depth probability volume, rather
than just a single depth value for each pixel of the novel
view. This allows us to leverage depth uncertainty in challenging regions, such as depth discontinuities. After using
it to get an initial estimate of the novel view, we explicitly
combine learned image priors and the depth uncertainty to
synthesize a refined image with less artifacts. Our method is
the first to show visually pleasing results for baseline magnifications of up to 30×. The code is available at https:
//github.com/NVlabs/extreme-view-synth

1. Introduction
The ability to capture visual content and render it from
a different perspective, usually referred to as novel view

synthesis, is a long-standing problem in computer graphics.
When appropriately solved, it enables telepresence applications such as head-mounted virtual and mixed reality, and
navigation of remote environments on a 2D screen—an experience popularized by Google Street View. The increasing amount of content that is uploaded daily to sharing services offers a rich source of data for novel view synthesis.
Nevertheless, a seamless navigation of the virtual world requires a more dense sampling than these sparse observations
offer. Synthesis from sparse views is challenging, in particular when generating views creating disocclusions, a common situation when the viewpoint is extrapolated, rather
than interpolated, from the input cameras.
Early novel view synthesis methods can generate new
images by interpolation either in pixel space [4], or in ray
space [20]. Novel views can also be synthesized with methods that use 3D information explicitly. A typical approach
would use it to warp the input views to the virtual camera
and merge them based on a measure of quality [1]. The advantage of such methods is that they explicitly leverage geometric constraints. Depth, however, does not come without
disadvantages. First and foremost is the problem of occlusions. Second, depth estimation is always subject to a de17781

