Quasi-globally Optimal and Efficient Vanishing Point Estimation
in Manhattan World

1

Haoang Li1 Ji Zhao2 Jean-Charles Bazin3 Wen Chen1 Zhe Liu1 Yun-Hui Liu1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China 2 TuSimple, China 3 KAIST, South Korea

{hali, wenchen, zliu, yhliu}@mae.cuhk.edu.hk zhaoji84@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Vanishing point (VP) is the intersection of a set of image
lines projected from parallel 3D lines. It has been successfully applied to various fields such as structure from motion [15, 23], scene understanding [14] and SLAM [21, 22].
Structured environments (typically man-made scenes) exhibit particular regularity like parallelism and orthogonality. Manhattan world [11] holds for the scenes with three
mutually orthogonal dominant directions that correspond
to three orthogonal VPs (shown in Fig. 1). In Manhattan
world, given several lines in a calibrated image, we aim at
clustering them by three unknown-but-sought VPs.
The Manhattan frame (MF) [30] is widely used to model
the structure of Manhattan world. Three axes of MF correspond to three dominant directions of Manhattan world.

Vanishing point
(VP)

Manhattan frame
(MF)

Abstract
The image lines projected from parallel 3D lines intersect at a common point called the vanishing point (VP).
Manhattan world holds for the scenes with three orthogonal VPs. In Manhattan world, given several lines in a calibrated image, we aim at clustering them by three unknownbut-sought VPs. The VP estimation can be reformulated as
computing the rotation between the Manhattan frame and
the camera frame. To compute this rotation, state-of-theart methods are based on either data sampling or parameter search, and they fail to guarantee the accuracy and
efficiency simultaneously. In contrast, we propose to hybridize these two strategies. We first compute two degrees
of freedom (DOF) of the above rotation by two sampled image lines, and then search for the optimal third DOF based
on the branch-and-bound. Our sampling accelerates our
search by reducing the search space and simplifying the
bound computation. Our search is not sensitive to noise and
achieves quasi-global optimality in terms of maximizing the
number of inliers. Experiments on synthetic and real-world
images showed that our method outperforms state-of-theart approaches in terms of accuracy and/or efficiency.

bazinjc@kaist.ac.kr

3D lines in
Manhattan world

Image plane

Camera frame

Figure 1. We cluster a set of image lines into three groups (shown
in different colors) by three unknown-but-sought orthogonal VPs.
The VP estimation can be reformulated as computing the rotation
between the MF and the camera frame.

Fig. 1 shows that the camera center and VPs define three
orthogonal 3D directions aligned to the MF axes. Based
on this constraint, the VP estimation can be reformulated
as computing the rotation between the MF and the camera
frame (hereinafter called the “MF rotation”). To compute
this rotation, state-of-the-art methods are based on either
data sampling [4,25,35] or parameter search [5,6,24]. They
hypothesize MF rotations in different ways and retrieve the
optimal one fitting most image lines. The sampling-based
methods (typically using RANSAC [13]) hypothesize finite MF rotations by the sampled image lines. Due to the
sampling uncertainty, they fail to guarantee the global optimality in terms of maximizing the number of inliers. The
search-based methods (typically using branch-and-bound
(BnB) [20]) directly face infinite MF rotations hypothesized
over the rotation space, and continuously narrow down the
search scope. While they achieve global optimality in terms
of maximizing the number of inliers, their efficiency is limited by high-dimensional search space and complex computation of the bounds of cost functions.
In contrast, we propose to hybridize the sampling and
search strategies to compute three degrees of freedom
(DOF) of the MF rotation. We first efficiently estimate two
DOF by two sampled image lines, and then employ BnB
to search for the optimal third DOF. The key advantage of
our method is that it achieves both high efficiency and high
accuracy. For efficiency, we exploit sampling to accelerate
our search by reducing the search space. Moreover, our rotation parametrization contributes to efficiently computing
tight bounds of our cost function, which further speeds up

1646

