Accelerated Gravitational Point Set Alignment with Altered Physical Laws*
Vladislav Golyanik1
1
MPI for Informatics

Christian Theobalt1
2
University of Kaiserslautern

Didier Stricker2,3
3
DFKI

Abstract
This work describes Barnes-Hut Rigid Gravitational Approach (BH-RGA) — a new rigid point set registration
method relying on principles of particle dynamics. Interpreting the inputs as two interacting particle swarms, we
directly minimise the gravitational potential energy of the
system using non-linear least squares. Compared to solutions obtained by solving systems of second-order ordinary
differential equations, our approach is more robust and less
dependent on the parameter choice. We accelerate otherwise exhaustive particle interactions with a Barnes-Hut tree
and efficiently handle massive point sets in quasilinear time
while preserving the globally multiply-linked character of
interactions. Among the advantages of BH-RGA is the possibility to define boundary conditions or additional alignment cues through varying point masses. Systematic experiments demonstrate that BH-RGA surpasses performances
of baseline methods in terms of the convergence basin and
accuracy when handling incomplete, noisy and perturbed
data. The proposed approach also positively compares to
the competing method for the alignment with prior matches.

1. Introduction
Alignment of point sets provided in different reference
frames is an essential algorithmic component in multiple
fields including but not limited to visual odometry [33], 3D
reconstruction and augmented reality [40], [39], robot navigation and localisation [46], computer graphics [48], CAD
modelling [52], cultural heritage [8] and medical technology [11, 25]. Even though rigid point set registration is
a well-studied area [6, 11, 43, 20, 12, 18, 25, 50, 41, 38,
14, 21, 15], multiple challenges are remaining — on the
top of the list are the broader basin of convergence, the robustness to disturbing effects in the samples (noise, missing
data, clustered outliers) and handling of massive point sets.
We are considering rigid alignment (RA) relative to a fixed
reference frame R (perhaps an observer’s reference frame),
and coordinates of one of the point sets X are known in R.
* supported by the ERC Consolidator Grant 4DReply (770784) and the
BMBF projects DYNAMICS (01IW15003) and VIDETE (01IW18002).

Figure 1: An overview of our BH-RGA approach. In every external iteration, we compute a Barnes-Hut tree for the reference and template jointly
and specify an optimisation problem. Next, an NLLS solver runs for a few
internal iterations while requiring O(M log N ) time to approximate gravitational potential energy of globally multiply-linked particle interactions.

We refer to X as a reference. The objective of RA is the
recovery of a non-injective, non-surjective correspondence
function f : Y → X together with the rigid transformation
parameters, i.e., rotation R and translation t (6 DoF) registering the template point set Y to X .
All RA techniques can be divided into local and
multiply-linked policies. An RA method is called globally
multiply-linked if and only if every point of X interacts with
every point of Y, with an example of the recently proposed
particle dynamics based gravitational approach (GA) [21].
In GA, every point of Y interacts with every point of X
through a force field. The method was shown to be more
robust to large amounts of noise. This robustness comes
at the cost of quadratic complexity and parameter sensitivity which impedes its applicability to real-world large and
dense point sets. Moreover, the solution based on physical
simulation is slow and unstable. We believe that considerable improvements are possible in the field of physics-based
RA. In practical applications, we are interested in fast convergence and well-posedness with respect to the parameter
settings, and less in the physically accurate modelling. On
the other hand, feasible acceleration techniques for particle dynamics based RA remained unexplored so far and are
worth to investigate.
Contributions. In the proposed exposition, we present a
stable, robust and accelerated globally multiply-linked particle dynamics based RA approach and overcome the limitations of previous works, see Fig. 1 for an overview. Recall that behind the scenes, GA finds transformations corre-

2080

