Estimating the Fundamental Matrix Without Point Correspondences With
Application to Transmission Imaging

1

Tobias Würfl1 , André Aichert2 , Nicole Maaß2 , Frank Dennerlein2 , Andreas Maier1
Pattern Recognition Lab, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU)
2
Siemens Healthcare GmbH
https://www5.cs.fau.de

Abstract
We present a general method to estimate the fundamental matrix from a pair of images under perspective projection without the need for image point correspondences. Our
method is particularly well-suited for transmission imaging,
where state-of-the-art feature detection and matching approaches generally do not perform well. Estimation of the
fundamental matrix plays a central role in auto-calibration
methods for reflection imaging. Such methods are currently
not applicable to transmission imaging. Furthermore, our
method extends an existing technique proposed for reflection imaging which potentially avoids the outlier-prone feature matching step from an orthographic projection model
to a perspective model. Our method exploits the idea that
under a linear attenuation model line integrals along corresponding epipolar lines are equal if we compute their
derivatives in orthogonal direction to their common epipolar plane. We use the fundamental matrix to parametrize
this equality. Our method estimates the matrix by formulating a non-convex optimization problem, minimizing
an error in our measurement of this equality. We believe
this technique will enable the application of the large body
of work on image-based camera pose estimation to transmission imaging leading to more accurate and more general motion compensation and auto-calibration algorithms,
particularly in medical X-ray and Computed Tomography
imaging.

1. Introduction
Transmission imaging modalities are very popular in
technical, scientific and medical applications. They measure attenuation of mechanical or electromagnetic waves
instead of light reflected from surfaces. Examples include
X-ray imaging, speed-of-sound ultrasound imaging [31, 32]
and electron-microscopy. Fan et al. [10] illustrate the differences and similarities between transmission and reflection

imaging. Most importantly, they show that transmission images are continuous functions as opposed to the widely used
discontinuous models for reflection images. This is a direct
consequence of the image formation process which superimposes all objects of the three dimensional data along the
projection rays. While feature detection and matching techniques suffer along occluding edges in reflection imaging,
transmission images are still harder to analyze because objects are always superimposed. Two-view reconstruction is
generally impossible in transmission imaging, however reconstruction of the 3D scene is routinely performed from
a continuous camera trajectory to disentangle the objects.
In X-ray imaging this is known as Computed Tomography
(CT). In contrast to reflection imaging the resulting scene
reconstructions are dense instead of mere surface models
and require considerably more than two images at the minimum.
Most research in these modalities concentrates around
solving the scene reconstruction problem while assuming
the scene structure is calibrated offline [17, 27, 9]. However,
in many scenarios this offline calibration falls short. E.g. in
medical imaging movement of the patient often needs to be
compensated [30]. Another difficult scenario are new generations of flexible X-ray systems on robotic arms which
can perform arbitrary scan trajectories and therefore currently require a high calibration effort [34] and cannot utilize their full flexibility [22]. This estimation of the threedimensional configuration of the imaging system has been
studied extensively in computer vision. However, most current techniques naturally assume an estimation of corresponding points in images is generally possible. This works
well in reflection imaging when the visual appearance of
certain surface points is distinct and consistent across images. It is well-known that glossy and transparent surfaces pose problems to most algorithms. Matters are even
more complicated in transmission imaging for three reasons. First, most systems do not distinguish between different energy spectra. Second, the resulting values only
reflect the accumulated attenuation from passing through
11072

