YOLACT
Real-time Instance Segmentation
Daniel Bolya

Chong Zhou

Fanyi Xiao

Yong Jae Lee

University of California, Davis
{dbolya, cczhou, fyxiao, yongjaelee}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
We present a simple, fully-convolutional model for realtime instance segmentation that achieves 29.8 mAP on MS
COCO at 33.5 fps evaluated on a single Titan Xp, which is
significantly faster than any previous competitive approach.
Moreover, we obtain this result after training on only one
GPU. We accomplish this by breaking instance segmentation into two parallel subtasks: (1) generating a set of prototype masks and (2) predicting per-instance mask coefficients. Then we produce instance masks by linearly combining the prototypes with the mask coefficients. We find that
because this process doesn’t depend on repooling, this approach produces very high-quality masks and exhibits temporal stability for free. Furthermore, we analyze the emergent behavior of our prototypes and show they learn to localize instances on their own in a translation variant manner, despite being fully-convolutional. Finally, we also propose Fast NMS, a drop-in 12 ms faster replacement for standard NMS that only has a marginal performance penalty.

1. Introduction
“Boxes are stupid anyway though, I’m probably a true
believer in masks except I can’t get YOLO to learn them.”
– Joseph Redmon, YOLOv3 [36]
What would it take to create a real-time instance segmentation algorithm? Over the past few years, the vision community has made great strides in instance segmentation, in part by drawing on powerful parallels from
the well-established domain of object detection. State-ofthe-art approaches to instance segmentation like Mask RCNN [18] and FCIS [24] directly build off of advances in
object detection like Faster R-CNN [37] and R-FCN [8].
Yet, these methods focus primarily on performance over
speed, leaving the scene devoid of instance segmentation
parallels to real-time object detectors like SSD [30] and
YOLO [35, 36]. In this work, our goal is to fill that gap with
a fast, one-stage instance segmentation model in the same
way that SSD and YOLO fill that gap for object detection.

Figure 1: Speed-performance trade-off for various instance
segmentation methods on COCO. To our knowledge, ours
is the first real-time (above 30 FPS) approach with around
30 mask mAP on COCO test-dev.
However, instance segmentation is hard—much harder
than object detection. One-stage object detectors like SSD
and YOLO are able to speed up existing two-stage detectors like Faster R-CNN by simply removing the second stage and making up for the lost performance in other
ways. The same approach is not easily extendable, however, to instance segmentation. State-of-the-art two-stage
instance segmentation methods depend heavily on feature
localization to produce masks. That is, these methods “repool” features in some bounding box region (e.g., via RoIpool/align), and then feed these now localized features to
their mask predictor. This approach is inherently sequential
and is therefore difficult to accelerate. One-stage methods
that perform these steps in parallel like FCIS do exist, but
they require significant amounts of post-processing after localization, and thus are still far from real-time.
To address these issues, we propose YOLACT1 , a realtime instance segmentation framework that forgoes an explicit localization step. Instead, YOLACT breaks up instance segmentation into two parallel tasks: (1) generat1 You Only Look At CoefficienTs

9157

