AWSD: Adaptive Weighted Spatiotemporal Distillation for Video Representation
Mohammad Tavakolian
University of Oulu

Hamed R. Tavakoli
Aalto University & Nokia Technologies

Abdenour Hadid
Univesity of Oulu

Abstract
We propose an Adaptive Weighted Spatiotemporal Distillation (AWSD) technique for video representation by encoding the appearance and dynamics of the videos into a single
RGB image map. This is obtained by adaptively dividing
the videos into small segments and comparing two consecutive segments. This allows using pre-trained models on still
images for video classification while successfully capturing
the spatiotemporal variations in the videos. The adaptive
segment selection enables effective encoding of the essential discriminative information of untrimmed videos. Based
on Gaussian Scale Mixture, we compute the weights by extracting the mutual information between two consecutive
segments. Unlike pooling-based methods, our AWSD gives
more importance to the frames that characterize actions or
events thanks to its adaptive segment length selection. We
conducted extensive experimental analysis to evaluate the
effectiveness of our proposed method and compared our results against those of recent state-of-the-art methods on four
benchmark datatsets, including UCF101, HMDB51, ActivityNet v1.3, and Maryland. The obtained results on these
benchmark datatsets showed that our method significantly
outperforms earlier works and sets the new state-of-the-art
performance in video classification. Code is available at the
project webpage: https://mohammadt68.github.
io/AWSD/

1. Introduction
Video understanding is a challenging task especially for
untrimmed videos, where several events happen during one
video. In this annals, the preliminary works treated videos
as either sequence of still images or volumetric objects,
and applied handcrafted local descriptors on a stack of images [33, 38, 32]. With the advent of representation learning and wave of deep neural networks in image understanding tasks, e.g. image classification [16], object, scene, and
face recognition [41, 9, 26], video understanding with neural networks has been receiving a plethora of attention in
recent years [23, 29, 15, 13].
Most of the existing deep models extend convolutional or

Figure 1: A visualization of Adaptive Weighted Spatiotemporal Distillation (AWSD) applied on RGB frames of
videos. Our AWSD captures the appearance and dynamic
information of videos and encodes them into one image,
which can be used as the input of deep models pre-trained
on still images.
recurrent neural networks to learn representations on short
interval of videos [23, 29]. This strategy limits the application of such models for capturing dynamics of the video
because they capture information of a short interval that can
lead to loss of critical statistics. Scaling an image-based
convolutional neural network (CNN) for videos often adds
another dimension of complexity as the number of parameters grows significantly. Note withstanding, training such
an architecture requires large volume of training data and
computational resources.
Recently, to circumvent the deficiencies caused by processing video on short intervals and/or avoid scaling deep
neural networks for temporal processing, a wave of methods
has started proposing learning an intermediate representation instead of a video volume prior to using a neural network for obtaining a final neural representation of a video,
e.g. [2, 37, 35]. A caveat to such approaches is the requirement for learning the intermediate representation, which adversely affects their generalization and efficient handling of
untrimmed videos.
We propose Adaptive Weighted Spatiotemporal Distillation (AWSD) for video representation. In contrast to existing approaches, our proposed model is free from learning
the intermediate representations and can handle untrimmed
videos effectively. The intermediate representation is di-

8020

