MultiSeg: Semantically Meaningful, Scale-Diverse Segmentations from Minimal User Input
Jun Hao Liew1∗ Scott Cohen2 Brian Price2 Long Mai2 Sim-Heng Ong1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Adobe Research
liewjunhao@u.nus.edu

{scohen,bprice,malong}@adobe.com

Abstract

{eleongsh,elefjia}@nus.edu.sg

Local Part

Multiple Objects

w/o diversity

Single Object

smaller scale

larger scale

with diversity

Existing deep learning-based interactive image segmentation approaches typically assume the target-of-interest is
always a single object and fail to account for the potential diversity in user expectations, thus requiring excessive
user input when it comes to segmenting an object part or
a group of objects instead. Motivated by the observation
that the object part, full object, and a collection of objects essentially differ in size, we propose a new concept
called scale-diversity, which characterizes the spectrum of
segmentations w.r.t. different scales. To address this, we
present MultiSeg, a scale-diverse interactive image segmentation network that incorporates a set of two-dimensional
scale priors into the model to generate a set of scale-varying
proposals that conform to the user input. We explicitly encourage segmentation diversity during training by synthesizing diverse training samples for a given image. As a result, our method allows the user to quickly locate the closest segmentation target for further refinement if necessary.
Despite its simplicity, experimental results demonstrate that
our proposed model is capable of quickly producing diverse
yet plausible segmentation outputs, reducing the user interaction required, especially in cases where many types of
segmentations (object parts or groups) are expected.

Jiashi Feng1

Figure 1: (Top row) Existing interactive image segmentation techniques typically do not account for diversity in
segmentations. Despite their excellent performance on extracting single object, they usually demand extensive user
input when segmenting a local part or a group of multiple
objects. (Bottom row) Our porposed MultiSeg produces a
set of scale-varying segmentations conforming to the given
user input. Positive (foreground) and negative (background)
clicks are represented by green and blue clicks, respectively.

1. Introduction
Interactive image segmentation takes user input (e.g.
clicks) to guide the segmentation process toward the desired output. Unlike semantic image segmentation which is
fully automated, interactive image segmentation is a semiautomated process, allowing extra user input to be added
for reﬁnement until the segmentation performance is satisfactory. It has become a popular research topic in the past
decades with a wide application domains such as data annotation, local image/video editing, image composition, and
medical image analysis.
Existing deep learning-based interactive image segmentation methods [16, 18, 23, 26, 27, 36] have demonstrated
signiﬁcant improvement over the previous techniques using
∗ This work was mainly done during an internship at Adobe Research.

hand-crafted features, typically allowing users to extract accurate segmentation masks with just a few user inputs. Although these models excel in extracting single object given
some user input, in practice, the target-of-interest may not
always be a single object. It could be a local part within the
object or a group of objects that this object belongs to. However, previous techniques do not account for such diversity
in segmentation, thus demanding additional user input when
the segmentation target is not a single object.
Figure 1 illustrates how conventional segmentation
methods ([36]) can struggle with handling varying userdesired segmentations. As shown in the ﬁrst column, such a
model is effective in extracting the single object (person),
requiring only one foreground click in this case. However, when the segmentation target is a local part (the ﬂower

662

