Deep Depth from Aberration Map

1

Masako Kashiwagi1 Nao Mishima1 Tatsuo Kozakaya1 Shinsaku Hiura2
Toshiba Corporate Research & Development Center 2 University of Hyogo
{firstname.lastname}@toshiba.co.jp

Aberration Map (A-Map)

Abstract
Passive and convenient depth estimation from singleshot image is still an open problem. Existing depth from
defocus methods require multiple input images or special
hardware customization. Recent deep monocular depth estimation is also limited to an image with sufficient contextual information. In this work, we propose a novel method
which realizes a single-shot deep depth measurement based
on physical depth cue using only an off-the-shelf camera
and lens. When a defocused image is taken by a camera,
it contains various types of aberrations corresponding to
distances from the image sensor and positions in the image plane. We call these minute and complexly compound
aberrations as Aberration Map (A-Map) and we found that
A-Map can be utilized as reliable physical depth cue. Additionally, our deep network named A-Map Analysis Network
(AMA-Net) is also proposed, which can effectively learn and
estimate depth via A-Map. To evaluate the validity and robustness of our approach, we have conducted extensive experiments using both real outdoor scenes and simulated images. The qualitative result shows the accuracy and availability of the method in comparison with a state-of-the-art
deep context-based method.

1. Introduction
Single-shot depth measurement using an off-the-shelf
camera is still an open problem despite remarkable advances in computational photography. In particular, the simultaneous pursuit of high robustness, low cost, and high
depth accuracy are challenging requirement for realizing
production.
For the single-shot approach, deep monocular depth estimation (DMDE) [17, 2] and depth from defocus (DfD)
[5, 14, 7, 19, 23, 25, 24] are mainly proposed in recent years.
DMDE is the most successful method, has greatly advanced
the accuracy of depth estimation by extracting contextual
information with a deep learning technique. Despite the re-

hiura@eng.u-hyogo.ac.jp

Supervised learning
Single-shot image

Depth map

AMA-Net

Near

Far

Figure 1. Depth measurement from a single-shot image by supervised learning of Aberration Map (A-Map) which contains various
types of aberrations, position of image, and distance information.

markable progress of DMDE, it has a fundamental limitation that a correct depth map cannot be estimated without
sufficient contextual information, for instance, in a scene
without the ground because it does not incorporate physical
depth cues. Conversely, single-shot DfD estimates depth
by purely simulating a model of defocus blur, without utilizing contextual information. Although the depth cue is
physically given as defocus blur, the depth still has the near
side or far side ambiguity from the focal plane. While several proposals which insert different types of color filters
[5, 7, 23, 25, 24] into the lens aperture solve this problem. Another approach of single-shot DfD focuses on axial
chromatic aberration [28, 9]. However, these approaches
need hardware customization to generate the desired aberration. Moreover, it is difficult to model the actual point
spread functions (PSFs) because a camera lens generally
contains various types of aberration. Recently, a combination of DMDE and DfD named as deep depth from defocus
(DDfD) is proposed in [22]. Its main idea is to improve

4070

