Adversarial Robustness vs. Model Compression, or Both?
Shaokai Ye1∗ Kaidi Xu2∗ Sijia Liu3 Hao Cheng4 Jan-Henrik Lambrechts1 Huan Zhang6
Aojun Zhou5 Kaisheng Ma1+ Yanzhi Wang2+ Xue Lin2+
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University & IIISCT, China 2 Northeastern University, USA
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research 4 Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
5
SenseTime Research, China 6 University of California, Los Angeles, USA

Abstract
It is well known that deep neural networks (DNNs) are
vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which are implemented
by adding crafted perturbations onto benign examples.
Min-max robust optimization based adversarial training
can provide a notion of security against adversarial attacks.
However, adversarial robustness requires a significantly
larger capacity of the network than that for the natural
training with only benign examples. This paper proposes
a framework of concurrent adversarial training and weight
pruning that enables model compression while still preserving the adversarial robustness and essentially tackles the
dilemma of adversarial training. Furthermore, this work
studies two hypotheses about weight pruning in the conventional setting and finds that weight pruning is essential for
reducing the network model size in the adversarial setting;
training a small model from scratch even with inherited
initialization from the large model cannot achieve neither
adversarial robustness nor high standard accuracy. Code
is available at https://github.com/yeshaokai/
Robustness-Aware-Pruning-ADMM .

1. Introduction
Deep learning or deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved extraordinary performance in many application
domains such as image classification [19, 39], object detection and recognition [27, 35], natural language processing [10, 34] and medical image analysis [28, 37]. Besides
deployments on the cloud, deep learning has become ubiquitous on embedded systems such as mobile phones, IoT
devices, personal healthcare wearables, autonomous driving [4, 11], unmanned aerial systems [6, 23], etc.
It has been well accepted that DNNs are vulnerable to
adversarial attacks [14, 46, 47, 53], which raises concerns
∗ Equal contribution
1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Core Technology

+ Corresponding Authors

of DNNs in security-critical applications and may result in
disastrous consequences. For example, in autonomous driving, a stop sign may be mistaken by a DNN as a speed limit
sign; malware may escape from deep learning based detection; and in authentication using face recognition, unauthorized people may escalate their access rights by fooling the
DNN.
Adversarial attacks are implemented by generating adversarial examples, i.e., adding sophisticated perturbations
onto benign examples, such that adversarial examples are
classified by the DNN as target (wrong) labels instead of
the correct labels of the benign examples. The adversary
may have white-box accesses to the DNN where the adversary has full information about the model (e.g., structure and weight parameters) [7, 8, 52, 45]; or black-box accesses where the adversary can only make queries and observe outputs [9, 22]. The black-box scenarios are of particular interest in the Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS)
paradigm, specifically in some cases where DNN models
trained through the cloud platform cannot be downloaded
and are accessed only through the service’s API.
According to [3], defenses that cause obfuscated gradients may provide a false sense of security and can be
overcome with improved attack techniques such as backward pass differentiable approximation, expectation over
transformation, and reparameterization. Also pointed out
in [3], adversarial training leveraging min-max robust optimization [33] does not have obfuscated gradients issue
and can be a promising defense mechanism. Since that researchers have begun to notice the issue when designing
new defenses, more defenses have been proposed including adversarial training based ones [29, 38, 42] and others [40, 48, 25].
Min-max robust optimization based adversarial training [33, 41] can provide a notion of security against all
first-order adversaries (i.e., attacks that rely on gradients of
the loss function with respect to the input), by modeling an
universal first-order attack through the inner maximization
problem while the outer minimization still representing the
1111

