Micro-Baseline Structured Light
Vishwanath Saragadam∗, Jian Wang, Mohit Gupta, and Shree Nayar
NYC Research Lab, Snap Inc.
vishwanathsrv@cmu.edu, {jwang4, snayar}@snap.com, mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

camera

Abstract
We propose Micro-baseline Structured Light (MSL), a
novel 3D imaging approach designed for small form-factor
devices such as cell-phones and miniature robots. MSL operates with small projector-camera baseline and low-cost
projection hardware, and can recover scene depths with
computationally lightweight algorithms. The main observation is that a small baseline leads to small disparities, enabling a first-order approximation of the non-linear SL image formation model. This leads to the key theoretical result
of the paper: the MSL equation, a linearized version of SL
image formation. MSL equation is under-constrained due to
two unknowns (depth and albedo) at each pixel, but can be
efficiently solved using a local least squares approach. We
analyze the performance of MSL in terms of various system parameters such as projected pattern and baseline, and
provide guidelines for optimizing performance. Armed with
these insights, we build a prototype to experimentally examine the theory and its practicality.

camera

camera

smartphone

drone

endoscopy

(a) Challenges faced by structured light on constrained devices:
limited baseline, low device complexity, low computational power
LED
microbaseline
camera
linearized
model

static
mask P 𝐱𝐱

scene

I 𝐱𝐱

I 𝐱𝐱 = ρ 𝐱𝐱 P 𝐱𝐱 + u 𝐱𝐱 P ′ 𝐱𝐱
unknown

(b) Proposed micro-baseline structured light

1. Introduction
Structured light (SL) is one of the most widely used 3D
imaging techniques. Due to simple hardware and high depth
resolution, SL is suitable for diverse applications, such as
3D modeling, biometrics, gaming, and user interfaces. A
typical SL system consists of a projector that illuminates
the scene of interest with coded patterns, and a camera that
images the scene. Depth at each scene point is computed via
triangulation, after determining correspondences between
projector and camera pixels.
Like all triangulation-based methods, SL requires a large
baseline between projector-camera pair for reliable depth
estimation [15, 31]. However, there are several emerging applications that increasingly rely on small form-factor
devices. Imagine a cell-phone based augmented reality
∗ This work was done at Snap’s NYC Research Lab and supported by

Snap Inc. Vishwanath is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University, and Mohit Gupta is with the
Department of Computer Science at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Figure 1: Structured light on constrained devices. Small
form-factor devices have severe constraints such as (i) small
projector-camera baseline, (ii) low-cost hardware with limited capabilities, and (iii) low computational power. (b) We propose
Micro-baseline Structured light, a novel approach that linearizes
the SL image formation model. This enables fast and accurate
depth recovery with low complexity projection devices, and lightweight computations.

(AR) application building a 3D model of its surroundings [19, 11, 29], or a micro-drone [22] identifying obstacles such as tree twigs while flying through a dense forest,
or a 3D camera on a thin endoscope [28] aiding a complex
surgery inside the human body (Figure 1 (a)). Due to their
small size, these devices cannot accommodate large baselines, making it challenging for existing SL approaches to
recover accurate scene geometry.
In addition to small size, many of these devices are further constrained by low computation power, as well as low
device complexity. For example, while it may be possible
14049

