Learning Local RGB-to-CAD Correspondences for Object Pose Estimation
Georgios Georgakis1 , Srikrishna Karanam2 , Ziyan Wu2 , and Jana Košecká1
1
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax VA
2
Siemens Corporate Technology, Princeton NJ
ggeorgak@gmu.edu,{first.last}@siemens.com,kosecka@cs.gmu.edu

3D Pose

R,t

Keypoint Learning

Viewpoint Invariance

Modality Invariance

Modality Consistency

Figure 1: We present a new method that matches RGB images to depth renderings of CAD models for object pose estimation.
It does not require either textured CAD models or 3D pose annotations for RGB images during training. This is achieved by
enforcing viewpoint and modality invariance for local features, and learning consistent keypoint selection across modalities.

Abstract
We consider the problem of 3D object pose estimation.
While much recent work has focused on the RGB domain,
the reliance on accurately annotated images limits generalizability and scalability. On the other hand, the easily
available object CAD models are rich sources of data, providing a large number of synthetically rendered images. In
this paper, we solve this key problem of existing methods requiring expensive 3D pose annotations by proposing a new
method that matches RGB images to CAD models for object
pose estimation. Our key innovations compared to existing
work include removing the need for either real-world textures for CAD models or explicit 3D pose annotations for
RGB images. We achieve this through a series of objectives
that learn how to select keypoints and enforce viewpoint and
modality invariance across RGB images and CAD model
renderings. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed
method can reliably estimate object pose in RGB images
and generalize to object instances not seen during training.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D pose of objects is an important capability for enabling robots’ interaction with real environ-

ments and objects as well as augmented reality applications.
While several approaches to this problem assume RGB-D
data [17, 31], most mobile and wearable cameras are not
paired with a depth sensor, prompting recent research focus on the RGB domain. Furthermore, even though several
methods have shown promising results on 3D object pose
estimation with real RGB images, they either require accurate 3D annotations [23, 26, 44, 30, 16] or 3D object models with realistic textures [5, 37, 6, 17] in the training stage.
Currently available datasets [20, 43] are not large enough to
capture real world diversity, limiting the potential of these
methods in generalizing to a variety of applications. In addition, capturing real RGB data and manual pose annotation
is an arduous procedure.
The problem of object pose estimation is an inherently
3D problem; it is the shape of the object which gives away
its pose regardless of its appearance. Instead of attempting
to learn an intrinsic decomposition of images [14], we focus on finding the association of parts of objects depicted
in RGB images with their counterparts in 3D depth images.
Ideally, we would like to learn this association in order to
establish correspondences between a query RGB image and
a rendered depth image from a CAD model, without requiring any existing 3D annotations. This, however, requires us
to address the problem of the large appearance gap between

8967

