Self-Supervised Representation Learning via Neighborhood-Relational Encoding
Mohammad Sabokrou

Mohammad Khalooei

Ehsan Adeli

Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences

Amirkabir University of Tech.

Stanford University

sabokro@ipm.ac.ir

khalooei@aut.ac.ir

eadeli@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel self-supervised representation learning by taking advantage of a neighborhoodrelational encoding (NRE) among the training data. Conventional unsupervised learning methods only focused on
training deep networks to understand the primitive characteristics of the visual data, mainly to be able to reconstruct the data from a latent space. They often neglected
the relation among the samples, which can serve as an
important metric for self-supervision. Different from the
previous work, NRE aims at preserving the local neighborhood structure on the data manifold. Therefore, it is
less sensitive to outliers. We integrate our NRE component
with an encoder-decoder structure for learning to represent samples considering their local neighborhood information. Such discriminative and unsupervised representation
learning scheme is adaptable to different computer vision
tasks due to its independence from intense annotation requirements. We evaluate our proposed method for different
tasks, including classification, detection, and segmentation
based on the learned latent representations. In addition, we
adopt the auto-encoding capability of our proposed method
for applications like defense against adversarial example
attacks and video anomaly detection. Results confirm the
performance of our method is better or at least comparable
with the state-of-the-art for each specific application, but
with a generic and self-supervised approach.

1. Introduction
The widespread adoption of deep learning methods in
computer vision owes its success to learning powerful visual representations [3]; however, this was achievable only
with intensive manual labeling effort (which is extravagant
and not scalable). Therefore, unsupervised feature learning
[7, 16, 29, 30, 37, 38, 59, 61, 64] has recently been widely
adopted to extract data representation without the need for
such label information. This representation can be used for
different tasks of image [26] or video classification [23].
Unsupervised representation learning in the context of

Eφ (X)

E(X)

92.2%

97.5%

Figure 1. Some samples from five classes of the Caltech dataset
(top), latent space visualization using a regular AE (i.e., E(X);
left), and our proposed AE that encodes the neighborhood relations (i.e., Eφ (X); right). With the same classifier, E(X) leads to
a classification accuracy of 92.2% and Eφ (X) 97.5%.

deep networks has often been defined by minimizing the
reconstruction error [34], such as in auto-encoders (AEs).
AEs have shown to be great tools for unsupervised representation learning in a variety of tasks, including image
inpainting [43], feature ranking [54], denosing [57], clustering [65], defense against adversarial examples [35], and
anomaly detection [48, 52]. Although AEs have led to farreaching success for data representation, there are some
caveats associated with using reconstruction errors as the
sole metric for representation learning: (1) As also argued
in [58], it forces to reconstruct all parts of the input, even if
they are irrelevant for any given task or are contaminated by
noise; (2) It leads to a mechanism that entirely depends on
single-point data abstraction, i.e., the AE learns to just reconstruct its input while neglecting other data points present
18010

