DeepGCNs: Can GCNs Go as Deep as CNNs?
https://sites.google.com/view/deep-gcns

Guohao Li∗ Matthias Müller∗ Ali Thabet Bernard Ghanem
Visual Computing Center, KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{guohao.li, matthias.mueller.2, ali.thabet, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract

1.4

1.2

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) achieve impressive performance in a wide variety of fields. Their success
benefited from a massive boost when very deep CNN models
were able to be reliably trained. Despite their merits, CNNs
fail to properly address problems with non-Euclidean data.
To overcome this challenge, Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) build graphs to represent non-Euclidean data, borrow concepts from CNNs, and apply them in training. GCNs
show promising results, but they are usually limited to very
shallow models due to the vanishing gradient problem (see
Figure 1). As a result, most state-of-the-art GCN models are
no deeper than 3 or 4 layers. In this work, we present new
ways to successfully train very deep GCNs. We do this by
borrowing concepts from CNNs, specifically residual/dense
connections and dilated convolutions, and adapting them to
GCN architectures. Extensive experiments show the positive effect of these deep GCN frameworks. Finally, we use
these new concepts to build a very deep 56-layer GCN, and
show how it significantly boosts performance (+3.7% mIoU
over state-of-the-art) in the task of point cloud semantic segmentation. We believe that the community can greatly benefit from this work, as it opens up many opportunities for
advancing GCN-based research.

1. Introduction
GCNs have been gaining a lot of momentum in the last
few years. This increased interest is attributed to two main
factors: the increasing proliferation of non-Euclidean data
in real-world applications, and the limited performance of
CNNs when dealing with such data. GCNs operate directly
on non-Euclidean data and are very promising for applications that depend on this information modality. GCNs are
currently used to predict individual relations in social networks [36], model proteins for drug discovery [53, 40], enhance predictions of recommendation engines [24, 49], efficiently segment large point clouds [42], among other fields.
∗ equal contribution

1.0

7 layers w/o residual

7 layers w/ residual

14 layers w/o residual

14 layers w/ residual

28 layers w/o residual

28 layers w/ residual

56 layers w/o residual

56 layers w/ residual

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

Figure 1. Training Deep GCNs. (left) We show the training loss
for GCNs with 7, 14, 28, and 56 layers, with and without residual
connections. We note how adding more layers without residual
connections translates to substantially higher loss. (right) In contrast, training GCNs with residual connections results in consistent
stability across all depths.

A key reason behind the success of CNNs is the ability to design and reliably train very deep CNN models. In
contrast, it is not yet clear how to properly train deep GCN
architectures, where several works have studied their limitations [19, 43, 52]. Stacking more layers into a GCN leads
to the common vanishing gradient problem. This means
that back-propagating through these networks causes oversmoothing, eventually leading to features of graph vertices
converging to the same value [19]. Due to these limitations,
most state-of-the-art GCNs are no deeper than 4 layers [52].
Vanishing gradients is not a foreign phenomenon in the
world of CNNs. It also posed limitations on the depth
growth of these types of networks. ResNet [11] provided
a big step forward in the pursuit of very deep CNNs when
it introduced residual connections between input and output
layers. These connections massively alleviated the vanishing gradient problem. Today, ResNets can reach 152 layers
and beyond. Further extension came with DenseNet [13],
where more connections are introduced across layers. More
layers could potentially mean more spatial information loss
due to pooling. This issue was also addressed, with Dilated
Convolutions [50]. The introductions of these key concepts
had substantial impact on the progress of CNNs, and we believe they can have a similar effect if well adapted to GCNs.

9267

