Deep Clustering by Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoders with
Graph Embedding
Linxiao Yang∗1,2 , Ngai-Man Cheung‡1 , Jiaying Li1 , and Jun Fang2
1
2

Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
‡

Corresponding author: ngaiman_cheung@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose DGG: Deep clustering via a Gaussianmixture variational autoencoder (VAE) with Graph embedding. To facilitate clustering, we apply Gaussian mixture model (GMM) as the prior in VAE. To handle data
with complex spread, we apply graph embedding. Our
idea is that graph information which captures local data
structures is an excellent complement to deep GMM. Combining them facilitates the network to learn powerful representations that follow global model and local structural constraints. Therefore, our method unifies modelbased and similarity-based approaches for clustering. To
combine graph embedding with probabilistic deep GMM,
we propose a novel stochastic extension of graph embedding: we treat samples as nodes on a graph and minimize the weighted distance between their posterior distributions. We apply Jenson-Shannon divergence as the
distance. We combine the divergence minimization with
the log-likelihood maximization of the deep GMM. We derive formulations to obtain an unified objective that enables simultaneous deep representation learning and clustering. Our experimental results show that our proposed
DGG outperforms recent deep Gaussian mixture methods (model-based) and deep spectral clustering (similaritybased). Our results highlight advantages of combining
model-based and similarity-based clustering as proposed
in this work. Our code is published here: https://
github.com/dodoyang0929/DGG.git

1. Introduction
Clustering aims to classify data into several classes without label information [15]. It is one of the fundamental
∗ Work done at SUTD

tasks of unsupervised learning. A number of methods have
been proposed [38, 19, 8]. Based on the approaches to
model the space structure, most clustering methods can be
classified into two categories, namely, model based methods and similarity based methods. The model based methods, such as the Gaussian mixture model [4] and subspace
clustering[1, 36], focus on the global structure of the data
space. They put assumptions on the whole data space and
fit the data using some specific models. An advantage of
model based methods is their good generalization ability.
Once trained, new samples can be readily clustered using
the learnt model parameters. However, it is challenging
for these methods to deal with data with complex spread.
Different from model based methods, the similarity based
methods emphasize the local structure of the data. These
methods formulate the local structures using some similarities or distances between the samples. Spectral clustering
[33, 26], a popular similarity-based method, constructs a
graph using the sample similarities, and treats the smoothest
signals on the graph as the features of the data. With mild
assumption, similarity-based methods achieve tremendous
success [25]. Many similarity-based methods, however,
suffer from high computational complexity. Spectral clustering, for instance, requires to perform a singular value decomposition when computing features, which is prohibitive
for large datasets. To address this issue, a lot of efforts
have been made and many methods have been proposed
[5, 10, 22, 39].
Deep clustering. Recent advanced deep learning technique offers new opportunities for clustering [24]. With
powerful capability to learn non-linear mapping, deep
learning provides a promising feature learning framework
[41, 37, 42]. Several works have considered to combine
the model-based clustering approach with deep learning,
where global assumptions were imposed on the feature
space [17, 7]. These methods jointly train the network to

6440

