Joint Learning of Semantic Alignment and Object Landmark Detection
Sangryul Jeon1 , Dongbo Min2 , Seungryong Kim3 , Kwanghoon Sohn1,∗
1
Yonsei University, 2 Ewha Womans University, 3 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
{cheonjsr,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr
dbmin@ewha.ac.kr,seungryong.kim@epfl.ch

Abstract

1. Introduction
Establishing dense correspondences and discovering object landmarks over semantically similar images can facilitate a variety of computer vision and computational photography applications [3, 21, 22, 33, 2]. Both tasks aim to
understand the underlying structure of an object that is geometrically consistent across different but semantically reThis research was supported by R&D program for Advanced
Integrated-intelligence for Identification (AIID) through the National Research Foundation of KOREA (NRF) funded by Ministry of Science and
ICT (NRF-2018M3E3A1057289).
∗ Corresponding author

Alignment information

Semantic alignment

Structure information

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based approaches for semantic alignment and object landmark detection have improved their performance significantly. Current efforts for the two tasks focus on addressing the lack
of massive training data through weakly- or unsupervised
learning frameworks. In this paper, we present a joint learning approach for obtaining dense correspondences and discovering object landmarks from semantically similar images. Based on the key insight that the two tasks can mutually provide supervisions to each other, our networks accomplish this through a joint loss function that alternatively
imposes a consistency constraint between the two tasks,
thereby boosting the performance and addressing the lack
of training data in a principled manner. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first attempt to address the lack
of training data for the two tasks through the joint learning. To further improve the robustness of our framework,
we introduce a probabilistic learning formulation that allows only reliable matches to be used in the joint learning
process. With the proposed method, state-of-the-art performance is attained on several standard benchmarks for semantic matching and landmark detection, including a newly
introduced dataset, JLAD, which contains larger number of
challenging image pairs than existing datasets.

Object landmark detection

Image pair

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed joint learning framework:
given only semantically similar image pairs, we address the crucial drawbacks of current weakly- or unsupervised models for the
object landmark detection and semantic alignment task by alternatively leveraging mutual guidance information between them.

lated instances.
Recently, numerous approaches for the semantic alignment [24, 25, 26, 9, 27, 15] and object landmark detection [30, 29, 33, 8] have been proposed to tackle each problem with deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in an
end-to-end manner. However, supervised training for such
tasks often involves in constructing large-scale and diverse
annotations of dense semantic correspondence maps or object landmarks. Collecting such annotations under large
intra-class appearance and shape variations requires a great
deal of manual works and is prone to error due to its subjectiveness. Consequently, current efforts have focused on
using additional constraints or assumptions that help their
networks to automatically learn each task in a weakly- or
unsupervised setting.
To overcome the limitations of insufficient training data
for semantic correspondence, several works [24, 27] have
been proposed to utilize a set of sparse corresponding points
between source and target images as an additional cue for
supervising their networks. The key idea is to regulate
the densely estimated transformation fields to be consistent
with the given sparse corresponding points. A possible approach is to synthetically generate the corresponding points
from an image itself, i.e., by uniformly sampling grid points
from a source image and then globally deforming them with

7294

