Neural Re-Simulation for Generating Bounces in Single Images
Carlo Innamorati1* , Bryan Russell2 , Danny M. Kaufman2 , and Niloy J. Mitra1,2
1

University College London
2
Adobe Research
http://geometry.cs.ucl.ac.uk/projects/2019/bounce-neural-resim/

Abstract
We introduce a method to generate videos of dynamic
virtual objects plausibly interacting via collisions with a
still image’s environment. Given a starting trajectory, physically simulated with the estimated geometry of a single,
static input image, we learn to ‘correct’ this trajectory to
a visually plausible one via a neural network. The neural
network can then be seen as learning to ‘correct’ traditional
simulation output, generated with incomplete and imprecise world information, to obtain context-specific, visually
plausible re-simulated output – a process we call neural resimulation. We train our system on a set of 50k synthetic
scenes where a virtual moving object (ball) has been physically simulated. We demonstrate our approach on both our
synthetic dataset and a collection of real-life images depicting everyday scenes, obtaining consistent improvement over
baseline alternatives throughout.

1. Introduction
Christopher Robin: You’re next, Tigger. Jump!
Tigger: Er, jump? Tiggers don’t jump, they
bounce.
Winnie the Pooh: Then bounce down.
Tigger: Don’t be “ridick-orous”. Tiggers only
bounce up!
– A. A. Milne, Winnie The Pooh
A single still image depicts an instant in time. Videos, on
the other hand, have the capacity to depict dynamic events
where scene objects may interact with and bounce off each
other over time. We seek to allow users to bring single still
images to life by allowing them to automatically generate
videos depicting a virtual object interacting with a depicted
scene in the image.
∗Work initiated at Adobe during CI’s summer internship.

Specifically, we address the problem of dynamic object
compositing in a single still image where a virtual object
physically interacts by contact, such as bouncing, with the
depicted scene. Our goal is to generate visually plausible
virtual object-scene interactions instead of a physically accurate forward prediction. In other words, we seek to generate an output that looks physically valid to a human observer
even if it does not exactly match an observed physical interaction starting from the same initial conditions. Our task is
important for applications in augmented reality and animation, allowing users to author dynamic events in a depicted
scene without access to sufficient information about the corresponding world.
For our study, we focus on the case where we toss a
virtual ball into an everyday scene, such as living rooms,
bedrooms, and kitchens, and seek to have the ball bounce
off different objects in the scene (see Figure 1). This setup
presents many challenges as we need to reason about the
geometric layout of the scene and infer how the virtual ball
will physically interact with the scene. Previous approaches
either do not physically interact with the scene through contact [12, 20], require captured scene depth through multiple
views or active sensing [33, 34], or rely on forward simulation using predicted single-view scene depth. However,
predicted scene depth may be noisy, resulting in inaccurate
and visually implausible forward-simulated trajectory output (see videos in supplemental). Furthermore, there may
be global scaling issues with depth predictions if an algorithm is trained on one dataset and applied to another with
different camera intrinsics.
To address the above challenges, we seek to learn to
‘re-simulate’ the outputs obtained from running a forward
simulation over noisy, estimated scene geometry inferred
for the input image to yield a visually plausible one. Resimulation methods are traditionally applied in visual effects to reuse and combine pre-exisiting physical simulations for new and novel scenarios [22, 39, 45]. Here, in
analogy, we introduce a neural network for learning re18719

