Unsupervised Learning of Landmarks by Descriptor Vector Exchange
Samuel Albanie∗

Hakan Bilen

Unitary

VGG, University of Oxford

University of Edinburgh

VGG, University of Oxford

james@unitary.ai

albanie@robots.ox.ac.uk

hbilen@ed.ac.uk

vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

James Thewlis∗

Andrea Vedaldi

Figure 1: We propose Descriptor Vector Exchange (DVE), a mechanism that enables unsupervised learning of robust highdimensional dense embeddings with equivariance losses. The embeddings learned for the category of faces are visualised
in the figure above with the help of a query image [8], shown in the centre of the figure. (Left): We colour the locations
of pixel embeddings that form the nearest neighbours of the query reference points. (Right): The same reference points are
used to retrieve patches amongst a collection of face images. The result is an approximate face mosaic, matching parts across
different identities despite the fact that no landmark annotations of any kind were used during learning.

Abstract
Equivariance to random image transformations is an effective method to learn landmarks of object categories, such
as the eyes and the nose in faces, without manual supervision. However, this method does not explicitly guarantee
that the learned landmarks are consistent with changes between different instances of the same object, such as different facial identities. In this paper, we develop a new perspective on the equivariance approach by noting that dense
landmark detectors can be interpreted as local image descriptors equipped with invariance to intra-category variations. We then propose a direct method to enforce such an
invariance in the standard equivariant loss. We do so by
exchanging descriptor vectors between images of different
object instances prior to matching them geometrically. In
this manner, the same vectors must work regardless of the
specific object identity considered. We use this approach to
learn vectors that can simultaneously be interpreted as local descriptors and dense landmarks, combining the advan∗ Equal Contribution. James was with the VGG during part of this work.

tages of both. Experiments on standard benchmarks show
that this approach can match, and in some cases surpass
state-of-the-art performance amongst existing methods that
learn landmarks without supervision. Code is available at
www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/DVE/.

1. Introduction
Learning without manual supervision remains an open
problem in machine learning and computer vision. Even
recent advances in self-supervision [15, 17] are often limited to learning generic feature extractors and still require
some manually annotated data to solve a concrete task such
as landmark detection. In this paper, we thus consider the
problem of learning the landmarks of an object category,
such as the eyes and nose in faces, without any manual annotation. Namely, given as input a collection of images of a
certain object, such as images of faces, the goal is to learn
what landmarks exist and how to detect them.
In the absence of manual annotations, an alternative supervisory signal is required. Recently, [46] proposed to
16361

