Language-Conditioned Graph Networks for Relational Reasoning
Ronghang Hu1
Anna Rohrbach1
Trevor Darrell1
Kate Saenko2
1
2
University of California, Berkeley
Boston University

Abstract
Solving grounded language tasks often requires reasoning about relationships between objects in the context of
a given task. For example, to answer the question “What
color is the mug on the plate?” we must check the color of
the specific mug that satisfies the “on” relationship with
respect to the plate. Recent work has proposed various
methods capable of complex relational reasoning. However,
most of their power is in the inference structure, while the
scene is represented with simple local appearance features.
In this paper, we take an alternate approach and build contextualized representations for objects in a visual scene to
support relational reasoning. We propose a general framework of Language-Conditioned Graph Networks (LCGN),
where each node represents an object, and is described by
a context-aware representation from related objects through
iterative message passing conditioned on the textual input.
E.g., conditioning on the “on” relationship to the plate, the
object “mug” gathers messages from the object “plate” to
update its representation to “mug on the plate”, which can
be easily consumed by a simple classifier for answer prediction. We experimentally show that our LCGN approach
effectively supports relational reasoning and improves performance across several tasks and datasets. Our code is
available at http://ronghanghu.com/lcgn.

1. Introduction
Grounded language comprehension tasks, such as visual
question answering (VQA) or referring expression comprehension (REF), require finding the relevant objects in the
scene and reasoning about certain relationships between
them. For example in Figure 1, to answer the question is
there a person to the left of the woman holding a blue umbrella, we must locate the relevant objects – person, woman
and blue umbrella – and model the specified relationships –
to the left of and holding.
How should we build a model to perform reasoning in
grounded language comprehension tasks? Prior works have
explored various approaches from learning joint visualtextual representations (e.g. [8, 31]) to pooling over pairwise relationships (e.g. [35, 43]) or constructing explicit

Question: Is there a person
to the left of the woman
holding a blue umbrella?

Question: Is the left-most
person holding a red bag?

Answer: Yes

Answer: No
3

3

1

5

1
2

4
5

2

4

Figure 1. In this work, we create context-aware representations
for objects by sending messages between relevant objects in a dynamic way that depends on the input language. In the left example,
the first round of message passing updates object 2 with features
of object 3 based on the woman holding a blue umbrella (green
arrow), and the second round updates object 1 with object 2’s features based on person to the left (red arrow). The final answer
prediction can be made by a single attention hop over the most
relevant object (blue box).

reasoning steps with modular or symbolic representations
(e.g. [2, 42]). Although these models are capable of performing complex relational inference, their scene representations are built upon local visual appearance features that
do not contain much contextual information. Instead, they
tend to rely heavily on manually designed inference structures or modules to perform reasoning about relationships,
and are often specific to a particular task.
In this work, we propose an alternative way to facilitate reasoning with a context-aware scene representation, suitable for multiple tasks. Our proposed LanguageConditioned Graph Network (LCGN) model augments the
local appearance feature of each entity in the scene with
a relational contextualized feature. Our model is a graph
network built upon visual entities in the scene, which collects relational information through multiple iterations of
message passing between the entities. It dynamically determines which objects to collect information from on each
round, by weighting the edges in the graph, and sends messages through the graph to propagate just the right amount
of relational information. The key idea is to condition the
message passing on the specific contextual relationships described in the input text. Figure 1 illustrates this process,

10294

