Deep Meta Metric Learning
Guangyi Chen1,2,3 , Tianren Zhang1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{chen-gy16,ztr15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Distance metric learning has been widely used in many
visual analysis applications, which aims to learn an embedding space where the distance between similar samples is
closer and that of dissimilar samples is farther. Conventional metric learning approaches learn the embedding space by
a linear Mahalanobis distance metric [13, 25, 57]. As linear metric learning approaches usually suffer from nonlinear correlations of samples, deep metric learning methods
have been proposed to learn discriminative nonlinear embeddings by deep neural networks [36, 44, 55].
One of the most important applications of deep metric
learning is visual recognition, which attempts to match a
probe sample from the large gallery set, such as person
re-identiﬁcation [4, 7], ﬁne-grained recognition [9, 63], and
∗ Corresponding author
1 Code:https://github.com/CHENGY12/DMML

Meta-based Methods

In this paper, we present a deep meta metric learning (DMML) approach for visual recognition. Unlike most existing deep metric learning methods formulating the learning
process by an overall objective, our DMML formulates the
metric learning in a meta way, and proves that softmax and
triplet loss are consistent in the meta space. Specifically,
we sample some subsets from the original training set and
learn metrics across different subsets. In each sampled subtask, we split the training data into a support set as well
as a query set, and learn the set-based distance, instead
of sample-based one, to verify the query cell from multiple
support cells. In addition, we introduce hard sample mining for set-based distance to encourage the intra-class compactness. Experimental results on three visual recognition
applications including person re-identification, vehicle reidentification and face verification show that the proposed
DMML method outperforms most existing approaches.1

Global Optimization Methods

Abstract

...

Training Procedure

Testing Procedure

Figure 1. Difference between global optimization methods and
meta-based methods. The top part shows that global optimization
methods learn classiﬁers with all training samples, which usually over-ﬁt on the “salient” feature of training data. The bottom
part shows that meta-based methods learn the meta metrics across
sampled multiple subsets, which mine the potential information
for better generalization. (Best viewed in color)

face recognition [41, 58]. Conventional deep metric learning methods apply the contrastive loss [8, 15] or triplet
loss [3, 57] to learn discriminative feature space to measure
the similarity of visual samples. Recently, N-pair loss [44]
has been presented to take advantage of the whole training batch in each update. However, these methods hardly
explain the generalization capacity of metric from training
dataset to testing dataset. As shown in Figure 1, we take
person re-identiﬁcation as an example. Assuming that most
persons in the training set are wearing colorful T-shirts and
similar plain pants while a few of them are wearing vivid
pants, global optimization methods (e.g. softmax) tend to
identify the persons only from colorful T-shirts and neglect
the potential information of pants. For the query samples
with similar T-shirts and different pants, they might fail due
to over-ﬁtting on the training set. In contrast, without the

9547

