DensePoint: Learning Densely Contextual Representation for Efficient Point
Cloud Processing
Yongcheng Liu†‡ Bin Fan∗† Gaofeng Meng† Jiwen Lu§ Shiming Xiang†‡ Chunhong Pan†
†
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
‡
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
§
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
{yongcheng.liu, bfan, gfmeng, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Point cloud processing is very challenging, as the diverse shapes formed by irregular points are often indistinguishable. A thorough grasp of the elusive shape requires sufficiently contextual semantic information, yet few
works devote to this. Here we propose DensePoint, a general architecture to learn densely contextual representation
for point cloud processing. Technically, it extends regular
grid CNN to irregular point configuration by generalizing
a convolution operator, which holds the permutation invariance of points, and achieves efficient inductive learning
of local patterns. Architecturally, it finds inspiration from
dense connection mode, to repeatedly aggregate multi-level
and multi-scale semantics in a deep hierarchy. As a result,
densely contextual information along with rich semantics,
can be acquired by DensePoint in an organic manner, making it highly effective. Extensive experiments on challenging
benchmarks across four tasks, as well as thorough model
analysis, verify DensePoint achieves the state of the arts.

1. Introduction
Recently, the processing of point cloud, which comprises
an irregular set of 3D points, has drawn a lot of attention,
due to its wide range of applications such as robot manipulation [19] and autonomous driving [30]. However, modern
applications usually demand for a high-level understanding
of point cloud, i.e., identifying the implicit 3D shape pattern. This is quite challenging, since the diverse shapes, abstractly formed by these irregular points, are often hardly
distinguishable. For this issue, it is essential to capture
sufficiently contextual semantic information for a thorough
grasp of the elusive shape (see Fig. 1 for details).
Over the past few years, convolutional neural network
(CNN) has demonstrated its powerful abstraction ability of
semantic information in image recognition field [60]. Ac∗ Corresponding author: Bin Fan

aggregate
PointNet

vase

bottle

bottle

sufficient context

Figure 1. Motivation: sufficiently contextual semantic information is essential for a thorough grasp of the elusive shape formed by
point cloud. The “bottle” is misidentified as the “vase” by PointNet [31], while with sufficient context aggregated, it can be accurately recognized. Here, we only illustrate the multi-level context
around the blue point for visual clearness.

cordingly, much effort is focused on replicating its remarkable success on the analysis of image [21, 40], i.e., regular grid data, to irregular point cloud processing [33, 18,
34, 48, 58, 26]. A straightforward strategy is to transform
point cloud into regular voxels [52, 27, 4] or multi-view images [43, 3, 6], for easy application of CNN. These transformations, however, usually lead to much loss of rich 3D
geometric information, as well as high complexity.
Another difficult yet attractive solution is to learn directly from irregular point cloud. PointNet [31], a pioneer in
this direction, achieves the permutation invariance of points
by learning over each point independently, then applying a
symmetric function to accumulate features. Though impressive, it ignores local patterns that have been proven to be important for abstracting high-level visual semantics in image
CNN [60]. To remedy this defect, KCNet [38] mines local
patterns by creating a k-NN graph over each point in PointNet. Nevertheless, it inherits another defect of PointNet,
i.e., no pooling layer to explicitly raise the level of semantics. PointNet++ [33] hierarchically groups point cloud into
local subsets and learns on them by PointNet. This design
indeed works like CNN, but the basic operator, PointNet,
demands high complexity for enough effectiveness.
Besides high-level semantics, contextual information,
which reflects the potential semantic dependencies between
a target pattern and its surroundings [29], is also critical for

5239

