Fair Loss: Margin-Aware Reinforcement Learning for Deep Face Recognition
Bingyu Liu, Weihong Deng∗, Yaoyao Zhong, Mei Wang, Jiani Hu
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{liubingyu,whdeng,zhongyaoyao,wangmei1,jnhu}@bupt.edu.cn

Xunqiang Tao, Yaohai Huang
Canon Information Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd
{taoxunqiang,huangyaohai}@canon-ib.com.cn

Abstract
Recently, large-margin softmax loss methods, such as
angular softmax loss (SphereFace), large margin cosine
loss (CosFace), and additive angular margin loss (ArcFace), have demonstrated impressive performance on deep
face recognition. These methods incorporate a fixed additive margin to all the classes, ignoring the class imbalance problem. However, imbalanced problem widely exists
in various real-world face datasets, in which samples from
some classes are in a higher number than others. We argue that the number of a class would influence its demand
for the additive margin. In this paper, we introduce a new
margin-aware reinforcement learning based loss function,
namely fair loss, in which each class will learn an appropriate adaptive margin by Deep Q-learning. Specifically, we
train an agent to learn a margin adaptive strategy for each
class, and make the additive margins for different classes
more reasonable. Our method has better performance than
present large-margin loss functions on three benchmarks,
Labeled Face in the Wild (LFW), Youtube Faces (YTF) and
MegaFace, which demonstrates that our method could learn
better face representation on imbalanced face datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) [28, 17,
10, 31, 43, 11, 37, 18] have become the mainstream technique for deep face recognition, which made remarkable
progress on both recognition accuracy and robustness. Deep
face models are usually learned in a supervised manner
by various loss functions. Classical softmax loss function is the most widely used for generic objects, but it is
not discriminative enough for face recognition due to the
fine-grained property [40, 21, 20]. To address this limi∗ Corresponding Author

tation, several large-margin loss functions have been proposed to improve the generalization ability of softmax loss,
such as SphereFace [20], CosFace [36], and ArcFace [5].
These losses successfully improve the generalization ability
of DCNN by incorporating a fixed margin to softmax, and
achieve state-of-the-art performance on major face benchmarks, such as LFW [13], YTF [41] and MegaFace [14, 24].
However, as illustrated in Fig. 1, previous large margin methods ignore the class imbalance of the training data, which refers to that the samples of majority classes are
much more than those of minority classes. Deep face models are inevitably affected by the class imbalance problem.
Owing to the lack of intra-class variance, the minority classes often fail to describe the real feature space. In this situation, the fixed additive margin for both majority and minority classes will aggravate the biased decision boundary.
Fig. 1(b) shows that the model tends to make mistakes on
new test samples of minority classes, which reflects the bad
generalization ability of deep representation. As a result, a
fixed margin may be misleading for unbalanced classes.
To improve the large-margin loss, we dedicate to explore adaptive boundaries between various classes, considering their representativeness to characterize the actual distribution. Majority classes would not converge with an excessively large margin, while a minority class would be
squeezed toward majority classes given a relatively small
margin. We propose to balance the additive margins between various classes. As shown in Fig. 1(c), a majority
class requires a relatively smaller margin, while a minority
class needs a relatively larger margin. By the adaptive margin, the test accuracy is significantly boosted. Meanwhile,
we assume that the demand for the margin of a particular
class may be different in the training progress following the
change of training state, such as the intra-class variance.
Inspired by this observation, we propose a new fair loss
with a margin adaptive strategy by reinforcement learning.
Specifically, we simulate all kinds of changes of additive

10052

