Distill Knowledge from NRSfM for Weakly Supervised 3D Pose Learning
Chaoyang Wang Chen Kong Simon Lucey
Carnegie Mellon University
{chaoyanw, chenk, slucey}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose to learn a 3D pose estimator by distilling
knowledge from Non-Rigid Structure from Motion (NRSfM).
Our method uses solely 2D landmark annotations. No 3D
data, multi-view/temporal footage, or object specific prior
is required. This alleviates the data bottleneck, which is one
of the major concern for supervised methods. The challenge
for using NRSfM as teacher is that they often make poor
depth reconstruction when the 2D projections have strong
ambiguity. Directly using those wrong depth as hard target
would negatively impact the student. Instead, we propose a
novel loss that ties depth prediction to the cost function used
in NRSfM. This gives the student pose estimator freedom to
reduce depth error by associating with image features. Validated on H3.6M dataset, our learned 3D pose estimation
network achieves more accurate reconstruction compared
to NRSfM methods. It also outperforms other weakly supervised methods, in spite of using significantly less supervision.

1. Introduction
Learning to estimate 3D pose from images is bottlenecked by the availability of abundant 3D annotated data.
Weakly supervised methods that reduce the amount of required annotation is of high practical value. Prior works
approach this problem by supplementing their training set
with: (i) extra 2D annotated data [47]; (ii) aligning 3D models to 2D annotations [35, 43, 37]; (iii) exploiting geometric
cues from multi-view footage [33, 32, 38]; or (iv) utilizing
adversarial framework to impose a prior on the 3D structure [12]. These methods, however, are either restricted to
laboratory settings or still requires a 3D training set – which
limits the type of target objects they can work with. This
paper addresses a more general setting – we utilize image
datasets with solely 2D landmark annotations (i.e. no 3D
supervision). This allows our method to be applied to a
wider scope of objects, not limited by the availability of 3D
models, kinematic priors, or sequential/multi-view footage.
Our work is made possible by some recent advances in

Deep-NRSfM

Ours

GT.

Figure 1. NRSfM methods often achieve poor reconstructions
when the 2D projections have strong ambiguity. Our proposed
knowledge distilling method lets the student pose estimation network (3rd column) correct some of the mistakes made by its
NRSfM teacher (2nd column).

Non-Rigid Structure from Motion (NRSfM). NRSfM methods reconstruct 3D shapes and camera positions from multiple 2D projections of articulated 3D points. These points do
not have to belong to the same object, but can be from multiple instances of the same object category, which naturally
applies to our problem. Prior NRSfM methods are restricted
by the number of frames and the type of shape variability they can handle, which limits their usage to many real
world problems. Kong and Lucey [21] recently proposed
a neural network architecture (Deep-NRSfM) interpreted as
solving a multi-layer block sparse dictionary learning problem, and can handle problems of unprecedented scale and
shape complexity. Our modified version of Deep-NRSfM
achieves state-of-the-arts accuracy on H3.6M [18] dataset,
outperforming other NRSfM methods by a significant margin.
Despite this progress, NRSfM still has difficulty in predicting correct depth for shapes with strong ambiguity in
terms of 2D projection, e.g. identifying if a leg is stretching
1743

