Differentiable Soft Quantization:
Bridging Full-Precision and Low-Bit Neural Networks
Ruihao Gong1,2 Xianglong Liu1∗ Shenghu Jiang1,2 Tianxiang Li2,3
Peng Hu2 Jiazhen Lin 2 Fengwei Yu2 Junjie Yan2
1
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
2
3
SenseTime Group Limited
Beijing Institute of Technology
{gongruihao, xlliu, jiangshenghu}@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn
{litianxiang, hupeng, linjiazhen, yufengwei, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Hardware-friendly network quantization (e.g., binary/uniform quantization) can efficiently accelerate the inference and meanwhile reduce memory consumption of the
deep neural networks, which is crucial for model deployment on resource-limited devices like mobile phones. However, due to the discreteness of low-bit quantization, existing
quantization methods often face the unstable training process and severe performance degradation. To address this
problem, in this paper we propose Differentiable Soft Quantization (DSQ) to bridge the gap between the full-precision
and low-bit networks. DSQ can automatically evolve during training to gradually approximate the standard quantization. Owing to its differentiable property, DSQ can help
pursue the accurate gradients in backward propagation,
and reduce the quantization loss in forward process with
an appropriate clipping range. Extensive experiments over
several popular network structures show that training lowbit neural networks with DSQ can consistently outperform
state-of-the-art quantization methods. Besides, our first efficient implementation for deploying 2 to 4-bit DSQ on devices with ARM architecture achieves up to 1.7× speed up,
compared with the open-source 8-bit high-performance inference framework NCNN [31].

1. Introduction
Deep convolution neural networks have achieved great
success in many fields, such as computer vision, natural
language processing, information retrieval, etc. However,
the expensive memory and computation costs seriously impede their deployment on the widespread resource-limited
devices, especially for real-time applications. To address

this problem, the quantization technique has emerged as
a promising network compression solution and achieved
substantial progress in recent years. It can largely reduce
the network storage and meanwhile accelerate the inference speed using different types of quantizers, mainly including binary/ternary [8, 9, 16, 23, 45, 25, 33], uniform
[46, 28, 6, 26, 43, 18, 36, 42, 20, 7, 2, 39, 21] and nonuniform [44, 35, 13, 5, 41, 30, 38, 37, 3].
Limited by the specific hardware features like the instruction sets, most quantization methods can hardly accomplish the goal of network acceleration and may still
heavily depend on the special hardware design and longterm hardware development. For example, a special inference engine EIE [12] has been developed to speed up the
method in [13]. Fortunately, the recent studies have proved
that both the binary and uniform quantization models enjoy the hardware-friendly property [18, 17, 11, 27], which
enables us to accelerate the inference directly on off-theshelf hardware with the efficient bit operation or integeronly arithmetic.
Despite the attractive benefits, when quantizing into extremely low bit, existing binary and uniform quantization
models still face the severe performance degradation, due
to the limited and discrete quantization levels [6]. First,
based on the discrete quantized representation, the backward propagation can hardly access the accurate gradients,
and thus has to resort to the appropriate approximation.
In the literature, straight through estimation (STE) [4] has
been widely used for approximation. But it ignores the influence of quantization, and when the data is quantized to
extremely low bit, its error will be amplified, causing an obvious instability of optimization. Experiments and analysis
in [26, 8, 24] have shown that the gradient error caused by
quantization and STE greatly harms the accuracy of quantized models.
Besides, the quantization itself inevitably brings large

∗ corresponding author

4852

