Differentiable Kernel Evolution
Yu Liu1,3∗
Jihao Liu2∗
Ailing Zeng3
Xiaogang Wang1,3
{yuliu@ee, xgwang@ee, alzeng@cse}.cuhk.edu.hk liujihao@sensetime.com
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory
2
SenseTime Research 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
This paper proposes a differentiable kernel evolution
(DKE) algorithm to find a better layer-operator for the
convolutional neural network. Unlike most of the other
neural architecture searching (NAS) technologies, we consider the searching space in a fundamental scope: kernel space, which encodes the assembly of basic multiplyaccumulate (MAC) operations into a conv-kernel. We first
deduce a strict form of the generalized convolutional operator by some necessary constraints and construct a continuous searching space for its extra freedom-of-degree,
namely, the connection of each MAC. Then a novel unsupervised greedy evolution algorithm called gradient agreement
guided searching (GAGS) is proposed to learn the optimal
location for each MAC in the spatially continuous searching
space. We leverage DKE on multiple kinds of tasks such as
object classification, face/object detection, large-scale finegrained and recognition, with various kinds of backbone architecture. Not to mention the consistent performance gain,
we found the proposed DKE can further act as an autodilated operator, which makes it easy to boost the performance of miniaturized neural networks in multiple tasks.

1. Introduction
Recently several works [2, 7, 10, 32] notice that a welldesigned / learnable kernel shape can boost the performance
of a convolutional neural network (CNN) on some speciﬁc tasks without modifying the macroscopical architecture. For a conventional kernel w with shape of k × k × cin
in the discrete spatial space, some of them [7] directly dilate the pixels of a convolution kernel by 0, increasing the
kernel shape to nk × nk × cin , so that it can hold a larger
receptive ﬁeld. Some of the others [2, 32] claim that learning a data-sensitive offset O, O ∈ RW ×H×k×k×2 to w is a
good choice, which enables the network to ﬁnd an ad-hoc
receptive ﬁeld based on what it is receipting at each loca∗ They contributed equally to this work

tion. However [10] holds the point that a ﬁxed and shared
offset O, O ∈ R2×k×k is good for generalization. Since all
of these works based on different environments and tasks
and thus have different motivations, they may lose generalization in some other tasks. For example, DCNs [2, 32]
mainly focus on object detection tasks, where the context
of the input image varies, so a spatial attention mechanism
is needed and it is natural to predict speciﬁc offsets for w
at different locations. However for tasks with ﬁxed input
size and well-aligned input data like face classiﬁcation and
ﬁne-grain recognition, it is not preferred to introduce extra
uncertainty like data-dependent kernel shape.
To ﬁnd a generalized direction for the kernel design, this
work does not focus on one speciﬁc task but the convolution
operation itself. We ﬁrst formulate a generalized operator
consisting of MAC operation between the input data and
kernel. The generalized form covers all the related works
mentioned above. After that, without any prejudice, we
construct two necessary constraints over it to maintain the
two appealing properties, namely equivalence to translation
and independence to data. Given the constraints, the ﬁnal
form will be degenerated to a generalized convolution operator, with the freedom of MAC location in each kernel and
each channel k. We will refer to the locations of MACs as
a set Vk , which consists of ”valid coordinate” y in a kernel. Note that the kernel size at each location is denoted as
k ′ . Then the main contribution of this work is to propose
a differentiable kernel evolution (DKE) algorithm to search
optimal locations for the k ′ × cin MACs in a spatial continuous space.
Searching the continuous coordinate y with discrete input data sources is difﬁcult. In this work, a greedy searching algorithm is constructed. Similar to the other works,
DKE visits the data value at a continuous point by interpolation. However, we found the commonly used nearest and bilinear interpolations naturally harm the searching process. Since the gradient direction of the interpolative function controls the evolution direction during each
searching step (see Sec. 4 for details), it should be in the
same direction to the ad hoc optima in each iteration. Un-

1834

