Learned Video Compression
Oren Rippel, Sanjay Nair, Carissa Lew, Steve Branson, Alexander G. Anderson, Lubomir Bourdev
WaveOne, Inc.
{oren, sanjay, carissa, steve, alex, lubomir}@wave.one

Abstract
We present a new algorithm for video coding, learned
end-to-end for the low-latency mode. In this setting, our approach outperforms all existing video codecs across nearly
the entire bitrate range. To our knowledge, this is the first
ML-based method to do so.
We evaluate our approach on standard video compression test sets of varying resolutions, and benchmark against
all mainstream commercial codecs in the low-latency mode.
On standard-definition videos, HEVC/H.265, AVC/H.264
and VP9 typically produce codes up to 60% larger than
our algorithm. On high-definition 1080p videos, H.265 and
VP9 typically produce codes up to 20% larger, and H.264
up to 35% larger. Furthermore, our approach does not
suffer from blocking artifacts and pixelation, and thus produces videos that are more visually pleasing.
We propose two main contributions. The first is a novel
architecture for video compression, which (1) generalizes
motion estimation to perform any learned compensation beyond simple translations, (2) rather than strictly relying on
previously transmitted reference frames, maintains a state
of arbitrary information learned by the model, and (3) enables jointly compressing all transmitted signals (such as
optical flow and residual).
Secondly, we present a framework for ML-based spatial
rate control — a mechanism for assigning variable bitrates
across space for each frame. This is a critical component
for video coding, which to our knowledge had not been developed within a machine learning setting.

1. Introduction
Video content consumed more than 70% of all internet traffic in 2016, and is expected to grow threefold by
2021 [1]. At the same time, the fundamentals of existing
video compression algorithms have not changed considerably over the last 20 years [46, 36, 35, . . . ]. While they
have been very well engineered and thoroughly tuned, they
are hard-coded, and as such cannot adapt to the growing demand and increasingly versatile spectrum of video use cases
such as social media sharing, object detection, VR streaming, and so on.

Meanwhile, approaches based on deep learning have revolutionized many industries and research disciplines. In
particular, in the last two years, the field of image compression has made large leaps: ML-based image compression
approaches have been surpassing the commercial codecs by
significant margins, and are still far from saturating to their
full potential (survey in Section 1.3).
The prevalence of deep learning has further catalyzed the
proliferation of architectures for neural network acceleration across a spectrum of devices and machines. This hardware revolution has been increasingly improving the performance of deployed ML-based technologies — rendering
video compression a prime candidate for disruption.
In this paper, we introduce a new algorithm for video
coding. Our approach is learned end-to-end for the lowlatency mode, where each frame can only rely on information from the past. This is an important setting for live transmission, and constitutes a self-contained research problem
and a stepping-stone towards coding in its full generality.
In this setting, our approach outperforms all existing video
codecs across nearly the entire bitrate range.
We thoroughly evaluate our approach on standard
datasets of varying resolutions, and benchmark against all
modern commercial codecs in this mode. On standarddefinition (SD) videos, HEVC/H.265, AVC/H.264 and VP9
typically produce codes up to 60% larger than our algorithm. On high-definition (HD) 1080p videos, H.265 and
VP9 typically produce codes up to 20% larger, and H.264
up to 35% larger. Furthermore, our approach does not suffer from blocking artifacts and pixelation, and thus produces
videos that are more visually pleasing (see Figure 1).
In Section 1.1, we provide a brief introduction to video
coding in general. In Section 1.2, we proceed to describe
our contributions. In Section 1.3 we discuss related work,
and in Section 1.4 we provide an outline of this paper.

1.1. Video coding in a nutshell
1.1.1

Video frame types

Video codecs are designed for high compression efficiency,
and achieve this by exploiting spatial and temporal redundancies within and across video frames ([51, 47, 36, 34]
provide great overviews of commercial video coding techniques). Existing video codecs feature 3 types of frames:

3454

