ELF: Embedded Localisation of Features in Pre-Trained CNN
Assia Benbihi
UMI2958 GeorgiaTech-CNRS
Centrale Supélec
Université Paris-Saclay
Metz, France

Matthieu Geist
Google Research
Brain Team

Cédric Pradalier
GeorgiaTech Lorraine-UMI2958
GeorgiaTech-CNRS
Metz, France

abenbihi@georgiatech-metz.fr

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel feature detector based
only on information embedded inside a CNN trained on
standard tasks (e.g. classification). While previous works
already show that the features of a trained CNN are suitable
descriptors, we show here how to extract the feature locations from the network to build a detector. This information is computed from the gradient of the feature map with
respect to the input image. This provides a saliency map
with local maxima on relevant keypoint locations. Contrary
to recent CNN-based detectors, this method requires neither supervised training nor finetuning. We evaluate how
repeatable and how ‘matchable’ the detected keypoints are
with the repeatability and matching scores. Matchability
is measured with a simple descriptor introduced for the
sake of the evaluation. This novel detector reaches similar
performances on the standard evaluation HPatches dataset,
as well as comparable robustness against illumination and
viewpoint changes on Webcam and photo-tourism images.
These results show that a CNN trained on a standard task
embeds feature location information that is as relevant as
when the CNN is specifically trained for feature detection.

1. Introduction
Feature extraction, description and matching is a recurrent problem in vision tasks such as Structure from Motion
(SfM), visual SLAM and scene recognition. The extraction
consists in detecting image keypoints, then the matching
pairs the nearest keypoints based on their descriptor distance. Even though hand-crafted solutions, such as SIFT
[19], prove to be successful, recent breakthroughs on local
feature detection and description rely on supervised deeplearning methods [12, 25, 40]. They detect keypoints on
saliency maps learned by a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN), then compute descriptors using another CNN or a

Figure 1. (1-6) Embedded Detector: Given a CNN trained on a
standard vision task (classification), we backpropagate the feature
map back to the image space to compute a saliency map. It is
thresholded to keep only the most informative signal and keypoints
are the local maxima. (7-8): Proxy-descriptor.

separate branch of it. They all require strong supervision
and complex training procedures: [40] requires groundtruth matching keypoints to initiate the training, [25] needs
the ground-truth camera pose and depth maps of the images, [12] circumvents the need for ground-truth data by using synthetic one but requires a heavy domain adaptation to
transfer the training to realistic images. All these methods
require a significant learning effort. In this paper, we show
that a trained network already embeds enough information
to build State-of-the-Art (SoA) detector and descriptor.
The proposed method for local feature detection needs
only a CNN trained on standard task, such as ImageNet
[11] classification, and no further training. The detector,
dubbed ELF, relies on the features learned by such a CNN
and extract their locations from the feature map gradients.
Previous work already highlights that trained CNN features
are relevant descriptors [13] and recent works [6, 15, 31]
specifically train CNN to produce features suitable for keypoint description. However, no existing approach uses a

7940

