Through-Wall Human Mesh Recovery Using Radio Signals
Mingmin Zhao Yingcheng Liu Aniruddh Raghu Tianhong Li
Hang Zhao Antonio Torralba Dina Katabi
MIT CSAIL
Person behind the wall

D +XPDQPHVKUHFRYHU\WKURXJKRFFOXVLRQV

E '\QDPLFKXPDQPHVKFDSWXUHVWKHERG\PRWLRQ

Figure 1: Dynamic human meshes estimated using radio signals. Images captured by a camera co-located with the radio sensor are
presented here for visual reference. (a) shows the estimated human meshes of the same person in sportswear, a baggy costume and when
he is behind the wall. (b) shows the dynamic meshes that capture the motion when the person walks, waves his hand, and sits.

Abstract – This paper presents RF-Avatar, a neural network model that can estimate 3D meshes of the human body
in the presence of occlusions, baggy clothes, and bad lighting conditions. We leverage that radio frequency (RF) signals in the WiFi range traverse clothes and occlusions and
bounce off the human body. Our model parses such radio signals and recovers 3D body meshes. Our meshes are
dynamic and smoothly track the movements of the corresponding people. Further, our model works both in single and multi-person scenarios. Inferring body meshes
from radio signals is a highly under-constrained problem.
Our model deals with this challenge using: 1) a combination of strong and weak supervision, 2) a multi-headed
self-attention mechanism that attends differently to temporal information in the radio signal, and 3) an adversarially trained temporal discriminator that imposes a prior
on the dynamics of human motion. Our results show that
RF-Avatar accurately recovers dynamic 3D meshes in the
presence of occlusions, baggy clothes, bad lighting conditions, and even through walls.

1. Introduction
Estimating a full 3D mesh of the human body, capturing
both human pose and body shape, is a challenging task in

computer vision. The community has achieved major advances in estimating 2D/3D human pose [15, 44], and more
recent work has succeeded in recovering a full 3D mesh of
the human body characterizing both pose and shape [9, 23].
However, as in any camera-based recognition task, human
mesh recovery is still prone to errors when people wear
baggy clothes, and in the presence of occlusions or under
bad lighting conditions.
Recent research has proposed to use different sensing
modalities that could augment vision systems and allow
them to expand beyond the capabilities of cameras [46, 45,
12, 47, 50]. In particular, radio frequency (RF) based sensing systems have demonstrated through-wall human detection and pose estimation [48, 49]. These methods leverage
the fact that RF signals in the WiFi range can traverse occlusions and reflect off the human body. The resulting systems
are privacy-preserving as they do not record visual data, and
can cover a large space with a single device, despite occlusions. However, RF signals have much lower spatial resolution than visual camera images, and therefore it remains
an open question as to whether it is possible at all to capture
dynamic 3D body meshes characterizing the human body
and its motion with RF sensing.
In this paper, we demonstrate how to use RF sensing

10113

