On the Over-Smoothing Problem of CNN Based Disparity Estimation
Chuangrong Chen
Sun Yat-sen University

Xiaozhi Chen
DJI

Hui Cheng∗
Sun Yat-sen University

chenchr5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

cxz.thu@gmail.com

chengh9@mail.sysu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Given a calibrated stereo-rig, the problem of disparity
estimation is to estimate per-pixel horizontal displacement
from left image to right image or vice versa. If the intrinsic
of the stereo-rig is known, per-pixel depth can be calculated
f ·b
, where b is stereo baseline, f is the focal
by depth = disp
length and disp is the estimated disparity. Stereo disparity plays an important role in many areas like robotics, autonomous driving, and augmented reality as it provides an
economical way to obtain the depth of the scene, compared
with expensive depth sensors such as LIDAR.
The pipeline of disparity estimation usually consists
of four components: feature extraction, cost computation,
cost aggregation, and disparity refinement. Traditional approaches use hand-crafted features and energy minimization methods to estimate disparity. Recent methods resort
to data-driven approach using Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). MC-CNN [27] uses CNN for feature extrac∗ Corresponding author

Ours
Groundtruth

Currently, most deep learning based disparity estimation
methods have the problem of over-smoothing at boundaries,
which is unfavorable for some applications such as point
cloud segmentation, mapping, etc. To address this problem,
we first analyze the potential causes and observe that the
estimated disparity at edge boundary pixels usually follows
multimodal distributions, causing over-smoothing estimation. Based on this observation, we propose a single-modal
weighted average operation on the probability distribution
during inference, which can alleviate the problem effectively. To integrate the constraint of this inference method
into training stage, we further analyze the characteristics
of different loss functions and demonstrate that cross entropy loss with Gaussian distribution further improves the
performance consistently. For quantitative evaluation, we
propose a novel metric that measures the disparity error
in the local structure of edge boundaries. Experiments on
various datasets using various networks show our method’s
effectiveness and general applicability.

PSMNet [2]

Abstract

Figure 1. Point cloud converted from disparity. Please zoom in
for more details.

tion and cost computation, and use traditional approaches
for the remaining parts. Some recent works formulate disparity estimation into an end-to-end manner. These methods can be divided into two categories: 2D CNN based
[15, 17, 10, 26] and 3D CNN based [11, 2, 23, 7]. These
two categories have two major differences in design. First,
given extracted left and right features, 2D CNN based methods use inner product or euclidean distance for cost computation and 2D convolution are applied for further process,
while 3D CNN based methods use concatenation operation
and 3D convolution for cost computation and aggregation.
Second, most 2D CNN based methods directly regress the
disparity while 3D CNN based methods predict probability
distribution over enumerated disparity and the final result is
obtained by a weighted average operation.
While CNN based methods have achieved large improvement on disparity estimation, they usually suffer from
severe over-smoothing problem at edge boundaries. While
the estimated disparity map looks good, when converted
to point cloud, they usually have the “long tail” effect at

8997

