Self-Supervised Representation Learning From Multi-Domain Data
Zeyu Feng
Chang Xu
Dacheng Tao
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
zfen2406@uni.sydney.edu.au, {c.xu, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
We present an information-theoretically motivated constraint for self-supervised representation learning from
multiple related domains. In contrast to previous selfsupervised learning methods, our approach learns from
multiple domains, which has the benefit of decreasing the
build-in bias of individual domain, as well as leveraging
information and allowing knowledge transfer across multiple domains. The proposed mutual information constraints
encourage neural network to extract common invariant information across domains and to preserve peculiar information of each domain simultaneously. We adopt tractable
upper and lower bounds of mutual information to make
the proposed constraints solvable. The learned representation is more unbiased and robust toward the input images.
Extensive experimental results on both multi-domain and
large-scale datasets demonstrate the necessity and advantage of multi-domain self-supervised learning with mutual
information constraints. Representations learned in our
framework on state-of-the-art methods achieve improved
performance than those learned on a single domain.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised visual representation learning algorithms
using deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have led
to breakthroughs in relieving the burden of massive manual
annotation [47, 5, 11, 48, 19]. They are capable of learning high-level semantic image representation transferable
to various downstream tasks without using expensive annotated labels, which greatly expend the scope of applications
for CNNs. Among many unsupervised learning methods,
the recently emerged self-supervised learning (SSL) techniques produce excellent representations, achieving stateof-the-art performance on standard computer vision benchmarks [34, 20, 18, 7, 36, 51]. SSL discovers supervisory
signals directly from the input data itself and defines a pretext task from this supervision. CNNs trained to accomplish such objectives have to understand the input data, for

Figure 1: We propose to perform self-supervised learning using
data from multiple related domains. (Images are selected from the
PACS dataset [26].)

instance salient objects and surrounding backgrounds for
object-oriented images. Intermediate layers of the CNN
will hence gain the ability of extracting high-level semantic representations for this type of data, which are useful for
solving different downstream tasks like image recognition.
Although the efficient training on unlabeled data largely
alleviates the burden of human labeling, the properties of
unlabeled training data themselves are not investigated thoroughly for image based SSL. Most of the prior work focuses
on proposing novel pretext tasks to improve the learned representation. Few methods investigate what is the influence
of training data used or in which way should training data be
chosen for SSL. In computer vision community, it has long
been recognized that datasets collected for vision tasks are
often individually biased and deviated from the goal of representing the visual world [46], if application on such real
world images is our aim. Moreover, total available images
for some domains can also be fundamentally constrained

3245

