Recognizing Part Attributes with Insufficient Data
Xiangyun Zhao
Northwestern University

Yi Yang
Baidu Research
Yingze Bao
Baidu Research

Feng Zhou
Baidu Research

Xiao Tan
Baidu Inc.

Yuchen Yuan
Baidu Inc.

Ying Wu
Northwestern University

Abstract
Recognizing attributes of objects and their parts is important to many computer vision applications. Although
great progress has been made to apply object-level recognition, recognizing the attributes of parts remains less applicable since the training data for part attributes recognition is usually scarce especially for internet-scale applications. Furthermore, most existing part attribute recognition methods rely on the part annotation which is more
expensive to obtain. To solve the data insufficiency problem and get rid of dependence on the part annotation, we
introduce a novel Concept Sharing Network (CSN) for part
attribute recognition. A great advantage of CSN is its capability of recognizing the part attribute (a combination
of part location and appearance pattern) that has insufficient or zero training data, by learning the part location
and appearance pattern respectively from the training data
that usually mix them in a single label. Extensive experiments on CUB-200-2011 [51], CelebA [35] and a newly
proposed human attribute dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of CSN and its advantages over other methods, especially for the attributes with few training samples. Further experiments show that CSN can also perform zero-shot
part attribute recognition. The code will be made available at https://github.com/Zhaoxiangyun/Concept-SharingNetwork.

1. Introduction
The computer vision community has seen tremendous
progress in recognizing global features of objects, such as
performing category detection [44, 15, 43, 68] and classification [24] (e.g. detect the bounding box and classify the
category of a bird from an image). Meanwhile, recognizing
attributes of object parts (e.g. localize the wing of a bird
and classify its biologic feature) is still a very challenging
problem due to multiple issues. First, attributes (e.g. the
color of the wing of a bird ) normally attach to a very lim-

wing spotted
some training samples

breast black
some training samples

wing white
some training samples

breast spotted
few training samples

Figure 1. In many datasets and real applications, the labeling of
part attributes is usually very limited. For example, as this figure
shows, in CUB-200-2011 [51] dataset the labels of breast spotted
is very few, whereas the number of the labels of wing spotted, wing
white, and breast black are more but still limited. We propose to
identify the relationships between different labels based on their
locations and patterns, so as to re-use the labels of other attributes
to facilitate the recognition of the attribute that lacks labels (e.g.
breast spotted in this figure). Further, we find that the recognition
of all these attributes can be jointly improved if individual concepts of different attributes can be shared.

ited area of an object, which are usually more difficult to be
accurately localized from an image compared to the overall object. Most existing part attribute recognition methods [64, 30, 62] train a part detector with large extra annotations to detect the relevant part. However, such part annotations are very expensive to obtain. Therefore, these methods generally fail when the part annotation is not available.
How to recognize the part attribute with only image-level
annotation is still under-explored.
Another important problem is that the training data is
expensive to obtain and usually insufficient in the existing
dataset. For example, in a commonly used bird parts attribute recognition dataset CUB-200-2011 [51], the number
of training images for most attributes varies from merely
1350

