TextDragon: An End-to-End Framework for Arbitrary Shaped Text Spotting
Wei Feng1,2

Wenhao He1,2 Fei Yin1,2 Xu-Yao Zhang1,2 Cheng-Lin Liu1,2,3
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence of Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing 100190, China
Email: {wei.feng, wenhao.he, fyin, xyz, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Most existing text spotting methods either focus on horizontal/oriented texts or perform arbitrary shaped text spotting with character-level annotations. In this paper, we propose a novel text spotting framework to detect and recognize
text of arbitrary shapes in an end-to-end manner, using only
word/line-level annotations for training. Motivated from the
name of TextSnake [32], which is only a detection model,
we call the proposed text spotting framework TextDragon.
In TextDragon, a text detector is designed to describe the
shape of text with a series of quadrangles, which can handle text of arbitrary shapes. To extract arbitrary text regions from feature maps, we propose a new differentiable
operator named RoISlide, which is the key to connect arbitrary shaped text detection and recognition. Based on
the extracted features through RoISlide, a CNN and CTC
based text recognizer is introduced to make the framework
free from labeling the location of characters. The proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance on two
curved text benchmarks CTW1500 and Total-Text, and competitive results on the ICDAR 2015 Dataset.

1. Introduction
Scene text spotting aims to detect and recognize text
in an image. It has attracted increasing attention in recent years, due to its wide applications in document analysis and scene understanding. Although previous methods [29, 33, 25, 3] have made significant progress on
datasets where text boundary is labeled by quadrangles or
rectangles, text spotting for arbitrary shapes is still challenging for both detection and recognition.
Most existing methods perform text spotting through two
independent steps: a detector is firstly employed to detect
all texts in the image, and then text recognition is conducted on the detected regions. The disadvantages of these

S

...

O

...

M

...

-

Figure 1. The reading mechanism of humans. Red boxes show the
areas of fixations, and yellow arrows indicate the directions of eye
movement. Black arrows indicate the recognition results, in which
“-” means blank. Green and blue lines show text boundaries.

methods lie in the heavy time cost and correlation ignorance between text detection and recognition. Thus, several
methods [29, 25, 3] are proposed recently to unify horizontal/oriented text detection and recognition in an end-to-end
manner. However, scene texts in the real-world often appear
in arbitrary shapes. Instead of describing text with quadrangles or rectangles, TextSnake [32] describes text with a
series of local units, which behaves like a snake. However,
this work mainly focuses on curved text detection. Lyu et
al. [33] proposed Mask Textspotter to detect and recognize
text of arbitrary shapes, in which a character-segmentation
based text recognizer is used, and thus character-level annotations are required in the training process. Nevertheless, most datasets do not have character-level annotations,
which require much more human labeling efforts.
To achieve the text spotting of arbitrary shapes, we can
follow the reading mechanism of human [1] as shown in
Fig 1. First, a local area of the text is detected. After that,
the contents of the local area are recognized. Finally, the
eyes move along the centerline of the text and repeat the

9076

