FiNet: Compatible and Diverse Fashion Image Inpainting
Xintong Han1,2

Zuxuan Wu3 Weilin Huang∗1,2 Matthew R. Scott1,2 Larry S. Davis3
1
Malong Technologies, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Malong Artificial Intelligence Research Center, Shenzhen, China
3
University of Maryland, College Park
{xinhan,whuang,mscott}@malong.com, {zxwu,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Original image

Generated
layouts

Generated appearances

Original image

Image with
missing garment

Image with
missing garment

Original layout

Original layout

Generated
layouts

Generated appearances

Original image

Generated
layouts

Generated appearances

Figure 1: We inpaint missing fashion items with compatibility and diversity in both shapes and appearances.

Abstract
Visual compatibility is critical for fashion analysis, yet
is missing in existing fashion image synthesis systems. In
this paper, we propose to explicitly model visual compatibility through fashion image inpainting. We present Fashion
Inpainting Networks (FiNet), a two-stage image-to-image
generation framework that is able to perform compatible
and diverse inpainting. Disentangling the generation of
shape and appearance to ensure photorealistic results, our
framework consists of a shape generation network and an
appearance generation network. More importantly, for
each generation network, we introduce two encoders interacting with one another to learn latent codes in a shared
compatibility space. The latent representations are jointly
optimized with the corresponding generation network to
condition the synthesis process, encouraging a diverse set of
generated results that are visually compatible with existing
fashion garments. In addition, our framework is readily extended to clothing reconstruction and fashion transfer. Extensive experiments on fashion synthesis quantitatively and
qualitatively demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
*Weilin Huang is the corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in deep generative models, especially Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [30], Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [16], and their variants
[25, 44, 10, 31], open a new door to a myriad of fashion
applications in computer vision, including fashion design
[28, 52], language-guided fashion synthesis [78, 51, 17],
virtual try-on systems [19, 63, 5, 8, 66, 7], clothing-based
appearance transfer [48, 74], etc. Unlike generating images
of rigid objects, fashion synthesis is more complicated as
it involves multiple clothing items that form a compatible
outfit. Items in the same outfit might have drastically different appearances like texture and color (e.g., cotton shirts,
denim pants, leather shoes, etc.), yet they are complementary to one another when assembled together, constituting
a stylish ensemble for a person. Therefore, exploring compatibility among different garments, an integral collection
rather than isolated elements, to synthesize a diverse set of
fashion images is critical for producing satisfying virtual
try-on experiences and stunning fashion design portfolios.
However, modeling visual compatibility in computer vision
tasks is difficult as there is no ground-truth annotation specifying whether fashion items are compatible. Hence, researchers mitigate this issue by leveraging contextual rela14481

