Global Feature Guided Local Pooling
Takumi Kobayashi
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Japan
takumi.kobayashi@aist.go.jp

Abstract
In deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), local pooling operation is a key building block to effectively downsize feature maps for reducing computation
cost as well as increasing robustness against input variation. There are several types of pooling operation, such as
average/max-pooling, from which one has to be manually
selected for building CNNs. The optimal pooling type would
be dependent on characteristics of features in CNNs and
classification tasks, making it hard to find out the proper
pooling module in advance. In this paper, we propose a
flexible pooling method which adaptively tunes the pooling
functionality based on input features without manually fixing it beforehand. In the proposed method, the parameterized pooling form is derived from a probabilistic perspective to flexibly represent various types of pooling and then
the parameters are estimated by means of global statistics
in the input feature map. Thus, the proposed local pooling guided by global features effectively works in the CNNs
trained in an end-to-end manner. The experimental results
on image classification tasks demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed pooling method in various deep CNNs.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are successful models for high-performance image recognition [18, 32, 12]. While some techniques such as BatchNormalization [16] and DropOut [33] are fundamental to
properly train the deep models, from the architectural viewpoint, the CNNs mainly comprise three basic operations of
convolution, activation and spatial pooling. The activation
functions, especially rectified-linear unit (ReLU) [26] and
its variants [24, 11], are applied to non-linearly transform
the neuron responses. The convolution is a crucial operation to extract effective features from an input image by the
learned filters [44, 4, 41]. The local convolution is expanded
to fully-connected (FC) one [18] which performs globally.
In a similar way to the convolution, there are two types

of spatial pooling in terms of receptive field, local or global
ones. The global pooling effectively substitutes for the FC
in some CNNs [22, 12, 34] through spatially compressing
the (last) feature map of space-channel tensor into the feature vector of channel dimensionality which is finally fed
into classification layers. Practically speaking, the averagepooling is mainly applied to globally aggregate features,
though some pooling forms are also investigated in [17].
In contrast to the global pooling, local pooling operation is a key building block commonly employed in most
CNNs to efficiently reduce spatial resolution with increasing robustness against variations in input images, such as
translation. The local pooling also stems from the biological insight [15]. According to the biologically-inspired
model [31], various types of deep CNNs [18, 32, 34] employ local max-pooling for downsizing the feature maps,
while average-pooling is also applied to CNNs [20]. On
the other hand, some models [12, 41] achieve the same effect of downsizing by means of strided convolution which
is also regarded as a pooling following the convolution of
1-striding [46]. Therefore, in contrast to convolution operation, there are several ways, such as avg/max, to implement the pooling operation and it is hard to manually choose
the optimal pooling type; it is determined based on the empirical performance, requiring huge amounts of effort in a
trial and error approach. Thus, it motivates us to optimize
the type of pooling function in an end-to-end training, as is
done for convolution filters or leaky-ReLU parameters [11].
Toward trainable pooling operation, it is necessary to
address two issues regarding (1) how to formulate various
types of local pooling function and (2) what kind of data to
use for determining the pooling type. Diverse pooling functionality has to be represented by a simple and unified form,
and the pooling operation in the form should be adaptively
tuned based on the input features even on a test phase, since
the optimal pooling type is related to the characteristics of
input features [1, 38]. Thus, the trainable pooling demands
such a dynamic and flexible formulation. In addition, the
optimal pooling functionality would be determined based
on the global characteristics of input features beyond local

3365

