Guided Curriculum Model Adaptation and Uncertainty-Aware Evaluation for
Semantic Nighttime Image Segmentation
Christos Sakaridis1 , Dengxin Dai1 , and Luc Van Gool1,2
1

ETH Zürich, 2 KU Leuven

Abstract
Most progress in semantic segmentation reports on daytime images taken under favorable illumination conditions.
We instead address the problem of semantic segmentation
of nighttime images and improve the state-of-the-art, by
adapting daytime models to nighttime without using nighttime annotations. Moreover, we design a new evaluation
framework to address the substantial uncertainty of semantics in nighttime images. Our central contributions are: 1) a
curriculum framework to gradually adapt semantic segmentation models from day to night via labeled synthetic images
and unlabeled real images, both for progressively darker
times of day, which exploits cross-time-of-day correspondences for the real images to guide the inference of their
labels; 2) a novel uncertainty-aware annotation and evaluation framework and metric for semantic segmentation, designed for adverse conditions and including image regions
beyond human recognition capability in the evaluation in a
principled fashion; 3) the Dark Zurich dataset, which comprises 2416 unlabeled nighttime and 2920 unlabeled twilight images with correspondences to their daytime counterparts plus a set of 151 nighttime images with fine pixellevel annotations created with our protocol, which serves as
a first benchmark to perform our novel evaluation. Experiments show that our guided curriculum adaptation significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on real nighttime sets both for standard metrics and our uncertaintyaware metric. Furthermore, our uncertainty-aware evaluation reveals that selective invalidation of predictions can
lead to better results on data with ambiguous content such
as our nighttime benchmark and profit safety-oriented applications which involve invalid inputs.

1. Introduction
The state of the art in semantic segmentation is rapidly
improving in recent years. Despite the advance, most meth-

ods are designed to operate at daytime, under favorable illumination conditions. However, many outdoor applications
require robust vision systems that perform well at all times
of day, under challenging lighting conditions, and in bad
weather [22]. Currently, the popular approach to solving
perceptual tasks such as semantic segmentation is to train
deep neural networks [20, 38, 44] using large-scale human
annotations [6, 9, 23]. This supervised scheme has achieved
great success for daytime images, but it scales badly to adverse conditions. In this work, we focus on semantic segmentation at nighttime, both at the method level and the
evaluation level.
At the method level, this work adapts semantic segmentation models from daytime to nighttime, without annotations in the latter domain. To this aim, we propose
a new method called Guided Curriculum Model Adaptation (GCMA). The underpinnings of GCMA are threefold: power of time, power of place, and power of data.
Time: environmental illumination changes continuously
from daytime to nighttime. This enables adding intermediate domains between the two to smoothly transfer semantic knowledge. This idea is found to be effective in [8, 26];
we extend it by adding two more modules. Place: images
taken over different time but with the same 6D camera pose
share a large portion of content. The shared content can
be used to guide the knowledge transfer process from a favorable condition (daytime) to an adverse condition (nighttime). We formalize this observation and propose a solution for large-scale application. Data: GCMA takes advantage of the powerful image translation techniques to stylize
large-scale real annotated daytime datasets to darker target
domains in order to perform standard supervised learning.
The adversity of nighttime poses further challenges for
perceptual tasks compared to daytime. The extracted features become corrupted due to visual hazards [41] such as
underexposure, noise, and motion blur. The degradation of
affected input regions is often so intense that they are rendered indiscernible, i.e. determining their semantic content
is impossible even for humans. We term such regions as

7374

