Deep Residual Learning in the JPEG Transform Domain
Max Ehrlich and Larry Davis
maxehr@umiacs.umd.edu

lsd@umiacs.umd.edu

University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.

Abstract
We introduce a general method of performing Residual
Network inference and learning in the JPEG transform domain that allows the network to consume compressed images as input. Our formulation leverages the linearity of the
JPEG transform to redefine convolution and batch normalization with a tune-able numerical approximation for ReLu.
The result is mathematically equivalent to the spatial domain network up to the ReLu approximation accuracy. A
formulation for image classification and a model conversion
algorithm for spatial domain networks are given as examples of the method. We show skipping the costly decompression step allows for faster processing of images with little
to no penalty in the network accuracy.

resentation. JPEG is the most widespread image file format. Traditionally, the first step in using JPEGs for machine
learning is to decompress them. We propose to skip this step
and instead reformulate the ResNet architecture to perform
its operations directly on compressed images. The goal is
to produce a new network that is mathematically equivalent
to the spatial domain network, but which operates on compressed images by including the compression transform into
the network weights, which can be done because they are
both linear maps. Because the ReLu function is non-linear,
we develop an approximation technique for it. This is a
general method and, to our knowledge, is the first attempt
at formulating a piecewise linear function in the transform
domain.
The contributions of this work are as follows
1. The general method for expressing convolutional networks in the JPEG domain

1. Introduction
The popularization of deep learning since the 2012
AlexNet [15] architecture has led to unprecedented gains
for the field. Many applications that were once academic are
now seeing widespread use of machine learning with success. Although the performance of deep neural networks far
exceeds classical methods, there are still some major problems with the algorithms from a computational standpoint.
Deep networks require massive amounts of data to learn effectively, especially for complex problems [18]. Further,
the computational and memory demands of deep networks
mean that for many large problems, only large institutions
with GPU clusters can afford to train from scratch, leaving
the average scientist to fine tune pre-trained weights.
This problem has been addressed many times in the literature. Batch normalization [12] is ubiquitous in modern
networks to accelerate their convergence. Residual learning [11] allows for much deeper networks to learn effective
mappings without overfitting. Techniques such as pruning
and weight compression [9] are becoming more commonplace. As problems become even larger and more complex,
these techniques are increasingly being relied upon for efficient training and inference.
We approach this problem at the level of the image rep-

2. Concrete formulation for residual blocks to perform
classification
3. A model conversion algorithm to apply pretrained spatial domain networks to JPEG images
4. Approximated Spatial Masking: the first general technique for application of piecewise linear functions in
the transform domain
By skipping the decompression step and by operating on the
compressed format, we show a notable increase in speed for
testing and a marginal speed for training.

2. Prior Work
We review prior work separated into three categories:
compressed domain operations, machine learning in the
compressed domain, and deep learning in the compressed
domain.

2.1. Compressed Domain Operations
The expression of common operations in the compressed
domain was an extremely active area of study in the late 80s
and early 90s, motivated by the lack of computing power to

3484

