SegSort: Segmentation by Discriminative Sorting of Segments
Jyh-Jing Hwang1,2 Stella X. Yu1 Jianbo Shi2
Maxwell D. Collins3 Tien-Ju Yang4 Xiao Zhang3 Liang-Chieh Chen3
1
UC Berkeley / ICSI 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 Google Research 4 MIT
{jyh,stellayu}@berkeley.edu

{jyh,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu

{maxwellcollins,tjy,andypassion,lcchen}@google.com

Abstract
Almost all existing deep learning approaches for semantic segmentation tackle this task as a pixel-wise classification problem. Yet humans understand a scene not in terms
of pixels, but by decomposing it into perceptual groups and
structures that are the basic building blocks of recognition. This motivates us to propose an end-to-end pixelwise metric learning approach that mimics this process. In
our approach, the optimal visual representation determines
the right segmentation within individual images and associates segments with the same semantic classes across images. The core visual learning problem is therefore to maximize the similarity within segments and minimize the similarity between segments. Given a model trained this way,
inference is performed consistently by extracting pixel-wise
embeddings and clustering, with the semantic label determined by the majority vote of its nearest neighbors from
an annotated set. As a result, we present the SegSort, as
a first attempt using deep learning for unsupervised semantic segmentation, achieving 76% performance of its supervised counterpart. When supervision is available, SegSort shows consistent improvements over conventional approaches based on pixel-wise softmax training. Additionally, our approach produces more precise boundaries and
consistent region predictions. The proposed SegSort further
produces an interpretable result, as each choice of label can
be easily understood from the retrieved nearest segments.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is usually approached by extending image-wise classification [41, 38] to pixel-wise classification, deployed in a fully convolutional fashion [47]. In
contrast, we study the semantic segmentation task in terms
of perceiving an image in groups of pixels and associating
objects from a large set of images. Particularly, we take the
perceptual organization view [66, 6] that pixels group by visual similarity and objects form by visual familiarity; con-

Figure 1. Top: Our proposed approach partitions an image in the
embedding space into aligned segments (framed in red) and assign the majority labels from retrieved segments (framed in green
or pink). Bottom: Our approach presents the first deep learning
based unsupervised semantic segmentation (right). If supervised,
our approach produces more consistent region predictions and precise boundaries in the supervised setting (middle) compared to its
parametric counterpart (left).

sequently a representation is developed to best relate pixels
and segments to each other in the visual world. Our method,
such motivated, not only achieves better supervised semantic segmentation but also presents the first attempt using
deep learning for unsupervised semantic segmentation.
We formulate this intuition as an end-to-end metric
learning problem. Each pixel in an image is mapped via
a CNN to a point in some visual embedding space, and
nearby points in that space indicate pixels belonging to the
same segments. From all the segments collected across images, clusters in the embedding space form semantic concepts. In other words, we sort segments with respect to
their visual and semantic attributes. The optimal visual representation delivers the right segmentation within individual images and associates segments with the same semantic
classes across images, yielding a non-parametric model as
its complexity scales with number of segments (exemplars).
We derive our method based on maximum likelihood
estimation of a single equation, resulting in a two-stage

7334

