Context-Aware Image Matting for Simultaneous Foreground and Alpha
Estimation
Qiqi Hou
Portland State University

Feng Liu
Portland State University

qiqi2@pdx.edu

fliu@cs.pdx.edu

Abstract
Natural image matting is an important problem in computer vision and graphics. It is an ill-posed problem when
only an input image is available without any external information. While the recent deep learning approaches have
shown promising results, they only estimate the alpha matte.
This paper presents a context-aware natural image matting
method for simultaneous foreground and alpha matte estimation. Our method employs two encoder networks to extract essential information for matting. Particularly, we use
a matting encoder to learn local features and a context encoder to obtain more global context information. We concatenate the outputs from these two encoders and feed them
into decoder networks to simultaneously estimate the foreground and alpha matte. To train this whole deep neural
network, we employ both the standard Laplacian loss and
the feature loss: the former helps to achieve high numerical performance while the latter leads to more perceptually
plausible results. We also report several data augmentation
strategies that greatly improve the network’s generalization
performance. Our qualitative and quantitative experiments
show that our method enables high-quality matting for a
single natural image.

1. Introduction
Natural image matting is the problem of estimating the
foreground image and the corresponding alpha matte from
an input image. It is a critical step of image composition,
which is widely used in image and video production. Without any external information, matting is a seriously ill-posed
problem. In practice, most existing matting methods take a
trimap as input; however, matting is still underconstrained
in the undefined area in the trimap.
Traditional methods solve the matting problem by inferring the alpha matte information in the undefined area
from those in the defined areas [51]. For instance, the matte
values in the undefined areas can be propagated from the
known areas according to the spatial and appearance affinity
between them [2, 6, 7, 20, 26, 27, 28, 46]. Alternatively, the

undefined matte values can be computed by sampling the
color or texture distribution of the known foreground and
background areas and optimizing a carefully defined metric, such as the likelihood of the foreground, background,
and alpha values [11, 18, 19, 49, 50]. While these methods
provide promising results and some of them are incorporated into commercial tools, single natural image matting
is still a challenging problem as these methods rely on the
distinctive appearance of the foreground and background areas, such as their local or global color distribution.
Our research is inspired by the recent deep learning approaches to image matting. These deep matting approaches,
such as [4, 33, 52] take an input image and the corresponding user-provided trimap as input and output an alpha
map. They are shown robust for many challenging scenarios. These methods, however, only output the alpha map
without the foreground or background image.
This paper presents a deep image matting method that
simultaneously estimate the alpha map and the foreground
image. Our method explores both local image and global
context information for high-quality matting. This is inspired by the success of non-deep learning-based matting
approaches that combines the global sampling and local
propagation strategies [2, 6, 7, 20, 19]. Specifically, we designed a two-encoder-two-decoder fully convolutional neural network for context-aware simultaneous foreground image and alpha map estimation. The matting encoder learns
to extract the local features while the context encoder learns
more global features. We concatenate the features from
these two encoders and feed them to an alpha decoder and a
foreground decoder to estimate the alpha map and the corresponding foreground image simultaneously.
We explore a Laplacian loss and the feature loss to train
our deep matting neural network. We found that the Laplacian loss enables our network to achieve the state-of-the-art
numerical performance while the feature loss leads to more
perceptually plausible matting results. We also found that
some data augmentation methods are particularly helpful
for our neural network to generalize to real-world images
although our network is trained on a synthetic dataset pro14130

