Spectral Feature Transformation for Person Re-Identification
Chuanchen Luo1,3 Yuntao Chen1,3 Naiyan Wang2 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,3,4
1
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
TuSimple
3
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
1

{luochuanchen2017, chenyuntao2016, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
2

winsty@gmail.com

Abstract
With the surge of deep learning techniques, the field of
person re-identification has witnessed rapid progress in recent years. Deep learning based methods focus on learning a discriminative feature space where data points are
clustered compactly according to their corresponding identities. Most existing methods process data points individually or only involves a fraction of samples while building
a similarity structure. They ignore dense informative connections among samples more or less. The lack of holistic
observation eventually leads to inferior performance. To
relieve the issue, we propose to formulate the whole data
batch as a similarity graph. Inspired by spectral clustering, a novel module termed Spectral Feature Transformation is developed to facilitate the optimization of groupwise similarities. It adds no burden to the inference and
can be applied to various scenarios. As a natural extension, we further derive a lightweight re-ranking method
named Local Blurring Re-ranking which makes the underlying clustering structure around the probe set more compact. Empirical studies on four public benchmarks show
the superiority of the proposed method. Code is available
at https://github.com/LuckyDC/SFT_REID.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) is an indispensable component in surveillance video analysis. Given the probe, person ReID aims at identifying images of the same person
across multiple non-overlapping camera views. Thanks to
the emergence of deep learning techniques and large scale
datasets [62, 64, 21, 55], the field of person identification
evolves rapidly. Though having achieved much progress,
it remains challenging due to drastic pose variation, occlusion, and background cluttering.
Deep learning based ReID methods focus on exploiting the powerful capability of neural networks to learn dis-

pos

pos

neg

neg

SFT
neg

(a) Pair-wise

(b) Triplet-wise

(c) Group-wise

Figure 1. The illustration of the similarity structure built by different methods. Contrastive and triplet loss focus on pair-wise(a) and
triplet-wise(b) relationship, respectively. While our method capture dense connections between samples by formulating the data
as a graph(c).

criminative feature. When projected to the obtained feature space, data points are expected to gather into clusters according to their labels. In order to intensify intraclass compactness and inter-class separability of the feature, many efforts have been made in recent years. Besides
designing tailor-made neural architectures, a large variety
of loss functions have also been proposed. The two most
prevalent types of loss functions in ReID are classification
loss(e.g. softmax cross entropy loss) [63, 10, 44, 43] and
metric learning based loss(e.g. triplet loss and contrastive
loss) [5, 15, 60]. Classification loss has promising convergence but is vulnerable to overfitting. It processes samples
individually and only builds connections implicitly through
the classifier. Metric learning based loss explicitly optimizes the distances between samples. While the similarity
structure it builds only involves a pair/triplet of data points
and ignores other informative samples. This leads to a large
proportion of trivial pairs/triplets which could overwhelm
the training process and eventually makes the model suffer
from slow convergence. To relieve the issue, many methods [40, 29, 27] incorporate more samples while building
the similarity structure. Whereas, they are still limited by
the number of samples considered which may impair the
performance.

4976

