Resolving 3D Human Pose Ambiguities with 3D Scene Constraints
Mohamed Hassan, Vasileios Choutas, Dimitrios Tzionas and Michael J. Black
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
{mhassan, vchoutas, dtzionas, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Figure 1: Standard 3D body estimation methods predict bodies that may be inconsistent with the 3D scene even though the
results may look reasonable from the camera viewpoint. To address this, we exploit the 3D scene structure and introduce
scene constraints for contact and inter-penetration. From left to right: (1) RGB image (top) and 3D scene reconstruction
(bottom), (2) overlay of estimated bodies on the original RGB image without (yellow) and with (gray) scene constraints, 3D
rendering of both the body and the scene from (3) camera view, (4) top view and (5) side view.

Abstract
To understand and analyze human behavior, we need to
capture humans moving in, and interacting with, the world.
Most existing methods perform 3D human pose estimation
without explicitly considering the scene. We observe however that the world constrains the body and vice-versa. To
motivate this, we show that current 3D human pose estimation methods produce results that are not consistent with
the 3D scene. Our key contribution is to exploit static 3D
scene structure to better estimate human pose from monocular images. The method enforces Proximal Relationships
with Object eXclusion and is called PROX. To test this, we
collect a new dataset composed of 12 different 3D scenes
and RGB sequences of 20 subjects moving in and interacting with the scenes. We represent human pose using the 3D
human body model SMPL-X and extend SMPLify-X to estimate body pose using scene constraints. We make use of the
3D scene information by formulating two main constraints.
The inter-penetration constraint penalizes intersection be-

tween the body model and the surrounding 3D scene. The
contact constraint encourages specific parts of the body to
be in contact with scene surfaces if they are close enough
in distance and orientation. For quantitative evaluation we
capture a separate dataset with 180 RGB frames in which
the ground-truth body pose is estimated using a motion capture system. We show quantitatively that introducing scene
constraints significantly reduces 3D joint error and vertex
error. Our code and data are available for research at
https://prox.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Humans move through, and interact with, the 3D world.
The world limits this movement and provides opportunities
(affordances) [20]. In fact, it is through contact between
our feet and the environment that we are able to move at all.
Whether simply standing, sitting, lying down, walking, or
manipulating objects, our posture, movement, and behavior is affected by the world around us. Despite this, most
work on 3D human pose estimation from images ignores

2282

