Scoot: A Perceptual Metric for Facial Sketches
Deng-Ping Fan1,2 ShengChuan Zhang4 Yu-Huan Wu 1 Yun Liu 1
Ming-Ming Cheng1, * Bo Ren1 Paul L. Rosin3 Rongrong Ji4,5
1

TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University
4

2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI)

Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University

5

3

Cardiff University

Peng Cheng Lab

http://mmcheng.net/scoot/

S0

Abstract
The human visual system has a strong ability to quickly
assess the perceptual similarity between two facial sketches.
However, existing popular facial sketch metrics, e.g., FSIM
and SSIM, which initially designed for evaluating local image distortion, often fail to address the perceptual similarity
between faces. In this paper, we design a perceptual metric, called Structure Co-Occurrence Texture (Scoot), which
simultaneously considers the block-level spatial structure
and co-occurrence texture statistics. To test the quality of
metrics, we propose three novel meta-measures based on
various reliable properties. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our Scoot metric exceeds the performance of
prior work. Besides, we built the first large scale (152k
judgments) human-perception-based sketch database that
can evaluate how well a metric is consistent with human
perception. Our results suggest that “spatial structure” and
“co-occurrence texture” are two generally applicable perceptual features in face sketch synthesis.

1. Introduction
Being able to properly evaluate the quality of different
algorithm outputs [80] against reference data is crucial in
all areas of computer vision and image processing [5,8,89].
For various end-user applications such as face sketch [49],
image style transfer [27], image quality assessment [66],
saliency detection [11–13, 90], segmentation [41–43] and
disease classification [73], image denoising [71], the comparison can turn out to be evaluating a “perceptual distance”, which assesses how similar two images are in a way
that highly correlates with human perception.
In this paper, we study facial sketch and show that human judgments are often different from current evaluation
metrics, and as the first related attempt, we provide a novel
perceptual distance for sketch according to human choice
* M.M. Cheng (cmm@nankai.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

R

S1

S0

Humans

Humans

Scoot

Scoot

Others

R

S1

Others

Figure 1: Which synthesized sketch is more similar to the middle sketch? For the right case, sketch 0 (S0) is more similar than
sketch 1 (S1) w.r.t. reference (R) in terms of structure and texture.
Sketch 1 almost completely destroys the texture of the hair. The
widely-used (SSIM [66], FSIM [76]), classic (IFC [40], VIF [39])
and recently released (GMSD [72]) metrics disagree with humans.
Only our Scoot metric agrees well with humans.

principles. As noticed in [80], human judgments of similarity depend on high-order image structure. Facial sketches
are made up of a lot of textures, and there are many algorithms for synthesizing sketches, which is a good fit for
this problem. However, designing a good perceptual metric
should take into account human perception in facial sketch
comparison, which should:
• closely match human perception so that good
sketches can be directly used in various subjective applications, e.g., law enforcement and entertainment.
• be insensitive to slight mismatches (i.e., re-size, rotation) since real-world sketches drawn by artists do not
precisely match each pixel to the original photos.
• be capable of capturing holistic content, that is,
prefer the complete sketch to one that only contains
strokes (i.e., has lost some facial components).
To the best of our knowledge, no prior metric can satisfy
all these properties simultaneously.
For example, in face sketch synthesis (FSS), the target
is for the synthetic sketch to be indistinguishable from the
reference by a human subject, although their pixel representations might be mismatched. Let us take a look at Fig. 1 in

5612

