AttPool: Towards Hierarchical Feature Representation in Graph Convolutional
Networks via Attention Mechanism
Jingjia Huang∗1,2 , Zhangheng Li∗ 1,2 , Nannan Li1,2 , Shan Liu3 , and Ge Li†1,2
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School,
Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Tencent Media Lab, Palo Alto, CA94301, USA

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are potentially
insufficient in the ability to learn hierarchical representation for graph embedding, which holds them back in the
graph classification task. To address the insufficiency, we
propose AttPool, which is a novel graph pooling module
based on an attention based mechanism, to remedy the
problem. It is able to select nodes that are significant for
graph representation adaptively, and generate hierarchical
features via aggregating the attention-weighted information
in nodes. Additionally, we devise a hierarchical prediction
architecture to sufficiently leverage the hierarchical representation and facilitate the model learning. The AttPool
module together with the entire training structure can be
integrated into existing GCNs, and is trained in an end-toend fashion conveniently. The experimental results on several graph-classification benchmark datasets with various
scales demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) in recent years, many researchers have attempted to extend convolution to graph-structured data,
such as social networks [2] and bioinformatics [31]. Unlike grid-structured data, e.g., images and videos, graphstructured data is often represented as the combination of
irregularly-arranged nodes and connection-indicated edges,
and therefore, the locality of graphs cannot be clearly defined. To handle this challenge, various graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have been proposed, which have
∗ The authors have equal contribution to the work and are listed in alphabetical order.
† Corresponding author: Ge Li (email: geli@ece.pku.cn).

achieved remarkable successes for representation learning
on graphs [40, 20], especially for node-embedding learning based tasks, such as node classification [18, 37] and
link prediction [1, 43]. However, without the pooling strategy, nearly all of existing GCNs are potentially lacking in
ability to learn hierarchical representation for graph embedding, which holds them back in the graph classification task. Hierarchical information is important for graph
classification. For example, in order to distinguish different organic molecules, it is beneficial to consider both local
patch (e.g. individual atoms and their bonds) and coarsegrained structure (e.g. groups of atoms and bonds representing functional units in a molecule) rather than only
local patterns [42]. To remedy the problem, a few researchers have tried to further generalize the pooling mechanism from CNNs to GCNs for hierarchical representation
learning [42, 16, 6, 11].
Early works perform graph pooling either via applying a
global pooling over all the node representations [16] or
through coarsening the graph into clusters with deterministic assignment rules in prepossessing [6, 5]. Recently, learnable pooling layers are proposed in [11, 42] to obtain selfadapting cluster assignments, which are data-driven and can
be trained in a differentiable way. Inspired by their work, in
this paper we present an attention-based novel pooling strategy to generate hierarchical feature representations for input
graphs. The attention mechanism allows a model to focus
on task-relevant parts of the inputs, helping it to make better decisions. More recently, there has been a growing interest in incorporating the attention mechanism into encoding relationships of neighboring nodes and promoting nodeembedding learning solutions [37, 35]. Unlike them, we
utilize a global attention mechanism to evaluate the importance for each node in the graph globally. Then, we adaptively select discriminative nodes to form multi-granularity

16480

