On the Design of Black-box Adversarial Examples by Leveraging
Gradient-free Optimization and Operator Splitting Method
Pu Zhao1 , Sijia Liu2 , Pin-Yu Chen2 , Trong Nghia Hoang2 , Kaidi Xu1 , Bhavya Kailkhura3 , Xue Lin1
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
3
Syracuse University
zhao.pu@husky.neu.edu, {sijia.liu, pin-yu.chen, nghiaht}@ibm.com, xu.kaid@husky.neu.edu,
bkailkhu@syr.edu, xue.lin@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Robust machine learning is currently one of the most
prominent topics which could potentially help shaping a future of advanced AI platforms that not only perform well
in average cases but also in worst cases or adverse situations. Despite the long-term vision, however, existing studies on black-box adversarial attacks are still restricted to
very specific settings of threat models (e.g., single distortion metric and restrictive assumption on target model’s
feedback to queries) and/or suffer from prohibitively high
query complexity. To push for further advances in this field,
we introduce a general framework based on an operator
splitting method, the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) to devise efficient, robust black-box attacks that work with various distortion metrics and feedback settings without incurring high query complexity. Due
to the black-box nature of the threat model, the proposed
ADMM solution framework is integrated with zeroth-order
(ZO) optimization and Bayesian optimization (BO), and thus
is applicable to the gradient-free regime. This results in two
new black-box adversarial attack generation methods, ZOADMM and BO-ADMM. Our empirical evaluations on image
classification datasets show that our proposed approaches
have much lower function query complexities compared to
state-of-the-art attack methods, but achieve very competitive attack success rates. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/LinLabNEU/Blackbox_ADMM .

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved signiﬁcant breakthroughs [22] in many machine
learning (ML) tasks. However, despite these success stories, there have been many recent studies showing that even
state-of-the-art DNNs might still be vulnerable to adversar-

ial misclassiﬁcation attacks [15, 38, 44]. The adversarial
attacks ﬁnd and add visually imperceptible noises to an originally correctly classiﬁed input and essentially cause it to
be misclassiﬁed by the DNNs. This raises security concerns
about the robustness of DNNs in extreme situations with
high reliability and dependability requirement such as face
recognition, autonomous driving car and malware detection
[34, 13, 17]. Investigating adversarial examples has become
an increasingly prevailing topic to develop potential defensive measures in trustworthy ML [24, 40, 42, 41]. It essentially lays the groundwork for building a new generation
of highly robust and reliable ML models acting as the core
engine of future AI technology.
However, most of preliminary studies on this topic are restricted to the white-box setting where the adversary has complete access and knowledge of the target system (e.g., DNNs)
[15, 21, 6, 7, 43]. Despite the theoretical interest, white-box
attack methods are not adapted to practical black-box threat
models. It is often the case that internal states/conﬁgurations
and operating mechanism of public ML systems are not revealed to the practitioners (e.g., Google Cloud Vision API).
Accordingly, the only mode of interaction with the system
is via submitting inputs and receiving the corresponding
predicted outputs.
To boost the practicality of such approaches, a few recent works have introduced a new class of threat models
that exploit either a surrogate of the target model [31] or a
gradient-free attack method [8, 1]. However, adversarial attacks that exploit a surrogate of the target model tend to yield
low success rate if the surrogate is inaccurate. On the other
hand, while attacks that use zeroth-order gradient estimation
[8] are often more effective, they require a large number of
queries to obtain an accurate estimate. Thus they are usually not economically efﬁcient, especially in query-limited
settings due to budget constraints.
To mitigate the above limitations of the existing literature,

121

