Digging Into Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Clément Godard1

Oisin Mac Aodha2
Michael Firman3
Gabriel Brostow3,1
1
2
3
UCL
Caltech
Niantic
www.github.com/nianticlabs/monodepth2

Abstract
Per-pixel ground-truth depth data is challenging to acquire at scale. To overcome this limitation, self-supervised
learning has emerged as a promising alternative for training models to perform monocular depth estimation. In this
paper, we propose a set of improvements, which together result in both quantitatively and qualitatively improved depth
maps compared to competing self-supervised methods.
Research on self-supervised monocular training usually
explores increasingly complex architectures, loss functions,
and image formation models, all of which have recently
helped to close the gap with fully-supervised methods. We
show that a surprisingly simple model, and associated design choices, lead to superior predictions. In particular, we
propose (i) a minimum reprojection loss, designed to robustly handle occlusions, (ii) a full-resolution multi-scale
sampling method that reduces visual artifacts, and (iii) an
auto-masking loss to ignore training pixels that violate camera motion assumptions. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of each component in isolation, and show high quality,
state-of-the-art results on the KITTI benchmark.

1. Introduction
We seek to automatically infer a dense depth image from
a single color input image. Estimating absolute, or even
relative depth, seems ill-posed without a second input image
to enable triangulation. Yet, humans learn from navigating
and interacting in the real-world, enabling us to hypothesize
plausible depth estimates for novel scenes [18].
Generating high quality depth-from-color is attractive
because it could inexpensively complement LIDAR sensors
used in self-driving cars, and enable new single-photo applications such as image-editing and AR-compositing. Solving for depth is also a powerful way to use large unlabeled
image datasets for the pretraining of deep networks for
downstream discriminative tasks [23]. However, collecting
large and varied training datasets with accurate ground truth
depth for supervised learning [55, 9] is itself a formidable
challenge. As an alternative, several recent self-supervised

Input

Monodepth2 (M)

Monodepth2 (S)

Monodepth2 (MS)

Zhou et al. [76] (M)

Monodepth [15] (S)

Zhan et al. [73] (MS)

DDVO [62] (M)

Ranjan et al. [51] (M)

EPC++ [38] (MS)

Figure 1. Depth from a single image. Our self-supervised model,
Monodepth2, produces sharp, high quality depth maps, whether
trained with monocular (M), stereo (S), or joint (MS) supervision.

approaches have shown that it is instead possible to train
monocular depth estimation models using only synchronized stereo pairs [12, 15] or monocular video [76].
Among the two self-supervised approaches, monocular
video is an attractive alternative to stereo-based supervision,
but it introduces its own set of challenges. In addition to
estimating depth, the model also needs to estimate the egomotion between temporal image pairs during training. This
typically involves training a pose estimation network that
takes a finite sequence of frames as input, and outputs the
corresponding camera transformations. Conversely, using
stereo data for training makes the camera-pose estimation a
one-time offline calibration, but can cause issues related to
occlusion and texture-copy artifacts [15].
We propose three architectural and loss innovations that
combined, lead to large improvements in monocular depth
estimation when training with monocular video, stereo
pairs, or both: (1) A novel appearance matching loss to address the problem of occluded pixels that occur when using monocular supervision. (2) A novel and simple automasking approach to ignore pixels where no relative camera

3828

