Unsupervised High-Resolution Depth Learning From Videos With Dual
Networks
Junsheng Zhou1,* , Yuwang Wang2 , Kaihuai Qin1 , and Wenjun Zeng2
1

Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

zhoujs17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, qkh-dcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
yuwwan, wezeng@microsoft.com

Abstract
Unsupervised depth learning takes the appearance difference between a target view and a view synthesized from
its adjacent frame as supervisory signal. Since the supervisory signal only comes from images themselves, the resolution of training data significantly impacts the performance.
High-resolution images contain more fine-grained details
and provide more accurate supervisory signal. However,
due to the limitation of memory and computation power, the
original images are typically down-sampled during training, which suffers heavy loss of details and disparity accuracy. In order to fully explore the information contained
in high-resolution data, we propose a simple yet effective
dual networks architecture, which can directly take highresolution images as input and generate high-resolution
and high-accuracy depth map efficiently. We also propose
a Self-assembled Attention (SA-Attention) module to handle low-texture region. The evaluation on the benchmark
KITTI and Make3D datasets demonstrates that our method
achieves state-of-the-art results in the monocular depth estimation task.

1. Introduction
Estimating depth from RGB images has broad applications such as scene understanding, 3D modelling, robotics,
autonomous driving, etc. However, depth estimation from
a single image is a well-known ill-posed problem and has
inherent scale ambiguity. Recently supervised deep learning methods [7, 30, 22] have achieved tremendous success in monocular depth estimation tasks. These methods
use convolutional neural networks to predict depth from
* Work done as an intern at MSRA.

single RGB image input under the supervision of groundtruth depth obtained by laser scanners. But fully supervised
learning methods still suffer from lack of large scale and
diverse datasets. So unsupervised methods [11, 54] have
been proposed to get rid of ground truth labeling and have
attracted increasing interest in recent years.
The key idea of unsupervised learning from video is to
simultaneously estimate depth of scenes and ego-motion of
camera, and use the predicted depth and pose to synthesize target view from source view based on geometric constraint. Then the appearance difference between the synthesized target view and real target view is used as supervisory signal. This unsupervised method is similar to traditional structure-from-motion and stereo matching methods, and therefore suffers from the same problems like occlusion/disocclusion and non-texture region. Since the supervisory signal only comes from images themselves, the
quality of images, e.g., the resolution, significantly impacts
the performance. For example, disparity of distant object
is always smaller than that of nearby object when the camera is moving forward. Since digital image is a discretized
representation of the real world, its resolution limits the accuracy of the disparity. More specifically, it is difficult to
distinguish whether the depth of an object is 40m or 80m
when its disparity is less than one pixel. Actually we also
observed that previous state-of-the-art methods that adopt
down-sampling, are prone to produce large error on distant
objects. In addition, due to the limitation of memory and
computation power, previous methods usually take downsampled images as training data and predict depth maps
with the same size as input. Then the low-resolution results
need to be upsampled to the original resolution, resulting
in blurred border in this operation. Besides, due to the loss
of fine-grained details, slim objects like traffic pole and tree
are often neglected, which is a serious safety problem in

6872

