UM-Adapt: Unsupervised Multi-Task Adaptation Using Adversarial Cross-Task
Distillation
Jogendra Nath Kundu
Nishank Lakkakula
R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
jogendrak@iisc.ac.in, nishank974@gmail.com, venky@iisc.ac.in

Task-1 Output
Distribution

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep networks have proven to be highly successful in a
wide range of computer vision problems. They not only excel in classification or recognition based tasks, but also deliver comparable performance improvements for complex
spatially-structured prediction tasks [8] like semantic segmentation, monocular depth estimation etc. However, generalizability of such models is one of the major concerns
before deploying them in a target environment, since such

Synthetic domain
(source)

C task-1

Cross-task
distillation

Aiming towards human-level generalization, there is a
need to explore adaptable representation learning methods
with greater transferability. Most existing approaches independently address task-transferability and cross-domain
adaptation, resulting in limited generalization. In this
paper, we propose UM-Adapt - a unified framework to
effectively perform unsupervised domain adaptation for
spatially-structured prediction tasks, simultaneously maintaining a balanced performance across individual tasks in a
multi-task setting. To realize this, we propose two novel regularization strategies; a) Contour-based content regularization (CCR) and b) exploitation of inter-task coherency using a cross-task distillation module. Furthermore, avoiding
a conventional ad-hoc domain discriminator, we re-utilize
the cross-task distillation loss as output of an energy function to adversarially minimize the input domain discrepancy. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate superior generalizability of the learned representations simultaneously for multiple tasks under domain-shifts from synthetic to natural environments. UM-Adapt yields state-ofthe-art transfer learning results on ImageNet classification
and comparable performance on PASCAL VOC 2007 detection task, even with a smaller backbone-net. Moreover, the
resulting semi-supervised framework outperforms the current fully-supervised multi-task learning state-of-the-art on
both NYUD and Cityscapes dataset.

Spatially-structured
Latent Distribution

C
Natural domain
(Target)

tas

k-2

UM-Adapt

Task-2 Output
Distribution

Figure 1. A schematic diagram to understand the implications
of cross-task distillation. The green arrows show consistency in
cross-task transfer for a source sample. Whereas, the red and purple arrows show a discrepancy (yellow arrows) in cross-task transfer for a target sample as a result of input domain-shift. UM-Adapt
aims to minimize this discrepancy as a proxy to achieve adaptation
at a spatially-structured common latent representation.

models exhibit alarming dataset or domain bias [4, 28]. To
effectively address this, researchers have started focusing
on unsupervised domain adaptation approaches [6]. In a
fully-unsupervised setting without target annotations, one
of the effective approaches [12, 57] is to minimize the domain discrepancy at a latent feature level so that the model
extracts domain agnostic and task-specific representations.
Although such approaches are very effective in classification or recognition based tasks [56], they yield suboptimal performance for adaptation of fully-convolutional architectures, which is particularly essential for spatial prediction tasks [62]. One of the major issues encountered
in such scenarios is attributed to the spatially-structured
high-dimensional latent representation in contrast to vectorized form [29]. Moreover, preservation of spatial-regularity,
avoiding mode-collapse [49] becomes a significant challenge while aiming to adapt in a fully unsupervised setting.
While we aim towards human level performance, there
is a need to explore scalable learning methods, which can
yield generic image representation with improved transferability across both tasks and data domains. Muti-task learn-

1436

