Physical Adversarial Textures That Fool Visual Object Tracking
Rey Reza Wiyatno
Anqi Xu
Element AI
Montreal, Canada
{rey.reza, ax}@elementai.com

Abstract
We present a method for creating inconspicuous-looking
textures that, when displayed as posters in the physical
world, cause visual object tracking systems to become confused. As a target being visually tracked moves in front
of such a poster, its adversarial texture makes the tracker
lock onto it, thus allowing the target to evade. This adversarial attack evaluates several optimization strategies for
fooling seldom-targeted regression models: non-targeted,
targeted, and a newly-coined family of guided adversarial
losses. Also, while we use the Expectation Over Transformation (EOT) algorithm to generate physical adversaries
that fool tracking models when imaged under diverse conditions, we compare the impacts of different scene variables
to find practical attack setups with high resulting adversarial strength and convergence speed. We further showcase
that textures optimized using simulated scenes can confuse
real-world tracking systems for cameras and robots.

1. Introduction
Research on adversarial attacks [24, 9, 18] have shown
that deep learning models, e.g., for classification and detection tasks, are confused by adversarial examples: slightlyperturbed images of objects that cause them to make wrong
predictions. While early attacks digitally modified inputs
to a victim model, later advances created photos [14] and
objects in the physical world that lead to misclassification
under diverse imaging conditions [7, 1]. Due to these added
complexities, many physical adversaries were not created
to look indistinguishable from regular items, but rather as
inconspicuous objects such as colorful eyeglasses [20, 21].
We study the creation of physical adversaries for an object tracking task, of which the goal is to find the boundingbox location of a target in the current camera frame given
its location in the previous frame. We present a method for
generating Physical Adversarial Textures (PAT) that, when
displayed as advertisement or art posters, cause regressionbased neural tracking models like GOTURN [10] to break
away from their tracked targets, even though these textures

(a) source texture

(b) adversarial texture

Figure 1: A poster of a Physical Adversarial Texture resembling a photograph, causes a tracker’s bounding-box predictions to lose track as the target person moves over it.
do not look like targets to human eyes, as seen in Figure 1.
Fooling a tracking system comes with added challenges
compared to attacking classification or detection models.
Since a tracker adapts to changes in the target’s appearance, an adversary must be universally effective as the target
moves and turns. Also, some trackers like GOTURN only
search within a sub-region of the frame around the previous target location, and so only a small part of the PAT may
be in view and not obstructed, yet it must still be potent.
Furthermore, it is insufficient for the tracker to be slightly
off-target on any single frame, as it may still end up tracking the target semi-faithfully; robust adversaries must cause
the system to break away from the tracked target over time.
Our main contributions are as follows:
1. first known demo of adversaries for sequential tracking
tasks, impacting domains such as surveillance, drone
photography, and autonomous convoying,
2. coining of “guided adversarial losses” concept, which
strikes a middle-ground between targeted and nontargeted adversarial objectives, and empirically shown
to enhance convergence and adversarial strength,
3. study of Expectation Over Transformation (EOT) [1],
highlighting the need to randomize only certain scene
variables while still creating potent adversaries, and
4. show sim-to-real transfer of PATs created using a nonphotorealistic simulator and diffuse-only materials.

4822

