Generating Diverse and Descriptive Image Captions Using Visual Paraphrases
Lixin Liu1,2,3
Jiajun Tang1
Xiaojun Wan1,2,3
Zongming Guo1,2
1
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
{liulixin, jiajun.tang, wanxiaojun, guozongming}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently there has been significant progress in image
captioning with the help of deep learning. However, captions generated by current state-of-the-art models are still
far from satisfactory, despite high scores in terms of conventional metrics such as BLEU and CIDEr. Human-written
captions are diverse, informative and precise, but machinegenerated captions seem to be simple, vague and dull. In
this paper, aimed at improving diversity and descriptiveness
characteristics of generated image captions, we propose a
model utilizing visual paraphrases (different sentences describing the same image) in captioning datasets. We explore different strategies to select useful visual paraphrase
pairs for training by designing a variety of scoring functions. Our model consists of two decoding stages, where a
preliminary caption is generated in the first stage and then
paraphrased into a more diverse and descriptive caption in
the second stage. Extensive experiments are conducted on
the benchmark MS COCO dataset, with automatic evaluation and human evaluation results verifying the effectiveness of our model.

1. Introduction
Image captioning is a task aiming to describe images
with natural languages. There have been remarkable developments in rent years with the emergence of deep learning
methods [18, 38, 47]. However, captions generated by current methods still require improvement.
Figure 1 shows a case where the imperfection of
machine-generated captions can be easily identified. We insist that a good caption which resembles a human-written
caption should have several properties. (1) Fluency: The
caption should be a fluent sentence. (2) Relevance: The
caption should correctly describe the visual content and be
closely relevant to the image. (3) Diversity: Language is a
rich, colorful and varied system. Good captions contain diverse wordings and rich expressions. (4) Descriptiveness:

Machine-generated Caption:
a man standing next to a white car
Human-written Captions:
Caption 1: a white compact car parked on a sandy dirt road
Caption 2: a car being driven onto two white flat things
Caption 3: a man getting in a sport utility vehicle with surf boards
on the roof
Caption 4: man standing in open door of car on a desert road
Caption 5: a man gets back into his car in the desert

Figure 1. A machine-generated caption by a state-of-the-art
attention-based image captioning model [34] and five humanwritten captions from MS COCO dataset [24].

A good caption describes an image by referring to the important, specific, and detailed aspects of the image, which
is precise, informative and descriptive [28]. As is shown
in Figure 1, the machine-generated caption is a fluent and
correct description of the image. However, it is very simple and vague. Computers prefer “safe” output sentences
with very high-frequency expressions [22], and they tend to
describe only the obvious facts, ignoring key details. On
the contrary, humans prefer writing captions with more diversity by using more varied wordings (like sandy dirt road
and standing in open door, etc.) and with more descriptiveness by describing more important details (like in the desert
and with surfboards, etc.).
Paraphrases are sentences or phrases that convey approximately the same meaning in different expressions [4]. In
the task of image captioning, different people may describe
the same image from different perspectives. Even they focus on the same scene in an image, their expressions can

4240

