Normalized Wasserstein for Mixture Distributions with Applications in
Adversarial Learning and Domain Adaptation
Yogesh Balaji
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland

Rama Chellappa
UMIACS
University of Maryland

Soheil Feizi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland

yogesh@cs.umd.edu

rama@umiacs.umd.edu

sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Understanding proper distance measures between distributions is at the core of several learning tasks such as
generative models, domain adaptation, clustering, etc. In
this work, we focus on mixture distributions that arise naturally in several application domains where the data contains different sub-populations. For mixture distributions,
established distance measures such as the Wasserstein distance do not take into account imbalanced mixture proportions. Thus, even if two mixture distributions have identical
mixture components but different mixture proportions, the
Wasserstein distance between them will be large. This often
leads to undesired results in distance-based learning methods for mixture distributions. In this paper, we resolve this
issue by introducing the Normalized Wasserstein measure.
The key idea is to introduce mixture proportions as optimization variables, effectively normalizing mixture proportions in the Wasserstein formulation. Using the proposed
normalized Wasserstein measure leads to significant performance gains for mixture distributions with imbalanced
mixture proportions compared to the vanilla Wasserstein
distance. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
measure in GANs, domain adaptation and adversarial clustering in several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Quantifying distances between probability distributions
is a fundamental problem in machine learning and statistics with several applications in generative models, domain
adaptation, clustering, etc. Popular probability distance
measures include optimal transport measures such as the
Wasserstein distance [22] and divergence measures such as
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [4].
Classical distance measures, however, can lead to some
issues for mixture distributions. A mixture distribution is
the probability distribution of a random variable X where

X = Xi with probability πi for 1 ≤ i ≤ k. k is the
number of mixture components and π = [π1 , ..., πk ]T is the
vector of mixture (or mode) proportions. The probability
distribution of each Xi is referred to as a mixture component (or, a mode). Mixture distributions arise naturally in
different applications where the data contains two or more
sub-populations. For example, image datasets with different labels can be viewed as a mixture (or, multi-modal) distribution where samples with the same label characterize a
specific mixture component.
If two mixture distributions have exactly same mixture
components (i.e. same Xi ’s) with different mixture proportions (i.e. different π’s), classical distance measures between the two will be large. This can lead to undesired results in several distance-based machine learning methods.
To illustrate this issue, consider the Wasserstein distance
between two distributions PX and PY , defined as [22]
W (PX , PY ) := min E [kX − Y k] ,
PX,Y

(1)

marginalX (PX,Y ) = PX , marginalY (PX,Y ) = PY
where PX,Y is the joint distribution (or coupling) whose
marginal distributions are equal to PX and PY . When no
confusion arises and to simplify notation, in some equations, we use W (X, Y ) notation instead of W (PX , PY ).
The Wasserstein distance optimization is over all joint
distributions (couplings) PX,Y whose marginal distributions match exactly with input distributions PX and PY .
This requirement can cause issues when PX and PY are
mixture distributions with different mixture proportions. In
this case, due to the marginal constraints, samples belonging to very different mixture components will have to be
coupled together in PX,Y (e.g. Figure 1(a)). Thus, using
this distance measure can then lead to undesirable outcomes
in problems such as domain adaptation. This motivates the
need for developing a new distance measure to take into account mode imbalances in mixture distributions.
In this paper, we propose a new distance measure that
resolves the issue of imbalanced mixture proportions for
16500

