Deep Graphical Feature Learning for the Feature Matching Problem
Zhen Zhang∗
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
School of Computer Science
The University of Adelaide

Wee Sun Lee
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
leews@comp.nus.edu.sg

zhen@zzhang.org

Feature Point
Coordinate

Abstract
The feature matching problem is a fundamental problem
in various areas of computer vision including image registration, tracking and motion analysis. Rich local representation is a key part of efficient feature matching methods.
However, when the local features are limited to the coordinate of key points, it becomes challenging to extract rich
local representations. Traditional approaches use pairwise
or higher order handcrafted geometric features to get robust matching; this requires solving NP-hard assignment
problems. In this paper, we address this problem by proposing a graph neural network model to transform coordinates of feature points into local features. With our local
features, the traditional NP-hard assignment problems are
replaced with a simple assignment problem which can be
solved efficiently. Promising results on both synthetic and
real datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method.

1. Introduction
Finding consistency correspondences between two sets
of features or points, a.k.a. feature matching, is a key
step in various tasks in computer vision including image
registration, motion analysis and multiple object tracking
[6, 10, 15, 17, 4]. When effective visual features are available, e.g. from successful deep learning, simple inference
algorithms such as the Hungarian/Munkres algorithm [19]
can achieve quite good performance [27, 7, 16]. However, for geometric feature matching problems, strong local features are not available; pairwise or higher order features must be applied to find robust matchings. These features, however, will transform the inference problem into
the Quadratic/Higher Order Assignment Problem, which is
NP-hard in general [2]. Due to the NP-hardness of the in∗ This work is done at the Department of Computer Science, National
University of Singapore.

Local
Geometric
Feature

Geometric
Feature Net

Feature Point
Coordinate

Feature
Similarity

Local
Geometric
Feature

Figure 1: The graph neural netowrk transforms the coordinates
into features of the points, so that a simple inference algorithm
can successfully do feature matching.

ference problem in geometric feature matching, previous
works mainly focus on developing efficient relaxation methods [28, 13, 12, 4, 31, 14, 15, 26, 30, 25, 29].
In this paper, we attack the geometric feature matching problem from a different direction. We show that it
is possible to learn a mapping from only the point coordinates and the graph structure into strong local features
using a graph neural network, such that simple inference
algorithms outperform traditional approaches that are based
on carefully designed inference algorithms. This process is
shown in Figure 1 where point coordinates for the vertices
of two graphs are transformed into rich features for effective
matching using the Hungarian/Munkres algorithm.
To do the feature matching problem from the point coordinates, various sources of information are likely to be useful. Pairwise information such as length and angle of edges
are likely be very important. Multi-scale information may
also play a useful role; this can often be obtained with the
use of hierarchical structures. Earlier works with hierarchical handcrafted features such as hierarchical structured image pyramid rely on strong local features to construct scale
invariant visual features [16, 1, 24]. In deep learning based
visual feature matching methods, the hierarchical structured
CNN has been applied to get rich local features. It is less
clear how to construct features that provide multi-scale information directly from just point coordinates.
15087

