Learning to Find Common Objects Across Few Image Collections
Amirreza Shaban∗1 , Amir Rahimi∗2 , Shray Bansal1 ,
Stephen Gould2 , Byron Boots1 , and Richard Hartley2
1

Georgia Tech, 2 ACRV, ANU Canberra

Abstract
Given a collection of bags where each bag is a set of images, our goal is to select one image from each bag such
that the selected images are from the same object class. We
model the selection as an energy minimization problem with
unary and pairwise potential functions. Inspired by recent
few-shot learning algorithms, we propose an approach to
learn the potential functions directly from the data. Furthermore, we propose a fast greedy inference algorithm for
energy minimization. We evaluate our approach on few-shot
common object recognition as well as object co-localization
tasks. Our experiments show that learning the pairwise and
unary terms greatly improves the performance of the model
over several well-known methods for these tasks. The proposed greedy optimization algorithm achieves performance
comparable to state-of-the-art structured inference algorithms while being ∼10 times faster.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of finding images of a common
object across bags of images. The input is a collection of
bags, each containing several images from multiple classes.
A bag is labelled as positive with respect to a given object
class if it contains at least one image from that class and
negative if none of the images in the bag are from the object
class. The task is to find an instance of the common object
in each positive bag. It is not assumed that objects of the
common class have been seen previously during training.
Since collections of images may accidentally contain irrelevant common objects (for instance indoor images often
contain person), the purpose of a negative bag is to indicate
objects we are not looking for, but which may be common
to the positive bags.
Several computer vision problems, including cosegmentation, co-localization, and unsupervised video ob∗ Equal contribution.
Contact at amirreza@gatech.edu or
amir.rahimi@anu.edu.au.

Figure 1. Co-localization, shown here, is an instance of the general
problem of finding common objects addressed in this paper. Each
image in the top row generates a positive bag containing a set of
cropped regions from that image. The task is to find a common
object from the positive bags by selecting one region from each
image (green bounding boxes). Cropped regions from the images
in the bottom row form a negative bag as they do not contain the
common object. The negative bag is optional here but can reduce
ambiguity. For example, since a knife is present in the negative
bag it can not be the desired common object.

ject tracking and segmentation have been formulated in this
way [48, 14, 23, 16, 3]. In the co-localization problem, Figure 1, each bag contains many cropped image regions (object proposals) from one image. The goal is to identify proposals, one per positive bag, that contain the common object. We design our approach to address the general problem
of finding common objects from positive bags and evaluate
it on two problems: few-shot common object recognition
and object co-localization.
Weakly supervised classification methods like multipleinstance learning [29] have been used to address this type of
problems, but they require many training bags to learn new
concepts [24]. Meta-learning techniques [15, 39, 40] have
been shown to reduce the need for training instances in fewshot learning, but these methods require full supervision for
the new classes.
We model the problem of finding common objects

5117

