nocaps: novel object captioning at scale
Harsh Agrawal˚1
Mark Johnson2
1

Karan Desai˚1,4
Dhruv Batra1,3

Yufei Wang2
Devi Parikh1,3

Xinlei Chen3
Stefan Lee1,5

Rishabh Jain1
Peter Anderson1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Macquarie University, 3 Facebook AI Research
4
University of Michigan, 5 Oregon State University
1

{hagrawal9, kdexd, rishabhjain, dbatra, parikh, steflee, peter.anderson}@gatech.edu
2

{yufei.wang, mark.johnson}@mq.edu.au

3

xinleic@fb.com

https://nocaps.org

Abstract
Image captioning models have achieved impressive results
on datasets containing limited visual concepts and large
amounts of paired image-caption training data. However,
if these models are to ever function in the wild, a much
larger variety of visual concepts must be learned, ideally
from less supervision. To encourage the development of image captioning models that can learn visual concepts from
alternative data sources, such as object detection datasets,
we present the first large-scale benchmark for this task.
Dubbed ‘nocaps’, for novel object captioning at scale, our
benchmark consists of 166,100 human-generated captions
describing 15,100 images from the Open Images validation and test sets. The associated training data consists
of COCO image-caption pairs, plus Open Images imagelevel labels and object bounding boxes. Since Open Images
contains many more classes than COCO, nearly 400 object
classes seen in test images have no or very few associated
training captions (hence, nocaps). We extend existing novel
object captioning models to establish strong baselines for
this benchmark and provide analysis to guide future work.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in image captioning, the task of generating natural language descriptions of visual content [9,10,16,
17,41,44], can be largely attributed to the publicly available
large-scale datasets of image-caption pairs [5,14,48] as well
as steady modeling improvements [4, 24, 35, 46]. However,
these models generalize poorly to images in the wild [37]
despite impressive benchmark performance, because they
are trained on datasets which cover a tiny fraction of the
long-tailed distribution of visual concepts in the real world.
For example, models trained on COCO Captions [5] can
typically describe images containing dogs, people and um‹ First two authors contributed equally, listed in alphabetical order.
Work done by KD during an internship at Georgia Tech.

Figure 1: The nocaps task setup: Image captioning models must
exploit the Open Images object detection dataset (bottom left) to
successfully describe novel objects not covered by the COCO Captions dataset (top left). The nocaps benchmark (right) evaluates
performance over in-domain, near-domain and out-of-domain
subsets of images containing only COCO classes, both COCO and
novel classes, and only novel classes, respectively.

brellas, but not accordions or dolphins. This limits the usefulness of these models in real-world applications, such as
providing assistance for people with impaired vision, or for
improving natural language query-based image retrieval.
To generalize better ‘in the wild’, we argue that captioning models should be able to leverage alternative data
sources – such as object detection datasets – in order to describe objects not present in the caption corpora on which
they are trained. Such objects which have detection annotations but are not present in caption corpora are referred to as novel objects and the task of describing images containing novel objects is termed novel object captioning [2, 3, 13, 25, 40, 43, 47]. Until now, novel object captioning approaches have been evaluated using a proof-ofconcept dataset introduced in [12]. This dataset has restric18948

