Dual Student: Breaking the Limits of the Teacher in Semi-supervised Learning
Zhanghan Ke1,2 ∗
1

Daoye Wang2

Qiong Yan2

Jimmy Ren2
2

City University of Hong Kong

Rynson W.H. Lau1

SenseTime Research

Abstract
Recently, consistency-based methods have achieved
state-of-the-art results in semi-supervised learning (SSL).
These methods always involve two roles, an explicit or implicit teacher model and a student model, and penalize predictions under different perturbations by a consistency constraint. However, the weights of these two roles are tightly
coupled since the teacher is essentially an exponential moving average (EMA) of the student. In this work, we show
that the coupled EMA teacher causes a performance bottleneck. To address this problem, we introduce Dual Student,
which replaces the teacher with another student. We also
define a novel concept, stable sample, following which a
stabilization constraint is designed for our structure to be
trainable. Further, we discuss two variants of our method,
which produce even higher performance. Extensive experiments show that our method improves the classification performance significantly on several main SSL benchmarks.
Specifically, it reduces the error rate of the 13-layer CNN
from 16.84% to 12.39% on CIFAR-10 with 1k labels and
from 34.10% to 31.56% on CIFAR-100 with 10k labels. In
addition, our method also achieves a clear improvement in
domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
Deep supervised learning has gained significant success
in computer vision tasks, which leads the community to
challenge larger and more complicated datasets like ImageNet [28] and WebVision [17]. However, obtaining full labels for a huge dataset is usually a very costly task. Hence,
more attention is now drawn on deep semi-supervised learning (SSL). In order to utilize unlabeled data, many methods
in traditional machine learning have been proposed [35],
and some of them are successfully adapted to deep learning. In addition, some latest techniques like self-training [5]
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [30, 22, 19]
have been utilized for deep SSL with promising results.
A primary track of recent deep semi-supervised methods
[27, 16, 7, 32] can be summarized as consistency-based
∗ kezhanghan@outlook.com

T

EMA
Weights
Consistency
Constraint

Teacher-Student

S

Independent
Initialization
Stabilization
Constraint

S’

Dual-Student

Figure 1: Teacher-Student versus Dual Student. The teacher
(T) in Teacher-Student is an EMA of the student (S), imposing a consistency constraint on the student. Their weights
are tightly coupled. In contrast, a bidirectional stabilization
constraint is applied between the two students (S and S’) in
Dual Student. Their weights are loosely coupled.
methods. In this type of methods, two roles are commonly
created, either explicitly or implicitly: a teacher model and
a student model (i.e., a Teacher-Student structure). The
teacher guides the student to approximate its performance
under perturbations. The perturbations could come from the
noise of the input or the dropout layer [31], etc. A consistency constraint is then imposed on the predictions between
two roles, and forces the unlabeled data to meet the smoothness assumption of semi-supervised learning.
The teacher in the Teacher-Student structure can be summarized as being generated by an exponential moving average (EMA) of the student model. In the VAT Model [20]
and the Π Model [16], the teacher shares the same weights
as the student, which is equivalent to setting the averaging
coefficient to zero. The Temporal Model [16] is similar to Π
Model except that it also applies an EMA to accumulate the
historical predictions. The Mean Teacher [32] applies an
EMA to the student to obtain an ensemble teacher. In this
work, we show that the two roles in the Teacher-Student
structure are tightly coupled and the degree of the coupling
increases as the training goes on. This phenomenon leads
to a performance bottleneck since a coupled EMA teacher
is not sufficient for the student.
To overcome this problem, the knowledge coming from
another independent model should help. Motivated by this
observation, we replace the EMA teacher by another student model. The two students start from different initial
16728

