Selectivity or Invariance: Boundary-aware Salient Object Detection
Jinming Su1,3 , Jia Li1,3∗ , Yu Zhang1 , Changqun Xia3 and Yonghong Tian2,3∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of EE&CS, Peking University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{sujm, jiali}@buaa.edu.cn, zhangyulb@gmail.com, xiachq@pcl.ac.cn, yhtian@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Typically, a salient object detection (SOD) model faces
opposite requirements in processing object interiors and
boundaries. The features of interiors should be invariant
to strong appearance change so as to pop-out the salient
object as a whole, while the features of boundaries should
be selective to slight appearance change to distinguish
salient objects and background. To address this selectivityinvariance dilemma, we propose a novel boundary-aware
network with successive dilation for image-based SOD. In
this network, the feature selectivity at boundaries is enhanced by incorporating a boundary localization stream,
while the feature invariance at interiors is guaranteed with
a complex interior perception stream. Moreover, a transition compensation stream is adopted to amend the probable failures in transitional regions between interiors and
boundaries. In particular, an integrated successive dilation
module is proposed to enhance the feature invariance at interiors and transitional regions. Extensive experiments on
six datasets show that the proposed approach outperforms
16 state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD), which aims to detect and
segment objects that can capture human visual attention, is
an important step before subsequent vision tasks such as object recognition [31], tracking [13] and image parsing [18].
To address the SOD problem, hundreds of learning-based
models [15, 36, 39, 7, 48, 11] have been proposed in the
past decades, among which the state-of-the-art deep models [36, 7] have demonstrated impressive performance on
many datasets [42, 43, 24, 21, 34, 39, 10]. However, there
still exist two key issues that need to be further addressed.
First, the interiors of a large salient object may have large
* Correspondence should be addressed to Jia Li and Yonghong Tian.
The code and models are available on http://cvteam.net.

Figure 1. Different regions of salient objects require different features. (a)(b) Features of interiors should be invariant to large appearance change to detect the salient object as a whole; (c)(d) features at boundaries should be selective to distinguish the slight differences between salient objects and background regions. Images
and ground-truth masks are from [42]. Results are generated by
C2SNet [23], PAGRN [50] and our approach.

appearance change, making it difficult to detect the salient
object as a whole (see Fig. 1(a)(b)). Second, the boundaries of salient objects may be very weak so that they cannot
be distinguished from the surrounding background regions
(see Fig. 1(c)(d)). Due to these two issues, SOD remains a
challenging task even in the deep learning era.
By further investigating these two issues at object interiors and boundaries, we find that the challenge may be
mainly from the selectivity-invariance dilemma [19]. In the
interiors, the features extracted by a SOD model should
be invariant to various appearance changes such as size,
color and texture. Such invariant features ensure that the
salient object can pop-out as a whole. However, the features at boundaries should be sufficiently selective at the
same time so that the minor difference between salient objects and background regions can be well distinguished. In
other words, different regions of a salient object poses different requirements for a SOD model, and such dilemma
actually prevents the perfect segmentation of salient objects
with various sizes, appearances and contexts.

3799

