Key.Net: Keypoint Detection by Handcrafted and Learned CNN Filters
Axel Barroso-Laguna1
Edgar Riba2,3
Daniel Ponsa2
Krystian Mikolajczyk1
1
2
3
Imperial College London
Computer Vision Center
Arraiy, Inc.
{axel.barroso17, k.mikolajczyk}@imperial.ac.uk
{eriba, daniel}@cvc.uab.es
Abstract
We introduce a novel approach for keypoint detection
task that combines handcrafted and learned CNN filters
within a shallow multi-scale architecture. Handcrafted filters provide anchor structures for learned filters, which localize, score and rank repeatable features. Scale-space representation is used within the network to extract keypoints
at different levels. We design a loss function to detect robust
features that exist across a range of scales and to maximize
the repeatability score. Our Key.Net model is trained on
data synthetically created from ImageNet and evaluated on
HPatches benchmark. Results show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art detectors in terms of repeatability,
matching performance and complexity.

H

W
M

3M

up

1. Introduction

Figure 1: The proposed Key.Net architecture combines
handcrafted and learned filters to extract features at different scale levels. Feature maps are upsampled and concatenated. Last learned filter combines the Scale Space Volume
to obtain the final response map.

Research advances in local feature detectors and descriptors led to remarkable improvements in areas such as image matching, object recognition, self-guided navigation or
3D reconstruction. Although the general direction of image
matching methods is moving towards learned based systems, the advantage of learning methods over handcrafted
ones has not been clearly demonstrated in keypoint detection [1]. In particular, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) were able to significantly reduce matching error in
local descriptors [2], despite the impractical inefficiency of
the initial techniques [3, 4]. These works stimulated further research efforts and resulted in improved efficiency of
CNN based descriptors, on the contrary, on top of the limited success of learned detectors, a general trend towards
dense rather than sparse representation and matching put
aside local feature detectors. However, the growing popularity of augmented reality (AR) headsets, as well as AR
smartphone apps, has drawn more attention to reliable and
efficient local feature detectors that could be used for surface estimation, sparse 3D reconstruction, 3D model acquisition or objects alignment, among others.
Traditionally, local feature detectors were based on engineered filters. For instance, approaches such as Difference

of Gaussians [5], Harris-Laplace or Hessian-Affine [6] use
combinations of image derivatives to compute feature maps,
which is remarkably similar to the operations in trained
CNN’s layers. Intuitively, with just a few layers, a network could mimic the behavior of traditional detectors by
learning the appropriate values in its convolutional filters.
However, unlike the success with CNNs based local image descriptors, the improvements upon handcrafted detectors offered by recently proposed fully CNN based methods [7, 8, 9, 10, 11] are limited in terms of widely accepted
metrics such as repeatability. One of the reasons is their
low accuracy when estimating the affine parameters of the
feature regions. Robustness to scale variations seems particularly problematic while other parameters such as dominant
orientation can be regressed well by CNNs [12, 7]. This motivates our novel architecture, termed Key.Net, that makes
use of handcrafted and learned filters as well as a multiscale representation. The Key.Net architecture is illustrated
in figure 1. Introducing handcrafted filters, which act as soft
anchors, makes possible to reduce the number of parameters
used by state-of-the-art detectors while maintaining the per-

5836

