Group-wise Deep Object Co-Segmentation with Co-Attention
Recurrent Neural Network
Bo Li
Nanjing University

Zhengxing Sun
Nanjing University

Qian Li
Nanjing University

njumagiclibo@gmail.com

szx@nju.edu.cn

public liqian@163.com

Yunjie Wu
Nanjing University

Anqi Hu
Nanjing University

JiejiangWu@outlook.com

dz1533009@smail.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

ages for higher accuracy. With such property, object cosegmentation can benefit various computer vision applications and beyond, such as image matching [4], weakly supervised learning [32], video object segmentation [18], and
3D reconstruction [36].
In order to segment the co-occurring objects accurately,
two issues should be concerned: 1) extract and learn effective feature representations of images in the group; 2) model
the synergetic relationship among the common objects to
generate the final co-segmentation results. For 1), feature
representation in the co-segmentation task should not only
express the images individual properties, but also reflect the
relevance and interaction between group images. For 2),
the synergetic relationship such as common objects, similar
categories, and related scenes should be fully exploited at
group level. Therefore, the co-segmentation job can apply
the single and the group-wise information to model the interaction between the images so that they mutually facilitate
each other for the final co-segmentation results.
Conventional co-segmentation approaches [6, 9, 20, 21,
22, 24, 28] utilize handcrafted features to represent images, such as color, texture and SIFT descriptors etc., and
these methods rely on researchers prior knowledge like objectness and saliency to model the interaction between the
group images. However, low-level features and predefined
prior knowledge are too subjective to face the multiple challenges including background clutter, appearance variance of
co-object across images, and similarity between co-object
and non-common object, etc. Encouraged by the success
of deep learning in many computer vision tasks, recent researches [12, 19, 33] improve object co-segmentation by
using deep neural network (DNN) to learn visual representation or segmentation inference module in a data driven
manner. However, as feature extraction and object segmentation are treated as separate steps in these approaches,
the learned features are not tailored for segmenting the co-

Effective feature representations which should not only
express the images individual properties, but also reflect
the interaction among group images are essentially crucial for real-world co-segmentation. This paper proposes
a novel end-to-end deep learning approach for group-wise
object co-segmentation with a recurrent network architecture. Specifically, the semantic features extracted from a
pre-trained CNN of each image are first processed by single image representation branch to learn the unique properties. Meanwhile, a specially designed Co-Attention Recurrent Unit (CARU) recurrently explores all images to generate the final group representation by using the co-attention
between images, and simultaneously suppresses noisy information. The group feature which contains synergetic information is broadcasted to each individual image and fused
with multi-scale fine-resolution features to facilitate the inferring of co-segmentation. Moreover, we propose a groupwise training objective to utilize the co-object similarity
and figure-ground distinctness as the additional supervision. The whole modules are collaboratively optimized in
an end-to-end manner, further improving the robustness of
the approach. Comprehensive experiments on three benchmarks can demonstrate the superiority of our approach in
comparison with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Object co-segmentation aims at discovering and segmenting the co-occurring objects from the given set of images containing the same or similar objects. Unlike the single image object segmentation methods which individually
segment image only using the information within one single
image, object co-segmentation methods can further exploit
the synergetic relationship among the multiple relevant im-

8519

