Foreground-aware Pyramid Reconstruction for
Alignment-free Occluded Person Re-identification
Lingxiao He1,2 , Yinggang Wang1 , Wu Liu1 , He Zhao1 , Zhenan Sun2∗ , Jiashi Feng3
1

JD AI Research, 2 CRIPAC & NLPR, CASIA, 3 National University of Singapore

{lxhe, wyg19970408}@gmail.com, liuwu@live.cn, zhaohe5@jd.com,
znsun@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Re-identifying a person across multiple disjoint camera views is important for intelligent video surveillance,
smart retailing and many other applications. However,
existing person re-identification (ReID) methods are challenged by the ubiquitous occlusion over persons and suffer from performance degradation. This paper proposes
a novel occlusion-robust and alignment-free model for occluded person ReID and extends its application to realistic
and crowded scenarios. The proposed model first leverages
the full convolution network (FCN) and pyramid pooling
to extract spatial pyramid features. Then an alignmentfree matching approach, namely Foreground-aware Pyramid Reconstruction (FPR), is developed to accurately compute matching scores between occluded persons, despite
their different scales and sizes. FPR uses the error from
robust reconstruction over spatial pyramid features to measure similarities between two persons. More importantly,
we design an occlusion-sensitive foreground probability
generator that focuses more on clean human body parts
to refine the similarity computation with less contamination from occlusion. The FPR is easily embedded into any
end-to-end person ReID models. The effectiveness of the
proposed method is clearly demonstrated by the experimental results (Rank-1 accuracy) on three occluded person
datasets: Partial REID (78.30%), Partial iLIDS (68.08%)
and Occluded REID (81.00%); and three benchmark person datasets: Market1501 (95.42%), DukeMTMC (88.64%)
and CUHK03 (76.08%).

1. Introduction
Person ReID is an important task with wide real-world
applications such as intelligent video surveillance, smart
retailing, etc., aiming at matching person images captured
from non-overlapping cameras. One major issue that chal*Zhenan Sun is the corresponding author.

Camera A

Camera B

Matching
who?

Figure 1. Illustration of the occluded person ReID problem. Here,
the ReID system aims to recognize the person within the red
bounding box captured by camera A from several person images
of different sizes captured by camera B. Most captured persons by
the surveillance operator are occluded.

lenges this task is the ubiquitous occlusion over the captured persons. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, people in
an unmanned supermarket are occluded by goods, shelves
or other persons, making it difficult to track their movements. Existing approaches [4, 6, 8, 12] mostly leverage
external cues, e.g. person mask, semantic parsing or pose
estimation, to align the detected persons. However, these
approaches may fail to generate accurate external cues in
heavily occluded cases such as half body of a subject being
occluded. Furthermore, it inevitably incurs more processing
time to infer these external cues. Some other approaches
[15, 21], by using part-based models, have achieved better performance via part-to-part matching, but they require
strict person alignment in advance.
In this paper, we propose a novel alignment-free approach that can re-identify persons accurately without requiring person alignment in advance even in the presence
of heavy occlusion with the help of a foreground-aware
18450

