Once a MAN: Towards Multi-Target Attack via Learning Multi-Target
Adversarial Network Once
Jiangfan Han1∗ , Xiaoyi Dong2∗, Ruimao Zhang1 , Dongdong Chen2 , Weiming Zhang2 ,
Nenghai Yu2† , Ping Luo3 , Xiaogang Wang1†
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
2
University of Science and Technology of China, Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic
Space Information, The Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 The University of Hong Kong
{jiangfanhan@link., ruimao.zhang@, xgwang@ee.}cuhk.edu.hk,

{dlight@mail., cd722522@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn, pluo@cs.hku.hk

MAN

Abstract
Modern deep neural networks are often vulnerable to adversarial samples. Based on the first optimization-based attacking method, many following methods are proposed to
improve the attacking performance and speed. Recently,
generation-based methods have received much attention
since they directly use feed-forward networks to generate
the adversarial samples, which avoid the time-consuming
iterative attacking procedure in optimization-based and
gradient-based methods. However, current generationbased methods are only able to attack one specific target
(category) within one model, thus making them not applicable to real classification systems that often have hundreds/thousands of categories. In this paper, we propose
the first Multi-target Adversarial Network (MAN), which
can generate multi-target adversarial samples with a single
model. By incorporating the specified category information
into the intermediate features, it can attack any category of
the target classification model during runtime. Experiments
show that the proposed MAN can produce stronger attack
results and also have better transferability than previous
state-of-the-art methods in both multi-target attack task and
single-target attack task. We further use the adversarial
samples generated by our MAN to improve the robustness
of the classification model. It can also achieve better classification accuracy than other methods when attacked by
various methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been significantly
successful in many artificial intelligence tasks such as im∗ Equal contribution.
† Nenghai Yu and Xiaogang Wang are the corresponding authors.

Model

Previous Methods
Class 1

Model 1

Class 1

Class 2

Model 2

Class 2

Class K

Model K

Class K

Figure 1. The comparison between our MAN and previous target
attack methods. Our network can generate adversarial sample to
all classes by training a single model once while others need individual models for each class.

age classification [16, 33, 12], object detection [8, 29, 20],
and natural language processing [35, 7]. However, recent
studies [32, 23, 21] showed that DNNs are vulnerable and
easy to be attacked by adversarial samples. By adding small
perturbation onto an image, it is difficult to differentiate adversarial sample from the original image visually but can
mislead modern classification model into definitely incorrect categories easily, which may produce severe security
threat for real application systems such as auto-driving and
face verification. Adversarial samples also possess the characteristic of transferability, which means adversarial sample
generated for attacking one model could also mislead another model. Thus much attention has been concentrated
on this phenomenon to better understand the weaknesses of
DNNs, as well as to develop and strengthen the robustness
of deep networks.
The pioneering work from [32] used an optimizationbased method to generate adversarial samples. Then many
different types of methods [23, 21, 26, 31] were proposed
to improve the attacking performance and speed. For example, Goodfellow et al. [9] proposed the first gradientbased method, which can attack DNNs effectively by us-

603

