Learning Motion in Feature Space: Locally-Consistent Deformable Convolution
Networks for Fine-Grained Action Detection
Khoi-Nguyen C. Mac1 , Dhiraj Joshi2 , Raymond A. Yeh1 , Jinjun Xiong2 , Rogerio S. Feris2 , Minh N. Do1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2 IBM Research AI
1
{knmac, yeh17, minhdo}@illinois.edu, 2 {djoshi, jinjun, rsferis}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Fine-grained action detection is an important task with
numerous applications in robotics and human-computer interaction. Existing methods typically utilize a two-stage approach including extraction of local spatio-temporal features followed by temporal modeling to capture long-term
dependencies. While most recent papers have focused on
the latter (long-temporal modeling), here, we focus on producing features capable of modeling fine-grained motion
more efficiently. We propose a novel locally-consistent deformable convolution, which utilizes the change in receptive fields and enforces a local coherency constraint to
capture motion information effectively. Our model jointly
learns spatio-temporal features (instead of using independent spatial and temporal streams). The temporal component is learned from the feature space instead of pixel space,
e.g. optical flow. The produced features can be flexibly
used in conjunction with other long-temporal modeling networks, e.g. ST-CNN, DilatedTCN, and ED-TCN. Overall,
our proposed approach robustly outperforms the original
long-temporal models on two fine-grained action datasets:
50 Salads and GTEA, achieving F1 scores of 80.22% and
75.39% respectively.

1. Introduction
Action detection, a.k.a action segmentation, addresses
the task of classifying every frame of a given video, containing multiple action segments, as one out of a fixed number of defined categories, including a category for unknown
actions. This is contrary to the simpler task of action recognition, wherein a given video is pre-segmented and guaranteed to be one of the provided action classes [13].
Fine-grained actions are a special class of actions which
can only be differentiated by subtle differences in motion
patterns. Such actions are characterized by high inter-class
similarity [20, 23], i.e. it is difficult, even for humans, to distinguish two different actions just from observing individual
frames. Unlike generic action detection, which can largely

(a) frame at time t-1.

(b) frame at time t.

(c) no motion vectors found (d) motion vectors found on
on the background region.
the moving region.

(e) the person at time t-1 (f) visualization of motion in
(blue) and t (green).
feature space.

Figure 1: Visualization of difference of adaptive receptive
fields for action cutting lettuce in 50 Salads dataset: (a)
and (b) are two consecutive frames; (c) and (d) are motion
vectors at background and moving regions (green dots indicate activation locations and red arrows indicate motion
vectors); (e) is the manually defined mask of the person at
time t − 1 and t; and (f) is the energy of motion field in
feature space, computed by aggregating motion vectors in
all deformable convolution layers.
rely on “what” is in a video frame to perform detection, finegrained action detection requires additional reason about
“how” the objects move across several video frames. In this
work, we consider the fine-grained action detection setting.
16282

