FACSIMILE:
Fast and Accurate Scans From an Image in Less Than a Second
David Smith

Matthew Loper

Xiaochen Hu
Paris Mavroidis
Amazon Body Labs

Javier Romero

{dlsmith,mloper,sonnyh,parism,javier}@amazon.com

a

b

c

d

e

Figure 1: FAX converts a single RGB image (a) into a scan (b, d) with albedo texture (c, e)

Abstract
Current methods for body shape estimation either lack
detail or require many images. They are usually architecturally complex and computationally expensive. We propose
FACSIMILE (FAX), a method that estimates a detailed body
from a single photo, lowering the bar for creating virtual
representations of humans. Our approach is easy to implement and fast to execute, making it easily deployable. FAX
uses an image-translation network which recovers geometry
at the original resolution of the image. Counterintuitively,
the main loss which drives FAX is on per-pixel surface normals instead of per-pixel depth, making it possible to estimate detailed body geometry without any depth supervision.
We evaluate our approach both qualitatively and quantitatively, and compare with a state-of-the-art method.

eras. On the other hand, modern systems for single-photo
body estimation lack detail [10, 31, 2, 22, 7, 33]. Our work
is designed to help close the gap between an easily acquired
image and a rich, detailed, reposeable avatar.
Systems targetted to recover shape from single images
do a laudable job at recovering intermediate body representations. These include voxel-based reconstruction in [44],
the synthetic-view generation system in [31], or the crossmodal neural nets in [10]. But inevitably, the fidelity of their
capture is limited by the granularity of their representation.

1. Introduction

To address this lack of representational power, we apply
modern image-to-image translation techniques [19, 46] to
geometry estimation. More concretely, we would like to
estimate the depth corresponding to every foreground pixel
in the image. But this presents a new problem: the naive
estimation of depth via an image translation network creates
noisy, unusable surfaces (Figure 2). This teaches us that
when estimating depth with image-to-image translation, a
direct loss on depth fails to give us a plausible surface.

High resolution body capture has not seen widespread
adoption, despite a myriad of applications in medicine,
gaming, and shopping. Traditional methods for high-quality
body estimation require expensive capture systems which
are difficult to deploy [28, 8]. More affordable RGB-D sensors like kinect have tried to overcome this problem [47, 6],
though those sensors are not as widespread as RGB cam-

The solution to this problem can be traced all the way
back to Shape From Shading (SFS) literature by Horn [18],
in which surface normals play a critical role in defining the
relationship between a surface and its appearance. Work
focused in the reconstruction of the face region [35] has
shown that a loss on depth can benefit from an additional
loss on normals. We go beyond this insight showing that a

5330

