End-to-end Hand Mesh Recovery from a Monocular RGB Image
Xiong Zhang1∗ , Qiang Li1∗ , Hong Mo2 , Wenbo Zhang1† , Wen Zheng1
1
Y-tech, Kwai, 2 State Key Laboratory of VR, Beihang University
1

{zhangxiong,liqiang03,zhangwenbo,zhengwen}@kuaishou.com, 2 mandymo@buaa.edu.cn

RGB image

2D pose

Projected mask

3D pose

Hand mesh

Other view

Figure 1: Hand Mesh Recovery. Our framework provides a unified scheme for monocular hand image understanding. The
first column shows two examples from the STB [55] and RHD [59] dataset respectively. The second and third columns present
the estimated 2D joints and 3D joints locations. The fourth column demonstrate the projection mask of the reconstructed
hand mesh, while the last two columns illustrate the recovered mesh from several viewpoints. Note that our framework can
recover the mesh in a reasonable way even in the presence of severe occlusions.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a HAnd Mesh Recovery
(HAMR) framework to tackle the problem of reconstructing the full 3D mesh of a human hand from a single RGB
image.1 In contrast to existing research on 2D or 3D hand
pose estimation from RGB or/and depth image data, HAMR
can provide a more expressive and useful mesh representation for monocular hand image understanding. In particular, the mesh representation is achieved by parameterizing
a generic 3D hand model with shape and relative 3D joint
angles. By utilizing this mesh representation, we can easily compute the 3D joint locations via linear interpolations
between the vertexes of the mesh, while obtain the 2D joint
locations with a projection of the 3D joints. To this end,
1 The code is available at https://github.com/MandyMo/HAMR.
*Indicates equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.

a differentiable re-projection loss can be defined in terms
of the derived representations and the ground-truth labels,
thus making our framework end-to-end trainable. Qualitative experiments show that our framework is capable of
recovering appealing 3D hand mesh even in the presence of
severe occlusions. Quantitatively, our approach also outperforms the state-of-the-art methods for both 2D and 3D
hand pose estimation from a monocular RGB image on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Hand image understanding targets the problem of recovering the spatial configuration of hands from natural RGB
or/and depth images, which has many applications such as
human-machine interaction [20, 40], and virtual/augmented
reality [18, 33]. Estimating the spatial configuration is
very challenging due to the diverse appearance variation,
self occlusions and complex articulations. While many

2354

