Multimodal Style Transfer via Graph Cuts
Yulun Zhang1,2 , Chen Fang2,3 , Yilin Wang2 , Zhaowen Wang2 , Zhe Lin2 , Yun Fu1 , Jimei Yang2
1
Northeastern University, 2 Adobe Research, 3 ByteDance AI Lab

Inputs

AdaIN

WCT

LST

MST (ours)

Inputs

CNNMRF

DFR

AvatarNet

MST (ours)

Figure 1: Gram matrix based style transfer methods (AdaIN [11], WCT [24], and LST [23]) may fail to distinguish style
patterns (1st and 2nd rows). Patch-swap based methods (CNNMRF [19], DFR [10], and AvatarNet [36]) may copy some less
desired style patterns (labeled with red arrows) to the results (3rd and 4th rows). Our MST alleviates all these limitations.

Abstract
An assumption widely used in recent neural style transfer methods is that image styles can be described by global
statics of deep features like Gram or covariance matrices.
Alternative approaches have represented styles by decomposing them into local pixel or neural patches. Despite the
recent progress, most existing methods treat the semantic
patterns of style image uniformly, resulting unpleasing results on complex styles. In this paper, we introduce a more
flexible and general universal style transfer technique: multimodal style transfer (MST). MST explicitly considers the
matching of semantic patterns in content and style images.
Speciﬁcally, the style image features are clustered into substyle components, which are matched with local content features under a graph cut formulation. A reconstruction network is trained to transfer each sub-style and render the ﬁnal stylized result. We also generalize MST to improve some
existing methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superior effectiveness, robustness, and flexibility of MST.

1. Introduction
Image style transfer is the process of rendering a content image with characteristics of a style image. Usually, it
would take a long time for a diligent artist to create a stylized image with particular style. Recently, it draws a lot of
interests [8, 14, 4, 39, 11, 24, 10, 36, 35, 3, 40, 23] since
Gatys et al. [8] discovered that the correlations between
convolutional features of deep networks can represent image styles, which would have been hard for traditional
patch-based methods to deal with. These neural style transfer methods either use an iterative optimization scheme [8]
or feed-forward networks [14, 4, 39, 11, 24, 36, 23] to synthesize the stylizations. Most of them are applicable for
arbitrary style transfer with a pre-determined model. These
universal style transfer methods [11, 24, 36, 23] inherently
assume that the style can be represented by the global statistics of deep features such as gram matrix [8] and its approximates [11, 24]. Although these neural style transfer methods can preserve the content well and match the overall style

5943

