Deep Non-Rigid Structure from Motion
Chen Kong
Carnegie Mellon University

Simon Lucey
Carnegie Mellon University

chenk@cs.cmu.edu

slucey@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Current non-rigid structure from motion (NRSfM) algorithms are mainly limited with respect to: (i) the number
of images, and (ii) the type of shape variability they can
handle. This has hampered the practical utility of NRSfM
for many applications within vision. In this paper we propose a novel deep neural network to recover camera poses
and 3D points solely from an ensemble of 2D image coordinates. The proposed neural network is mathematically
interpretable as a multi-layer block sparse dictionary learning problem, and can handle problems of unprecedented
scale and shape complexity. Extensive experiments demonstrate the impressive performance of our approach where
we exhibit superior precision and robustness against all
available state-of-the-art works by an order of magnitude.
We further propose a quality measure (based on the network
weights) which circumvents the need for 3D ground-truth to
ascertain the confidence we have in the reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Building an AI capable of inferring the 3D structure and
pose of an object from a single image is a problem of immense importance. Training such a system using supervised
learning requires a large number of labeled images – how to
obtain these labels is currently an open problem for the vision community. Rendering [27] is problematic as the synthetic images seldom match the appearance and geometry
of the objects we encounter in the real-world. Hand annotation is preferable, but current strategies rely on associating the natural images with an external 3D dataset (e.g.
ShapeNet [8], ModelNet [32]), which we refer to as 3D
supervision. If the 3D shape dataset does not capture the
variation we see in the imagery, it is inherently ill-posed.
Non-Rigid Structure from Motion (NRSf M) offers computer vision a way out of this quandary – by recovering the
pose and 3D structure of an object category solely from
hand annotated 2D landmarks with no need for 3D supervision. Classically [6], the problem of NRSf M has been
applied to objects that move non-rigidly over time such as

Figure 1: In this paper, we want to reconstruct 3D shapes
solely from a sequence of annotated images—shown on
top—with no need of 3D ground truth. Our proposed hierarchical sparse coding model and corresponding deep solution outperforms state-of-the-art by an order of magnitude.

the human body and face. But NRSf M is not restricted
to non-rigid objects; it can equally be applied to rigid objects whose object categories deform non-rigidly [19, 2, 30].
Consider, for example, the five objects in Figure 1 (top), instances from the visual object category “chair”. Each object in isolation represents a rigid chair, but the set of all 3D
shapes describing “chair” is non-rigid. In other words, each
object instance can be modeled as a deformation from its
category’s general shape.
NRSf M is well-noted in literature as an ill-posed problem due to the non-rigidity. This has been mainly addressed
by imposing additional shape priors, e.g. low rank [6, 10],
union-of-subspaces [36, 2], and block-sparsity [18, 19].
However, low rank is only applicable to simple non-rigid
objects with limited deformations and union-of-subspaces
relies heavily on frame clustering which is still an open
problem. Block-sparsity, where each shape can be represented by at most K bases out of L, is considered as one
of the most promising assumptions in terms of modeling
broad shape variations. This
 is because sparsity can be
L
subspaces constraint and an
thought of as a union of K
over-complete dictionary could be utilized. However, it was
noted by Kong et al. [18], that searching for the best sub11558

