Transformable Bottleneck Networks

1

Kyle Olszewski13∗, Sergey Tulyakov2 , Oliver Woodford2 , Hao Li134 , and Linjie Luo5∗
University of Southern California, 2 Snap Inc., 3 USC ICT, 4 Pinscreen Inc., 5 ByteDance Inc.
Abstract

We propose a novel approach to performing fine-grained
3D manipulation of image content via a convolutional neural network, which we call the Transformable Bottleneck
Network (TBN). It applies given spatial transformations
directly to a volumetric bottleneck within our encoderbottleneck-decoder architecture. Multi-view supervision
encourages the network to learn to spatially disentangle the
feature space within the bottleneck. The resulting spatial
structure can be manipulated with arbitrary spatial transformations. We demonstrate the efficacy of TBNs for novel
view synthesis, achieving state-of-the-art results on a challenging benchmark. We demonstrate that the bottlenecks
produced by networks trained for this task contain meaningful spatial structure that allows us to intuitively perform a
variety of image manipulations in 3D, well beyond the rigid
transformations seen during training. These manipulations
include non-uniform scaling, non-rigid warping, and combining content from different images. Finally, we extract
explicit 3D structure from the bottleneck, performing impressive 3D reconstruction from a single input image. 1

Source

Transformable bottleneck

Stretching

3D Reconstruction

Novel view synthesis

Slicing and combining

Figure 1: Applications of TBNs. A Transformable Bottleneck
Network uses one or more images (column 1; here, 4 randomly
sampled views) to encode volumetric bottlenecks (columns 2 & 3),
which are explicitly transformed into and aggregated in an output
view coordinate frame. Transformed bottlenecks are then decoded
to synthesize state-of-the-art novel views (columns 5 & 6), as well
as reconstruct 3D geometry (column 4). Fine-grained and nonrigid transformations, as well as combinations, can be applied in
3D, allowing creative manipulations (bottom row) that were never
used during training. Images shown are samples of real results.

1. Introduction
Inferring and manipulating the 3D structure of an image
is a challenging task, but one that enables many exciting applications. By rigidly transforming this structure, one can
synthesize novel views of the content. More general transformations can be used to perform tasks such as warping or
exaggerating features of an object, or fusing components of
different objects. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
have shown impressive results on various 2D image synthesis and manipulation tasks, but specifying such fine-grained
and varied 3D manipulations of the image content, while
achieving high-quality synthesis results, remains difficult.
Several approaches to providing transformation parameters as an input to, and applying such transformations
within, a network have been explored. A common approach
is to pass spatial transformation parameters as an explicit
input vector to the network [31], optionally with a decoder
∗ This work was performed while the author was at Snap Inc.
1 Code and data for this project are available on our website:
https://github.com/kyleolsz/TB-Networks

trained to perform a specific set of transformations [3, 30].
Other approaches include altering the input by augmenting
it with auxiliary channels defining the desired spatial transformation [21], or constructing a renderable representation
that is spatially transformed prior to rendering [19, 32].
We propose a novel approach: directly applying the spatial transformations to a volumetric bottleneck within an
encoder-bottleneck-decoder network architecture. We call
these Transformable Bottleneck Networks (TBNs). The network learns that these 3D transformations correspond to
transformations between source and target images.
There are several advantages to this approach. Firstly,
supervising on multi-view datasets encourages the network
to infer spatial structure—it learns to spatially disentangle
the feature space within the bottleneck. Consequently, even
when training a network using only rigid transformations
corresponding to viewpoint changes, we can manipulate the
network output at test time with arbitrary spatial transformations (see Figs. 1 & 6). The operations enabled by these

7648

