Learning to Reconstruct 3D Manhattan Wireframes from a Single Image
Yichao Zhou1,2,∗ Haozhi Qi1 Yuexiang Zhai1,3 Qi Sun2 Zhili Chen2,3 Li-Yi Wei2 Yi Ma1,3
1 UC Berkeley

2 Adobe Research

3 ByteDance Inc.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a method to obtain a compact
and accurate 3D wireframe representation from a single image by effectively exploiting global structural regularities.
Our method trains a convolutional neural network to simultaneously detect salient junctions and straight lines, as well
as predict their 3D depths and vanishing points. Compared
with the state-of-the-art learning-based wireframe detection
methods, our network is much simpler and more unified,
leading to better 2D wireframe detection. With global structural priors such as Manhattan assumption, our method
further reconstructs a full 3D wireframe model, a compact
vector representation suitable for a variety of high-level vision tasks such as AR and CAD. We conduct extensive evaluations on a large synthetic dataset of urban scenes as well
as real images.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D geometry of a scene from RGB images is
one of the most fundamental and yet challenging problems
in computer vision. Most existing oﬀ-the-shelf commercial solutions to obtain 3D geometry still requires active
depth sensors such as structured lights (e.g., Apple ARKit
and Microsoft Mixed Realty Toolkit) or LIDARs (popular
in autonomous driving). Although these systems can meet
the needs of speciﬁc purposes, they are limited by the cost,
range, and working conditions (indoor or outdoor) of the
sensors. The representations of ﬁnal outputs are typically
dense point clouds, which are not only memory and computation intense, but also may contain noises and errors due to
transparency, occlusions, reﬂections, etc.
On the other hand, traditional image-based 3D reconstruction methods, such as Structure from Motion (SfM) and
visual SLAM, often rely on local features. Although the efﬁciency and reliability have been improving (e.g., Microsoft
Hololens, Magic Leap), they often need multiple cameras
with depth sensors [13] for better accuracy. The ﬁnal scene
representation remains quasi-dense point clouds, which are
∗ This work was done when Y. Zhou was an intern at Adobe Research.

(a) Input image

(b) 3D wireframe

(c) Novel view

Figure 1. Results of our method tested on a single synthetic image
(top row) and a real image (bottom row). Column (a) shows the
input images overlaid with the groundtruth wireframes, in which
the red and blue dots represent the C- and T-type junctions, respectively. Column (b) shows the predicted 3D wireframe from
our system, with grayscale visualizing depth. Column (c) shows
alternative views of (b). Note that our system recovers geometrically salient wireframes, without being aﬀected by the textural
lines, e.g., the vertical textural patterns on the Big Ben facade.

typically incomplete, noisy, and cumbersome to store and
share. Consequently, complex post-processing techniques
such as plane-ﬁtting [11] and mesh reﬁnement [14, 19] are
required. Such traditional representations can hardly meet
the increasing demand for high-level 3D modeling, content
editing, and model sharing from hand-held cameras, mobile
phones, and even drones.
Unlike conventional 3D geometry capturing systems, the
human visual system does not perceive the world as uniformly distributed points. Instead, humans are remarkably eﬀective, eﬃcient, and robust in utilizing geometrically
salient global structures such as lines, contours, planes, and
smooth surfaces to perceive 3D scenes [1]. However, it remains challenging for vision algorithms to detect and utilize
such global structures from local image features, until recent
advances in deep learning which makes learning high-level
features possible from labeled data. The examples include
17698

