Occlusion-Aware Networks for 3D Human Pose Estimation in Video
Yu Cheng∗1 , Bo Yang∗2 , Bo Wang2 , Wending Yan1 , and Robby T. Tan1,3
1
2

National University of Singapore
Tencent Game AI Research Center
3
Yale-NUS College

{e0321276,e0267911}@u.nus.edu, {brandonyang,bohawkwang}@tencent.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Occlusion is a key problem in 3D human pose estimation
from a monocular video. To address this problem, we introduce an occlusion-aware deep-learning framework. By
employing estimated 2D confidence heatmaps of keypoints
and an optical-flow consistency constraint, we filter out the
unreliable estimations of occluded keypoints. When occlusion occurs, we have incomplete 2D keypoints and feed
them to our 2D and 3D temporal convolutional networks
(2D and 3D TCNs) that enforce temporal smoothness to
produce a complete 3D pose. By using incomplete 2D keypoints, instead of complete but incorrect ones, our networks
are less affected by the error-prone estimations of occluded
keypoints. Training the occlusion-aware 3D TCN requires
pairs of a 3D pose and a 2D pose with occlusion labels.
As no such a dataset is available, we introduce a “Cylinder
Man Model” to approximate the occupation of body parts
in 3D space. By projecting the model onto a 2D plane in
different viewing angles, we obtain and label the occluded
keypoints, providing us plenty of training data. In addition,
we use this model to create a pose regularization constraint,
preferring the 2D estimations of unreliable keypoints to be
occluded. Our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on Human 3.6M and HumanEva-I datasets.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human poses from a monocular video
is important in many applications, such as animation generation, activity recognition, human-computer interaction,
and etc. Recent top-down pose estimation methods have
achieved promising results [29, 13, 27, 6, 21, 28, 36]. Generally, these methods detect individual persons in each image, estimate the 2D pose within each person bounding box,
and finally convert the 2D pose to a 3D pose. As humans are
articulated objects, many joints or keypoints, such as those
at wrist, elbow, and foot, can be invisible due to occlusion,
∗ Both authors contributed equally.

Frame 126

Frame 146

Frame 210

Frame 230

Figure 1. Comparison between 3D pose estimation results using
occlusion awareness (fourth row) or not (third row). The 2D pose
estimation results are shown in the second row, and the occluded
and unoccluded human joints are labeled as green and white respectively (best viewed in color).

as shown in the second row in Figure 1. These methods
always predict 2D locations of all keypoints belonging to a
person, even though some of them are invisible or occluded.
This is risky, since consequently the 3D pose estimation becomes vulnerable to error.
Researchers have shown that occlusion is a major source
of errors of human pose estimation from a single image
[25, 24, 39, 23], and state-of-the-art methods [34, 42, 8]
still suffer from it. There have been attempts to estimate
occlusion likelihoods of keypoints or body parts from an
image [32, 11], penalize occluded keypoints [1], or infer
multiple 3D poses [44, 18]. For video input, to address the
problem, temporal information are utilized [16, 13, 17, 29].
However, they are based on an assumption that occlusion

723

