Mop Moiré Patterns Using MopNet
Bin He1
Ce Wang1
Boxin Shi1,2
Ling-Yu Duan1,2∗
National Engineering Lab for Video Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China1
The Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China2
{cs hebin, wce, shiboxin, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Moiré pattern is a common image quality degradation
caused by frequency aliasing between monitors and cameras when taking screen-shot photos. The complex frequency distribution , imbalanced magnitude in colour channels , and diverse appearance attributes of moiré pattern
make its removal a challenging problem. In this paper, we
propose a Moiré pattern Removal Neural Network (MopNet) to solve this problem. All core components of MopNet are specially designed for unique properties of moiré
patterns, including the multi-scale feature aggregation to
address complex frequency, the channel-wise target edge
predictor to exploit imbalanced magnitude among colour
channels, and the attribute-aware classifiers to characterize
the diverse appearance for better modelling Moiré patterns.
Quantitative and qualitative comparison experiments have
validated the state-of-the-art performance of MopNet.

1. Introduction
With the widespread use of smart phones and the booming of social media, nowadays the digital images occupy
an indispensable part in our everyday life for capturing and
sharing memorable moments or useful information. However, when people take a shot of the content in front of
the monitors, there are often occasions when the images
are contaminated by undesired moiré artifacts as shown in
the upper row of Figure 1. Moiré pattern is a kind of artifact caused by frequency aliasing, particularly interference
between overlapping patterns like the grids of display elements and camera sensors. The appearance of moiré patterns can be rather diverse and complex, shaped in spatially
varying stripes, curves or ripples. Moiré patterns also superimpose colour variations onto images, drastically degrading
the visual quality of images.
Removing the undesired patterns from a moiré image is
an image restoration problem, but it is not trivial to ana∗ Ling-Yu Duan is the corresponding author.

Moiré screen-shot image on Twitter

Moiré pattern removal results

DMCNN

MopNet

Figure 1: Undesired Moiré patterns are often observed on
an image captured in front of the monitor (upper row).
MopNet is proposed to more cleanly remove such patterns
than state-of-the-art methods (e.g., DMCNN [20]).
lytically write down the moiré image formation model due
to its complex properties: 1) the moiré pattern signal spans
a broad frequency spectrum mixed with natural images, 2)
the imbalanced colour distribution of the colour filter array (CFA) makes moiré patterns show different intensities
in RGB colour channels respectively, and 3) the appearance
of moiré patterns, especially the shape, not only varies from
image to image, but also changes locally within the same
image. These complex properties pose unique challenges to
moiré pattern removal problem.
To remove moiré patterns, an anti-aliasing low-pass filter [17] can be added to the camera, however the optical
filter causes the loss of high-frequency information and results in over-smoothed images. Post-processing algorithms
for removing moiré artifacts is a more often used solution.
Existing methods [15, 22] mostly resort to signal processing theory and explore low-rank and sparsity constraint, but
they cannot deal with complex moiré patterns other than

2424

