Vehicle Re-identification with Viewpoint-aware Metric Learning
Ruihang Chu1 , Yifan Sun2 , Yadong Li3 , Zheng Liu3 , Chi Zhang3∗, Yichen Wei3
1
School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Beihang University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
3
Megvii Technology
churuihang@buaa.edu.cn sunyf15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{liyadong, liuzheng03, zhangchi, weiyichen}@megvii.com

Abstract
This paper considers vehicle re-identification (re-ID)
problem. The extreme viewpoint variation (up to 180 degrees) poses great challenges for existing approaches. Inspired by the behavior in human’s recognition process, we
propose a novel viewpoint-aware metric learning approach.
It learns two metrics for similar viewpoints and different
viewpoints in two feature spaces, respectively, giving rise
to viewpoint-aware network (VANet). During training, two
types of constraints are applied jointly. During inference,
viewpoint is firstly estimated and the corresponding metric
is used. Experimental results confirm that VANet significantly improves re-ID accuracy, especially when the pair is
observed from different viewpoints. Our method establishes
the new state-of-the-art on two benchmarks. 1

(a)

(b)

distance

Frequency

distance

Distance of pairs (In the baseline)
S-view pos
S-view neg
D-view pos
D-view neg

Frequency

(c)

1. Introduction
Vehicle re-identification (re-ID) aims at matching vehicles in surveillance cameras with different viewpoints. It is
of significant value in public security and intelligent transportation. The major challenge is the viewpoint variation
problem. As illustrated in Fig. 1, two different vehicles
may appear similar from the similar viewpoint (Fig. 1 (a)),
while the same vehicle appears quite different from different viewpoints (Fig. 1 (b)). For simplicity, we define S-view
as similar viewpoint and D-view as different viewpoint.
Handling viewpoint variations in object recognition has
been well studied, e.g., for person re-identification [36, 37,
28, 24, 3, 19, 20, 14, 23] and face verification [33, 41, 30,
21]. While deep metric learning has achieved certain success in obtaining viewpoint invariant features, the viewpoint
variation for vehicles is extreme (180 degrees) and this is
still very challenging.

different view

similar view

(d)

Distance of pairs (In VANet)

Figure 1. Illustration of vehicle re-ID with viewpoint variations.
Two different vehicles from similar viewpoints (a) appear more
similar than the same vehicle observed from different viewpoints
(b). (c) distance distribution of a baseline method (see Tab. 1). (d)
distance distribution of proposed VANet method. S-view pos: positive pairs from S-views. S-view neg: negative pairs from S-views.
D-view pos: positive pairs from D-views. D-view neg: negative
pairs from D-views. In the baseline (c), the “D-view pos” are not
well separated from “S-view neg”. In VANet (d), the distances
of “D-view pos” become smaller, while the distances of “S-view
neg” become larger. They are better separated.

∗ Corresponding author
1 R. Chu and Y. Sun share equal contribution.

8282

