Learning Relationships for Multi-View 3D Object Recognition
Ze Yang1
Liwei Wang1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
yangze@pku.edu.cn

wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

CNN

CNN

CNN

Airplane
3D
Descriptor

...

...
CNN

CNN

We humans live in an environment that 3D object is a
ubiquitous and rich source of information. Understanding and representing 3D object has been one of the most
fundamental problems in the field of computer vision and
artificial intelligence, as it becomes increasingly important for a wide range of practical applications (e.g. selfdriving, autonomous robot). With the success of deep
learning [23, 33, 25, 42] and the rapid development of
large-scale 3D repositories [6, 46], various approaches
have been proposed for 3D object recognition. Overall
speaking, those approaches can be divided into three lines
of research according to the input modality: view-based
approaches [39, 43, 17, 2, 31, 47, 10, 18], voxel-based
approaches [46, 24, 27, 31, 35] and pointset-based approaches [30, 32, 20, 38]. The view-based approaches render the 3D object from multiple views and deploy imagebased classifiers on individual view image; The voxel-based
approaches represent the object as a 3D occupancy grid and
analyze the grid using 3D deep networks. The pointsetbased approaches represent the object as a collection of

CNN

1. Introduction

...

Recognizing 3D object has attracted plenty of attention
recently, and view-based methods have achieved best results until now. However, previous view-based methods
ignore the region-to-region and view-to-view relationships
between different view images, which are crucial for multiview 3D object representation. To tackle this problem, we
propose a Relation Network to effectively connect corresponding regions from different viewpoints, and therefore
reinforce the information of individual view image. In addition, the Relation Network exploits the inter-relationships
over a group of views, and integrates those views to obtain
a discriminative 3D object representation. Systematic experiments conducted on ModelNet dataset demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed methods for both 3D object
recognition and retrieval tasks.

Integrating block

Reinforcing block

Abstract

Feature maps

Feature vectors

Figure 1. The overview of our method. The Reinforcing block
models the region-to-region relationships between different views
to reinforce their information. The Integrating block models the
view-to-view relationships over views to integrate them into an
effective 3D object descriptor.

unordered points and make predictions based on the point
cloud. Among these approaches, the view-based methods
have achieved the best performance so far. Comparing to
other input modality, the view-based input is relatively lowdimensional, contains more fine-grained details about the
3D object, and is robust to 3D object representation artifacts. Another advantage of view-based methods is that the
input views can be easily captured comparing to other methods, especially for the situation that one cannot directly access to 3D object models. The great success of view-base
methods also benefits from the well-established 2D deep
representation models, e.g., VGG [37], GoogLeNet [40],
ResNet [13] and DenseNet [16].
Intuitively, when humans recognize the 3D object in the
world from one particular viewpoint, the object usually have
some regions that are occluded, reflective, incomplete or totally invisible to human eyes. Thus humans will need information from other viewpoints to fully understand the object. For this reason, how to combine the information from
multiple viewpoints leaves a very important question. Unfortunately, current prevailing view-based methods, in general, cannot solve this problem fundamentally: they lack
a mechanism to reason about the relationships of the 2D
appearances from different viewpoints. For example, the
Multi-View CNN (MVCNN) [39] method uses a view-wise

7505

