Shadow Removal via Shadow Image Decomposition
Hieu Le
Stony Brook University
New York, 11794, USA

Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University
New York, 11794, USA

hle@cs.stonybrook.edu

samaras@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel deep learning method for shadow
removal. Inspired by physical models of shadow formation,
we use a linear illumination transformation to model the
shadow effects in the image that allows the shadow image
to be expressed as a combination of the shadow-free image,
the shadow parameters, and a matte layer. We use two deep
networks, namely SP-Net and M-Net, to predict the shadow
parameters and the shadow matte respectively. This system allows us to remove the shadow effects on the images.
We train and test our framework on the most challenging
shadow removal dataset (ISTD). Compared to the state-ofthe-art method, our model achieves a 40% error reduction
in terms of root mean square error (RMSE) for the shadow
area, reducing RMSE from 13.3 to 7.9. Moreover, we create
an augmented ISTD dataset based on an image decomposition system by modifying the shadow parameters to generate new synthetic shadow images. Training our model on
this new augmented ISTD dataset further lowers the RMSE
on the shadow area to 7.4.

I relit

ad

w

h
*I s

+b

ow

I shadow * α + I relit * (1-α)

I shadow-free

I shadow

α : shadow matte

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Shadow Removal via Shadow Image Decomposition. A shadow-free image Ishadow-free can be expressed
in terms of a shadow image Ishadow , a relit image Irelit and a
shadow matte α. The relit image is a linear transformation
of the shadow image. The two unknown factors of this system are the shadow parameters (w, b) and the shadow matte
layer α. We use two deep networks to estimate these two
unknown factors.

Shadows are cast whenever a light source is blocked by
an object. Shadows often confound computer vision algorithms such as segmentation, tracking, or recognition. The
appearance of shadow edges is hard to distinguish from
edges due to material changes [27]. Dark albedo material
regions can be easily misclassified as shadows [18]. Thus
many methods have been proposed to identify and remove
shadows from images.
Early shadow removal work was based on physical
shadow models [1]. A common approach is to formulate the
shadow removal problem using an image formation model,
in which the image is expressed in terms of material properties and a light source-occluder system that casts shadows.
Hence, a shadow-free image can be obtained by estimating the parameters of the source-occluder system and then
reversing the shadow effects on the image [10, 14, 13, 28].

These methods relight the shadows in a physically plausible
manner. However, estimating the correct solution for such
illumination models is non-trivial and requires considerable
processing time or user assistance[39, 3].
On the other hand, recently published large-scale
datasets [25, 34, 32] allow the use of deep learning methods
for shadow removal. In these cases, a network is trained
in an end-to-end fashion to map the input shadow image
to a shadow-free image. The success of these approaches
shows that deep networks can effectively learn transformations that relight shadowed pixels. However, the actual
physical properties of shadows are ignored, and there is no
guarantee that the networks would learn physically plausible transformations. Moreover, there are still well known
18578

