Proximal Mean-field for Neural Network Quantization
Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan∗1 , Puneet K. Dokania2 , Richard Hartley1 , and Philip H. S. Torr2
1

Australian National University

Abstract
Compressing large Neural Networks (NN) by quantizing the parameters, while maintaining the performance is
highly desirable due to reduced memory and time complexity. In this work, we cast NN quantization as a discrete labelling problem, and by examining relaxations, we design
an efficient iterative optimization procedure that involves
stochastic gradient descent followed by a projection. We
prove that our simple projected gradient descent approach
is, in fact, equivalent to a proximal version of the wellknown mean-field method. These findings would allow the
decades-old and theoretically grounded research on MRF
optimization to be used to design better network quantization schemes. Our experiments on standard classification
datasets (MNIST, CIFAR10/100, TinyImageNet) with convolutional and residual architectures show that our algorithm
obtains fully-quantized networks with accuracies very close
to the floating-point reference networks.

1. Introduction
Despite the success of deep neural networks, they are
highly overparametrized, resulting in excessive computational and memory requirements. Compressing such large
networks by quantizing the parameters, while maintaining
the performance, is highly desirable for real-time applications, or for resource-limited devices.
In Neural Network (NN) quantization, the objective is to
learn a network while restricting the parameters to take values from a small discrete set (usually binary) representing
quantization levels. This can be formulated as a discrete
labelling problem where each learnable parameter takes a
label from the discrete set and the learning objective is to
find the label configuration that minimizes the empirical
loss. This is an extremely challenging discrete optimization
problem because the number of label configurations grows
exponentially with the number of parameters in the network
and the loss function is highly non-convex.
Over the past 20 years, similar large-scale discrete la∗ Part of the work was done while at the University of Oxford.

2

University of Oxford

belling problems have been extensively studied under the
context of Markov Random Field (MRF) optimization, and
many efficient approximate algorithms have been developed
[2, 6, 11, 31, 41, 42]. In this work, we take inspiration from
the rich literature on MRF optimization, and design an efficient approximate algorithm based on the popular meanfield method [42] for NN quantization.
Specifically, we first formulate NN quantization as a discrete labelling problem. Then, we relax the discrete solution space to a convex polytope and introduce an algorithm
to iteratively optimize the first-order Taylor approximation
of the loss function over the polytope. This approach is a
(stochastic) gradient descent method with an additional projection step at each iteration. For a particular choice of projection, we show that our method is equivalent to a proximal version of the well-known mean-field method. Furthermore, we prove that under certain conditions, our algorithm
specializes to the popular BinaryConnect [10] algorithm.
The MRF view of NN quantization opens up many interesting research directions. In fact, our approach represents
the simplest case where the NN parameters are assumed to
be independent of each other. However, one can potentially
model second-order or even high-order interactions among
parameters and use efficient inference algorithms developed
and well-studied in the MRF optimization literature. Therefore, we believe, many such algorithms can be transposed
into this framework to design better network quantization
schemes. Furthermore, in contrast to the existing NN quantization methods [21, 35], we quantize all the learnable parameters in the network (including biases) and our formulation can be seamlessly extended to quantization levels beyond binary.
We evaluate the merits of our algorithm on MNIST,
CIFAR-10/100, and TinyImageNet classification datasets
with convolutional and residual architectures. Our experiments show that the quantized networks obtained by
our algorithm yield accuracies very close to the floatingpoint counterparts while consistently outperforming directly comparable baselines. Our code is available at
https://github.com/tajanthan/pmf.
14871

