SANet: Scene Agnostic Network for Camera Localization
Luwei Yang1,∗ Ziqian Bai1,∗ Chengzhou Tang1 Honghua Li2 Yasutaka Furukawa1 Ping Tan1
1
Simon Fraser University 2 Alibaba A.I Labs
{luweiy, ziqianb, cta73, furukawa, pingtan}@sfu.ca, honghua.lhh@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
This paper presents a scene agnostic neural architecture for camera localization, where model parameters and
scenes are independent from each other. Despite recent advancement in learning based methods, most approaches require training for each scene one by one, not applicable
for online applications such as SLAM and robotic navigation, where a model must be built on-the-fly. Our approach
learns to build a hierarchical scene representation and predicts a dense scene coordinate map of a query RGB image
on-the-fly given an arbitrary scene. The 6D camera pose of
the query image can be estimated with the predicted scene
coordinate map. Additionally, the dense prediction can be
used for other online robotic and AR applications such as
obstacle avoidance. We demonstrate the effectiveness and
efficiency of our method on both indoor and outdoor benchmarks, achieving state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Camera localization amounts to determining the orientation and position of a camera from the image it captures.
It is a critical component for many applications such as
SLAM, location recognition, robot navigation, and augmented reality. Conventionally [30, 26, 25, 16, 15, 7], this
problem is solved by first finding a set of feature correspondences between the input image and a reference scene (either represented by a point cloud or a set of reference images), and then estimating the camera pose by minimizing
some energy function defined over these correspondences.
This approach is often brittle due to the long pipeline of
hand-crafted components, i.e., image retrieval, feature correspondence matching, and camera pose estimation.
Recently, learning based approaches [18, 4, 11, 3] have
advanced the performance of camera localization with
random forests (RFs) and convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). Some works [11, 10, 32, 2] directly regress the
camera poses using CNNs; while others [9, 31, 27, 3, 5]
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

first estimate a scene coordinate map, defining the xyz coordinates of each pixel in the query image, then compute
camera pose accordingly, which is a well posed optimization problem. These methods often enjoy better robustness
than the conventional pipeline. However, the RFs or CNNs
are typically learned from images for a specific scene and
require retraining or adaptation before they can be applied
to a different scene. While online adaptation is possible, it
has been only demonstrated with RGBD query images and
a RF [6]. CNNs typically produce higher localization accuracy, but it is unknown how a CNN can be quickly adapted
to a different scene, which limits their applications.
We follow this learning based approach for camera localization and aim to build a scene agnostic network that
works on unseen scenes without retraining or adaptation.
This capability is important for online applications such as
SLAM and robotic navigation where retraining is impossible. We focus on the problem of scene coordinate map
estimation, and adopt a similar method as [5] to compute
the camera pose from the estimated scene coordinate map,
while striving to make this process scene agnostic. The estimated dense scene coordinate map might be further applied
for other applications such as robot obstacle avoidance.
To achieve this goal, we design a network, SANet, to extract a scene representation from some reference scene images and 3D points, instead of encoding specific scene information in network parameters, so that our network can be
applied to different scenes without any retraining or adaptation. Specifically, our scene representation is a hierarchical
pyramid of features at different resolutions. At querying
time, this scene representation is combined with features
from the query image to predict a dense scene coordinate
map from coarse to fine. Intuitively, the network learns to
fit the query image onto the 3D scene surfaces in a visually
consistent manner. In order to fuse query image features
and scene features, we adopt a similar structure as the PointNet [21, 22], which can handle unordered point clouds, to
predict the scene coordinate features.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method, we have evaluated our method on several benchmark datasets including indoor scenes (7Scenes [27]) and

42

