λ-net: Reconstruct Hyperspectral Images from a Snapshot Measurement
Xin Miao1,†
Xin Yuan2,∗
1
University of Texas at Arlington, TX, USA
xin.miao@mavs.uta.edu

Yunchen Pu3
Vassilis Athitsos1
2
Nokia Bell Labs, NJ, USA 3 Facebook, CA, USA

xyuan@bell-labs.com

pyc40@fb.com

athitsos@uta.edu

Abstract
We propose the λ-net, which reconstructs hyperspectral images (e.g., with 24 spectral channels) from a single shot measurement. This task is usually termed snapshot compressive-spectral imaging (SCI), which enjoys low
cost, low bandwidth and high-speed sensing rate to capture the three-dimensional (3D) signal i.e., (x, y, λ), using a 2D snapshot. Though proposed more than a decade
ago, the poor quality and low-speed of reconstruction algorithms preclude wide applications of SCI. To address this
challenge, in this paper, we develop a dual-stage generative
model to reconstruct the desired 3D signal in SCI, dubbed
λ-net. Results on both simulation and real datasets demonstrate the significant advantages of λ-net, which leads to
>4dB improvement in PSNR on simulation data compared
to the current state-of-the-art. Furthermore, λ-net can finish the reconstruction task within sub-seconds instead of
hours taken by the most recently proposed DeSCI algorithm, thus speeding up the reconstruction >1000 times.

1. Introduction
Snapshot compressive-spectral imaging (SCI) refers to
compressive imaging systems where multiple hyperspectral frames are mapped into a single measurement [6, 12,
22, 39, 61, 62, 84]. The first SCI system, called coded
aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI), was developed
in [22], which modulates signals at different wavelengths by
a coded aperture (physical mask) and a disperser [61]. In
this manner, a two-dimensional (2D) monochromatic camera can sample the hyperspectral scenes at video rate [62]
and thus saves memory, bandwidth and cost significantly
compared with that using a traditional spectrometer in addition to the high-speed sensing. While enjoying all these
advantages, similar to other computational imaging systems [4], one important step in SCI is that algorithms are
required to reconstruct the 3D hyperspectral data-cube from
every snapshot measurement after the sensing process. Ex† Part of this work was performed when Xin Miao was a summer intern
at Nokia Bell Labs in 2018. ∗ Corresponding author. The code is available
at https://github.com/xinxinmiao/lambda-net.

Figure 1. Hyperspectral images (right) reconstructed from a single
shot measurement (left) using various algorithms: the proposed λnet (PSNR: 30.0dB), DeSCI (PSNR: 22.4dB), GAP-TV (PSNR:
16.6dB) and TwIST (PSNR: 13.1dB), compared with the ground
truth. Four out of 24 reconstructed frames at different wavelengths
are shown. Notice that only λ-net can recover the continuous wire.

isting algorithms are either too slow or the performance is
not high. Inspired by the recent advances of deep learning
for inversion problems [13, 36, 43, 74, 82], in this paper, we
propose λ-net for SCI reconstruction.
Fig. 1 depicts that different algorithms lead to various
quality reconstructed images, where TwIST (Two-Step Iterative Shrinkage/Thresholding) [10] and GAP-TV (Generalized Alternating Projection based Total Variation) [76] are
used in previous CASSI systems [39, 61, 84] as baselines
and the most recently proposed algorithm, decompress SCI
(DeSCI), introduced in [39], has achieved state-of-the-art
results in both video and spectral SCI. Note that all these
algorithms reconstruct 24 spectral images (channels) from
a single measurement (Fig. 1 left) captured by the camera
(Fig. 2 top), and 4 selected channels are plotted in the right
of Fig. 1. It can be observed that TwIST leads to blurry
results and GAP-TV provides unpleasant artifacts; DeSCI
offers higher quality images than both of them but leads to
over-smooth phenomenon. By contrast, our proposed λ-net
has led to significant better results (>7dB in PSNR for the
scene in Fig. 1) than all these previous methods, and only
λ-net can reconstruct the continuous wire in Fig. 1. Further-

4059

