Instance-Guided Context Rendering for Cross-Domain Person Re-Identification
Yanbei Chen

Xiatian Zhu

Shaogang Gong

Queen Mary University of London

Vision Semantics Ltd.

Queen Mary University of London

yanbei.chen@qmul.ac.uk

eddy.zhuxt@gmail.com

s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
GAN

Existing person re-identification (re-id) methods mostly
assume the availability of large-scale identity labels for
model learning in any target domain deployment. This
greatly limits their scalability in practice. To tackle this limitation, we propose a novel Instance-Guided Context Rendering scheme, which transfers the source person identities
into diverse target domain contexts to enable supervised reid model learning in the unlabelled target domain. Unlike previous image synthesis methods that transform the
source person images into limited fixed target styles, our approach produces more visually plausible, and diverse synthetic training data. Specifically, we formulate a dual conditional generative adversarial network that augments each
source person image with rich contextual variations. To explicitly achieve diverse rendering effects, we leverage abundant unlabelled target instances as contextual guidance for
image generation. Extensive experiments on Market-1501,
DukeMTMC-reID and CUHK03 benchmarks show that the
re-id performance can be significantly improved when using
our synthetic data in cross-domain re-id model learning.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) is a task of re-identifying
a query person-of-interest, across non-overlapping cameras
distributed over wide surveillance spaces [16]. Since the
surge of deep representation learning, great boosts of re-id
performance have been witnessed in an idealistic closedworld supervised learning testbed [63, 58, 54, 64, 20, 6,
30, 47, 5]: The rank-1 matching rate has reached 93.3% [5]
on the Market1501 benchmark [63], as compared to 44.4%
in 2015. However, this success relies heavily on an unrealistic assumption that the training and test data have to be
drawn from the same camera network, i.e. the same domain.
When deploying such re-id models to new domains, their
performances often degrade significantly, mainly due to the
inevitable domain gaps between datasets collected from different surveillance camera networks. This weakness greatly
restricts the generalisability of these domain-specific learn-

source labelled domain

target unlabelled domain
target domain contexts

Cam "

Cam !

…

rendering

…

synthetic outputs

Figure 1: Motivation illustration. In open surveillance spaces, the
contextual variations can be quite diverse, due to wide-of-the-field
imagery and varying times of the day. Our approach learns to hallucinate the same persons in such surveillance contexts, as if they
were captured from different places and times in the target domain.

ing methods in real-world deployment, when manually labelling new identity population becomes prohibitively expensive at large scale [57, 11, 55, 28, 7, 34]. It is therefore
essential to automate the domain-adaptive learnability with
more advanced and robust domain-generic learning models.
The aforementioned problem, known as cross-domain
person re-id, is gaining increasing attention [40, 56, 37,
57, 11, 55, 1, 65, 33]. It raises a more challenging open-set
unsupervised domain adaptation problem [4, 44], which requires to bridge the domain gap between two disjoint identity class spaces. Recent methods typically mitigate this gap
by attribute-identity distribution alignment at the feature
level [55, 33], or style transfer at the image level [57, 11].
However, they all neglect to exploit the rich contextual variations as a potential domain bridge. In this work, we aim
to utilise the contextual information for more effective reid model learning. This is motivated by our observation
of complex environmental dynamics commonly existed in
open public scenes (see Fig. 1) – domain contexts are indeed
quite diverse in surveillance spaces, given that the viewing
1232

