SceneGraphNet: Neural Message Passing for 3D Indoor Scene Augmentation
Yang Zhou

Zachary While
Evangelos Kalogerakis
University of Massachusetts Amherst

{yangzhou,zwhile,kalo}@cs.umass.edu

What object type can
go in that location?

Abstract
In this paper we propose a neural message passing approach to augment an input 3D indoor scene with new objects matching their surroundings. Given an input, potentially incomplete, 3D scene and a query location (Figure
1), our method predicts a probability distribution over object types that fit well in that location. Our distribution
is predicted though passing learned messages in a dense
graph whose nodes represent objects in the input scene and
edges represent spatial and structural relationships. By
weighting messages through an attention mechanism, our
method learns to focus on the most relevant surrounding
scene context to predict new scene objects. We found that
our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in terms of correctly predicting objects missing in
a scene based on our experiments in the SUNCG dataset.
We also demonstrate other applications of our method, including context-based 3D object recognition and iterative
scene generation.

1. Introduction
With the increasing number of 3D models and scenes
becoming available in online repositories, the need for effectively answering object queries in 3D scenes has become
greater than ever. A common type of scene queries is to
predict plausible object types that match well the surrounding context of an input 3D scene. For example, as shown
in Figure 1, given a query location close to a TV stand and
a room corner, a likely choice for an object to be added in
that location can be a speaker, or less likely a plant.
We designed a neural message passing method to predict a probability distribution over object types given query
locations in the scene. Our predicted distributions can be
used in various vision and graphics tasks. First, our method
can enhance 3D object recognition in scenes by taking into
account the scene context (Figure 2). Second, it can also be
used to automatically populate 3D scenes with more objects
by evaluating our probability distribution at different locations in the scene (Figure 3). Another related application is
to provide object type recommendations to designers while
interactively modeling a 3D scenes.

Query
location

…
Shelves
…
Lamp
…
Speaker

3%

…
Ottoman
…
Plant

1%

relations

9%
70%
15%

…

SceneGraphNet Predictions

Figure 1. SceneGraphNet captures relationships between objects
in an input 3D scene through iterative message passing in a dense
graph to make object type predictions at query locations.

Our method models the scene as a graph, where nodes
represent existing objects and edges represent various spatial and structural relationships between them, such as supporting, surrounding, adjacency, and object co-occurrence
relationships. The edges are not limited only to neighboring objects, but can also capture long-range dependencies
in the scene e.g., the choice of a sofa in one side of a room
can influence the selection of other sofas, chairs, or tables in
the opposite side of the room to maintain a plausible object
set and arrangement.
Our method is inspired by graph neural network approaches that learn message passing in graphs [1, 6, 7] to
infer node representations and interactions between them.
Our method learns message passing to aggregate the surrounding scene context from different objects. It addresses
a number of challenges in this setting. First, scene objects
may have multiple types of relationships between them e.g.,
a nightstand can be adjacent to a bed, while at the same
time it is placed symmetrically wrt to another nightstand
surrounding the bed from both sides. We found that object
relationships are more effectively captured through neural
network modules specialized for each type of relationship.
In addition, we found that predictions are more plausible,
when we model not only local or strictly hierarchical object
relationships, but also long-range relationships captured in a
dense graph. Since we do not know a priori which relationships are most important for predicting objects at query locations, we designed an attention mechanism to weigh different messages i.e., we find which edges are more important for making object predictions. Finally, we found that
aggregating messages from multiple objects are better handled with memory-enabled units (GRUs) rather than other
simpler schemes, such as summation or max-pooling.

7384

