Deep Parametric Indoor Lighting Estimation
Marc-André Gardner* ,
Yannick Hold-Geoffroy† ,
Kalyan Sunkavalli† ,
Christian Gagné* ,
Jean-François Lalonde*
*
†
Université Laval, Adobe Research
{holdgeof,sunkaval}@adobe.com

marc-andre.gardner.1@ulaval.ca

{christian.gagne,jflalonde}@gel.ulaval.ca
https://lvsn.github.io/deepparametric/

Abstract
We present a method to estimate lighting from a single image of an indoor scene. Previous work has used an
environment map representation that does not account for
the localized nature of indoor lighting. Instead, we represent lighting as a set of discrete 3D lights with geometric
and photometric parameters. We train a deep neural network to regress these parameters from a single image, on
a dataset of environment maps annotated with depth. We
propose a differentiable layer to convert these parameters
to an environment map to compute our loss; this bypasses
the challenge of establishing correspondences between estimated and ground truth lights. We demonstrate, via quantitative and qualitative evaluations, that our representation
and training scheme lead to more accurate results compared to previous work, while allowing for more realistic
3D object compositing with spatially-varying lighting.

1. Introduction
Recovering the lighting in a scene from a single image
is a highly ill-posed problem. Since images are formed by
conflating lighting with surface reflectance, scene geometry and the camera response function, inverting the image
formation process to recover any of these components is
severely under-constrained. This is especially true when the
image has low dynamic range (LDR) and limited field of
view, such as one captured by standard consumer cameras.
In his pioneering work in image-based lighting, Debevec [6] proposed to directly capture the lighting conditions at a location in the image by inserting a light probe at
that location. The resulting HDR environment map represents the illumination incident from every direction at that
point in the scene, and can be used to realistically relight
virtual objects at that location. Recently, fully automatic
methods leveraging deep learning were proposed to esti-

(a) Gardner et al. [7]

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Our method takes an indoor image as input and estimates
a parametric lighting representation, enabling tasks such as virtual object insertion. Unlike previous methods that predict global
lighting [7] (a), our estimates vary based on spatial location (b),
generating different shadow directions (green, teal) and shading
(orange, blue) that realistically adapt to the location in the image.

mate an environment map from a single indoor image [7].
However, the environment map representation assumes that
lighting is distant — which is why it can be represented as a
function of the incident direction. This assumption is often
violated for indoor scenes that have localized light sources
leading to spatially-varying lighting in the scene. Consequently, using a single environment map for the entire scene
leads to inconsistent results for applications such as 3D object compositing (see Figure 1(a)).
Alternatively, parametric lighting models represent illumination using a discrete set of light sources with various
geometric and photometric properties. This is a global representation that can be used to reconstruct lighting at any
3D location in the scene (assuming known scene geometry).
Techniques for learning parametric lighting have been proposed for the simpler case of outdoor illumination [13, 10].
Indoor lighting, on the other hand, is much more complex,
with a varying number of light sources, all with potentially
different properties, and located in close proximity to the
scene. As a result, techniques for recovering parametric
lighting in indoor scenes rely on extensive user input [11]
17175

