Homography from two orientation- and scale-covariant features
Daniel Barath1,2 Zuzana Kukelova1
1
VRG, Department of Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
2
Machine Perception Research Laboratory, MTA SZTAKI, Budapest, Hungary
barath.daniel@sztaki.mta.hu

Abstract
This paper proposes a geometric interpretation of the angles and scales which the orientation- and scale-covariant
feature detectors, e.g. SIFT, provide. Two new general constraints are derived on the scales and rotations which can be
used in any geometric model estimation tasks. Using these
formulas, two new constraints on homography estimation
are introduced. Exploiting the derived equations, a solver
for estimating the homography from the minimal number of
two correspondences is proposed. Also, it is shown how
the normalization of the point correspondences affects the
rotation and scale parameters, thus achieving numerically
stable results. Due to requiring merely two feature pairs,
robust estimators, e.g. RANSAC, do significantly fewer iterations than by using the four-point algorithm. When using covariant features, e.g. SIFT, the information about the
scale and orientation is given at no cost. The proposed homography estimation method is tested in a synthetic environment and on publicly available real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of interpreting, in a geometrically justifiable manner, the rotation and scale which
the orientation- and scale-covariant feature detectors, e.g.
SIFT [22] or SURF [10], provide. Then, by exploiting
these new constraints, we involve all the obtained parameters of the SIFT features (i.e. the point coordinates, angle,
and scale) into the homography estimation procedure. In
particular, we are interested in the minimal case, to estimate
a homography from solely two correspondences.
Nowadays, a number of algorithms exist for estimating
or approximating geometric models, e.g. homographies, using affine-covariant features. A technique, proposed by Perdoch et al. [29], approximates the epipolar geometry from
one or two affine correspondences by converting them to
point pairs. Bentolila and Francos [11] proposed a solution
for estimating the fundamental matrix using three affine features. Raposo et al. [32, 31] and Barath et al. [6] showed that

P

C1

C2
α2

α1
p1

q1

p2

q2

Figure 1: Visualization of the orientation- and scalecovariant features. Point P and the surrounding patch projected into cameras C1 and C2 . A window showing the
projected points p1 = [u1 v1 1]T and p2 = [u2 v2 1]T are
cut out and enlarged. The rotation of the feature in the ith
image is αi and the size is qi (i ∈ {1, 2}). The scaling from
the 1st to the 2nd image is calculated as q = q2 /q1 .

two correspondences are enough for estimating the relative
camera motion. Moreover, two feature pairs are enough for
solving the semi-calibrated case, i.e. when the objective is
to find the essential matrix and a common unknown focal
length [9]. Also, homographies can be estimated from two
affine correspondences [17], and, in case of known epipolar
geometry, from a single correspondence [5]. There is a oneto-one relationship between local affine transformations and
surface normals [17, 8]. Pritts et al. [30] showed that
the lens distortion parameters can be retrieved using affine
features. Affine correspondences encode higher-order information about the scene geometry. This is the reason
why the previously mentioned algorithms solve geometric
estimation problems exploiting fewer features than point
correspondence-based methods. This implies nevertheless
their major drawback: obtaining affine features accurately
(e.g. by Affine SIFT [28], MODS [26], Hessian-Affine, or
Harris-Affine [24] detectors) is time-consuming and, thus,
is barely doable in time-sensitive applications.
Most of the widely-used feature detectors provide parts
11091

