Incremental Class Discovery for Semantic Segmentation with RGBD Sensing
Yoshikatsu Nakajima1,2
Byeongkeun Kang1
1
Carnegie Mellon University
{byeongkk,kkitani}@andrew.cmu.edu

Hideo Saito2
Kris Kitani1
2
Keio University

{nakajima,saito}@hvrl.ics.keio.ac.jp

Abstract
This work addresses the task of open world semantic segmentation using RGBD sensing to discover new semantic
classes over time. Although there are many types of objects in the real-word, current semantic segmentation methods make a closed world assumption and are trained only
to segment a limited number of object classes. Towards a
more open world approach, we propose a novel method that
incrementally learns new classes for image segmentation.
The proposed system first segments each RGBD frame using
both color and geometric information, and then aggregates
that information to build a single segmented dense 3D map
of the environment. The segmented 3D map representation
is a key component of our approach as it is used to discover new object classes by identifying coherent regions in
the 3D map that have no semantic label. The use of coherent region in the 3D map as a primitive element, rather than
traditional elements such as surfels or voxels, also significantly reduces the computational complexity and memory
use of our method. It thus leads to semi-real-time performance at 10.7Hz when incrementally updating the dense 3D
map at every frame. Through experiments on the NYUDv2
dataset, we demonstrate that the proposed method is able to
correctly cluster objects of both known and unseen classes.
We also show the quantitative comparison with the stateof-the-art supervised methods, the processing time of each
step, and the influences of each component.

1. Introduction
Building a semantically annotated 3D map (i.e., semantic mapping) has become a vital research topic in computer
vision and robotics communities since it provides 3D location information as well as object/scene category information. It is naturally very useful in a wide range of applications including robot navigation, mixed/virtual reality, and
remote robot control. In most of these applications, it is important to achieve both high accuracy and efficiency. Considering robot navigation, robots need to recognize objects
accurately and efficiently to navigate actively changing en-

Scene

Discovered Classes

Figure 1. Proposed method incrementally discovers new classes
(e.g., pictures) in the reconstructed 3D map.

vironments without any accident. In mixed reality systems,
accuracy and efficiency are important to achieve more natural interactions without delay. When controlling surgical
robots remotely, they are even more essential.
Consequently, many research have been conducted to develop an accurate and efficient system for semantic mapping [17, 11, 22, 23, 33, 43, 47, 18, 20]. Most of the recent
semantic mapping systems consist of two principal components, building a 3D map from RGBD images and processing semantic segmentation on either images or the built
3D maps [17, 11, 22, 23]. Since the introduction of RGBD
sensors such as Microsoft Kinect [48], many approaches
have been presented for building a 3D map from RGBD
images [24, 14, 16, 19]. Regarding semantic segmentation, as semantic segmentation algorithms for images have
been studied in many literatures, most semantic mapping
systems have adapted these algorithms. Recently, since
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) improve the performance of semantic segmentation further [21, 35, 5], CNNs
1972

