Efficient Learning on Point Clouds with Basis Point Sets
Sergey Prokudin ∗
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany

Christoph Lassner †
Amazon
Tübingen, Germany

Javier Romero †
Amazon
Barcelona, Spain

sergey.prokudin@tuebingen.mpg.de

classner@amazon.com

javier@amazon.com

Abstract
With an increased availability of 3D scanning technology, point clouds are moving into the focus of computer vision as a rich representation of everyday scenes. However,
they are hard to handle for machine learning algorithms
due to their unordered structure. One common approach
is to apply occupancy grid mapping, which dramatically
increases the amount of data stored and at the same time
loses details through discretization. Recently, deep learning models were proposed to handle point clouds directly
and achieve input permutation invariance. However, these
architectures often use an increased number of parameters
and are computationally inefficient. In this work we propose basis point sets (BPS) as a highly efficient and fully
general way to process point clouds with machine learning
algorithms. The basis point set representation is a residual
representation that can be computed efficiently and can be
used with standard neural network architectures and other
machine learning algorithms. Using the proposed representation as the input to a simple fully connected network
allows us to match the performance of PointNet on a shape
classification task, while using three orders of magnitude
less floating point operations. In a second experiment, we
show how the proposed representation can be used for registering high resolution meshes to noisy 3D scans. Here,
we present the first method for single-pass high-resolution
mesh registration, avoiding time-consuming per-scan optimization and allowing real-time execution.

1. Introduction
Point cloud data is becoming more ubiquitous than ever:
anyone can create a point cloud from a set of photos with
easy to use photogrammetry software or capture a point
cloud directly with one of many consumer-grade depth sensors available worldwide. These sensors will soon be used
∗ work was done during internship at Amazon
† the last two authors were equally involved

Figure 1. Basis point set encoding for point clouds. The encoding of a point cloud X = {x1 , . . . , xn } is a fixed-length feature
vector, computed as the minimal distances to a fixed set of points
B = [b1 , ..., bk ]T . This representation can be used as input to
arbitrary machine learning methods, in particular it can be used
as input for off-the-shelf neural networks. This leads to substantial performance gains as compared to occupancy grid encoding
or specialized neural network architectures without sacrificing the
accuracy of predictions.

in most aspects of our daily lives, with autonomous cars
recording streets and city environments and VR and AR
devices recording our home environment on a regular basis. The resulting data represents a great opportunity for
computer vision research: it complements image data with
depth information and opens up new fields of research.
However, point cloud data itself is unstructured. This
leads to a variety of problems: (a) point clouds have no fixed
cardinality, varying their size depending on the recorded
scene. They are also not ‘registered’ in the sense that it
is not trivial to find correspondences between points across
recordings of the same or of a similar scene. (b) Point

4332

