X-Section: Cross-Section Prediction for Enhanced RGB-D Fusion
Andrea Nicastro1 , Ronald Clark1 , Stefan Leutenegger2
1
Dyson Robotics Lab, 2 Smart Robotics Lab, Imperial College London
a.nicastro15@imperial.ac.uk

RGB-D 1

Thickness 1

RGB-D 2

Thickness 2

RGB-D 3

Thickness 3

RGB-D 4

Thickness 4

RGB-D 5

Thickness 5

RGB-D 6

Thickness 6

Figure 1: Our approach uses predictions of the objects cross-sectional thickness to improve volumetric reconstruction quality.
Top row shows the input to the proposed pipeline, an RGB-D frame. Bottom, cross-section prediction. From left to right in
the middle, incremental reconstruction via our enhanced TSDF fusion algorithm.

Abstract

Detailed 3D reconstruction is an important challenge
with application to robotics, augmented and virtual reality, which has seen impressive progress throughout the
past years. Advancements were driven by the availability of depth cameras (RGB-D), as well as increased compute power, e.g. in the form of GPUs – but also thanks
to inclusion of machine learning in the process. Here, we
propose X-Section, an RGB-D 3D reconstruction approach
that leverages deep learning to make object-level predictions about thicknesses that can be readily integrated into
a volumetric multi-view fusion process, where we propose
an extension to the popular KinectFusion approach. In
essence, our method allows to complete shapes in general
indoor scenes behind what is sensed by the RGB-D camera, which may be crucial e.g. for robotic manipulation
tasks or efficient scene exploration. Predicting object thicknesses rather than volumes allows us to work with comparably high spatial resolution without exploding memory and
training data requirements on the employed Convolutional
Neural Networks. In a series of qualitative and quantitative
evaluations, we demonstrate how we accurately predict object thickness and reconstruct general 3D scenes containing
multiple objects.

1. Introduction
Knowledge of the shape of objects and of unseen part
of the scene plays a critical role in applications such as
robotic manipulation and autonomous exploration. In robot
manipulation, the understanding of object geometry clearly
influences the choice of grasping points. Similarly, in autonomous navigation, any additional information about occupied versus free space in the scene is helpful. The fusion
of unseen information in the mapping process leads to more
efficient exploration and faster map coverage.
Recent advancements in machine learning have fuelled
improvements in single view 3D reconstruction. However,
the developed techniques are not necessarily readily integrated with state of the art spatial mapping systems.
In this work, we propose a novel approach to object
reconstruction embedded in a scene that allows scalable
multi-view reconstruction of both individual objects and
groups thereof. The task we propose is to predict the geometry behind sensed surfaces in the form of view-centred
cross-sectional thickness. We embed the thickness prediction network, X-Section, in a pipeline that allows to scale
our approach to scene level. To integrate multiple views
and recover 3D geometry, we suggest a modification to truncated signed distance function (TSDF) fusion. Furthermore,
our framework can be easily paired with other mapping approaches such as Bayesian probabilistic mapping [23].
There are several reasons to prefer 2D predictions rather

1517

