BMN: Boundary-Matching Network for Temporal Action Proposal Generation
Tianwei Lin, Xiao Liu, Xin Li, Errui Ding, Shilei Wen
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.
{lintianwei01,liuxiao12,lixin41,dingerrui,wenshilei}@baidu.com

Abstract
Temporal action proposal generation is an challenging
and promising task which aims to locate temporal regions
in real-world videos where action or event may occur. Current bottom-up proposal generation methods can generate
proposals with precise boundary, but cannot efficiently generate adequately reliable confidence scores for retrieving
proposals. To address these difficulties, we introduce the
Boundary-Matching (BM) mechanism to evaluate confidence scores of densely distributed proposals, which denote a proposal as a matching pair of starting and ending
boundaries and combine all densely distributed BM pairs
into the BM confidence map. Based on BM mechanism,
we propose an effective, efficient and end-to-end proposal
generation method, named Boundary-Matching Network
(BMN), which generates proposals with precise temporal
boundaries as well as reliable confidence scores simultaneously. The two-branches of BMN are jointly trained in an
unified framework. We conduct experiments on two challenging datasets: THUMOS-14 and ActivityNet-1.3, where
BMN shows significant performance improvement with remarkable efficiency and generalizability. Further, combining with existing action classifier, BMN can achieve stateof-the-art temporal action detection performance.

1. Introduction
With the number of videos in Internet growing rapidly,
video content analysis methods have attracted widespread
attention from both academia and industry. Temporal action
detection is an important task in video content analysis area,
which aims to locate action instances in untrimmed long
videos with both action categories and temporal boundaries.
Akin to object detection, temporal action detection method
can be divided into two stages: temporal action proposal
generation and action classification. Although convincing
classification accuracy can be achieved by action recognition methods, the detection performance is still low in
mainstream benchmarks [15, 5]. Therefore, many recent
methods work on improving the quality of temporal action

Figure 1. Overview of our method. Given an untrimmed video,
BMN can simultaneously generate (1) boundary probabilities sequence to construct proposals and (2) Boundary-Matching confidence map to densely evaluate confidence of all proposals.

proposals. Besides being used in temporal action detection
task, temporal proposal generation methods also have wide
applications in many areas such as video recommendation,
video highlight detection and smart surveillance.
To achieve high proposal quality, a proposal generation method should (1) generate temporal proposals with
flexible duration and precise boundaries to cover groundtruth action instances precisely and exhaustively; (2) generate reliable confidence scores so that proposals can be retrieved properly. Most existing proposal generation methods [3, 4, 8, 24] adopted a “top-down” fashion to generate proposals with multi-scale temporal sliding windows
in regular interval, and then evaluate confidence scores
of proposals respectively or simultaneously. The main
drawback of these methods is that generated proposals are
usually not temporally precise or not flexible enough to
cover ground-truth action instances of varies duration. Recently, Boundary-Sensitive Network (BSN) [18] adopted a
“bottom-up” fashion to generate proposals in two stages:

3889

