OperatorNet: Recovering 3D Shapes From Difference Operators
Ruqi Huang∗
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique

Marie-Julie Rakotosaona∗
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique

Panos Achlioptas
Stanford University

rqhuang88@gmail.com

mrakotos@lix.polytechnique.fr

optas@cs.stanford.edu

Leonidas Guibas
Stanford University

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique

guibas@cs.stanford.edu

maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
This paper proposes a learning-based framework for reconstructing 3D shapes from functional operators, compactly encoded as small-sized matrices. To this end we
introduce a novel neural architecture, called OperatorNet,
which takes as input a set of linear operators representing
a shape and produces its 3D embedding. We demonstrate
that this approach significantly outperforms previous purely
geometric methods for the same problem. Furthermore, we
introduce a novel functional operator, which encodes the extrinsic or pose-dependent shape information, and thus complements purely intrinsic pose-oblivious operators, such as
the classical Laplacian. Coupled with this novel operator,
our reconstruction network achieves very high reconstruction accuracy, even in the presence of incomplete information about a shape, given a soft or functional map expressed
in a reduced basis. Finally, we demonstrate that the multiplicative functional algebra enjoyed by these operators can
be used to synthesize entirely new unseen shapes, in the context of shape interpolation and shape analogy applications.

1. Introduction
Encoding and reconstructing 3D shapes is a fundamental problem in Computer Graphics, Computer Vision and
related fields. Unlike images, which enjoy a canonical representation, 3D shapes are encoded through a large variety
of representations, such as point clouds, triangle meshes and
volumetric data, to name a few. Perhaps even more importantly, 3D shapes may undergo a diverse set of transformations, ranging from rigid motions to complex non-rigid and
articulated deformations, that impact these representations.
The representation issues have become even more
prominent with the recent advent of learning-based techniques, leading to a number of solutions for learning di∗ denotes equal contribution.

Figure 1. Shape interpolation via OperatorNet (top) and PointNet
autoencoder (bottom). Our interpolations are more smooth and
less distorted.

rectly on geometric 3D data [7]. This is challenging, as
point clouds and meshes lack the regular grid structure exploited by convolutional architectures. In particular, devising representations that are well-adapted for both shape
analysis and especially shape synthesis remains difficult.
For example, several methods for shape interpolation have
been proposed by designing deep neural networks, including auto-encoder architectures, and interpolating the latent
vectors learned by such networks [35, 1] . Unfortunately, it
is not clear if the latent vectors lie in a linear vector space,
and thus linear interpolation can lead to unrealistic intermediate shapes.
In this paper, we show that 3D shapes can not only be
compactly encoded as linear functional operators, using the
previously proposed shape difference operators [32], but
that this representation lends itself very naturally to learning, and allows us to recover the 3D shape information, using a novel neural network architecture which we call OperatorNet. Our key observations are twofold: first we show
that since shape difference operators can be stored as canonical matrices, for a given choice of basis, they enable the use
18588

