Image Generation From Small Datasets via Batch Statistics Adaptation
Atsuhiro Noguchi1 and Tatsuya Harada1,2
1

The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN

Figure 1: Interpolation results generated by BigGAN adapted to only 25 human and anime face images. The left- and rightmost images are the generated images that correspond to training samples, and the other images are generated by linearly
changing the latent vector. In spite of the small amount of training data, our method achieves a smooth interpolation.

Abstract
Thanks to the recent development of deep generative
models, it is becoming possible to generate high-quality
images with both fidelity and diversity. However, the
training of such generative models requires a large dataset.
To reduce the amount of data required, we propose a new
method for transferring prior knowledge of the pre-trained
generator, which is trained with a large dataset, to a small
dataset in a different domain. Using such prior knowledge,
the model can generate images leveraging some common
sense that cannot be acquired from a small dataset. In
this work, we propose a novel method focusing on the parameters for batch statistics, scale and shift, of the hidden
layers in the generator. By training only these parameters
in a supervised manner, we achieved stable training of the
generator, and our method can generate higher quality
images compared to previous methods without collapsing,
even when the dataset is small (∼100). Our results show
that the diversity of the filters acquired in the pre-trained
generator is important for the performance on the target
domain. Our method makes it possible to add a new class
or domain to a pre-trained generator without disturbing the
performance on the original domain. Code is available at
github.com/nogu-atsu/small-dataset-image-generation

1. Introduction
In recent years, image generation using deep generative models has rapidly developed, and some state-of-the-art

methods can generate images that cannot be distinguished
from real data [14, 6, 24, 33, 11, 20, 36, 8, 18]. Typical generative models include Variational Auto-Encoders
(VAEs) [14, 25], Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[6], and Auto-Regressive (AR) models [33]. Although these
methods can generate novel images that are not included in
the training dataset, these generative models have many parameters. For instance, Spectral Normalization GAN with
a projection discriminator (SNGAN projection) [20, 21]
for 128 × 128 sized images has 90 M trainable parameters. Accordingly, we need a large dataset to train such
a large network without overfitting. In general, a large
dataset (∼10,000) is required to train generative models
[24, 11, 20, 21]. However, constructing such a huge dataset
requires significant effort, and a conventional generative
model cannot be applied to a domain in which collecting
sufficient data is difficult. Therefore, training a generative model from a small dataset is crucial. Moreover, because generative models can learn the data distribution, they
have an advantage not only in generating images but also
in improving the performance of classification and abnormality detection models through semi-supervised learning
[13, 27]. If we can train a generator from a small dataset,
the performance of these tasks can be improved by interpolating the training data.
The transfer of prior knowledge is effective to train deeplearning models from a sparsely annotated or small dataset.
For a feature extractor model, transfer learning, in which
a feature extractor model is trained using a large labeled
dataset and is transferred to another domain with sparse

2750

