End-to-End Learning of Representations for Asynchronous Event-Based Data
Daniel Gehrig1 , Antonio Loquercio1 , Konstantinos G. Derpanis2 , Davide Scaramuzza1
1
Robotics and Perception Group
Depts. Informatics and Neuroinformatics
University of Zurich and ETH Zurich
2
Ryerson University and Samsung AI Centre Toronto

Abstract
Event cameras are vision sensors that record asynchronous streams of per-pixel brightness changes, referred
to as “events”. They have appealing advantages over
frame-based cameras for computer vision, including high
temporal resolution, high dynamic range, and no motion
blur. Due to the sparse, non-uniform spatiotemporal layout of the event signal, pattern recognition algorithms typically aggregate events into a grid-based representation and
subsequently process it by a standard vision pipeline, e.g.,
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). In this work, we introduce a general framework to convert event streams into
grid-based representations through a sequence of differentiable operations. Our framework comes with two main advantages: (i) allows learning the input event representation
together with the task dedicated network in an end-to-end
manner, and (ii) lays out a taxonomy that unifies the majority of extant event representations in the literature and identifies novel ones. Empirically, we show that our approach to
learning the event representation end-to-end yields an improvement of approximately 12% on optical flow estimation
and object recognition over state-of-the-art methods.

Multimedia Material
The project’s code is available on the following page: https://github.com/uzh-rpg/rpg_
event_representation_learning. Additionally,
qualitative results can be viewed in this video: https:
//youtu.be/bQtSx59GXRY

1. Introduction
Event cameras are bio-inspired vision sensors that operate radically differently from traditional cameras. Instead of capturing brightness images at a fixed rate, event
cameras measure brightness changes (called events) for
each pixel independently. Event cameras, such as the Dy-

Figure 1. General framework to convert asynchronous event data
into grid-based representations using convolutions, quantization,
and projections. All of these operations are differentiable. Best
viewed in color.

namic Vision Sensor (DVS) [34], possess appealing properties compared to traditional frame-based cameras, including a very high dynamic range, high temporal resolution
(in the order of microseconds), and low power consumption. In addition, event cameras greatly reduce bandwidth.
While frame-based cameras with comparable temporal resolution and/or dynamic range cameras exist, they are typically bulky, power-intensive, and require cooling [48].
The output of an event camera consists of a stream of
events that encode the time, location, and polarity (sign)
of the brightness changes. Consequently, each event alone
carries very little information about the scene. Event-based
vision algorithms aggregate information to enable further
processing in two ways: (i) use a continuous-time model
(e.g., Kalman filter) that can be updated asynchronously

5633

