Unsupervised Collaborative Learning of Keyframe Detection and Visual
Odometry Towards Monocular Deep SLAM
Lu Sheng1∗ Dan Xu2∗ Wanli Ouyang3 Xiaogang Wang4
College of Software, Beihang University, China 2 University of Oxford, UK
3
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
4
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
1

lsheng@buaa.edu.cn, danxu@robots.ox.ac.uk, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper we tackle the joint learning problem of
keyframe detection and visual odometry towards monocular visual SLAM systems. As an important task in visual SLAM, keyframe selection helps efficient camera relocalization and effective augmentation of visual odometry.
To benefit from it, we first present a deep network design
for the keyframe selection, which is able to reliably detect
keyframes and localize new frames, then an end-to-end unsupervised deep framework further proposed for simultaneously learning the keyframe selection and the visual odometry tasks. As far as we know, it is the first work to jointly
optimize these two complementary tasks in a single deep
framework. To make the two tasks facilitate each other
in the learning, a collaborative optimization loss based on
both geometric and visual metrics is proposed. Extensive
experiments on publicly available datasets (i.e. KITTI raw
dataset and its odometry split [12]) clearly demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed approach, and new state-ofthe-art results are established on the unsupervised depth
and pose estimation from monocular video.

1. Introduction
While perception of 3D geometric scenes is particularly
important for interaction with real-world environments, as
one important topic, visual simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) [10] has received emerging attention in
recent years. However, due to the task complexity and limited annotated data, the power of deep learning is only partially explored on existing visual SLAM systems [5, 28].
In this work, we focus on techniques for monocular visual SLAM systems, which generally contains several subtasks, such as depth prediction and camera motion estimation for local 3D scene structure recovery, and keyframe se∗ Equal contribution.

It+1

It

It−1
Camera Trajectory

Visual Odometry

Ip
Keyframe Selection

In
: Keyframes

: Consecutive Frames

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation: The keyframe selection
and the visual odometry are intercorrelated in monocular visual
SLAM. The keyframes can improve the depth prediction and camera motion estimation for the visual odometry, while inversely,
the visual odometry facilitates more effective identification of
keyframes. We expect that a joint learning of both tasks in a single
deep model would make them benefit each other.

lection and management for global map construction and
localization. As an important part in monocular SLAM, the
keyframe selection has been widely investigated in traditional approaches for aiding the visual odometry and scene
matching [30, 9]. Although various evidences have shown
that using deep models with geometric constraints clearly
boosts the performance of depth, camera motion and optical flow estimation [51, 49], to our best knowledge, no existing work has considered deep learning based frameworks
for the keyframe selection task.
In this paper, we argue that a joint optimization of the
keyframe selection and visual odometry should greatly benefit each other. Robust keyframe selection not only provides an efficient manner for fast localization and mapping,
but also is particularly useful for effective refinement of the
camera motion and depth predictions in the visual odometry task. Inversely, better visual odometry is able to facilitate more accurate keyframe identification. In addition,

4302

