NOTE-RCNN: NOise Tolerant Ensemble RCNN for Semi-Supervised Object
Detection

1

Jiyang Gao1 Jiang Wang2 Shengyang Dai2 Li-Jia Li3 Ram Nevatia1
2
3
University of Southern California
Google Could
Stanford University

{jiyangga, nevatia}@usc.edu, {wangjiang, sydai}@google.com,

Abstract
The labeling cost of large number of bounding boxes is
one of the main challenges for training modern object detectors. To reduce the dependence on expensive bounding
box annotations, we propose a new semi-supervised object detection formulation, in which a few seed box level
annotations and a large scale of image level annotations
are used to train the detector. We adopt a training-mining
framework, which is widely used in weakly supervised object detection tasks. However, the mining process inherently introduces various kinds of labelling noises: false
negatives, false positives and inaccurate boundaries, which
can be harmful for training the standard object detectors
(e.g. Faster RCNN). We propose a novel NOise Tolerant
Ensemble RCNN (NOTE-RCNN) object detector to handle
such noisy labels. Comparing to standard Faster RCNN,
it contains three highlights: an ensemble of two classification heads and a distillation head to avoid overfitting on
noisy labels and improve the mining precision, masking the
negative sample loss in box predictor to avoid the harm of
false negative labels, and training box regression head only
on seed annotations to eliminate the harm from inaccurate
boundaries of mined bounding boxes. We evaluate the methods on ILSVRC 2013 and MSCOCO 2017 dataset; we observe that the detection accuracy consistently improves as
we iterate between mining and training steps, and state-ofthe-art performance is achieved.

1. Introduction
With the recent advances in deep learning, modern object detectors, such as Faster RCNN [21], YOLO [20], SSD
[19] and RetinaNet [17], are reliable in predicting both object classes and their bounding boxes. However, the application of deep learning-based detectors is still limited by
the efforts of collecting bounding box training data. These
detectors are trained with huge amount of manually labelled
bounding boxes. In real world, each application may require

lijiali@cs.stanford.edu

Localization

Training

Image labels

Seed box labels
Boxes | Labels
Target detector

Update
Predict

Mined box labels
Box predictions

Init
Source detector

Figure 1. Iterative training-mining pipeline.

us to detect a unique set of the categories. It’s expensive and
time-consuming to label tens of thousands of object bounding boxes for each application.
To reduce the effort of labelling bounding boxes, researchers worked on learning object detectors with only
image-level labels, which are substantially cheaper to annotate, or even free with image search engines; this task is
called weakly supervised object detection [4, 25, 29]. Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) [6] based training-mining
pipeline [4, 25, 27] is widely used for this task; however,
the resulting detectors perform considerably worse than the
fully supervised counterparts. We believe the reasons are
two-fold: First, a detector learned with only image-level labels often performs poorly in localization, it may focus on
the object part, but not the whole object (e.g., in Figure 2,
“cat” detector detects cat head); second, without an accurate
detector, object instances cannot be mined correctly, especially when the scene is complicated.
To address the aforementioned problems in weakly supervised object detection, we propose a semi-supervised
object detection setting: learning an object detector with
a limited amount of labelled bounding boxes (e.g. 10 to
20 images with fully labeled bounding boxes) as well as a
large amount of image-level labels. Specifically, we want
to train an object detector for a set of target categories. For
target categories, a small amount of seed bounding box annotations and a large amount of image-level annotations are
19508

