S4 L: Self-Supervised Semi-Supervised Learning
Xiaohua Zhai∗, Avital Oliver∗, Alexander Kolesnikov∗, Lucas Beyer∗
Google Research, Brain Team
{xzhai, avitalo, akolesnikov, lbeyer}@google.com

Abstract

0°

This work tackles the problem of semi-supervised learning of image classifiers. Our main insight is that the field of
semi-supervised learning can benefit from the quickly advancing field of self-supervised visual representation learning. Unifying these two approaches, we propose the framework of self-supervised semi-supervised learning (S 4 L)
and use it to derive two novel semi-supervised image classification methods. We demonstrate the effectiveness of these
methods in comparison to both carefully tuned baselines,
and existing semi-supervised learning methods. We then
show that S 4 L and existing semi-supervised methods can
be jointly trained, yielding a new state-of-the-art result on
semi-supervised ILSVRC-2012 with 10% of labels.

1. Introduction
Modern computer vision systems demonstrate outstanding performance on a variety of challenging computer vision benchmarks, such as image recognition [32], object
detection [20], semantic image segmentation [8], etc. Their
success relies on the availability of a large amount of annotated data that is time-consuming and expensive to acquire.
Many real-world computer vision applications are concerned with visual categories that are not present in standard
benchmark datasets, or with applications of dynamic nature where visual categories or their appearance may change
over time. Unfortunately, building large labeled datasets for
all these scenarios is not practically feasible. Therefore, it
is an important research challenge to design a learning approach that can successfully learn to recognize new concepts by leveraging only a small amount of labeled examples. The fact that humans quickly understand new concepts
after seeing only a few (labeled) examples suggests that this
goal is achievable in principle.
Notably, a large research effort is dedicated towards
learning from unlabeled data that, in many realistic applications, is much less onerous to acquire than labeled
∗ equal contribution

270°

0°

hat

270°

hat

...

...

Full dataset

Labelled images

Figure 1.
A schematic illustration of one of the proposed
self-supervised semi-supervised techniques: S 4 L-Rotation. Our
model makes use of both labeled and unlabled images. The first
step is to create four input images for any image by rotating it by
0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ and 270◦ (inspired by [9]). Then, we train a single
network that predicts which rotation was applied to all these images and, additionally, predicts semantic labels of annotated images. This conceptually simple technique is competitive with existing semi-supervised learning methods.

data. Within this effort, the field of self-supervised visual
representation learning has recently demonstrated the most
promising results [16]. Self-supervised learning techniques
define pretext tasks which can be formulated using only unlabeled data, but do require higher-level semantic understanding in order to be solved. As a result, models trained
for solving these pretext tasks learn representations that can
be used for solving other downstream tasks of interest, such
as image recognition.
Despite demonstrating encouraging results [16], purely
self-supervised techniques learn visual representations that
are significantly inferior to those delivered by fullysupervised techniques. Thus, their practical applicability is
limited and as of yet, self-supervision alone is insufficient.
We hypothesize that self-supervised learning techniques
could dramatically benefit from a small amount of labeled

1476

