Adaptive Reconstruction Network for Weakly Supervised
Referring Expression Grounding
Xuejing Liu1,2 , Liang Li∗1 , Shuhui Wang1 , Zheng-Jun Zha3 , Dechao Meng1,2 , and Qingming Huang2,1,4
1

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{xuejing.liu, liang.li, dechao.meng}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn,
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Weakly supervised referring expression grounding aims
at localizing the referential object in an image according to
the linguistic query, where the mapping between the referential object and query is unknown in the training stage.
To address this problem, we propose a novel end-to-end
adaptive reconstruction network (ARN). It builds the correspondence between image region proposal and query in
an adaptive manner: adaptive grounding and collaborative reconstruction. Specifically, we first extract the subject, location and context features to represent the proposals and the query respectively. Then, we design the adaptive
grounding module to compute the matching score between
each proposal and query by a hierarchical attention model.
Finally, based on attention score and proposal features,
we reconstruct the input query with a collaborative loss of
language reconstruction loss, adaptive reconstruction loss,
and attribute classification loss. This adaptive mechanism
helps our model to alleviate the variance of different referring expressions. Experiments on four large-scale datasets
show ARN outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods by
a large margin. Qualitative results demonstrate that the
proposed ARN can better handle the situation where multiple objects of a particular category situated together1 .

1. Introduction
Referring expression grounding (REG), also known as
phrase localization, has been a surge of interest in both com∗ Corresponding author.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/GingL/ARN

Input image

Input query
Query: man in white on
the left holding a bat.

Subject
man in white
Location
on the left
Context
holding a bat

𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑢𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

0.21

0.02

0.23

0.24

0.20

0.37

0.36

0.15

0.10

0.02

0.48

0.02
0.07
0.42
Proposal Attention

0.01

Language Attention

+
𝐴𝑑𝑎𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

+
𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠ification

Output

Training

Inference

Matching Score

Figure 1. The proposed adaptive reconstruction network (ARN).
Given a query and an image with region proposals, ARN localizes
the referential object through adaptive grounding and collaborative
reconstruction.

puter vision and natural language processing [24, 14, 29, 41,
39, 19, 38, 36]. Given a query (referring expression) in natural language and an image, REG is to find the corresponding location of the referential object. REG can be widely
used in interactive applications, such as robotic navigation
[31, 1], visual Q&A [6, 10], or photo editing [5].
Training the REG model in a supervised manner requires
expensive annotated data that explicitly draw the connection between the input query and its corresponding object
proposal in the image. Besides, limited to the training
data, supervised REG models can only handle the grounding with certain categories, which cannot meet the demand
for real-world applications. Here we focus on weakly su-

2611

