Improved Conditional VRNNs for Video Prediction
Lluis Castrejon∗
Mila, Université de Montréal

Nicolas Ballas
Facebook AI Research

Aaron Courville
CIFAR, Mila, Université de Montréal

lluis.castrejon@gmail.com

nballas@fb.com

aaron.courville@umontreal.ca

Context
t=2

Predicting future frames for a video sequence is a challenging generative modeling task. Promising approaches
include probabilistic latent variable models such as the
Variational Auto-Encoder. While VAEs can handle uncertainty and model multiple possible future outcomes, they
have a tendency to produce blurry predictions. In this work
we argue that this is a sign of underfitting. To address
this issue, we propose to increase the expressiveness of the
latent distributions and to use higher capacity likelihood
models. Our approach relies on a hierarchy of latent variables, which defines a family of flexible prior and posterior distributions in order to better model the probability of
future sequences. We validate our proposal through a series of ablation experiments and compare our approach to
current state-of-the-art latent variable models. Our method
performs favorably under several metrics in three different
datasets.

1. Introduction
We investigate the task of video prediction, a particular instantiation of self-supervision [7, 9] where generative
models learn to predict future frames in a video. Training
such models does not require any annotated data, yet the
models need to capture a notion of the complex dynamics
of real-world phenomena (such as physical interactions) to
generate coherent sequences.
Uncertainty is an inherent difficulty associated with
video prediction, as many future outcomes are plausible
for a given sequence of observations [1, 5]. Predictions
from deterministic models rapidly degrade over time as uncertainty grows, converging to an average of the possible
future outcomes [34]. To address this issue, probabilistic
latent variable models such as Variational Auto-Encoders
(VAEs) [19, 31], and more specifically Variational Recurrent Neural Networks (VRNNs) [3], have been proposed for
video prediction [1, 5]. These models define a prior distri∗ Work done while part-time at Facebook AI Research.

t=3

Predicted Frames
t=5
t = 10

t = 20

GT

Abstract

SVG-LP [5]

O URS
Figure 1: Can generative models predict the future? We propose an improved VAE model for video prediction. Our model
uses hierarchical latents and a higher capacity likelihood network
to improve upon previous VAE approaches, generating more visually appealing samples that remain coherent for longer temporal
horizons.

bution over a set of latent variables, allowing different samples from these latents to capture multiple outcomes.
It has been empirically observed that VAE and VRNNbased models produce blurry predictions [21, 22]. This tendency is usually attributed to the use of a similarity metric
in pixel space [21, 26] such as Mean Squared Error (corresponding to a log-likelihood loss under a fully factorized
Gaussian distribution). This has lead to alternative models
such as VAE-GAN [21, 22], which extends the traditional
VAE objective with an adversarial loss in order to obtain
more visually compelling generations.
In addition, the lack of expressive latent distributions has
been shown to lead to poor model fitting [13]. Training
VAEs involves defining an approximate posterior distribution over the latent variables which models their probability after the generated data has been observed. If the approximate posterior is too constrained, it will not be able
to match the true posterior distribution and this will prevent
the model from accurately fitting the training data. On the
other hand, the prior distribution over the latent variables
can be interpreted as a model of uncertainty.

7608

