Zero-Shot Grounding of Objects from Natural Language Queries
Arka Sadhu1
Kan Chen2†
1
University of Southern California
{asadhu|nevatia}@usc.edu

Ram Nevatia1
2
Facebook Inc.

kanchen18@fb.com

Abstract
A phrase grounding system localizes a particular object
in an image referred to by a natural language query. In previous work, the phrases were restricted to have nouns that
were encountered in training, we extend the task to ZeroShot Grounding(ZSG) which can include novel, “unseen”
nouns. Current phrase grounding systems use an explicit
object detection network in a 2-stage framework where one
stage generates sparse proposals and the other stage evaluates them. In the ZSG setting, generating appropriate proposals itself becomes an obstacle as the proposal generator is trained on the entities common in the detection and
grounding datasets. We propose a new single-stage model
called ZSGNet which combines the detector network and
the grounding system and predicts classification scores and
regression parameters. Evaluation of ZSG system brings
additional subtleties due to the influence of the relationship
between the query and learned categories; we define four
distinct conditions that incorporate different levels of difficulty. We also introduce new datasets, sub-sampled from
Flickr30k Entities and Visual Genome, that enable evaluations for the four conditions. Our experiments show that
ZSGNet achieves state-of-the-art performance on Flickr30k
and ReferIt under the usual “seen” settings and performs
significantly better than baseline in the zero-shot setting.

1. Introduction
Detecting objects in an image is a fundamental objective of computer vision. A variation of this task is phrase
grounding (also called visual grounding and referring expressions) where the objective is to detect objects referenced by noun phrases in a text query [7, 18, 39, 44]. It
can be directly applied to other tasks such as visual question answering [1, 50] and image retrieval [5] and has thus
garnered wide interest.
While existing phrase grounding systems accept novel
query phrases as inputs, they are limited to the nouns en† This work was done while the author was at USC.

(a) red car

(b) blue shirt

(c) blue car

(d) blue chair

(e) red minivan

(f) silver moped

Figure 1. Illustration of the key difference between current scope
of phrase grounding and the proposed zero-shot grounding. The
query word is italicized in all cases. (a)-(f) denote the image-query
pairs input to the system. (a) and (b) are examples of training
images. A test image query pair for phrase grounding could be
(c). Zero-shot grounding additionally can be tested on (d), (e) and
(f) in which “chair”, “minivan” and “moped” are object categories
not annotated in the training data. (f) additionally contains a “car”
object which is a trained category, indicating that both novel and
related trained category objects may be present in a test image.

countered in the training data (i.e. the referred object types
need to have been “seen” in training images before). As an
important extension, we define zero-shot grounding (ZSG)
to allow the use of phrases with nouns that the grounding
system has not encountered in training set before. Fig 1
illustrates this concept with examples.
To enable grounding of novel object categories, we need
to relate the appearance of referred objects to their linguistic descriptions. Current, state-of-art phrase grounding systems [7, 9, 33, 44, 48] rely on an explicit object detector
to obtain proposed object bounding boxes and their ROIpooled features as a pre-processing step. This essentially
limits these systems to a fixed set of object categories that
the detector was trained on. In ZSG, we need to have a
reasonable proposal box for the novel object, classify it as a
foreground and regress the box to be a more accurate spatial
fit. In traditional phrase grounding, a key challenge is to dis-

4694

