SSF-DAN: Separated Semantic Feature based Domain Adaptation Network for
Semantic Segmentation
Liang Du∗1 , Jingang Tan1 , Hongye Yang1 , Jianfeng Feng2 , Xiangyang Xue3 , Qibao Zheng2 , Xiaoqing
Ye4 and Xiaolin Zhang1,5
1

Bionic Vision System Laboratory, State Key Laboratory of Transducer Technology, Shanghai Institute
of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
2
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University, China.
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China.
4
Baidu Inc.
5
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China.

Abstract
Despite the great success achieved by supervised fully
convolutional models in semantic segmentation, training
the models requires a large amount of labor-intensive work
to generate pixel-level annotations. Recent works exploit
synthetic data to train the model for semantic segmentation,
but the domain adaptation between real and synthetic images remains a challenging problem. In this work, we propose a Separated Semantic Feature based domain adaptation network, named SSF-DAN, for semantic segmentation.
First, a Semantic-wise Separable Discriminator (SS-D) is
designed to independently adapt semantic features across
the target and source domains, which addresses the inconsistent adaptation issue in the class-wise adversarial learning. In SS-D, a progressive confidence strategy is included
to achieve a more reliable separation. Then, an efficient
Class-wise Adversarial loss Reweighting module (CA-R) is
introduced to balance the class-wise adversarial learning
process, which leads the generator to focus more on poorly
adapted classes. The presented framework demonstrates robust performance, superior to state-of-the-art methods on
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has been extensively studied due
to its potential utilisation in autonomous driving [10, 40]
and medical image processing [29]. A substantial number
of works based on convolutional neural networks [3, 4, 20–

Target Source Classifier Class I Class II
Domain Domain Boundary

Principal
Direction
Incorrect
Direction

Separation
Synthetic
Direction

Soft
Class-wise
Links

Soft
Class-wise
Links

Traditional Class-wise Adversarial Learning
Hard
Class-wise
Links

Hard
Class-wise
Links

Ours

Figure 1: Illustration of the traditional class-wise adversarial learning method [6] and ours. Traditional class-wise
adaptation considers all possible class-wise adaptation directions for the features. For unsupervised learning, it is
common that some of these directions are incorrect. Consequently, these incorrect directions will influence the entire
class-wise adaptation direction. In our method, for each feature, we take the class with highest proportion in its respective field of the prediction as principal adaptation direction
to separate features for independent adaptation operation. It
prevents the principal adaptation from being affected by the
incorrect adaptation, which keeps the clear classifier boundary among the adapted features.

∗ duliang@mail.ustc.edu.cn

982

