Simultaneous multi-view instance detection with learned geometric
soft-constraints
Ahmed Samy Nassar1,2 , Sébastien Lefèvre1 , Jan D. Wegner2
1
2

IRISA, Université Bretagne Sud

EcoVision Lab, Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing group, ETH Zurich

{ahmed-samy-mohamed.nassar, sebastien.lefevre}@irisa.fr, jan.wegner@geod.baug.ethz.ch

Abstract
We propose to jointly learn multi-view geometry and
warping between views of the same object instances for robust cross-view object detection. What makes multi-view
object instance detection difficult are strong changes in
viewpoint, lighting conditions, high similarity of neighbouring objects, and strong variability in scale. By turning
object detection and instance re-identification in different
views into a joint learning task, we are able to incorporate
both image appearance and geometric soft constraints into
a single, multi-view detection process that is learnable endto-end. We validate our method on a new, large data set of
street-level panoramas of urban objects and show superior
performance compared to various baselines. Our contribution is threefold: a large-scale, publicly available data set
for multi-view instance detection and re-identification; an
annotation tool custom-tailored for multi-view instance detection; and a novel, holistic multi-view instance detection
and re-identification method that jointly models geometry
and appearance across views.

1. Introduction
We propose a method to simultaneously detect objects
and re-identify instances across multiple different streetlevel images using noisy relative camera pose as weak
supervision signal. Our method learns a joint distribution across camera pose and object instance warping between views. While object detection in single street-level
panorama images is straightforward since the introduction
of robust, deep learning-based approaches like Faster RCNN [25] for object detection or Mask R-CNN [11] for instance segmentation, establishing instance correspondences
across multiple views with this wide baseline setting is
very challenging due to strong perspective change between

views. Moreover, Google street-view panoramas, which are
our core data in this paper, are stitched together from multiple individual photos leading to stitching artefacts in addition to motion-blur, rolling shutter effects etc. that are common for these type of mobile mapping imagery. This makes
correspondence search via classical structure-from-motion
methods like [3, 2] impossible.
Our core motivation is facilitating city maintenance using crowd-sourced images. In general, monitoring streetside objects in public spaces in cities is a labor-intensive
and costly process in practice today that is mainly carried
out via in situ surveys of field crews. One strategy that
can complement greedy city surveillance and maintenance
efforts is crowd-sourcing information through geo-located
images like proposed for street trees [30, 4, 17]. We follow
this line of work, but propose an entirely new simultaneous
multi-view object instance detection and re-identification
method that jointly reasons across multi-view geometry and
object instance warping between views. We formulate this
problem as an instance detection and re-identification task,
where the typical warping function between multiple views
of the same tree (Fig. 2) in street-view panoramas is learned
together with the geometric configuration. More precisely,
instead of merely relying on image appearance for instance
re-identification, we insert heading and geo-location of the
different views to the learning process. Our model learns
to correlate typical pose configurations with corresponding
object instance warping functions to disentangle multiple
possibly matching candidates in case of ambiguous image
evidence.
Our contributions are (i) a novel multi-view object instance detection and re-identification method that jointly
reasons across camera poses and object instances, (ii) a new
object instance re-identification data set with thousands of
geo-coded trees, and (iii) a new interactive, semi-supervised
multi-view instance labeling tool. We show that learning
geometry and appearance jointly end-to-end significantly

6559

