Reciprocal Multi-Layer Subspace Learning for Multi-View Clustering
Ruihuang Li1 Changqing Zhang1∗ Huazhu Fu2 Xi Peng3 Tianyi Zhou4 Qinghua Hu1
1
Tianjin University 2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence 3 Sichuan University
4

Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR
{liruihuang, zhangchangqing, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn
{huazhufu, pengx.gm, joey.tianyi.zhou}@gmail.com
Abstract
Multi-view clustering is a long-standing important research topic, however, remains challenging when handling
high-dimensional data and simultaneously exploring the
consistency and complementarity of different views. In
this work, we present a novel Reciprocal Multi-layer Subspace Learning (RMSL) algorithm for multi-view clustering, which is composed of two main components: Hierarchical Self-Representative Layers (HSRL), and Backward
Encoding Networks (BEN). Specifically, HSRL constructs
reciprocal multi-layer subspace representations linked with
a latent representation to hierarchically recover the underlying low-dimensional subspaces in which the highdimensional data lie; BEN explores complex relationships
among different views and implicitly enforces the subspaces
of all views to be consistent with each other and more separable. The latent representation flexibly encodes complementary information from multiple views and depicts data
more comprehensively. Our model can be efficiently optimized by an alternating optimization scheme. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets show the superiority of
RMSL over other state-of-the-art clustering methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-view clustering, which aims to obtain a consensus partition of data across multiple views, has become a
fundamental technique in the computer vision and machine
learning communities. It is common in many practical applications that data are described using high-dimensional
and highly heterogeneous features from multiple views. For
example, one image can be represented by different descriptors such as Gabor [16], SIFT [20], and HOG [8], etc. Compared to single-view approaches, multi-view clustering can
access to more comprehensive characteristics and structural
∗ Corresponding Author

information hidden in the data. However, most of conventional methods [4, 7, 32] directly project multiple raw
features into a common space, while neglecting the highdimensionality of data and large imbalances between different views, which will degrade the clustering performance.
Under the assumption that high-dimensional data can
be well characterized by low-dimensional subspaces, subspace clustering aims to recover the underlying subspace
structure of data. The effectiveness and robustness of existing self-representation-based subspace clustering methods
[10, 19, 12, 21] have been validated. The key of these methods is to find an affinity matrix, each entry of which reveals
the degree of similarity of two samples.
Recently, several multi-view subspace clustering methods have been proposed [6, 31, 32, 28, 22], which can
be roughly divided into two main groups. The first category [6, 31] conducts self-representation within each individual view to learn an affinity matrix. By combining all view-specific affinity matrices together, an comprehensive similarity matrix which reflects intrinsic relationships among data is resulted. Although these methods have
achieved promising performances, there are still some limitations: first, these methods reconstruct data within each
single view, thus can not well extract comprehensive information; second, they focus on exploiting linear subspaces
of data, while many real-world datasets are not necessarily subject to linear subspaces. The second category [32]
aims to search for a latent representation shared by different
views and then conducts self-representation on it. Despite
the comprehensiveness of latent representation, these approaches can not explore the consistency of different views.
In addition, these methods integrate multiple views in the
raw-feature level, thus they are easily affected by the highdimensionality of original features and possible noise.
To address above limitations, we propose the Reciprocal
Multi-Layer Subspace Learning (RMSL) algorithm to cluster data from multiple sources. There is a basic assumption for multi-view clustering problem that different views

8172

