FrameNet: Learning Local Canonical Frames of 3D Surfaces
from a Single RGB Image
Jingwei Huang1
1

Stanford University

Yichao Zhou2
2

Thomas Funkhouser3,4

University of California, Berkeley

3

Princeton University

Abstract
In this work, we introduce the novel problem of identifying dense canonical 3D coordinate frames from a single RGB image. We observe that each pixel in an image
is the projection of a small surface region in the underlying 3D geometry, where a canonical frame can be identified
as represented by three orthogonal axes, one along its normal direction and two in its tangent plane. We propose an
algorithm to predict these axes from RGB data. Our first insight is that canonical frames computed automatically with
recently introduced direction field synthesis methods can
provide training data for the task. Our second insight is
that networks designed for surface normal prediction provide better results when trained jointly to predict canonical
frames, and even better when trained to also predict 2D projections of canonical frames. We conjecture this is because
projections of canonical tangent directions often align with
local gradients in images, and because those directions are
tightly linked to 3D canonical frames through projective geometry and orthogonality constraints. In our experiments,
we find that our method predicts 3D canonical frames that
can be used in applications ranging from surface normal
estimation, feature matching, and augmented reality.

1. Introduction
In recent years, learning to predict 3D properties from a
single RGB image has made great progress. For example,
monocular depth estimation [34, 25, 47, 44, 12] and surface
normal prediction [10, 45, 3, 28] have improved dramatically. There are many applications for these tasks in scene
understanding and robot interaction.
The main challenge in this domain is choosing an appropriate representation of 3D geometry to predict. Zhang et
al. [52] predict dense surface normals and then use geometric constraints to solve for depth with a global optimization. GeoNet [28] predicts both surface normals and depth
and then passes them to a refinement network for further
optimization. These methods are clever in their use of geometric constraints to regularize dense predictions. However,

4

Leonidas Guibas1,5
Google

5

Facebook AI Research

Camera
Alignment

RGB Images
CNN

3D Scans

QuadriFlow

for
er
n
nd sio
Re ervi
p
u
S

Principal Directions

Local Principal Axes +
Projected Tangent Principal Directions

Normal Prediction

Perspective Invariant
Feature Matching

Augmented Reality

Figure 1. We propose the novel task of predicting dense 3D canonical frames from a single RGB image. We compute the frames
from reconstructed meshes using QuadriFlow and render them to
images to supervise the task. We train a network that predicts all
directions of the frames jointly. We find that predicted tangents
provides better surface normals, and are useful for applications
like feature matching and augmented reality.

they infer only 2 of the 3 degrees of freedom in a 3D coordinate frame – the rotation in the tangent plane around the
surface normal is left unknown. As such, they are missing
3D information critical to many applications. For example,
they cannot assist an AR system in placing a picture frame
on a wall or a laptop on a table because they don’t know the
full 3D coordinate frame (including tangent directions) of
the wall or table surfaces.
In this work, we propose a novel image-to-3D task:
dense 3D canonical frames estimation from a single image
(figure 1). This task requires predicting a full 3D coordinate frame defined by the surface normal and two principal tangent directions of the surface observed at every pixel
in a RGB image. We investigate this task for three reasons. First, we expect that predicting principal tangent directions is easier than predicting normals because they are
often aligned with observable patterns in surface textures
(e.g., wood grains, fabric weaves, tile seams, etc.) and surface boundaries, which are directly observable in images
(figure 2). Second, we expect that joint surface normal and
tangent prediction is more robust than normal prediction

8638

