Person Search by Text Attribute Query as Zero-Shot Learning
Qi Dong

Shaogang Gong

Queen Mary University of London

Queen Mary University of London

Vision Semantics Ltd.

q.dong@qmul.ac.uk

s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

eddy.zhuxt@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing person search methods predominantly assume
the availability of at least one-shot imagery sample of the
queried person. This assumption is limited in circumstances
where only a brief textual (or verbal) description of the target person is available. In this work, we present a deep
learning method for text attribute description based person search without any query imagery. Whilst conventional
cross-modality matching methods, such as global visualtextual embedding based zero-shot learning and local individual attribute recognition, are functionally applicable,
they are limited by several assumptions invalid to person
search in deployment scale, data quality, and/or category
name semantics. We overcome these issues by formulating
an Attribute-Image Hierarchical Matching (AIHM) model.
It is able to more reliably match text attribute descriptions with noisy surveillance person images by jointly learning global category-level and local attribute-level textualvisual embedding as well as matching. Extensive evaluations demonstrate the superiority of our AIHM model over
a wide variety of state-of-the-art methods on three publicly available attribute labelled surveillance person search
benchmarks: Market-1501, DukeMTMC, and PA100K.

1. Introduction
Person search in large scale videos is a challenging problem with extensive applications in forensic video analysis
and live video surveillance [11]. From increasing numbers
of smart cities across the world equipped with tens to hundreds of thousands of 24/7 surveillance cameras per city,
a massive quantity of raw video data is cumulatively produced daily. It is infeasible for human operators to manually
search people (e.g. criminal suspects or missing persons) in
such data. Automated person search becomes essential.
Most existing person search methods are based on image queries (probes), also known as person re-identification
[11, 13, 21, 39, 40]. Given a query image, a system computes pairwise visual similarity scores between the query
image and every gallery image in the test data. The top

Xiatian Zhu

Person Image Database

Attribute Text
Teenage, Backpack,
Down-black, Up-red,
Low-short-clothing,
Short-sleeves, Pants,
Short-hair, Male

Query

Retrieval Images
Retrieve

…

High

Matching Score

Low

Figure 1: Person search by text attributes (keywords).
ranks with the highest similarity scores are considered as
possible matches. Such an operation assumes that at least
one image (one-shot) of the queried person is available for
initiating the search. This is limited when there is only verbal or text description of the target persons.
There are a number of attempts on person search by text
queries, e.g. natural language descriptions [20, 19] or discrete text attributes [37, 16, 32]. To learn such search systems, labelling a large training dataset across textual and
visual data modalities is necessary. Elaborative language
descriptions not only require more expensive training data
labelling, but also present significant computational challenges. This is due to ambiguities in interpretation between
language descriptions and image appearance such that: (1)
significant and/or subtle visual variations for the same language description; (2) flexible sentence syntax in language
descriptions for the same image; and (3) modelling the sequential word dependence in a sentence is a difficult problem, particularly for long descriptions.
In contrast, text attribute descriptions are not only much
cheaper in collecting labelled training data, but also more
tractable in model optimisation. Importantly, they eliminate the need for modelling complex sentence structures
and their correlations to the same visual appearance, and
vice versa. Whilst giving a compromise of weaker appearance descriptive capacity, using text attributes favourably
enables a more robust and computationally tractable means

3652

