PIE: A Large-Scale Dataset and Models for Pedestrian Intention Estimation and
Trajectory Prediction
Amir Rasouli∗ , Iuliia Kotseruba∗, Toni Kunic and John K. Tsotsos
York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
{aras,yulia k,tk,tsotsos}@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the past decade, we have witnessed a rapid growth in
the development of assistive and autonomous driving systems capable of performing various perception, planning
and control tasks. Yet these systems still face a major challenge when it comes to driving in highly dynamic urban environments. Aside from perceiving the environment, an intelligent driving system should be capable of comprehending the underlying intentions of other road users and anticipating their forthcoming actions (Figure 1) [33]. This is
particularly important when dealing with pedestrians at the
point of crossing as they exhibit highly variable behavior
patterns [26].
Most current approaches to pedestrian action prediction
are trajectory-based [16, 1, 5], meaning that they rely on
∗ denotes equal contribution

b)

c)

Motion

a)

Local Context + Appearance

Pedestrian behavior anticipation is a key challenge in
the design of assistive and autonomous driving systems suitable for urban environments. An intelligent system should
be able to understand the intentions or underlying motives
of pedestrians and to predict their forthcoming actions. To
date, only a few public datasets were proposed for the purpose of studying pedestrian behavior prediction in the context of intelligent driving. To this end, we propose a novel
large-scale dataset designed for pedestrian intention estimation (PIE). We conducted a large-scale human experiment to establish human reference data for pedestrian intention in traffic scenes. We propose models for estimating pedestrian crossing intention and predicting their future
trajectory. Our intention estimation model achieves 79%
accuracy and our trajectory prediction algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art by 26% on the proposed dataset. We
further show that combining pedestrian intention with observed motion improves trajectory prediction. The dataset
and models are available at http://data.nvision2.
eecs.yorku.ca/PIE_dataset/.

Vehicle Odometry

Intention
Estimation

Vehicle
Speed
Prediction

Trajectory
Prediction

Intention
Estimation

Vehicle
Speed
Prediction

Trajectory
Prediction

Intention
Estimation

Vehicle
Speed
Prediction

Trajectory
Prediction

Figure 1. Processing stages for different sources of information
required for understanding and predicting pedestrian behavior.
Three examples are shown: a) a pedestrian who does not intend
to cross, b) a pedestrian who intends to cross but does not cross
and c) a pedestrian who intends to cross and crosses the street.
Observations of pedestrians’ appearance and movement in combination with local context help estimate whether they intend to
cross the street. Intention can be used to filter out irrelevant pedestrians (eliminating the need for further processing as shown with
dashed lines) and/or to improve trajectory prediction.

the past observed motion of the pedestrians and/or vehicle
dynamics to predict the future locations of the pedestrians.
These approaches, however, are effective when the pedestrians are already crossing or are about to do so, i.e. these
algorithms react to an action already in progress instead of
anticipating it. For example, scenarios where a pedestrian
is standing at the intersection or walking alongside the road
prior to crossing can be challenging for trajectory-based
approaches. Moreover, the past trajectory of a pedestrian
might not necessarily reflect their ultimate objective. For
instance, a pedestrian waiting at a bus stop might step on
the road to check for the bus. This action might be interpreted as a crossing event by a trajectory-based approach.
A remedy for the common drawbacks of trajectory-based
algorithms is to anticipate the action by estimating its underlying cause or intention. Intention estimation allows one
to predict a future situation using expected behaviors rather
than merely rely on scene dynamics [33]. In the context

6262

