The LogBarrier adversarial attack: making effective use of decision boundary
information
Chris Finlay, Aram-Alexandre Pooladian, and Adam Oberman
McGill University
{christopher.finlay, aram-alexandre.pooladian}@mail.mcgill.ca, adam.oberman@mcgill.ca
Abstract
Adversarial attacks for image classification are small
perturbations to images that are designed to cause misclassification by a model. Adversarial attacks formally correspond to an optimization problem: find a minimum norm
image perturbation, constrained to cause misclassification.
A number of effective attacks have been developed. However, to date, no gradient-based attacks have used best
practices from the optimization literature to solve this constrained minimization problem. We design a new untargeted attack, based on these best practices, using the wellregarded logarithmic barrier method.
On average, our attack distance is similar or better than
all state-of-the-art attacks on benchmark datasets (MNIST,
CIFAR10, ImageNet-1K). In addition, our method performs
significantly better on the most challenging images, those
which normally require larger perturbations for misclassification. We employ the LogBarrier attack on several adversarially defended models, and show that it adversarially perturbs all images more efficiently than other attacks:
the distance needed to perturb all images is significantly
smaller with the LogBarrier attack than with other state-ofthe-art attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved impressive results
in many areas of application. However, deep learning models remain vulnerable to adversarial attacks [21]: small
changes (imperceptible to the human eye) in the model
input may lead to vastly different model predictions. In
security-based applications, this vulnerability is of utmost
concern. For example, traffic signs may be modified with
small stickers to cause misclassification, causing say a stop
sign to be treated as speed limit sign [7]. Facial recognition
systems can be easily spoofed using colourful glasses [19].
This security flaw has led to an arms race in the research community, between those who develop defences to

adversarial attacks, and those working to overcome these
defences with stronger adversarial attack methods [22, 17].
Notably, as the community develops stronger adversarial attack methods, claims of model robustness to adversarial attack are often proved to be premature [5, 2].
There are two approaches to demonstrating a model is
resistant to adversarial attacks. The first is theoretical, via a
provable lower bound on the minimum adversarial distance
necessary to cause misclassification [22, 17, 9]. Theoretical lower bounds are often pessimistic: the gap between the
theoretical lower bound and adversarial examples generated
by state-of-the-art attack algorithms can be large. Therefore, a second empirical approach is also used: an upper
bound on the minimum adversarial distance is demonstrated
through adversarial examples created by adversarial attacks
[11, 14, 5, 4]. The motivation to design strong adversarial
attacks is therefore twofold: on the one hand, to validate
theoretical lower bounds on robustness; and on the other,
to construct empirical upper bounds on the minimum adversarial distance. Ideally, the gap between the theoretical lower bound and the empirical upper bound should be
small. As adversarial attacks become stronger, the gap narrows from above.
The process of finding an adversarial example with an
adversarial attack is an optimization problem: find a small
perturbation of the model input which causes misclassification. This optimization problem has been recast in various ways. Rather than directly enforcing misclassification,
many adversarial attacks instead attempt to maximize the
loss function. The Fast Gradient Signed Method (FGSM)
was one of the first adversarial attacks to do so [21], measuring perturbation size in the ℓ∞ norm. Iterative versions
of FGSM were soon developed [11, 14, 24]. When perturbations are measured in the ℓ2 norm, the iterative version
performs Projected Gradient Descent (PGD); when measured in ℓ∞ the iterative version is known as IFGSM. Both
iterative versions maximize the loss function subject to a
constraint enforcing small perturbation in the appropriate
norm. Other works have studied sparse adversarial attacks,
as in [16]. Rather than maximizing the loss, Carlini and

4862

