Fashion Retrieval via Graph Reasoning Networks on a Similarity Pyramid
Zhanghui Kuang1∗, Yiming Gao12∗ , Guanbin Li2 , Ping Luo3 , Yimin Chen1 , Liang Lin2 , Wayne Zhang1†
1
SenseTime Research 2 Sun Yat-sen University 3 The University of Hong Kong
{kuangzhanghui, chenyimin, wayne.zhang}@sensetime.com
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

pluo@cs.hku.hk

gaoym9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Global similarity

Matching clothing images from customers and online
shopping stores has rich applications in E-commerce. Existing algorithms encoded an image as a global feature vector and performed retrieval with the global representation.
However, discriminative local information on clothes are
submerged in this global representation, resulting in suboptimal performance. To address this issue, we propose a
novel Graph Reasoning Network (GRNet) on a Similarity
Pyramid, which learns similarities between a query and a
gallery cloth by using both global and local representations in multiple scales. The similarity pyramid is represented
by a Graph of similarity, where nodes represent similarities
between clothing components at different scales, and the final matching score is obtained by message passing along
edges. In GRNet, graph reasoning is solved by training
a graph convolutional network, enabling to align salient
clothing components to improve clothing retrieval. To facilitate future researches, we introduce a new benchmark
FindFashion, containing rich annotations of bounding boxes, views, occlusions, and cropping. Extensive experiments
show that GRNet obtains new state-of-the-art results on two
challenging benchmarks, e.g. pushing the top-1, top-20, and
top-50 accuracies on DeepFashion to 26%, 64%, and 75%
(i.e. 4%, 10%, and 10% absolute improvements), outperforming competitors with large margins. On FindFashion,
GRNet achieves considerable improvements on all empirical settings.

1. Introduction
Fashion image retrieval between customers and online
shopping stores has various applications for E-commerce.
Given a street-snapshot of clothing image, this task is to
search the same garment item in the online store. It is a key
step for future applications such as generating descriptions
∗ They contributed equally to this work
† Wayne Zhang is the corresponding author

Global similarity

Intra-scale
connection
Inter-scale
connection

Pyramid
scale 1
Pyramid
scale 2
Pyramid
scale 3

(a) Global Similarity

Local similarity
(b) Similarity Pyramid

Figure 1: Comparison between global similarity and similarity pyramid with graph reasoning. The left illustrates the
global similarity. The right shows the similarity pyramid
with graph reasoning, where scale 1 computes the global
similarity while scale 2 and 3 compute local similarities between all possible combinations of local patches from one
image pair. The dash gray lines indicate one similarity is
related to two patches. Pyramid similarities (including the
global and the local) are reasoned mutually. The blue lines
indicate interactions between similarities at one scale while
the red dash lines indicate those across scales (best viewed
in color).

of clothes, brands, materials, and styles. While matching
clothes across modalities appears effortless for human vision, it is extremely challenging for machine vision. The
same cloth may exhibit large variations due to occlusions,
cropping, and viewpoints. More importantly, garments may
differ in small local regions such as logos only.
The task of customer-to-shop clothes retrieval has great
progresses [22, 25, 34, 24, 44, 9, 13, 8, 58] by using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [28, 19, 14, 21, 39]. Existing methods often employed the global similarity pipeline.
For example, they first aggregate local features into compact global features, and then compute global similarities
between query and gallery images by using cosine or Euclidean distance (see Figure 1 (a)). In the procedure of
global feature aggregation, the discriminative local regions

3066

