Towards Multi-pose Guided Virtual Try-on Network
Haoye Dong1,2 , Xiaodan Liang3 ,Xiaohui Shen7 , Bochao Wang1 ,
Hanjiang Lai1,2 , Jia Zhu4,5 , Zhiting Hu6 , Jian Yin1,2,∗
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
3
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
4
School of Computer Science, South China Normal University
5
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Education
6
Carnegie Mellon University, 7 ByteDance AI Lab.
{donghy7@mail2,laihanj3@mail,issjyin@mail}.sysu.edu.cn
xdliang328@gmail.com,jzhu@m.scun.edu.cn,shenxiaohui@bytedance.com

Abstract
Virtual try-on systems under arbitrary human poses have
significant application potential, yet also raise extensive
challenges, such as self-occlusions, heavy misalignment
among different poses, and complex clothes textures. Existing virtual try-on methods can only transfer clothes given
a fixed human pose, and still show unsatisfactory performances, often failing to preserve person identity or texture
details, and with limited pose diversity. This paper makes
the first attempt towards a multi-pose guided virtual tryon system, which enables clothes to transfer onto a person
with diverse poses. Given an input person image, a desired clothes image, and a desired pose, the proposed Multipose Guided Virtual Try-On Network (MG-VTON) generates a new person image after fitting the desired clothes into
the person and manipulating the pose. MG-VTON is constructed with three stages: 1) a conditional human parsing
network is proposed that matches both the desired pose and
the desired clothes shape; 2) a deep Warping Generative
Adversarial Network (Warp-GAN) that warps the desired
clothes appearance into the synthesized human parsing map
and alleviates the misalignment problem between the input
human pose and the desired one; 3) a refinement render network recovers the texture details of clothes and removes artifacts, based on multi-pose composition masks. Extensive
experiments on commonly-used datasets and our newlycollected largest virtual try-on benchmark demonstrate that
our MG-VTON significantly outperforms all state-of-theart methods both qualitatively and quantitatively, showing
promising virtual try-on performances.
∗ Corresponding author is Jian Yin

Figure 1. Some results of our model. The clothes and poses images
are shown in the first row, while the person images shown in the
first column. The results manipulated by both clothes and pose are
shown in the other columns.

1. Introduction
Virtual try-on, which enables users to try on clothes to
check the size or style in a virtual way, has a huge amount
of commercial value and attracts extensive attention in computer vision. Many virtual try-on systems [13, 38] have
been presented and achieve promising results when the pose
is fixed. However, these approaches usually learn to synthesize the image conditioned on clothes only. When given a
different pose, they tend to synthesize blurry images, losing
most of the details and style, as shown in Figure 4.

9026

