Scene Graph Prediction with Limited Labels
Vincent S. Chen, Paroma Varma, Ranjay Krishna, Michael Bernstein, Christopher Ré, Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University
{vincentsc, paroma, ranjaykrishna, msb, chrismre, feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu
Inputs

Abstract

Limited labels

Probabilistic training labels
Eat: 0.35

Visual knowledge bases such as Visual Genome power
numerous applications in computer vision, including visual
question answering and captioning, but suffer from sparse,
incomplete relationships. All scene graph models to date
are limited to training on a small set of visual relationships
that have thousands of training labels each. Hiring human
annotators is expensive, and using textual knowledge base
completion methods are incompatible with visual data. In
this paper, we introduce a semi-supervised method that assigns probabilistic relationship labels to a large number of
unlabeled images using few labeled examples. We analyze
visual relationships to suggest two types of image-agnostic
features that are used to generate noisy heuristics, whose outputs are aggregated using a factor graph-based generative
model. With as few as 10 labeled examples per relationship, the generative model creates enough training data to
train any existing state-of-the-art scene graph model. We
demonstrate that our method outperforms all baseline approaches on scene graph prediction by 5.16 recall@100
for PREDCLS. In our limited label setting, we define a
complexity metric for relationships that serves as an indicator (R2 = 0.778) for conditions under which our method
succeeds over transfer learning, the de-facto approach for
training with limited labels.

1. Introduction
In an effort to formalize a structured representation for
images, Visual Genome [27] defined scene graphs, a formalization similar to those widely used to represent knowledge bases [13, 18, 56]. Scene graphs encode objects (e.g.
person, bike) as nodes connected via pairwise relationships (e.g., riding) as edges. This formalization has led
to state-of-the-art models in image captioning [3], image
retrieval [25, 42], visual question answering [24], relationship modeling [26] and image generation [23]. However,
all existing scene graph models ignore more than 98% of
relationship categories that do not have sufficient labeled
instances (see Figure 2) and instead focus on modeling the

Unlabeled images

Our semisupevised
method

Eat: 0.7
Eat: 0.85

Any existing
scene graph
model

Eat: 0.3

Figure 1. Our semi-supervised method automatically generates
probabilistic relationship labels to train any scene graph model.

few relationships that have thousands of labels [31, 49, 54].
Hiring more human workers is an ineffective solution to
labeling relationships because image annotation is so tedious
that seemingly obvious labels are left unannotated. To complement human annotators, traditional text-based knowledge
completion tasks have leveraged numerous semi-supervised
or distant supervision approaches [6, 7, 17, 34]. These methods find syntactical or lexical patterns from a small labeled
set to extract missing relationships from a large unlabeled
set. In text, pattern-based methods are successful, as relationships in text are usually document-agnostic (e.g. <Tokyo
- is capital of - Japan>). Visual relationships are
often incidental: they depend on the contents of the particular image they appear in. Therefore, methods that rely on
external knowledge or on patterns over concepts (e.g. most
instances of dog next to frisbee are playing with it)
do not generalize well. The inability to utilize the progress
in text-based methods necessitates specialized methods for
visual knowledge.
In this paper, we automatically generate missing relationships labels using a small, labeled dataset and use these
generated labels to train downstream scene graph models
(see Figure 1). We begin by exploring how to define imageagnostic features for relationships so they follow patterns
across images. For example, eat usually consists of one
object consuming another object smaller than itself, whereas
look often consists of common objects: phone, laptop,
or window (see Figure 3). These rules are not dependent on
raw pixel values; they can be derived from image-agnostic
features like object categories and relative spatial positions
between objects in a relationship. While such rules are simple, their capacity to provide supervision for unannotated
relationships has been unexplored. While image-agnostic
12580

