Why Does a Visual Question Have Different Answers?
Nilavra Bhattacharya∗ , Qing Li+ , Danna Gurari∗
∗
University of Texas at Austin, + University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
Visual question answering is the task of returning the answer to a question about an image. A challenge is that different people often provide different answers to the same
visual question. To our knowledge, this is the first work that
aims to understand why. We propose a taxonomy of nine
plausible reasons, and create two labelled datasets consisting of ∼45,000 visual questions indicating which reasons
led to answer differences. We then propose a novel problem
of predicting directly from a visual question which reasons
will cause answer differences as well as a novel algorithm
for this purpose. Experiments demonstrate the advantage
of our approach over several related baselines on two diverse datasets. We publicly share the datasets and code at
https://vizwiz.org.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA), the task of returning
the answer to a question about an image, is of widespread
interest across both industry and academia. For example,
many people who are blind find existing VQA solutions are
indispensable assistants for providing answers to their daily
visual questions; e.g., they use vision-based assistants such
as VizWiz [7] and BeSpecular [1] to snap a photo with their
mobile phones and then receive answers from remote workers. In the artificial intelligence research community, the
VQA problem has emerged as an iconic challenge for emulating a human’s vision and language capabilities [5, 24].
Despite the tremendous social impact and progress with
VQA solutions, a limitation is that most solutions lack a
way to handle when a visual question elicits different answers from different people. The prevailing assumption
is that the goal is to return a single answer. Yet prior
work [17] has shown that it is common for visual questions
to elicit different answers—it occurs for over half of nearly
500,000 visual questions in three VQA datasets.
Our goal is to identify why different answers arise. Accordingly, our work is premised on the assumption that
there can exist multiple answers for a visual question. Our
work extends prior work [5, 17, 30, 38] which has suggested

reasons why answers can differ—including that visual questions are difficult, subjective, or ambiguous as well as synonymous answers. First, we propose a taxonomy of nine
plausible reasons why answers can differ, which are exemplified in Figure 1. We next ask crowd workers to identify
which of these reasons led to answer differences for each
of ∼45,000 visual questions asked by people who are blind
and sighted. Finally, we propose a novel problem of predicting which reasons will lead to answer differences directly from a visual question and propose a novel algorithm
for this task. Our findings offer compelling evidence that an
algorithmic framework must learn to simultaneously model
and synthesize different individuals’ (potentially conflicting) perceptions of images and language.
We offer our work as a valuable foundation for improving VQA services, by empowering system designers and
users to know how to prevent, interpret, or resolve answer
differences. Specifically, a solution that anticipates why a
visual question will lead to different answers (summarized
in Figure 1) could (1) help users identify how to modify
their visual question in order to arrive at a single, unambiguous answer; e.g., retake an image when it is low quality or
does not show the answer versus modify the question when
it is ambiguous or invalid; (2) increase users’ awareness for
what reasons, if any, trigger answer differences when they
are given a single answer; or (3) reveal how to automatically aggregate different answers [2, 18, 23, 25, 42] when
multiple answers are collected.
More generally, to our knowledge, this is the first work
in the computer vision community to characterize, quantify,
and model reasons why annotations differ. We believe it
will motivate and facilitate future work on related problems
that similarly face annotator differences, including image
captioning, visual storytelling, and visual dialog. We publicly share the datasets and code to encourage community
progress in developing algorithmic frameworks that can account for the diversity of perspectives in a crowd.

2. Related Work
Visual Question Answering Datasets. Numerous dataset
challenges have been posed to encourage the development of algorithms that automatically answer visual ques14271

