Learning Single Camera Depth Estimation using Dual-Pixels
Rahul Garg

Neal Wadhwa
Sameer Ansari
Google Research

Abstract
Deep learning techniques have enabled rapid progress
in monocular depth estimation, but their quality is limited
by the ill-posed nature of the problem and the scarcity of
high quality datasets. We estimate depth from a single camera by leveraging the dual-pixel auto-focus hardware that is
increasingly common on modern camera sensors. Classic
stereo algorithms and prior learning-based depth estimation techniques underperform when applied on this dualpixel data, the former due to too-strong assumptions about
RGB image matching, and the latter due to not leveraging
the understanding of optics of dual-pixel image formation.
To allow learning based methods to work well on dual-pixel
imagery, we identify an inherent ambiguity in the depth estimated from dual-pixel cues, and develop an approach to
estimate depth up to this ambiguity. Using our approach,
existing monocular depth estimation techniques can be effectively applied to dual-pixel data, and much smaller models can be constructed that still infer high quality depth. To
demonstrate this, we capture a large dataset of in-the-wild
5-viewpoint RGB images paired with corresponding dualpixel data, and show how view supervision with this data
can be used to learn depth up to the unknown ambiguity.
On our new task, our model is 30% more accurate than any
prior work on learning-based monocular or stereoscopic
depth estimation.

Jonathan T. Barron

results in inaccurate estimation.
Recent developments in consumer hardware may provide an opportunity for a new approach in depth estimation. Cameras have recently become available that allow
a single camera to simultaneously capture two images that
resemble a stereo pair with a tiny baseline (Fig. 1), through
the use of dense dual-pixel (DP) sensors (Fig. 2). Though
this technology was originally developed in service of camera auto-focus, dual-pixel images can also be exploited to
recover dense depth maps from a single camera, thereby
obviating any need for additional hardware, calibration, or
synchronization. For example, Wadhwa et al. [50] used
classical stereo techniques (block matching and edge aware
smoothing) to recover depth from DP data. But as shown
in Fig. 1, the quality of depth maps that can be produced by
conventional stereo techniques is limited, because the interplay between disparity and focus in DP imagery can cause
classic stereo-matching techniques to fail. Existing monocular learning-based techniques also perform poorly on this

(a) RGB image

(b) Depth from [50]

1. Introduction

150

Intensity

Depth estimation has long been a central problem in
computer vision, both as a basic component of visual perception, and in service to various graphics, recognition, and
robotics tasks. Depth can be acquired via dedicated hardware that directly senses depth (time-of-flight, structured
light, etc) but these sensors are often expensive, powerhungry, or limited to certain environments (such as indoors).
Depth can be inferred from multiple cameras through the
use of multi-view geometry, but building a stereo camera
requires significant complexity in the form of calibration,
rectification, and synchronization. Machine learning techniques can be used to estimate depth from a single image,
but the under-constrained nature of image formation often

(c) Our depth
Left
Right

100

50

X direction

(d) Left DP view

(e) Right DP view

(f) Left vs Right intensity

Figure 1. Here we have an RGB image (a) containing dual-pixel
data. Crops of the left and right dual-pixel images corresponding
to the marked rectangle in (a) are shown in (d), (e), and their intensity profiles along the marked scanline are shown in (f). While
the profiles matches for the in-focus flower, they are considerably
different for the out of focus background. Because [50] uses traditional stereo matching that assumes that intensity values differ by
only a scale factor and a local displacement, it fails to match the
background accurately, and produces the depth shown in (b). Our
technique learns the correlation between depth and differences in
dual-pixel data thereby estimates an accurate depth map (c).

7628

