Dual Attention Matching for Audio-Visual Event Localization

1

Baidu Research

Yu Wu1,2 , Linchao Zhu2 , Yan Yan3 , Yi Yang2∗
2
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney 3 Texas State University

yu.wu-3@student.uts.edu.au; {linchao.zhu, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au; tom yan@txstate.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the audio-visual event localization problem. This task is to localize a visible and audible event in a video. Previous methods first divide a video
into short segments, and then fuse visual and acoustic features at the segment level. The duration of these segments
is usually short, making the visual and acoustic feature of
each segment possibly not well aligned. Direct concatenation of the two features at the segment level can be vulnerable to a minor temporal misalignment of the two signals.
We propose a Dual Attention Matching (DAM) module to
cover a longer video duration for better high-level event information modeling, while the local temporal information is
attained by the global cross-check mechanism. Our premise
is that one should watch the whole video to understand the
high-level event, while shorter segments should be checked
in detail for localization. Specifically, the global feature of
one modality queries the local feature in the other modality in a bi-directional way. With temporal co-occurrence
encoded between auditory and visual signals, DAM can be
readily applied in various audio-visual event localization
tasks, e.g., cross-modality localization, supervised event
localization. Experiments on the AVE dataset show our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Multi-modal perception is essential when we human explore, capture and perceive the real world. Among these simultaneous sensory streams, vision and audio are two basic
streams that convey significant information. Jointly modeling these two modalities facilitates audio-visual scenes understanding and event detection.
Recently, some works explore the cross-modal learning
of visual and auditory information [3, 4, 5]. These studies
focus on the representation learning of two modalities but
∗ This work was done when Yu Wu interned at Baidu Research. Yi Yang
is the corresponding author.

The cross modality localization task

Inputs:

Output:

The supervised audio-visual event localization task

Inputs:

Output:

Figure 1. Examples of the audio-visual event localization problem.
It includes two tasks, i.e., the cross-modality localization (CML)
task and the supervised audio-visual event localization (SEL) task.
The CML task (the upper one in the figure) is to localize the event
boundary in one modality given an input event signal in the other
modality. The SEL task (the lower one) is to predict the event category (including background) of each input audio-visual segment.
The orange color in the figure indicates the output of each task.

yet to explore the temporal localization. To study how to exploit audio and visual features for event localization jointly,
Tian et al. [30] introduce audio-visual event localization
in unconstrained videos. In this problem, an audio-visual
event is defined as an event that is both visible and audible
in a video segment. The goal is to localize the event boundary in the temporal dimension (the cross-modality localization task) and to predict what category the event belongs to
(the supervised audio-visual event localization task).
The cross-modality localization (CML) task is to locate the corresponding visual signals temporally from given
sound signals and vice versa. For example, as most aerial
videos have no audio signals, CML is particularly useful
when one needs to localize an event in aerial videos given a
query audio recorded by a smartphone. As defined in [30],
the task is generic, and thus no semantic label (event cate-

6292

