COCO-GAN: Generation by Parts via Conditional Coordinating
Chieh Hubert Lin1
Da-Cheng Juan3
1

Chia-Che Chang1
Wei Wei3

National Tsing Hua University

2

Yu-Sheng Chen2
Hwann-Tzong Chen1

National Taiwan University

3

Google AI

Abstract
Humans can only interact with part of the surrounding environment due to biological restrictions. Therefore,
we learn to reason the spatial relationships across a series of observations to piece together the surrounding environment. Inspired by such behavior and the fact that
machines also have computational constraints, we propose
COnditional COordinate GAN (COCO-GAN) of which the
generator generates images by parts based on their spatial coordinates as the condition. On the other hand, the
discriminator learns to justify realism across multiple assembled patches by global coherence, local appearance,
and edge-crossing continuity. Despite the full images are
never generated during training, we show that COCO-GAN
can produce state-of-the-art-quality full images during inference. We further demonstrate a variety of novel applications enabled by teaching the network to be aware
of coordinates. First, we perform extrapolation to the
learned coordinate manifold and generate off-the-boundary
patches. Combining with the originally generated full image, COCO-GAN can produce images that are larger than
training samples, which we called “beyond-boundary generation”. We then showcase panorama generation within a
cylindrical coordinate system that inherently preserves horizontally cyclic topology. On the computation side, COCOGAN has a built-in divide-and-conquer paradigm that reduces memory requisition during training and inference,
provides high-parallelism, and can generate parts of images
on-demand.

1. Introduction
The human perception has only partial access to the surrounding environment due to biological restrictions (such
as the limited acuity area of the fovea), and therefore humans infer the whole environment by “assembling” few local views obtained from their eyesight. This recognition
can be done partially because humans are able to associate
the spatial coordination of these local views with the environment (where they are situated in), then correctly assem-

𝑮enerator

𝑫iscriminator

Figure 1: COCO-GAN generates and discriminates only
parts of the full image via conditional coordinating. Despite the full images are never generated during training, the
generator can still produce full images that are visually indistinguishable to standard GAN samples during inference.
ble these local views, and recognize the whole environment.
Currently, most of the computational vision models assume
to have access to full images as inputs for down-streaming
tasks, which sometimes may become a computational bottleneck of modern vision models when dealing with large
field-of-view images. This limitation piques our interest and
raises an intriguing question: “is it possible to train generative models to be aware of coordinate system for generating
local views (i.e. parts of the image) that can be assembled
into a globally coherent image?”
Conventional GANs [9] target at learning a generator
that models a mapping from a prior latent distribution (normally a unit Gaussian) to the real data distribution. To
achieve generating high-quality images by parts, we introduce coordinate systems within an image and divide image generation into separated parallel sub-procedures. Our
framework, named COnditional COordinate GAN (COCOGAN), aims at learning a coordinate manifold that is orthogonal to the latent distribution manifold. After a latent
vector is sampled, the generator conditions on each spatial
coordinate and generate patches at each corresponding spatial position. On the other hand, the discriminator learns
to judge whether adjacent patches are structurally sound,
visually homogeneous, and continuous across the edges be14512

