Adaptive Context Network for Scene Parsing
Jun Fu 1, 4 Jing Liu∗ 1 Yuhang Wang 1
Yong Li 2 Yongjun Bao 2 Jinhui Tang 3 Hanqing Lu 1
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Business Growth BU, JD.com 3 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jun.fu,jliu,luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,wangyuhang.casia@gmail.com,
{liyong5,baoyongjun}@jd.com,jinhuitang@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent works attempt to improve scene parsing performance by exploring different levels of contexts, and typically train a well-designed convolutional network to exploit
useful contexts across all pixels equally. However, in this
paper, we find that the context demands are varying from
different pixels or regions in each image. Based on this observation, we propose an Adaptive Context Network (ACNet) to capture the pixel-aware contexts by a competitive
fusion of global context and local context according to different per-pixel demands. Specifically, when given a pixel,
the global context demand is measured by the similarity between the global feature and its local feature, whose reverse value can be used to measure the local context demand. We model the two demand measurements by the proposed global context module and local context module, respectively, to generate adaptive contextual features. Furthermore, we import multiple such modules to build several adaptive context blocks in different levels of network to
obtain a coarse-to-fine result. Finally, comprehensive experimental evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed ACNet, and new state-of-the-arts performances
are achieved on all four public datasets, i.e. Cityscapes,
ADE20K, PASCAL Context, and COCO Stuff.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing is a fundamental image understanding task
which aims to perform per-pixel categorizations for a given
scene image. Most recent approaches for scene parsing are
based on Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [24]. However, there are two limitations in FCN framworks. First, the
∗ Corresponding Author

Global pooling+Conv+Upsampling

(a).FCN

(b). FCN+Global context

(c). FCN+Local context

Figure 1. The performance improvements over the basic FCN (a.
Dilated FCN) on Cityscapes val set with the help of global context
(b. Dilated FCN+Global context) and local context (c. Dilated
FCN+Local context). Specially, pixel-wise enhanced representation by the global average pooling feature are employed as the
global context, and a concatenated representation with low-level
features as the local context.

consecutive subsampling operations like pooling and convolution striding lead to a significant decrease of the initial image resolution and make the loss of spatial details for
scene parsing. Second, due to the limited receptive field
[23, 25] or local context features, the per-pixel dense classification is often ambiguous. In the end, FCNs result in the
problems of rough object boundaries, ignorance of small
objects, and misclassification of big objects and stuff.
Throughout various FCN-based improvements to overcome the above limitations, effective strategies to utilize
different levels of contexts (i.e., local context and global
context) are the main directions. Specifically, some methods [22, 39, 34, 9] adopt “U-net” architectures, which ex-

6748

