Small Steps and Giant Leaps: Minimal Newton Solvers for Deep Learning
João F. Henriques

Sebastien Ehrhardt
Samuel Albanie
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

Andrea Vedaldi

{joao,hyenal,albanie,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a fast second-order method that can be used
as a drop-in replacement for current deep learning solvers.
Compared to stochastic gradient descent (SGD), it only requires two additional forward-mode automatic differentiation operations per iteration, which has a computational
cost comparable to two standard forward passes and is easy
to implement. Our method addresses long-standing issues
with current second-order solvers, which invert an approximate Hessian matrix every iteration exactly or by conjugategradient methods, procedures that are much slower than a
SGD step. Instead, we propose to keep a single estimate of
the gradient projected by the inverse Hessian matrix, and
update it once per iteration with just two passes over the
network. This estimate has the same size and is similar
to the momentum variable that is commonly used in SGD.
No estimate of the Hessian is maintained. We first validate
our method, called C URVE BALL, on small problems with
known solutions (noisy Rosenbrock function and degenerate 2-layer linear networks), where current deep learning
solvers struggle. We then train several large models on CIFAR and ImageNet, including ResNet and VGG-f networks,
where we demonstrate faster convergence with no hyperparameter tuning. We also show our optimiser’s generality by
testing on a large set of randomly-generated architectures.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and backpropagation (17) are the algorithmic backbone of
current deep network training. The success of deep learning
demonstrates the power of this combination, which has been
successfully applied on various tasks with large datasets and
very deep networks (12).
Yet, while SGD has many advantages, speed of convergence (in terms of number of iterations) is not necessarily
one of them. While individual SGD iterations are very quick
to compute and lead to rapid progress at the beginning of the
optimisation, it soon reaches a slower phase where further

improvements are achieved slowly. This can be attributed to
entering regions of the parameter space where the objective
function is poorly scaled. In such cases, rapid progress would
require vastly different step sizes for different directions in
parameter space, which SGD cannot deliver.
Second-order methods, such as Newton’s method and
its variants, eliminate this issue by rescaling the gradient
according to the local curvature of the objective function.
For a scalar loss in R, this rescaling takes the form H −1 J
where H is the Hessian matrix (second-order derivatives)
or an approximation of the local curvature in the objective
space, and J is the gradient of the objective. They can in
fact achieve local scale-invariance (37, p. 27), and make
provably better progress in the regions where gradient descent stalls. While they are unmatched in other domains,
there are several obstacles to their application to deep models. First, it is impractical to invert or even store the Hessian,
since it grows quadratically with the number of parameters,
and there are typically millions of them. Second, any Hessian estimate is necessarily noisy and ill-conditioned due
to stochastic sampling, to which classic inversion methods
such as conjugate-gradient are not robust.
In this paper, we propose a new algorithm that can overcome these difficulties and make second order optimisation
practical for deep learning. We show in particular how to
avoid the storage of any estimate of the Hessian matrix or
its inverse. Instead, we treat the computation of the Newton
update, H −1 J, as solving a linear system that itself can be
solved via gradient descent. The cost of solving this system
is amortized over time by interleaving its steps with the parameter update steps. Our proposed method adds little overhead, since a Hessian-vector product can be implemented for
modern networks with just two steps of automatic differentiation. Interestingly, we show that our method is equivalent
to momentum SGD (also known as the heavy-ball method)
with a single additional term, accounting for curvature. For
this reason we named our method C URVE BALL. Unlike
other proposals, the total memory footprint is as small as
that of momentum SGD.
This paper is structured as follows. We introduce relevant
technical background in sec. 2, and present our method in
14763

