Towards Bridging Semantic Gap to Improve Semantic Segmentation
Yanwei Pang1 , Yazhao Li1 , Jianbing Shen2∗, Ling Shao2
1

Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
pyw@tju.edu.cn,

2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE

lyztju@tju.edu.cn, shenjianbingcg@gmail.com,

ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Aggregating multi-level features is essential for capturing multi-scale context information for precise scene semantic segmentation. However, the improvement by directly
fusing shallow features and deep features becomes limited
as the semantic gap between them increases. To solve this
problem, we explore two strategies for robust feature fusion.
One is enhancing shallow features using a semantic enhancement module (SeEM) to alleviate the semantic gap between shallow features and deep features. The other strategy is feature attention, which involves discovering complementary information (i.e., boundary information) from
low-level features to enhance high-level features for precise
segmentation. By embedding these two strategies, we construct a parallel feature pyramid towards improving multilevel feature fusion. A Semantic Enhanced Network called
SeENet is constructed with the parallel pyramid to implement precise segmentation. Experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
for robust multi-level feature aggregation. As a result, our
SeENet has achieved better performance than other stateof-the-art methods for semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Scene semantic segmentation is a high-level visual task
whose goal is to assign a corresponding semantic label to
each pixel in an image. To deal with complex scale variations, it is essential to extract multi-scale robust features
and abundant context information [21, 57, 19, 47].
State-of-the-art semantic segmentation methods are typically based on the Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [36,
53]. Most FCN-based methods [48] tend to construct an
encoder branch to gradually improve the semantic levels
without using fully connected layers. To restore the resolution information, a cascaded decoder stream is widely
explored [2, 41, 5, 49]. A skip connection [38, 30, 14] is
frequently used to combine the encoder and decoder features. The decoder stream, which acts as a feature pyramid,
∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen

(a) B0

(b) B1

(c) B2

(d) B0 enhanced

(e) B1 enhanced

(f) B2 enhanced

(g) Image

(h) Ground truth

(i) SeENet result

Figure 1. Feature enhancement towards bridging the semantic gap.
(a)∼(c) show the features of (g) from the final three blocks respectively. A semantic gap exists when combining them. (d)∼(f) show
features after enhancing (a)∼(c) respectively. Combining (d) with
(b) is more robust than combining (a) and (b). (h) shows the segmentation ground truth, and (i) shows the segmentation result by
our method.

helps aggregate multi-level features and capture multi-scale
context information. In this framework, features from shallow layers encode more detailed information, while features
from deep layers encode more semantic information to distinguish different classes. The shallow features and deep
features are complementary for precise segmentation [59].
However, shallow features are low-level for the edges,
lines, and corners, while deep features are high-level for
measuring object characteristics, classification, and scene
parsing. We refer this kind of difference of semantic granularity as semantic gap in this paper. This gap exists to disturb the multi-level feature fusion but has rarely been explored. We show some feature heat maps in Fig. 1 (a)∼(c)
of an image (g). These features are generated from the last
three stages of a FCN network to present the gap existed
in different layers. As can be seen, features in (a), which
are from the shallow layer, contain more local region and
edge information for the dogs and the background hill. Fea-

4230

