Multi-Stage Pathological Image Classification using Semantic Segmentation
Shusuke Takahama1 Yusuke Kurose1,2 Yusuke Mukuta1,2 Hiroyuki Abe1,3
Masashi Fukayama1,3 Akihiko Yoshizawa3,4 Masanobu Kitagawa3,5 Tatsuya Harada1,2,6
1

The University of Tokyo 2 RIKEN 3 The Japanese Society of Pathology
4
Kyoto University 5 Tokyo Medical and Dental University
6
Research Center for Medical Bigdata, National Institute of Informatics
{takahama, kurose, mukuta, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Histopathological image analysis is an essential process for the discovery of diseases such as cancer. However, it is challenging to train CNN on whole slide images (WSIs) of gigapixel resolution considering the available memory capacity. Most of the previous works divide
high resolution WSIs into small image patches and separately input them into the model to classify it as a tumor or a normal tissue. However, patch-based classification uses only patch-scale local information but ignores
the relationship between neighboring patches. If we consider the relationship of neighboring patches and global
features, we can improve the classification performance. In
this paper, we propose a new model structure combining
the patch-based classification model and whole slide-scale
segmentation model in order to improve the prediction performance of automatic pathological diagnosis. We extract
patch features from the classification model and input them
into the segmentation model to obtain a whole slide tumor
probability heatmap. The classification model considers
patch-scale local features, and the segmentation model can
take global information into account. We also propose a
new optimization method that retains gradient information
and trains the model partially for end-to-end learning with
limited GPU memory capacity. We apply our method to
the tumor/normal prediction on WSIs and the classification
performance is improved compared with the conventional
patch-based method.

1. Introduction
Pathological diagnosis is the observation of tissue slides
with a microscope to identify the presence of disease such
as cancer. In recent years, a technology called digital
pathology has been developed; it captures entire slide images with a scanner and stores it as a digital image (whole

Figure 1. Example of gigapixel WSI in the Stomach biopsy
dataset. Pathologists need to scrutinize the details of WSIs, such as
cellular tissue, for diagnosis. Therefore, WSIs must be of high resolution and large dimensions. When image analysis is performed
on a WSI, small images called patches (right) are cut out. Note
that the tissue size, color, and shape exhibit substantial diversity
depending on the location on the WSI.

slide image, WSI). Numerous WSI data has been accumulated with the spread of digital pathology, and many researches are aimed at assisting pathologists’ diagnosis by
applying image analysis technology using machine learning to WSI [16, 1, 12, 19, 32, 31].
The most characteristic aspect of WSI is the large image size and its exceptionally high resolution. Its size can
be of over 105 × 105 pixels. In order to diagnose the presence of disease, it is necessary to investigate the local structures observed in the high resolution image. It is almost
unfeasible to input WSIs directly into the machine learning
model, considering GPU memory consumption. Furthermore, if we decrease the resolution in order to input the
WSI into the model, the local features are lost, resulting in
performance degradation. Therefore, past researches have
adopted a method that divides a large WSI into small patch

10702

