Symmetric Cross Entropy for Robust Learning with Noisy Labels
∗

∗

Yisen Wang1 † Xingjun Ma2 † Zaiyi Chen3 Yuan Luo1 Jinfeng Yi4 James Bailey2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 The University of Melbourne 3 Cainiao AI 4 JD AI

Abstract
Training accurate deep neural networks (DNNs) in the
presence of noisy labels is an important and challenging
task. Though a number of approaches have been proposed
for learning with noisy labels, many open issues remain. In
this paper, we show that DNN learning with Cross Entropy
(CE) exhibits overfitting to noisy labels on some classes
(“easy” classes), but more surprisingly, it also suffers from
significant under learning on some other classes (“hard”
classes). Intuitively, CE requires an extra term to facilitate
learning of hard classes, and more importantly, this term
should be noise tolerant, so as to avoid overfitting to noisy
labels. Inspired by the symmetric KL-divergence, we propose the approach of Symmetric cross entropy Learning
(SL), boosting CE symmetrically with a noise robust counterpart Reverse Cross Entropy (RCE). Our proposed SL approach simultaneously addresses both the under learning
and overfitting problem of CE in the presence of noisy labels. We provide a theoretical analysis of SL and also empirically show, on a range of benchmark and real-world
datasets, that SL outperforms state-of-the-art methods. We
also show that SL can be easily incorporated into existing
methods in order to further enhance their performance.

1. Introduction
Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) are often highly
complex models that have hundreds of layers and millions
of trainable parameters, requiring large-scale datasets with
clean label annotations such as ImageNet [2] for proper
training. However, labeling large-scale datasets is a costly
and error-prone process, and even high-quality datasets are
likely to contain noisy (incorrect) labels. Therefore, training
accurate DNNs in the presence of noisy labels has become
a task of great practical importance in deep learning.
Recently, several works have studied the dynamics of
DNN learning with noisy labels. Zhang et.al [28] argued
that DNNs exhibit memorization effects whereby they first
memorize the training data for clean labels and then subsequently memorize data for the noisy labels. Similar findings
∗ Equal contribution. Part of work was done at JD AI Research.
† Correspondence to: Yisen Wang (eewangyisen@gmail.com) and
Xingjun Ma (xingjun.ma@unimelb.edu.au).

(a) CE - clean

(b) CE - noisy

(c) LSR - noisy

(d) SL - noisy

Figure 1: The class-wise test accuracy of an 8-layer CNN
on CIFAR-10 trained by (a) CE on clean labels with classbiased phenomenon, (b) CE on 40% symmetric/uniform
noisy labels with amplified class-biased phenomenon and
under learning on hard classes (e.g., class 3), (c) LSR under
the same setting to (b) with under learning on hard classes
still existing, (d) our proposed SL under the same setting to
(b) exhibiting overall improved learning on all classes.
are also reported in [1] that DNNs first learn clean and easy
patterns and eventually memorize the wrongly assigned labels. Further evidence is provided in [13] that DNNs first
learn simple representations via subspace dimensionality
compression and then overfit to noisy labels via subspace
dimensionality expansion. Different findings are reported
in [19], where DNNs with a specific activation function
(i.e., tanh) undergo an initial label fitting phase then a subsequent representation compression phase where the overfitting starts. Despite these important findings, a complete
understanding of DNN learning behavior, particularly their
learning process for noisy labels, remains an open question.
In this paper, we provide further insights into the learning procedure of DNNs by investigating the learning dynamics across classes. While Cross Entropy (CE) loss is
the most commonly used loss for training DNNs, we have
found that DNN learning with CE can be class-biased:

322

