New Convex Relaxations for MRF Inference with Unknown Graphs
Zhenhua Wang †∗ , Tong Liu † , Qinfeng Shi ‡ , M. Pawan Kumar ♯ , Jianhua Zhang †
†
Zhejiang University of Technology, ‡ The University of Adelaide, ♯ University of Oxford
{zhhwang, zjh}@zjut.edu.cn, javen.shi@adelaide.edu.au,

1

Abstract

0.8

Treating graph structures of Markov random fields as unknown and estimating them jointly with labels have been
shown to be useful for modeling human activity recognition and other related tasks. We propose two novel relaxations for solving this problem. The first is a linear programming (LP) relaxation, which is provably tighter than
the existing LP relaxation. The second is a non-convex
quadratic programming (QP) relaxation, which admits an
efficient concave-convex procedure (CCCP). The CCCP algorithm is initialized by solving a convex QP relaxation of
the problem, which is obtained by modifying the diagonal of
the matrix that specifies the non-convex QP relaxation. We
show that our convex QP relaxation is optimal in the sense
that it minimizes the ℓ1 norm of the diagonal modification
vector. While the convex QP relaxation is not as tight as
the existing and the new LP relaxations, when used in conjunction with the CCCP algorithm for the non-convex QP
relaxation, it provides accurate solutions. We demonstrate
the efficacy of our new relaxations for both synthetic data
and human activity recognition.

1. Introduction
Traditional methods for maximum a posteriori (MAP)
inference, or energy minimization, in Markov random fields
(MRFs) assume a known graph structure of the MRF
[20, 11, 26]. However, the assumption is weak due to two
reasons. First, it restricts the use of MRFs to problems
where all the instances are homogeneous, that is, when the
underlying graphs for all problem instances are the same.
Even in the case of a time series problem, where the number of nodes of a MRF varies across instances, this assumption forces us to retain the same basic structure across two
consecutive time frames (for example, see Fig. 6.1 of [10]).
Second, due to the lack of information of the relationship
among variables, domain knowledge or human heuristics
are typically utilized to construct graphs such as trees, grids
and fully-connected nets [5, 12, 3, 26, 25], which probably
are not the most desirable structure. In order to overcome

pawan@robots.ox.ac.uk

0.6

LP-M relaxation
convex QP relaxation
without relaxation

0.4
0.2
0

Figure 1: An illustration of the proposed new convex relaxations
using a toy example. Both upper and lower bounds for these relaxations are shown. The LP-M relaxation (green) is provably tighter
than the convex QP relaxation (blue), which in turn delivers significantly better solutions to the original problem (see Section 5).

the deficiency of MRFs with known graph structures, recent
research has started to focus on treating the graph structure
as unknown and estimating proper structures jointly with labels [15, 24, 16]. Such an approach lends itself naturally to
various real-world problems where the graphs are heterogeneous. For example, when modeling human actions in TV
episodes, where each node represents an actor, the graph
structure changes dynamically as different actors enter and
exit the scene.
The problem of simultaneous estimating labels and
graphs was first introduced by Lan et al. [15], who suggested an alternating search strategy to obtain an approximate solution. Specifically, their method alternates between
finding the best labels for a fixed graph, and finding the
best graph for the fixed labels. While such an approach
is computationally efficient, it is prone to bad local minima solutions. Wang et al. [24] cast this problem as an
integer quadratic program. By dropping the integral constraints, they obtain a bilinear program, which they further
relaxed to a linear program (LP). The LP relaxation of [24],
which we refer to as LP-W, can either be solved over the
entire feasible region, or it can be used in conjunction with
a branch-and-bound strategy [2]. Each subproblem of the
branch-and-bound approach requires us to solve the LPW relaxation over a subset of the feasible region, which
makes it computationally infeasible for even a smaller number of nodes. Typically, the branch-and-bound approach is
19935

