Feature Weighting and Boosting for Few-Shot Segmentation
Khoi Nguyen and Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
{nguyenkh,sinisa}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper is about few-shot segmentation of foreground
objects in images. We train a CNN on small subsets of
training images, each mimicking the few-shot setting. In
each subset, one image serves as the query and the other(s)
as support image(s) with ground-truth segmentation. The
CNN first extracts feature maps from the query and support images. Then, a class feature vector is computed as
an average of the support’s feature maps over the known
foreground. Finally, the target object is segmented in the
query image by using a cosine similarity between the class
feature vector and the query’s feature map. We make two
contributions by: (1) Improving discriminativeness of features so their activations are high on the foreground and low
elsewhere; and (2) Boosting inference with an ensemble of
experts guided with the gradient of loss incurred when segmenting the support images in testing. Our evaluations on
the PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i datasets demonstrate that
we significantly outperform existing approaches.

Pooled features
Masked
Pooling

Query mask
prediction

Support mask
Cosine
Similarity

Support image

CNN

Query Feature maps
Query image

Figure 1. Our goal is to segment a foreground object class in a
query image, given a single (few) support image(s) showing the
same class with the known ground-truth segmentation mask(s).
The target class may appear in the query and support images in
different numbers of instances and 3D poses. Recent work uses
cosine similarity to first estimate a similarity map between CNN
features of the query and support images. The similarity map is
then used for segmentation of the target class in the query image.

1. Introduction
This paper is about few-shot segmentation of foreground
objects in images. As Fig. 1 shows, given only a few training examples – called support images – and their groundtruth segmentation of the target object class, our goal is to
segment the target class in the query image. This problem is
challenging, because the support and query images may significantly differ in the number of instances and 3D poses of
the target class, as illustrated in Fig. 1. This important problem arises in many applications dealing with scarce training
examples of target classes.
Recently, prior work has addressed this problem by training an object segmenter on a large training set, under the
few-shot constraint [26, 6, 20]. The training set is split
into many small subsets. In every subset, one image serves
as the query and the other(s) as the support image(s) with
known ground truth(s). As shown in Fig. 1, their framework uses a CNN – e.g., VGG [27] or ResNet [12] – for

extracting feature maps from the support and query images. The support’s feature maps are first pooled over
the known ground-truth foreground. Then, the support’s
masked-pooled features are used to estimate a cosine similarity map with the query’s features. The resulting similarity
map and the query’s features are finally passed to a few convolutional layers in order to segment the target object class
in the query. The incurred loss between the prediction and
the query’s ground-truth is used for the CNN’s training.
The above framework has two critical limitations which
we address in this paper. First, we experimentally found that
the CNN has a tendency to learn non-discriminative features
with high activations for different classes. To address this
issue, as Fig. 2 shows, our first contribution extends prior
work by efficiently estimating feature relevance so as to encourage that their activations are high inside the groundtruth locations of the target class, and low elsewhere in the

622

