Deep Metric Learning with Tuplet Margin Loss
Baosheng Yu and Dacheng Tao
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science,
Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
{baosheng.yu, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep metric learning focuses on learning a deep feature
embedding consistent with semantic similarity, i.e., a small
intra-class variation and a large inter-class variation [38,
35]. It has been proven that deep metric learning methods
are extremely valuable in visual recognition tasks such as
one-shot learning [5, 29], image retrieval [9, 18], person reidentification [39, 12], and face recognition [27, 23]. With
the growing scale of training data, i.e., both the number
of samples and classes, deep metric learning loss function
has attracted more and more attention in large-scale visual
recognition tasks [23, 17].
Deep metric learning loss function can be divided into
two main groups: (1) classification-based loss functions,
e.g., large-margin softmax loss [14] and center loss [36];
and (2) distance-based loss functions, e.g., contrastive
loss [2, 27] and triplet loss [24, 23]. However, existing
loss functions usually suffer from several inherent draw-

¡
¢
s cosµani ¡cos(µap¡¯)

e

Deep metric learning, in which the loss function plays a
key role, has proven to be extremely useful in visual recognition tasks. However, existing deep metric learning loss
functions such as contrastive loss and triplet loss usually
rely on delicately selected samples (pairs or triplets) for fast
convergence. In this paper, we propose a new deep metric
learning loss function, tuplet margin loss, using randomly
selected samples from each mini-batch. Specifically, the
proposed tuplet margin loss implicitly up-weights hard samples and down-weights easy samples, while a slack margin
in angular space is introduced to mitigate the problem of
overfitting on the hardest sample. Furthermore, we address
the problem of intra-pair variation by disentangling classspecific information to improve the generalizability of tuplet margin loss. Experimental results on three widely used
deep metric learning datasets, CARS196, CUB200-2011,
and Stanford Online Products, demonstrate significant improvements over existing deep metric learning methods.

¯ =0
¯ >0

xp
xni

xa
xp

xa
xni

1
Easy

0
Hard
cosµani ¡cos(µap¡¯)

Figure 1: An illustration of tuplet margin loss function.
Given a tuplet (xa , xp , xn1 , . . . , xnk−1 ), tuplet margin loss
exponentially up-weights hard triplets and down-weights
easy triplets within the tuplet. Specifically, the loss of each
triplet (xa , xp , xni ) is defined by the scale factor s > 1 and
the violate margin cos θani −cos θap . A slack margin β > 0
is used to mitigate the problem of overfitting on the hardest triplets by paying more attention to “moderately hard
triplets” (the shaded area). See more details in Section 3.3.

backs. Specifically, classification-based loss functions usually use a classification layer or a reference point for each
class [36], in which both the computation and the requirements on device memory increase linearly with the number of classes [8]. Recently, several methods such as dynamic class selection [43] and distributed parallel acceleration [4] have been developed to relieve the computation and
memory bottlenecks in classification-based loss functions,
while the discussion of approximation algorithms for massive classification is beyond the scope of this paper. Regardless of the heavy classification layer or massive reference points, distance-based loss functions directly optimize the margin between intra- and inter-class distances,
and are independent with the number of classes [23]. However, existing distance-based loss functions, e.g., triplet loss,
16490

