Frame-to-Frame Aggregation of Active Regions in Web Videos for Weakly
Supervised Semantic Segmentation

1

Jungbeom Lee1
Eunji Kim1
Sungmin Lee1
Jangho Lee1
Sungroh Yoon1,2,∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
2
ASRI, INMC, ISRC, and Institute of Engineering Research, Seoul National University
{jbeom.lee93, kce407, simonlee0810, ubuntu, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the most important
tasks in computer vision and one that has made tremendous progress with fully annotated pixel-level labels [52, 3].
However, real applications of semantic image segmentation
require a large variety of object classes and a great deal of
labeled data for each class, and labeling pixel-level annotations is laborious. This problem can be addressed by weakly
supervised methods that use more easily obtainable annotations such as scribbles, bounding boxes, or image-level tags.
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation methods have
evolved rapidly. Scribble supervision [39] can now achieve
97% of the performance of manually supervised semantic segmentation with the same backbone network, and
even the weakest image-level supervision [24] can produce
∗ Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.

Bicycle

Warp &
Aggregation

Person

(a)
Mult i

Bicycle

Single

Person

When a deep neural network is trained on data with only
image-level labeling, the regions activated in each image
tend to identify only a small region of the target object. We
propose a method of using videos automatically harvested
from the web to identify a larger region of the target object
by using temporal information, which is not present in the
static image. The temporal variations in a video allow different regions of the target object to be activated. We obtain
an activated region in each frame of a video, and then aggregate the regions from successive frames into a single image, using a warping technique based on optical flow. The
resulting localization maps cover more of the target object,
and can then be used as proxy ground-truth to train a segmentation network. This simple approach outperforms existing methods under the same level of supervision, and even
approaches relying on extra annotations. Based on VGG-16
and ResNet 101 backbones, our method achieves the mIoU
of 65.0 and 67.4, respectively, on PASCAL VOC 2012 test
images, which represents a new state-of-the-art.

Optical Flows

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Our method discovers activated regions from
each frame and aggregates them into a single frame using a
warping technique based on optical flow. (b) Comparison of
generated proxy ground truth masks obtained from a single
frame (1st row) and aggregated for multiple frames (2nd
row). The latter covers larger region of the target objects
because it embodies information from several frames.
90% of that performance. However, the rate at which segmentation techniques relying on weak annotations are improving is declining rapidly. For instance, under imagelevel supervision, a 7.9% improvement on PASCAL VOC
2012 validation images [7] was achieved between 2016 and
2017 [23, 2], 1.8% between 2017 and 2018 [46], but only
0.8% since then [24].
Most methods of weakly supervised segmentation use
localization maps activated by a classifier (e.g. a CAM [53])
as a proxy ground truth to train their segmentation network.
However, because such localization maps are coarse and
therefore activate only part of a target object, they provide a
poor version of proxy ground truth. Some researchers have

6808

