WoodScape: A multi-task, multi-camera fisheye dataset for autonomous driving
Senthil Yogamani, Ciarán Hughes, Jonathan Horgan, Ganesh Sistu, Padraig Varley, Derek O’Dea,
Michal Uřičář, Stefan Milz, Martin Simon, Karl Amende, Christian Witt, Hazem Rashed,
Sumanth Chennupati, Sanjaya Nayak, Saquib Mansoor, Xavier Perrotton, Patrick Pérez
https://github.com/valeoai/WoodScape

3D Box Lidar View

Front Camera

Lidar Bird-View

Left Camera

firstname.lastname@valeo.com

Front Camera & Semantic Segmentation

Right Camera

Rear Camera

Figure 1: We introduce WoodScape, the first fisheye image dataset dedicated to autonomous driving. It contains four cameras
covering 360° accompanied by a HD laser scanner, IMU and GNSS. Annotations are made available for nine tasks, notably
3D object detection, depth estimation (overlaid on front camera) and semantic segmentation as illustrated here.

Abstract
Lidar 3D View

Fisheye cameras are commonly employed for obtaining a
large field of view in surveillance, augmented reality and in
particular automotive applications. In spite of their prevalence, there are few public datasets for detailed evaluation
of computer vision algorithms on fisheye images. We release the first extensive fisheye automotive dataset, WoodScape, named after Robert Wood who invented the fisheye
camera in 1906. WoodScape comprises of four surround
view cameras and nine tasks including segmentation, depth
estimation, 3D bounding box detection and soiling detection. Semantic annotation of 40 classes at the instance level
is provided for over 10,000 images and annotation for other
tasks are provided for over 100,000 images. With WoodScape, we would like to encourage the community to adapt
computer vision models for fisheye camera instead of using
naı̈ve rectification.

1. Introduction
Fisheye lenses provide a large field of view (FOV) using a highly non-linear mapping instead of the standard perspective projection. However, it comes at the cost of strong
radial distortion. Fisheye cameras are so-named because

they relate to the 180° view of the world that a fish has observing the water surface from below, a phenomenon known
as Snell’s window. Robert Wood originally coined the term
in 1906 [58], and constructed a basic fisheye camera by taking a pin-hole camera and filling it with water. It was later
replaced with a hemispherical lens [3]. To pay homage to
the original inventor and coiner of the term “fisheye”, we
have named our dataset WoodScape.
Large FOV cameras are necessary for various computer
vision application domains, including video surveillance
[28] and augmented reality [46], and have been of particular
interest in autonomous driving [23]. In automotive, rearview fisheye cameras are commonly deployed in existing
vehicles for dashboard viewing and reverse parking. While
commercial autonomous driving systems typically make
use of narrow FOV forward facing cameras at present,
full 360° perception is now investigated for handling
more complex use cases. In spite of this growing interest,
there is relatively little literature and datasets available.
Some examples of the few datasets that have fisheye are:
Visual SLAM ground truth for indoor scenes with omnidirectional cameras in [7], SphereNet [9] containing 1200
labelled images of parked cars using 360° cameras (not
strictly fisheye) and, in automotive, the Oxford Robotcar
19308

