Deep Floor Plan Recognition Using a Multi-Task Network
with Room-Boundary-Guided Attention
Zhiliang Zeng Xianzhi Li Ying Kin Yu Chi-Wing Fu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{zlzeng,xzli,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

ykyu.hk@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper presents a new approach to recognize elements in floor plan layouts. Besides walls and rooms, we
aim to recognize diverse floor plan elements, such as doors,
windows and different types of rooms, in the floor layouts.
To this end, we model a hierarchy of floor plan elements and
design a deep multi-task neural network with two tasks: one
to learn to predict room-boundary elements, and the other
to predict rooms with types. More importantly, we formulate the room-boundary-guided attention mechanism in our
spatial contextual module to carefully take room-boundary
features into account to enhance the room-type predictions.
Furthermore, we design a cross-and-within-task weighted
loss to balance the multi-label tasks and prepare two new
datasets for floor plan recognition. Experimental results
demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of our network over the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
To recognize floor plan elements in a layout requires the
learning of semantic information in the floor plans. It is
not merely a general segmentation problem since floor plans
present not only the individual floor plan elements, such as
walls, doors, windows, and closets, etc., but also how the
elements relate to one another, and how they are arranged
to make up different types of rooms. While recognizing
semantic information in floor plans is generally straightforward for humans, automatically processing floor plans and
recognizing layout semantics is a very challenging problem
in image understanding and document analysis.
Traditionally, the problem is solved based on low-level
image processing methods [14, 2, 7] that exploit heuristics
to locate the graphical notations in the floor plans. Clearly,
simply relying on hand-crafted features is insufficient, since
it lacks generality to handle diverse conditions.
Recent methods [11, 5, 20] for the problem has begun to
explore deep learning approaches. Liu et al. [11] designed a

Figure 1. Our network is able to recognize walls of nonuniform
thickness (see boxes 2, 4, 5), walls that meet at irregular junctions
(see boxes 1, 2), curved walls (see box 3), and various room types
in the layout; see Figure 2 for the legend of the color labels.

convolutional neural network (CNN) to recognize junction
points in a floor plan image and connected the junctions to
locate walls. The method, however, can only locate walls
of uniform thickness along XY-principal directions in the
image. Later, Yamasaki et al. [20] adopted a fully convolutional network to label pixels in a floor plan; however,
the method simply uses a general segmentation network to
recognize pixels of different classes and ignores the spatial
relations between floor plan elements and room boundary.
This paper presents a new method for floor plan recognition, with a focus on recognizing diverse floor plan elements, e.g., walls, doors, rooms, closets, etc.; see Figure 1
for two example results and Figure 2 for the legend. These
elements are inter-related graphical elements with structural
semantics in the floor plans. To approach the problem, we
model a hierarchy of labels for the floor plan elements and
design a deep multi-task neural network based on the hierarchy. Our network learns shared features from the input floor plan and refines the features to learn to recognize individual elements. Specifically, we design the spatial
contextual module to explore the spatial relations between
19096

