Multi-Level Bottom-Top and Top-Bottom Feature Fusion for Crowd Counting
Vishwanath A. Sindagi
Vishal M. Patel
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles St, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
{vishwanathsindagi,vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Crowd counting presents enormous challenges in the
form of large variation in scales within images and across
the dataset. These issues are further exacerbated in highly
congested scenes. Approaches based on straightforward fusion of multi-scale features from a deep network seem to
be obvious solutions to this problem. However, these fusion approaches do not yield significant improvements in
the case of crowd counting in congested scenes. This is
usually due to their limited abilities in effectively combining the multi-scale features for problems like crowd counting. To overcome this, we focus on how to efficiently leverage information present in different layers of the network.
Specifically, we present a network that involves: (i) a multilevel bottom-top and top-bottom fusion (MBTTBF) method
to combine information from shallower to deeper layers and
vice versa at multiple levels, (ii) scale complementary feature extraction blocks (SCFB) involving cross-scale residual functions to explicitly enable flow of complementary
features from adjacent conv layers along the fusion paths.
Furthermore, in order to increase the effectiveness of the
multi-scale fusion, we employ a principled way of generating scale-aware ground-truth density maps for training. Experiments conducted on three datasets that contain highly
congested scenes (ShanghaiTech, UCF CROWD 50, and
UCF-QNRF) demonstrate that the proposed method is able
to outperform several recent methods in all the datasets.

1. Introduction
Computer vision-based crowd counting [8, 17, 26, 27,
36, 44, 48, 56, 68, 69, 74, 77] has witnessed tremendous
progress in the recent years. Algorithms developed for
crowd counting have found a variety of applications such
as video and traffic surveillance [15, 21, 38, 59, 64, 71, 72],
agriculture monitoring (plant counting) [35], cell counting
[22], scene understanding, urban planning and environmental survey [11, 68].
Crowd counting from a single image, especially in con-

gested scenes, is a difficult problem since it suffers from
multiple issues like high variability in scales, occlusions,
perspective changes, background clutter, etc. Recently,
several convolutional neural network (CNN) based methods [3, 7, 34, 43, 48, 49, 51, 56, 69, 74] have attempted
to address these issues with varying degree of successes.
Among these issues, the problem of scale variation has
particularly received considerable attention from the research community. Scale variation typically refers to large
variations in scale of the objects being counted (in this
case heads) (i) within image and (ii) across images in
a dataset. Several other related tasks like object detection [6, 16, 23, 30, 37, 45] and visual saliency detection
[10, 14, 41, 73] are also affected by such effects. However,
these effects are more evident especially in crowd counting
in congested scenes. Furthermore, since the annotation process for highly congested scenes is notoriously challenging,
the datasets available for crowd counting typically provide
only x, y location information about the heads in the images. Since the scale labels are unavailable, training the
networks to be robust to scale variations is much more challenging. In this work, we focus on addressing the issue of
scale variation and missing scale information from the annotations.
CNNs are known to be relatively less robust to the presence of such scale variations and hence, special techniques
are required to mitigate their effects. Using features from
different layers of a deep network is one approach that has
been successful in addressing this issue for other problems
like object detection. It is well known that feature maps
from shallower layers encode low-level details and spatial
information [6, 13, 29, 42, 67], which can be exploited to
achieve better localization. However, such features are typically noisy and require further processing. Meanwhile,
deeper layers encode high-level context and semantic information [6, 13, 29, 42] due to their larger receptive field
sizes, and can aid in incorporating global context into the
network. However, these features lack spatial resolution,
resulting in poor localization. Motivated by these observations, we believe that high-level global semantic informa-

1002

