An Alarm System for Segmentation Algorithm Based on Shape Model
Fengze Liu1 , Yingda Xia1 , Dong Yang2 , Alan Yuille1 , Daguang Xu2
1
Johns Hopkins University, 2 NVIDIA Corporation

Abstract
It is usually hard for a learning system to predict correctly on rare events that never occur in the training data,
and there is no exception for segmentation algorithms.
Meanwhile, manual inspection of each case to locate the
failures becomes infeasible due to the trend of large data
scale and limited human resource. Therefore, we build an
alarm system that will set off alerts when the segmentation
result is possibly unsatisfactory, assuming no corresponding ground truth mask is provided. One plausible solution
is to project the segmentation results into a low dimensional
feature space; then learn classifiers/regressors to predict
their qualities. Motivated by this, in this paper, we learn a
feature space using the shape information which is a strong
prior shared among different datasets and robust to the appearance variation of input data. The shape feature is captured using a Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) network that
trained with only the ground truth masks. During testing,
the segmentation results with bad shapes shall not fit the
shape prior well, resulting in large loss values. Thus, the
VAE is able to evaluate the quality of segmentation result on
unseen data, without using ground truth. Finally, we learn
a regressor in the one-dimensional feature space to predict
the qualities of segmentation results. Our alarm system is
evaluated on several recent state-of-art segmentation algorithms for 3D medical segmentation tasks. Compared with
other standard quality assessment methods, our system consistently provides more reliable prediction on the qualities
of segmentation results.

1. Introduction
Segmentation algorithms often fail on rare events, and
it is hard to fully avoid such issue. The rare events may
occur due to limited number of training data. The most intuitive way to handle this problem is to increase the number
of training data. However, the labelled data is usually hard
to collect especially in medical domain, e.g., fully annotating a 3D medical CT scan requires professional radiology
knowledge and several hours of work. Meanwhile, even

CT image

Ground Truth

Prediction

Ground Truth
(Reconstruction)

Prediction
(Reconstruction)

Uncertainty

Figure 1. The visualize on an NIH CT data for pancreas segmentation. The Dice between GT and Prediction is 47.06 (real Dice)
while the Dice between Prediction and Prediction(Reconstruction)
from VAE is 47.25 (fake Dice). Our method uses the fake Dice to
predict the former real Dice which is usually unknown at inference
phase of real applications. This case shows how these two Dice
scores are related to each other. In contrast, the uncertainty used
in existing approaches (introduced in section 2) mainly distributes
on the boundary of predicted mask, which makes it a vague information when detecting the failure cases.

large number of labelled data is usually unable to cover all
possible cases. Previously, various methods have been proposed to make better use of the training data, like sampling
strategies paying more attention to the rare events [25]. But
still they may fail on rare events that never occur in the training data. Another direction is to increase the robustness of
the segmentation algorithm to rare events. [10] proposed the
Bayesian neural network that models the uncertainty as an
additional loss to make the algorithm more robust to noisy
data. These kinds of methods make the algorithm insensitive to certain types of perturbations, but the algorithms may
still fail on other perturbations.
Since it is hard to completely prevent the segmentation
algorithm from failure, we consider detecting the failure instead: build up an alarm system cooperating with the segmentation algorithm, which will set off alerts when the system finds that the segmentation result is not good enough.

10652

