Spatial Correspondence with Generative Adversarial Network:
Learning Depth from Monocular Videos

1

Zhenyao Wu1,∗ , Xinyi Wu1,∗, Xiaoping Zhang2 , Song Wang1,3,† , Lili Ju1,3,†
University of South Carolina, USA 2 Wuhan University, China 3 Farsee2 Technology Ltd, China

{zhenyao, xinyiw}@email.sc.edu, xpzhang.math@whu.edu.cn, songwang@cec.sc.edu, ju@math.sc.edu

Abstract
Depth estimation from monocular videos has important
applications in many areas such as autonomous driving and
robot navigation. It is a very challenging problem without knowing the camera pose since errors in camera-pose
estimation can significantly affect the video-based depth
estimation accuracy. In this paper, we present a novel
SC-GAN network with end-to-end adversarial training for
depth estimation from monocular videos without estimating the camera pose and pose change over time. To exploit cross-frame relations, SC-GAN includes a spatial correspondence module which uses Smolyak sparse grids to
efficiently match the features across adjacent frames, and
an attention mechanism to learn the importance of features
in different directions. Furthermore, the generator in SCGAN learns to estimate depth from the input frames, while
the discriminator learns to distinguish between the groundtruth and estimated depth map for the reference frame. Experiments on the KITTI and Cityscapes datasets show that
the proposed SC-GAN can achieve much more accurate
depth maps than many existing state-of-the-art methods on
monocular videos.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation from 2D images or videos is critical for
many computer-vision applications, including robotics [4],
autonomous driving [9, 23], 3D reconstruction [58] and
augmented realities [11]. As in many other computer vision
tasks, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
widely applied to depth estimation with significant success
in recent years, such as estimating depth from single images [18, 19, 20, 40, 2, 57], stereo images [8, 38], multiview images [32, 49, 51, 54] and monocular videos [37,
60, 59, 48, 42, 55]. Among them, depth estimation from
monocular videos has drawn more and more interests in recent years since 1) it only requires one monocular camera
∗ Equal contribution, † Co-corresponding authors.

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 1. An illustration of the spatial relations between adjacent
frames and depth estimation. (a) The reference frame; (b) the corresponding features between two adjacent frames; (c) the depth
map estimated by the proposed SC-GAN.

as in many real scenarios, and 2) spatial relations between
adjacent frames provide important information for depth estimation. The goal of our work focuses on developing new
CNN models for depth estimation from monocular videos.
Different from stereo matching where the input pair
of stereo images are taken by two cameras with a fixed
relative pose, the camera pose change between adjacent
frames in videos are time-varying and unknown priorly,
which makes depth estimation from monocular videos a
very challenging problem. Most of the available methods
address this problem by first estimating the camera pose
and pose change over time, usually by training respective
CNNs [46, 50, 60]. For these methods, errors in camerapose estimation can significantly affect the accuracy of final
depth estimation [51].
In this paper, we develop a novel network of SC-GAN
(Spatial Correspondence with Generative Adversarial Network) to exploit latent information between adjacent frames
of a monocular video and estimate the depth by supervised
training. We first propose a spatial correspondence (SC)
module to match the features between adjacent frames, as

7494

