Perspective-Guided Convolution Networks for Crowd Counting
Zhaoyi Yan1†, Yuchen Yuan2 , Wangmeng Zuo1,3∗, Xiao Tan2 , Yezhen Wang1 , Shilei Wen2 , Errui Ding2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
yanzhaoyi@outlook.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn
{tanxchong, yezhen.wang0305}@gmail.com

{yuanyuchen02, wenshilei, dingerrui}@baidu.com

Abstract
Count: 21.0

In this paper, we propose a novel perspective-guided
convolution (PGC) for convolutional neural network (CNN)
based crowd counting (i.e. PGCNet), which aims to overcome the dramatic intra-scene scale variations of people
due to the perspective effect. While most state-of-the-arts
adopt multi-scale or multi-column architectures to address
such issue, they generally fail in modeling continuous scale
variations since only discrete representative scales are considered. PGCNet, on the other hand, utilizes perspective information to guide the spatially variant smoothing
of feature maps before feeding them to the successive convolutions. An effective perspective estimation branch is
also introduced to PGCNet, which can be trained in either supervised setting or weakly-supervised setting when
the branch has been pre-trained. Our PGCNet is singlecolumn with moderate increase in computation, and extensive experimental results on four benchmark datasets
show the improvements of our method against the stateof-the-arts. Additionally, we also introduce Crowd Surveillance, a large scale dataset for crowd counting that contains
13,000+ high-resolution images with challenging scenarios. Code and pre-trained models are available at https:
//github.com/Zhaoyi-Yan/PGCNet.

1. Introduction
The growth of global population and urbanization has
been consistently promoting the frequency of crowd gathering. In such scenarios, stampedes and crushes can be life
threatening and should always be prevented. Congested
scene analysis and understanding is thus essential to the
management, control, and security guarding of crowd gathering in cities. Among the developments in congested scene
analysis, crowd counting [28, 10] is one of the fundamental
† This work was done when Zhaoyi Yan was a research intern at Baidu
∗ Corresponding author

Count: 5.0

(a) Input
Count: 17.6

Count: 4.3

(c) CSRNet

(b) Ground-truth
Count: 21.3

Count: 5.2

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Density map estimations by CSRNet [11] and our PGCNet. The MAE of our PGCNet is 2.8, much lower than that of
CSRNet (7.7). It is observed that PGCNet has consistent better
performances at either smaller or larger scales among the marked
regions.

tasks, and recently has drawn considerable attention from
the computer vision community.
Single image based crowd counting remains an active but
challenging topic due to the complex distribution of people,
non-uniform illumination, inter- and intra-scene scale variations, cluttering and occlusions, etc. Existing crowd counting methods can be broadly classified into three categories,
i.e. detection-based [22, 14], regression-based [7, 27], and
CNN-based methods [11, 15]. Among them, CNN-based
methods have been studied in depth in the past few years,
and have achieved superior performances in terms of accuracy and robustness.
However, the dramatic intra-scene scale variations of
people due to the perspective effect forms a major challenge. Existing methods [6, 19, 23, 26, 29, 30] usually
adopt multi-scale or multi-column architectures to fuse the

952

