Motion Guided Attention for Video Salient Object Detection
Haofeng Li1
Guanqi Chen2
Guanbin Li2∗
1
2
The University of Hong Kong
Sun Yat-sen University

Yizhou Yu1,3
3
Deepwise AI Lab

lhaof@foxmail.com, chengq26@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Video salient object detection aims at discovering the
most visually distinctive objects in a video. How to effectively take object motion into consideration during video
salient object detection is a critical issue. Existing stateof-the-art methods either do not explicitly model and harvest motion cues or ignore spatial contexts within optical
flow images. In this paper, we develop a multi-task motion
guided video salient object detection network, which learns
to accomplish two sub-tasks using two sub-networks, one
sub-network for salient object detection in still images and
the other for motion saliency detection in optical flow images. We further introduce a series of novel motion guided
attention modules, which utilize the motion saliency subnetwork to attend and enhance the sub-network for still images. These two sub-networks learn to adapt to each other
by end-to-end training. Experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed method significantly outperforms existing
state-of-the-art algorithms on a wide range of benchmarks.
We hope our simple and effective approach will serve as a
solid baseline and help ease future research in video salient
object detection. Code and models will be made available.

1. Introduction
Video salient object detection aims at discovering the
most visually distinctive objects in a video, and identifying all pixels covering these salient objects. Video saliency
detection tasks can be roughly categorized into two groups.
The first group focuses on predicting eye fixations of viewers in a video, which may help biologically understand the
inner mechanism of the human visual and cognitive systems. The second group requires the segmentation of the
most important or visually prominent objects from a potentially cluttered background. In this paper, we attempt to address the second problem, namely, video salient object detection (SOD). A visual SOD model can serve as an impor∗ Corresponding author is Guanbin Li.

(i)

(ii)
video

optical flow appearance
model

motion
model

ours

GT

Figure 1. Effectiveness of our proposed network. An appearance
based saliency model and a motion based saliency model, which
take an RGB video frame and an optical flow image as their input respectively, have their own advantages and weaknesses. Our
proposed method successfully complements an appearance branch
with a motion branch, and outperforms any one of them.

tant pre-processing component for many applications, for
examples, image and video compression [16], visual tracking [45] and person re-identification [50].
The most important difference between static images and
videos is that objects in videos have motion, which is also
a key factor that causes visual attention. That is, the motion
of certain objects may make the object more prominent than
others. How to effectively take object motion into consideration during video salient object detection is a critical issue
for the following reasons. First, object saliency in a video is
not only determined by object appearance (including color,
texture and semantics), but also affected by object motion
between consecutive frames. Itti et al. [17] suggest that differences between consecutive frames resulting from object
motion are more attractive to human attention. Second, object motion provides an essential hint on spatial coherence.
Neighboring image patches with similar displacements very
possibly belong to the same foreground object, or the background region. Third, exploiting motion cues makes the
segmentation of salient objects in a video easier, and hence,
produces saliency maps of higher quality. For example, in
RGB frames, the background may contain diverse contents
with different colors and texture, and the foreground object
may be composed of parts with sharp edges and different
appearances. It is challenging to locate and segment complete salient objects in such video frames without motion
cues.
Video saliency detection have attracted a wide range of
research interests in the field of computer vision. How-

7274

