Scaling Recurrent Models via Orthogonal Approximations in Tensor Trains
Ronak Mehta1 , Rudrasis Chakraborty2 , Yunyang Xiong1 , and Vikas Singh1
ronakrm@cs.wisc.edu
rudra@berkeley.edu
1
University of Wisconsin Madison

Abstract
Modern deep networks have proven to be very effective
for analyzing real world images. However, their application in medical imaging is still in its early stages, primarily
due to the large size of three-dimensional images, requiring
enormous convolutional or fully connected layers – if we
treat an image (and not image patches) as a sample. These
issues only compound when the focus moves towards longitudinal analysis of 3D image volumes through recurrent
structures, and when a point estimate of model parameters
is insufficient in scientific applications where a reliability
measure is necessary. Using insights from differential geometry, we adapt the tensor train decomposition to construct
networks with significantly fewer parameters, allowing us to
train powerful recurrent networks on whole brain image volume sequences. We describe the “orthogonal” tensor train,
and demonstrate its ability to express a standard network
layer both theoretically and empirically. We show its ability
to effectively reconstruct whole brain volumes with faster
convergence and stronger confidence intervals compared to
the standard tensor train decomposition. We provide code
and show experiments on the ADNI dataset using image
sequences to regress on a cognition related outcome.

1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural networks (RNNs) and its variants are
the de facto tool of choice for modeling sequential data
in machine learning and vision. But until only recently,
these models have been limited in their ability to model
high-dimensional data. Part of the reason is that recurrent
structures often lead to large model sizes dependent on sequence length, and thus also require an equivalent number of
increased computation. While RNNs have been successfully
applied to video data in some cases, the strategy requires
problem specific innovations because of the large mapping
necessary from inputs to hidden representations. It is fair to
say that the growth in the number of model parameters in

yxiong43@wisc.edu
vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu
2
University of California Berkeley

various types of recurrent models remains a bottleneck for
high dimensional datasets. Convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), on the other hand, handle high dimensional data far
better and can reduce the dimension of an input significantly
by deriving rich feature maps. Most computer vision tasks
involve some form of a CNN within the architecture, but
incorporating CNNs within recurrent structures seamlessly
to mitigate the RNN specific model size issues described
above is not always straightforward. Notice that a direct
replacement of input and output layers with CNNs leads to a
shrinkage of the sequence length considerably [24], and pretraining CNN layers may lead to poor local minima when we
train without using an end-to-end pipeline [7]. Some recent
works suggest the use of dilated convolutional networks for
sequence modeling [28] to partly mitigate these issues, but
this line of work is still developing [31]. For model-size
reduction, both for RNN style networks and otherwise, PCA
or random projections [2,27] style “compression” ideas have
also been used with varying degrees of success.
An interesting perspective on the effective degrees of freedom afforded by a given network, a surrogate for the actual
“size” of the architecture, is provided by tensor methods. Tensor decomposition based methods have recently been shown
to enable low dimensional representations of very high dimensional data [13], and while these ideas were known to be
effective in the “shallow” regime much earlier, new results
also demonstrate their applicability for deep neural networks.
In particular, in the last year, we see a number of tensor based
methods being successfully adapted for deep neural network
design and compression [4, 25, 29, 30]. Specifically, [26]
shows that these compression methods can be very effective
in reducing the parameter cost of weight layers in RNNs,
enabling simple video analysis tasks that previously would
have been computationally prohibitive.
There are a number of key reasons why the size of the
model, especially in the context of formulations for sequential data, is central to this paper. Our goal is to design rich
sequential or recurrent models to analyze a longitudinal sequence of high dimensional 3D brain images. This task

10571

