CamNet: Coarse-to-Fine Retrieval for Camera Re-Localization
Mingyu Ding1 Zhe Wang2 Jiankai Sun3 Jianping Shi2 Ping Luo1
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{dingmyu,pluo.lhi}@gmail.com
sj019@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
{wangzhe,shijianping}@sensetime.com
Abstract
Camera re-localization is an important but challenging task in applications like robotics and autonomous driving. Recently, retrieval-based methods have been considered as a promising direction as they can be easily generalized to novel scenes. Despite significant progress has been
made, we observe that the performance bottleneck of previous methods actually lies in the retrieval module. These
methods use the same features for both retrieval and relative pose regression tasks which have potential conflicts
in learning. To this end, here we present a coarse-to-fine
retrieval-based deep learning framework, which includes
three steps, i.e., image-based coarse retrieval, pose-based
fine retrieval and precise relative pose regression. With our
carefully designed retrieval module, the relative pose regression task can be surprisingly simpler. We design novel
retrieval losses with batch hard sampling criterion and twostage retrieval to locate samples that adapt to the relative
pose regression task. Extensive experiments show that our
model (CamNet) outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
by a large margin on both indoor and outdoor datasets.

1. Introduction
The task of camera re-localization has long been studied in various visual SLAM systems [25] or structure from
motion (SfM) systems. These approaches are built on the
elegant multi-view geometry theory by optimizing the geometric constraints from low-level key points. Hand-craft
image descriptors (e.g., SIFT, ORB [28, 4]) are widely used
to find the correspondences between the local features extracted from images. The 6-DoF camera pose is then recovered from such correspondences. However, these methods
have difficulty in dealing with texture-less scenes, or places
with drastic changes in illumination, occlusions and repetitive structures. Also, the computational expense is high.
Recently, a variety of machine learning algorithms have
been applied to this problem. Some methods based on Random Forest [9, 23, 35, 40] establish 2D-3D matches to re-

GT
Ours
MapNet++
NN-Net
Retrieval (Top 3)

Our CamNet

NN-Net

Figure 1: Our CamNet outperforms the state-of-the-art
image-based method MapNet++ [7] by a large margin. As a
retrieval-based model, the CamNet shows more accurate retrieval results than NN-Net [18]. The top 3 retrieval results
are displayed.
cover 6-DoF camera pose by applying RANSAC to achieve
impressing results. Combining the differentiable counterpart of RANSAC and fully convolutional neural network
(FCN), [5, 6] are proposed for more robust 2D-3D matches.
While this approach achieves state-of-the-art results, it requires additional depth maps associated with input images
at training time.
Inspired by the success of deep learning models, a series
of approaches [17, 41, 15, 16, 7, 38, 39] have been proposed
to regress the absolute camera pose directly from RGB images. In essence, these models “remember” the scene by
leveraging the expressive power of deep models. However,
it means that they have to be retrained for unseen scenes,
which largely limits their generalization capabilities. The
other category of deep learning methods [18, 3] builds a
database with extracted features of images from the target
scene as well as the ground truth absolute poses. Then given
a query image, it first retrieve the most similar image in the
database with its absolute poses and then predict the relative
12871

