LIP: Local Importance-based Pooling
Ziteng Gao Limin Wang∗ Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
Spatial downsampling layers are favored in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to downscale feature maps
for larger receptive fields and less memory consumption.
However, for discriminative tasks, there is a possibility that
these layers lose the discriminative details due to improper
pooling strategies, which could hinder the learning process
and eventually result in suboptimal models. In this paper,
we present a unified framework over the existing downsampling layers (e.g., average pooling, max pooling, and
strided convolution) from a local importance view. In this
framework, we analyze the issues of these widely-used pooling layers and figure out the criteria for designing an effective downsampling layer. According to this analysis, we
propose a conceptually simple, general, and effective pooling layer based on local importance modeling, termed as
Local Importance-based Pooling (LIP). LIP can automatically enhance discriminative features during the downsampling procedure by learning adaptive importance weights
based on inputs. Experiment results show that LIP consistently yields notable gains with different depths and different architectures on ImageNet classification. In the challenging MS COCO dataset, detectors with our LIP-ResNets
as backbones obtain a consistent improvement (≥ 1.4%)
over the vanilla ResNets, and especially achieve the current
state-of-the-art performance in detecting small objects under the single-scale testing scheme.1

1. Introduction
For discriminative tasks like image classification [8] and
object detection [27], the modern architectures of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) mostly utilize spatial downsampling (pooling) layers to reduce the spatial size of feature maps in the hidden layers. Such pooling layers are for
larger receptive fields and less memory consumption, especially in extremely deep networks [34, 15]. The widelyused max pooling, average pooling, and strided convolution
use a sliding window whose stride is larger than 1 and pool
∗ Corresponding author.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/sebgao/LIP.

activations
of patches

how to
downsample?

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation. (Left to right) the
original image, some nearby patches, corresponding illustrative activations in the feature map to downsample, and
last, the output activations that we need. Here, red-tone
activations are caused by the foreground bird. Blue-tone
activations are caused by the background clutter in the top
patch or the representive blue feather in the bottom patch.
We want to preserve the red-tone activations in the top patch
window and the blue-tone activations in the bottom. The
downsampling method should recognize discriminative features adaptively across sliding windows.
features by different strategies in each local window. But
these layers might prevent discriminative details from being well preserved, which are crucial for recognition and
detection task. This is especially undesirable for discriminative features of tiny objects, as such details might be
diluted with clutter activations or even not be sampled by
improper downsampling strategies.
In this paper, we aim to address these issues raised by the
existing downsampling layers. To analyze their drawbacks,
we present a unified framework from a local importance
view. Under this new perspective, the existing pooling procedure could be seen as aggregating features with their local
importance in each sliding window. To our best knowledge,
we are the first to present a framework from the importance
view for downsampling layers, which allows us to analyze
and improve the pooling methods in a more principled way.
As a result, we show that average and max pooling are both
suboptimal due to the strong assumption or the invalid prior
knowledge. Strided convolution adopts the improper interval sampling and also fails to model importance adaptively.
To overcome their limitations, we present a new pooling
method to learn importance weights automatically, coined
as Local Importance-based Pooling (LIP).
Basically, we argue that not all nearby pixels contribute

3355

