Dynamic Context Correspondence Network for Semantic Alignment
Shuaiyi Huang, Qiuyue Wang, Songyang Zhang, Shipeng Yan, Xuming He
ShanghaiTech University
{huangshy1, wangqy2, zhangsy1, yanshp, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Establishing semantic correspondence is a core problem
in computer vision and remains challenging due to large
intra-class variations and lack of annotated data. In this
paper, we aim to incorporate global semantic context in a
flexible manner to overcome the limitations of prior work
that relies on local semantic representations. To this end,
we first propose a context-aware semantic representation
that incorporates spatial layout for robust matching against
local ambiguities. We then develop a novel dynamic fusion strategy based on attention mechanism to weave the
advantages of both local and context features by integrating semantic cues from multiple scales. We instantiate our
strategy by designing an end-to-end learnable deep network, named as Dynamic Context Correspondence Network
(DCCNet). To train the network, we adopt a multi-auxiliary
task loss to improve the efficiency of our weakly-supervised
learning procedure. Our approach achieves superior or
competitive performance over previous methods on several
challenging datasets, including PF-Pascal, PF-Willow, and
TSS, demonstrating its effectiveness and generality.

1. Introduction
Estimating dense correspondence across related images
is a fundamental task in computer vision [33, 13, 15]. While
early works have focused on correspondence between images depicting the same object or scene, semantic alignment
aims to find dense correspondence between different objects
belonging to the same category [25]. Such semantic correspondence has attracted much attention recently [10, 31, 18]
due to its potential use in a broad range of real-world applications such as image editing [7], co-segmentation [35],
3D reconstruction and scene recognition [1, 27]. However,
this task remains extremely challenging because of large
intra-class variations, viewpoint changes, background clutters and lack of data with dense annotation [30, 31].
There has been tremendous progress in semantic correspondence recently, thanks to learned feature representations based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
the adoption of weak supervision strategy in network train-

Figure 1. Given a point in the source image (blue dots in column
1), our goal is to match the corresponding point (red squares in column 2) in the target image. The values of correlation score maps
(column 3) indicate the likelihood of the corresponding point locating at each location in the target image. Our model (row 2)
predicts correspondence with higher precision than the baseline
model [32] (row 1), demonstrating its robustness despite the repetitive patterns (blue dots in column 2).

ing [32, 31, 30, 18, 23, 19]. Most existing approaches
learn a convolutional feature embedding so that similar image patches are mapped close to each other in the feature
space, and use nearest neighbor search or geometric models for correspondence estimation [30, 31, 18, 23]. In order
to achieve localization precision and robustness against deformations, such feature representations typically capture
local image patterns which are insufficient to encode global
semantic cues. Consequently, they are particularly sensitive
to large intra-class variations and the presence of repetitive
patterns. While recent efforts [19, 32] introduce local neighborhood cues to improve the matching quality, their effectiveness is limited by the local operations and short-range
context.
In this work, we aim to address the aforementioned limitations by incorporating global context information and a
fusion mechanism that weaves the advantages of both local and spatial features for accurate semantic matching, as
shown in Fig. 1. To this end, we first introduce a contextaware semantic representation that integrates appearance
features with a self-similarity pattern descriptor, which enables us to capture global semantic context with spatial lay-

2010

