Fully Convolutional Pixel Adaptive Image Denoiser
Sungmin Cha1 and Taesup Moon1,2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 Department of Artificial Intelligence
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea 16419
{csm9493,tsmoon}@skku.edu
Abstract
We propose a new image denoising algorithm, dubbed as
Fully Convolutional Adaptive Image DEnoiser (FC-AIDE),
that can learn from an offline supervised training set with
a fully convolutional neural network as well as adaptively
fine-tune the supervised model for each given noisy image.
We significantly extend the framework of the recently proposed Neural AIDE, which formulates the denoiser to be
context-based pixelwise mappings and utilizes the unbiased
estimator of MSE for such denoisers. The two main contributions we make are; 1) implementing a novel fully convolutional architecture that boosts the base supervised model,
and 2) introducing regularization methods for the adaptive
fine-tuning such that a stronger and more robust adaptivity can be attained. As a result, FC-AIDE is shown to
possess many desirable features; it outperforms the recent
CNN-based state-of-the-art denoisers on all of the benchmark datasets we tested, and gets particularly strong for
various challenging scenarios, e.g., with mismatched image/noise characteristics or with scarce supervised training data. The source code our algorithm is available at
https://github.com/csm9493/FC-AIDE-Keras.

1. Introduction
Image denoising, which tries to recover a clean image
from its noisy observation, is one of the oldest and most
prevalent problems in image processing and low-level computer vision. While numerous algorithms have been proposed over the past few decades, e.g., [8, 2, 7, 11, 9, 21],
the current throne-holders in terms of the average denoising performance are convolutional neural network (CNN)based methods [38, 22, 31].
The main idea behind the CNN-based method is to treat
denoising as a supervised regression problem; namely, first
collect numerous clean-noisy image pairs as a supervised
training set, then learn a regression function that maps the
noisy image to the clean image. Such approach is relatively simple since it does not require any complex priors

on the underlying clean images and let CNN figure out to
learn the correct mapping from the vast training data. Despite the conceptual simplicity, several recent variations of
the CNN-based denoisers using residual learning [38], skipconnections [22], and densely connected structure [31] have
achieved impressive state-of-the-art performances.
However, we stress that one apparent drawback exists
in above methods; namely, they are solely based on offline batch training of CNN, hence, lack adaptivity to the
given noisy image subject to denoising. Such absence of
adaptivity, which is typically possessed in other prior or
optimization-based methods, e.g., [8, 2, 7, 11, 9, 21], can seriously deteriorate the denoising performance of the CNNbased methods in multiple practical scenarios in which various mismatches exist between the training data and the
given noisy image. One category of such mismatch is the
image mismatch, in which the image characteristics of the
given noisy image are not well represented in the offline
training set. The other category is noise mismatch, in which
the noise level or the distribution for the given noisy image is different from what the CNN has been trained for.
Above drawbacks can be partially addressed by building a
composite training set with multiple noise and image characteristics, e.g., the so-called blind training [16, 38], but the
limitation of such approach is evident since building largescale supervised training set that sufficiently contains all the
variations is not always possible in many applications.
To that end, we propose a new CNN-based denoising
algorithm that can learn from an offline supervised training set, like other recent state-of-the-arts, as well as adaptively fine-tune the denoiser for each given noisy image, like
other prior or optimization based methods. The main vehicle for devising our algorithm, dubbed as FC-AIDE (Fully
Convolutional Adaptive Image DEnoiser), is the framework
recently proposed in [4]. Namely, we formulate the denoiser to be context-based pixelwise mappings and obtain
the SURE (Stein’s Unbiased Risk Estimator)[30]-like estimated losses of the mean-squared errors (MSE) for the
mappings. Then, the specific mapping for each pixel is
learned with a neural network first by supervised training

4160

