Sampling Wisely: Deep Image Embedding by Top-k Precision Optimization
Jing Lu1∗
1

Chaofan Xu2,3∗ Wei Zhang2

Business Growth BU, JD

2

Lingyu Duan4

Tao Mei2

JD AI Research 3 Harbin Institute of Technology 4 Peking University

lvjing12@jd.com,xuchaofan1994@126.com,wzhang.cu@gmail.com,lingyu@pku.edu.cn,tmei@live.com

Abstract
Deep image embedding aims at learning a convolutional
neural network (CNN) based mapping function that maps
an image to a feature vector. The embedding quality is usually evaluated by the performance in image search tasks.
Since very few users bother to open the second page search
results, top-k precision mostly dominates the user experience and thus is one of the crucial evaluation metrics for
the embedding quality. Despite being extensively studied,
existing algorithms are usually based on heuristic observation without theoretical guarantee. Consequently, gradient
descent direction on the training loss is mostly inconsistent
with the direction of optimizing the concerned evaluation
metric. This inconsistency certainly misleads the training
direction and degrades the performance. In contrast, in this
paper, we propose a novel deep image embedding algorithm
with end-to-end optimization to top-k precision, the evaluation metric that is closely related to user experience. Specially, our loss function is constructed with Wisely Sampled
“misplaced” images along the top-k nearest neighbor decision boundary, so that the gradient descent update directly
promotes the concerned metric, top-k precision. Further
more, our theoretical analysis on the upper bounding and
consistency properties of the proposed loss supports that
minimizing our proposed loss is equivalent to maximizing
top-k precision. Experiments show that our proposed algorithm outperforms all compared state-of-the-art deep image
embedding algorithms on three benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep image embedding is a fundamental component for
a wide range of applications, such as image clustering [9],
visual product retrieval [41], face verification and identification [34, 25], object tracking [17], etc. The aim is to learn
∗ Equal Contribution. This work was done when the two authors were
in JD AI Research, Beijing, China.

Top 5 Neighbors
Query Image

𝐸

𝐹

Positive Image

B
A

Negative Image

Query

D

Gradient Descent

C
Figure 1. A toy example to illustrate our motivation. Consider a
task of learning a deep image embedding model, where top 5 precision is the concerned evaluation metric. Conventional algorithms
sample training images without focus on the top 5 nearest neighbor decision boundary. Since the number of candidates (batch
size) is much larger than 5, the probability of sampling just besides the decision boundary is extremely small. Assuming triplet
{Query, E, F } is sampled. The gradient descent might improve
the embedding but does not directly promote top-5 precision. In
contrast, the proposed algorithm wisely selects the misplaced images besides the boundary: A, B that should be out of the boundary and C, D that should be in the boundary. The gradient descent
pushes A, B, C, D in the direction of directly promoting top-5
precision from 35 to 55 .

a CNN based mapping function f that maps an image z to a
compact feature vector f (z) while preserving the semantic
distance. Namely, similar images should be embedded close
to each other while dissimilar images should be pushed far
away. Without loss of generality, the embedding quality is
mostly evaluated by the performance in a visual search task
[33, 22]. Since very few users bother to open the second
page search results, top-k precision (Prec@k for short) usually dominates the user experience. Consequently, Prec@k
has been considered as one of the crucial evaluation metrics
for the embedding quality.
Recent years have witnessed a variety of emerging studies for deep image embedding. Examples include con-

7961

