Deep Meta Functionals for Shape Representation
Gidi Littwin1 and Lior Wolf1,2
1

2

Tel Aviv University
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We present a new method for 3D shape reconstruction
from a single image, in which a deep neural network directly
maps an image to a vector of network weights. The network parametrized by these weights represents a 3D shape
by classifying every point in the volume as either within
or outside the shape. The new representation has virtually
unlimited capacity and resolution, and can have an arbitrary topology. Our experiments show that it leads to more
accurate shape inference from a 2D projection than the
existing methods, including voxel-, silhouette-, and meshbased methods. The code will be available at: https:
//github.com/gidilittwin/Deep-Meta.

1. Introduction
We propose a novel deep learning method for representing shape and for recovering that representation from a single input image. Every shape is represented as a deep neural network classifier g, which takes as input points in 3D
space. In addition, the parameters (weights) of the network
g are inferred from the input image, by another network f .
The method is elegant and enables an end-to-end training with a single and straightforward loss. As a level set
surface representation, one is guaranteed to obtain a continuous manifold. Since every point in 3D is assigned a
value by g, efficient (and even differentiable) rendering is
obtained. For the same reason, unlike voxel or point-cloud
based methods, the gradient information is given in every
point in 3D, making training efficient. This gradient information, however, is more informative near the shape’s
boundary. Therefore, we propose a simple scheme of selectively sampling 3D points during training, such that points
near the objects boundary are over-represented.
In contrast to most other methods, which suffer from a
capacity limitation, the capacity of the 3D surface is exponential in the number of parameters of network g. Even for
relatively small networks, it exceeds what is required by all
graphical applications.

In contrast to mesh based methods, the topology of the
resulting shape is not limited to a template shape and it can
have an arbitrary topological complexity.
Our experiments show that in addition to these modeling
and structural advantages, the method also results in better
benchmark performance than the existing ones.

2. Previous work
Propelled by the availability of large scale CAD collections such as ShapeNet [6] and the increase in GPU parallel
computing capabilities, learning based solutions have become the method of choice for reconstructing 3D shapes
from single images. Generally speaking, the 3D representations currently in use fall into three main categories: (i) grid
based methods, such as voxel, which are 3D extensions of
Pixels, (ii) topology preserving geometric methods, such as
polygon meshes, and (iii) un-ordered geometric structures
such as point clouds.
Grid based methods form the largest body of work in the
current literature. Voxels, however, do not scale well, due
to their cubic memory to resolution ratio. To address this
issue, researchers have come up with more efficient memory structures. Riegler et al. [34] , Tatarchenko et al. [35]
and Häne et al. [13] use nested tree structures (Octrees) to
leverage the inherent sparsity of the voxel representation.
Richter et al. [32] introduce an encoder decoder architecture, which decodes into 2D nested shape layers that enable
reconstruction of the 3D shape.
A different approach for handling the inherent sparsity
of the data is using a point cloud representation. Point
clouds form an efficient and scaleable representation. Fan
et al. [10] designed a point set generation network, which
Jiang et al. [17] improved, by adding a geometric consistency loss via re-projected silhouettes and a point-based adversarial loss. The clear disadvantage of this approach is
the ambiguous topology, which needs to be recovered in
post-processing, in order for the object to be properly lit
and textured.
Another form of 3D representation that is especially
suited for 2D projections is the polygon mesh. Kato et
11824

