StructureFlow: Image Inpainting via Structure-aware Appearance Flow
Yurui Ren1,2 Xiaoming Yu1,2 Ruonan Zhang2 Thomas H. Li3,1 Shan Liu4 Ge Li 1,2
1
School of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University 4 Tencent America
yrren@pku.edu.cn

xiaomingyu@pku.edu.cn

zhangrn@pcl.ac.cn

tli@aiit.org.cn

shanl@tencent.com

geli@ece.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Image inpainting techniques have shown significant improvements by using deep neural networks recently. However, most of them may either fail to reconstruct reasonable
structures or restore fine-grained textures. In order to solve
this problem, in this paper, we propose a two-stage model
which splits the inpainting task into two parts: structure reconstruction and texture generation. In the first stage, edgepreserved smooth images are employed to train a structure
reconstructor which completes the missing structures of the
inputs. In the second stage, based on the reconstructed
structures, a texture generator using appearance flow is designed to yield image details. Experiments on multiple publicly available datasets show the superior performance of
the proposed network.

1 . Introduction
Image inpainting refers to generating alternative structures and textures for missing regions of corrupted input
images and obtaining visually realistic results. It has a
wide range of applications. For example, users can remove
unwanted objects or edit contents of images by using inpainting techniques. A major challenge of image inpainting tasks is to generate correct structures and realistic textures. Some early patch-based works attempt to fill missing
holes with image patches from existing regions [1, 8]. By
nearest-neighbor searching and copying relevant patches,
these methods can synthesize vivid textures for background
inpainting tasks. However, since these methods cannot capture high-level semantics, it is hard for them to generate
realistic structures for images with non-repetitive patterns
(e.g. faces).
With the advent of deep neural network techniques, some
recent works [22, 12, 32, 33, 16] model the inpainting task
as a conditional generation problem, which learns mapping functions between the input corrupted images and the
ground truth images. These methods are able to learn mean-

Figure 1. (From left to right) Input corrupted images, reconstructed
structure images, visualizations of the appearance flow fields, final output images. Our method first recovers global structures for
missing regions, then generate textures by sampling features from
existing regions according to the recovered structures. To visualize the appearance flow fields, we plot the sample points of some
typical missing regions. The arrows show the direction of the appearance flow.

ingful semantics, so they can generate coherent structures
for missing holes. However, since these methods do not
effectively separate the structure and texture information,
they often suffer from either over-smoothed boundaries or
texture artifacts.
To solve this problem, some two-stage networks [33, 26,
21] are proposed. These methods recover missing structures
in the first stage and generate the final results using the reconstructed information in the second stage. The method
1181

