AdvIT: Adversarial Frames Identifier Based on Temporal Consistency In Videos
Chaowei Xiao 1 ∗ Ruizhi Deng 2 Bo Li 3 Taesung Lee 4
Benjamin Edwards4 Jinfeng Yi 5 Dawn Song 6 Mingyan Liu 1 Ian Molloy4
1
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Simon Fraser University 3 UIUC
4
IBM Research AI 5 JD.com 6 UC Berkeley

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely applied in various applications. However, DNNs are found
to be vulnerable to adversarial examples. While several defense and detection approaches are proposed for static image classification, many security-critical tasks use videos
as their input and require efficient processing. In this paper,
we propose an efficient and effective method AdvIT to detect adversarial frames within videos against different types
of attacks based on temporal consistency property of videos.
In particular, we apply optical flow estimation to the target
and previous frames to generate pseudo frames and evaluate the consistency of the learner output between these
pseudo frames and target. High inconsistency indicates that
the target frame is adversarial. We conduct extensive experiments on various learning tasks including video semantic
segmentation, human pose estimation, object detection, and
action recognition, and demonstrate that we can achieve
above 95% adversarial frame detection rate. To consider
adaptive attackers, we show that even if an adversary has
access to the detector and performs a strong adaptive attack
based on the state of the art expectation of transformation
method, the detection rate stays almost the same. We also
tested the transferability among different optical flow estimators and show that it is hard for attackers to attack one
and transfer the perturbation to others. In addition, as efficiency is important in video analysis, we show that AdvIT
can achieve real-time detection.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely studied
and have shown impressive performance in many tasks [15,
30, 31]. However, recent studies have shown that DNNs are
vulnerable to adversarial examples [5, 6, 9, 17, 28, 35, 40–
43] which are carefully crafted input instances targeted at
leading machine learning models to produce attacker controlled errors in the output. This raises a number of security
concerns in real-world machine learning based applications
∗ This work was performed when Chaowei Xiao was at IBM

such as self-driving cars and surveillance [5, 6, 14, 28, 32].
While currently most research on adversarial examples
focuses on static images, DNNs on videos is a particularly
interesting and important domain, as attacks against many
applications have the potential to cause serious physical and
financial damage. For example, one application of DNNs to
video is in autonomous vehicles; DNNs are used to identify
other cars, road markings, street signs, and pedestrians. An
adversarial attack forcing a network to classify a stop sign
as a speed limit sign could easily cause a crash. Recently
Wei et.al [38] proposed an adversarial attack targeting on
action recognition task in videos which again emphasizes
the vulnerabilities of learners for videos.
Several defense or detection methods have been proposed on static images but most of them are defeated by
adaptive attacks [4, 8, 22, 23]. As a result, directly applying
existing defenses on static images to videos is not robust nor
efficient considering the high requirements for video processing. While general defense approach is hard, leveraging special properties of data source (e.g. videos) and enhancing model robustness is possible. In this paper, we propose AdvIT : the first adversarial frame identifier for videos
based on temporal consistency. In particular, we allow the
attacker to have white-box access to the target DNNs and
add adversarial perturbation to one or more frames. Here
we consider two types of attacks: independent frame attack
which adds adversarial perturbation to selected frames independently (e.g. Houdini and DAG [10, 44]); and temporal
continuity attack which generates perturbation considering
the continuity among video frames (e.g. sparse and universal attack [38]). Our temporal consistency-based detection
framework AdvIT is shown in Fig. 1. Given a target frame
within a video, we first estimate the optical flows between
the target Xt and its previous frames (Xt−1 , · · · , Xt−k ).
We then fuzz the estimated optical flows with small randomness α ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) and transform the previous frames
as “pseudo frames” and check the consistency between the
outputs of learning tasks based on the pseudo frames and the
original target. We find that the frame transformation described above preserves the temporal consistency of learn-

3968

