Reasoning About Human-Object Interactions Through Dual Attention Networks
Tete Xiao1,2∗ Quanfu Fan2 Dan Gutfreund2
1
University of California, Berkeley
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Mathew Monfort3 Aude Oliva3 Bolei Zhou4
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Objects are entities we act upon, where the functionality
of an object is determined by how we interact with it. In this
work we propose a Dual Attention Network model which reasons about human-object interactions. The dual-attentional
framework weights the important features for objects and
actions respectively. As a result, the recognition of objects
and actions mutually benefit each other. The proposed model
shows competitive classification performance on the humanobject interaction dataset Something-Something. Besides,
it can perform weak spatiotemporal localization and affordance segmentation, despite being trained only with videolevel labels. The model not only finds when an action is
happening and which object is being manipulated, but also
identifies which part of the object is being interacted with.

1. Introduction
Affordance, introduced by James Gibson [9], refers to
the properties of an object, often its shape and material, that
dictate how the object should be manipulated or interacted
with. The possible set of actions that an object can afford is
constrained. For instance, we can drink from a plastic bottle,
pour water into it, squeeze it, or spin it, but we cannot tear it
easily into two pieces (see Figure 1). Similarly, for a given
action, the possible objects which it can apply to are also
limited. For example, we can fold a paper but not a bottle.
A handful of works have exploited object information for
the recognition of Human-Object Interactions (HOIs) and
more general action recognition [3, 10, 31, 19, 44]. However,
understanding HOIs goes beyond the perception of objects
and actions: it involves reasoning about the relationships
between how the action is portrayed and the consequence on
the object (i.e., whether the shape or location of the object is
changed by the action upon it). Most of the previous works
pre-define human-object or action-object pairs for HOI [3,
10, 31]. The classification is done by either a graphical
model [12], a classifier based on the appearance features [10],
∗ The work was done when Tete Xiao was an intern at IBM Research,

Cambridge.

Pour sth. into sth.

Spin sth.

Tear sth. into two pieces

Fold sth.

Bowl

Bottle

Cloth

Paper

Figure 1: Object and action co-dependence. The action
tearing something into two pieces can be performed on a
piece of paper but not a bottle. Given the object bottle, we
can pour water into it or spin it, but cannot fold it or tear it.
or a graph parsing model [31]. A potential issue with the
previous approaches is that the complexity of an HOI model
grows quickly as the number of objects and actions increase.
The reasoning capability of these approaches is also limited
due to the action-object pairs being preset for modeling. In
addition, full annotations including action labels and object
bounding-boxes are often required by these approaches for
the effective modeling of HOIs.
Here we propose a Dual Attention Network model that
leverages object priors as the guidance to where actions are
likely to be performed in a video stream and vice versa. The
focus of attention is represented by a heatmap indicating
the likelihood of where an action is taking place or where
an object is being manipulated in each frame. These attention maps can enhance video representation and improve
both action and object recognition, yielding very competitive performance on Something-something [11] dataset. We
show that the attention maps are intuitive and interpretable,
enabling better video understanding and model diagnosis.
Such attention maps also facilitate weakly-supervised spatiotemporal localization of objects and actions.

1.1. Related work
Action recognition. Deep convolutional neural networks have been used with success for action recognition
[23, 38, 45, 13, 16]. For instance, we can exploit the suc-

3919

