EPIC-Fusion: Audio-Visual Temporal Binding
for Egocentric Action Recognition

1

Evangelos Kazakos1 Arsha Nagrani2 Andrew Zisserman2 Dima Damen1
Visual Information Lab, University of Bristol 2 Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

Abstract
We focus on multi-modal fusion for egocentric action
recognition, and propose a novel architecture for multimodal temporal-binding, i.e. the combination of modalities
within a range of temporal offsets. We train the architecture
with three modalities – RGB, Flow and Audio – and combine them with mid-level fusion alongside sparse temporal
sampling of fused representations. In contrast with previous
works, modalities are fused before temporal aggregation,
with shared modality and fusion weights over time. Our
proposed architecture is trained end-to-end, outperforming
individual modalities as well as late-fusion of modalities.
We demonstrate the importance of audio in egocentric
vision, on per-class basis, for identifying actions as well as
interacting objects. Our method achieves state of the art
results on both the seen and unseen test sets of the largest
egocentric dataset: EPIC-Kitchens, on all metrics using the
public leaderboard.

1. Introduction
With the availability of multi-sensor wearable devices
(e.g. GoPro, Google Glass, Microsoft Hololens, MagicLeap), egocentric audio-video recordings have become
popular in many areas such as extreme sports, health monitoring, life logging, and home automation. As a result, there
has been a renewed interest from the computer vision community on collecting large-scale datasets [8, 35] as well as
developing new or adapting existing methods to the firstperson point-of-view scenario [9, 17, 21, 32, 44, 46].
In this work, we explore audio as a prime modality to
provide complementary information to visual modalities
(appearance and motion) in egocentric action recognition.
While audio has been explored in video understanding in
general [2, 3, 5, 6, 11, 23, 27–29, 34] the egocentric domain
in particular offers rich sounds resulting from the interactions between hands and objects, as well as the close proximity of the wearable microphone to the undergoing action. Audio is a prime discriminator for some actions (e.g.
‘wash’, ‘fry’) as well as objects within actions (e.g. ‘put

Figure 1: As the width of the temporal binding window increases (left to right), modalities (appearance, motion and
audio) are fused with varying temporal shifts.

plate’ vs ‘put bag’). At times, the temporal progression (or
change) of sounds can separate visually ambiguous actions
(e.g. ‘open tap’ vs ‘close tap’). Audio can also capture actions that are out of the wearable camera’s field of view,
but audible (e.g. ‘eat’ can be heard but not seen). Conversely, other actions are sound-less (e.g. ‘wipe hands’) and
the wearable sensor might capture irrelevant sounds, such
as talking or music playing in the background. The opportunities and challenges of incorporating audio in egocentric
action recognition allow us to explore new multi-sensory
fusion approaches, particularly related to the potential temporal asynchrony between the action’s appearance and the
discriminative audio signal – the main focus of our work.
While several multi-modal fusion architectures exist for
action recognition, current approaches perform temporal
aggregation within each modality before modalities are
fused [22, 42] or embedded [23]. Works that do fuse inputs before temporal aggregation, e.g. [10], do so with inputs synchronised across modalities. In Fig. 1, we show
an example of ‘breaking an egg into a pan’ from the EPICKitchens dataset. The distinct sound of cracking the egg,
the motion of separating the egg and the change in appearance of the egg occur at different frames/temporal positions
within the video. Approaches that fuse modalities with
synchronised input would thus be limited in their ability

5492

