UprightNet: Geometry-Aware Camera Orientation Estimation
from Single Images
Wenqi Xian∗,1 Zhengqi Li∗,1 Matthew Fisher2 Jonathan Eisenmann2 Eli Shechtman2 Noah Snavely1
1

Cornell Tech, Cornell University

2

Adobe Research

Abstract
We introduce UprightNet, a learning-based approach for
estimating 2DoF camera orientation from a single RGB
image of an indoor scene. Unlike recent methods that leverage deep learning to perform black-box regression from
image to orientation parameters, we propose an end-to-end
framework that incorporates explicit geometric reasoning.
In particular, we design a network that predicts two representations of scene geometry, in both the local camera
and global reference coordinate systems, and solves for the
camera orientation as the rotation that best aligns these two
predictions via a differentiable least squares module. This
network can be trained end-to-end, and can be supervised
with both ground truth camera poses and intermediate representations of surface geometry. We evaluate UprightNet on
the single-image camera orientation task on synthetic and
real datasets, and show significant improvements over prior
state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of estimating camera orientation
from a single RGB photograph. This is an important problem
with applications in robotics, image editing, and augmented
reality. Classical approaches often rely on 2D projective
geometric cues such as vanishing points [26]. However,
more recent methods have sought to leverage the power of
deep learning to directly regress from an image to extrinsic
calibration parameters, by training on images with known
ground truth orientation information [48, 19]. But these
methods typically do not explicitly leverage the knowledge
of projective geometry, treating the problem as a black-box
regression or classification.
In this work, we introduce UprightNet, a novel deep network model for extrinsic camera calibration that incorporates
explicit geometric principles. We hypothesize that injecting
geometry will help achieve better performance and better
∗ indicates equal contribution

Local camera surface geometry

Input image

Global upright surface geometry

Weighted
Least Square

Z

Y

X
Camera
orientation

Weights

Figure 1: UprightNet overview. UprightNet takes a single
RGB image and predicts surface geometry in both local
camera and global upright coordinate systems. The camera
orientation is then computed as the alignment between these
two predictions, solved for by a differentiable least squares
module, and weighted using predicted weight maps.

generalization to a broader class of images, because geometry affords generally applicable principles, and because
geometric representations provide a structured intermediary
in the otherwise highly non-linear relationship between raw
pixels and camera orientation.
In particular, we define and use surface frames as an
intermediate geometric representation. The orthogonal basis
of the surface frames include the surface normal and two
vectors that span the tangent plane of the surface. Surface
frames allow us to capture useful geometric features—for
instance, predicted surface normals on the ground will point
directly in the up direction, and horizontal lines in the scene
will point perpendicular to the up direction. However, it
is not enough to know normals and other salient vectors in
camera coordinates, we also need to know which normals
are on the ground, etc. Therefore, our insight is to predict
surface geometry not only in local camera coordinates, but
also in global upright coordinates, as shown in Figure 1.
Such a global prediction is consistent across different
camera views and is highly related to the semantic task of

9974

