Total Denoising: Unsupervised Learning of 3D Point Cloud Cleaning
Pedro Hermosilla

Tobias Ritschel

Timo Ropinski

Ulm University

University College London

Ulm University
Linköping University

Abstract

While the amount of clean 3D geometry is limited by
the manual effort of human 3D CAD modelling, the amount
of 3D point clouds is growing rapidly everyday: our city’s
streets, the interior of everyday buildings, and even the
goods we consume are routinely 3D-scanned. Regrettably,
these data are corrupted by scanner noise and as such not accessible to supervised learning that requires pairs of noisy
and clean data. Consequently, it is desirable to be able to
denoise the acquired noisy 3D point clouds by solely using
the noisy data itself.
Two necessary recent developments indicate that this
might be possible: deep learning on 3D point clouds [19]
and unsupervised denoising of images [17, 15, 2].
Unfortunately, these two methods cannot be combined
naı̈vely. To learn our unsupervised 3D point cloud denoisers

(Fig. 1), we need to overcome two main limitations: the
practical obstacle to have a pair of two noisy scans of the
same object and the theoretical difficulty that noise in 3D
point clouds is total.
We refer to noise as ‘total’ (Fig. 2) when distortions are
not confined to the range (pixel values) while the domain is
clean (as pixel positions are), but to the more challenging
setting where both domain and range are affected by noise.
The name is chosen in analogy to total least squares [9],
which dealt with simultaneous noise in domain and range,
but for a linear, non-deep setting.
This paper’s evaluation shows for simulated noise of different kind, as well as for real point clouds, how our unsupervised approach nonetheless outperforms a supervised
approach given enough, and in some cases even when given
the same magnitude of, training data, while it runs effi-

Structured
Common noise
2D image pixels

Unstructured
Total noise
3D point clouds

Noisy

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We learn 3D point cloud cleaning (right), unsupervised,
from noisy examples alone (left).

Noisy

We show that denoising of 3D point clouds can be
learned unsupervised, directly from noisy 3D point cloud
data only. This is achieved by extending recent ideas from
learning of unsupervised image denoisers to unstructured
3D point clouds. Unsupervised image denoisers operate under the assumption that a noisy pixel observation is a random realization of a distribution around a clean pixel value,
which allows appropriate learning on this distribution to
eventually converge to the correct value. Regrettably, this
assumption is not valid for unstructured points: 3D point
clouds are subject to total noise, i. e., deviations in all coordinates, with no reliable pixel grid. Thus, an observation can be the realization of an entire manifold of clean 3D
points, which makes a naı̈ve extension of unsupervised image denoisers to 3D point clouds impractical. Overcoming
this, we introduce a spatial prior term, that steers converges
to the unique closest out of the many possible modes on
a manifold. Our results demonstrate unsupervised denoising performance similar to that of supervised learning with
clean data when given enough training examples - whereby
we do not need any pairs of noisy and clean training data.

Clean

Noisy

Figure 2. To learn denoising of 3D point clouds, we need to extend
from common noise that is clean in one part of the signal, to a total
setting, where all parts of the signal are noisy. This example shows
three realizations of common noise (left) and total noise (right)
for three samples (colors). Please note, how total noise is “more
noisy” as both axis are corrupted.

52

