Zero-Shot Video Object Segmentation via Attentive Graph Neural Networks
Wenguan Wang1∗, Xiankai Lu1∗ , Jianbing Shen1†, David Crandall2 , Ling Shao1
1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 2 Indiana University, USA

{wenguanwang.ai, carrierlxk, shenjianbingcg}@gmail.com
https://github.com/carrierlxk/AGNN

Abstract
This work proposes a novel attentive graph neural
network (AGNN) for zero-shot video object segmentation
(ZVOS). The suggested AGNN recasts this task as a process
of iterative information fusion over video graphs. Specifically, AGNN builds a fully connected graph to efficiently represent frames as nodes, and relations between arbitrary frame pairs as edges. The underlying pair-wise relations are described by a differentiable attention mechanism. Through parametric message passing, AGNN is able to
efficiently capture and mine much richer and higher-order
relations between video frames, thus enabling a more complete understanding of video content and more accurate
foreground estimation. Experimental results on three video
segmentation datasets show that AGNN sets a new state-ofthe-art in each case. To further demonstrate the generalizability of our framework, we extend AGNN to an additional task: image object co-segmentation (IOCS). We perform
experiments on two famous IOCS datasets and observe again the superiority of our AGNN model. The extensive experiments verify that AGNN is able to learn the underlying
semantic/appearance relationships among video frames or
related images, and discover the common objects.

1. Introduction
Automatically identifying the primary objects in videos
is an important problem that could benefit a wide variety of
applications, by reducing or eliminating manual effort needed to process and understand video. However, discovering
the most prominent and distinct objects across video frames
without having prior knowledge of what those foreground
objects are is a challenging task. Traditional methods tend
to tackle this issue by using handcrafted or learnable features in a local or sequential manner. For instance, handcrafted feature based methods use objectness [74], motion
boundary [43], and saliency [67] cues over a few successive
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed AGNN based ZVOS
model. (a) Input video sequence, typically with object occlusion
and scale variation. (b) The suggested AGNN represents video
frames as nodes (blue circles), and the relations between arbitrary frame pairs as edges (black arrows), captured by an attention
mechanism. After several message passing iterations, higher-order
relations can be mined and more optimal foreground estimations
are obtained from a global view. (c) Final video object segmentation results. Best viewed in color. Zoom in for details.

video frames, or explore trajectories [41], i.e., link optical
flow over multiple frames to capture long-term motion information. These are typically non-learning methods working in a purely unsupervised manner. Recent deep learning
based methods learn more powerful video object features
from large-scale training data, yielding a zero-shot solution [63] (still no annotation used for any testing frame).
Many of these [7, 57, 21, 58, 31, 55] employ two-stream
networks to combine local motion and appearance information, and apply recurrent neural networks to model the
dynamics in a frame-by-frame manner.
Though these methods greatly promoted the development of this field and gained promising results, they generally suffer from two limitations. First, they focus primarily
on the local pair-wise or sequential relations between successive frames, while ignoring the ubiquitous, high-order
relationships among the frames (since frames from the same
video are usually correlated). Second, since they do not fully leverage the rich relationships, they fail to completely
capture the video content and hence may easily get inferior

9236

