Adversarial Fine-Grained Composition Learning
for Unseen Attribute-Object Recognition
Kun Wei1 , Muli Yang1 , Hao Wang1 , Cheng Deng1,2∗, and Xianglong Liu3∗
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen 518057, China
3
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
1

{weikunsk, muliyang.m, haowang.xidian, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com, xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Understanding visual concepts has always been a holy
grail of computer vision. Different from supervised learning, zero-shot learning deals with the situation wherein not
all samples are assigned with labels, and thus an in-depth
interpretation is required to recognize the samples never appearing during training. In this paper, we consider a zeroshot recognition scenario where each sample is respectively
composed of an attribute and an object (namely an adjective plus a noun). As shown in Figure 1, we train with two
groups of samples young tiger and old car, and expect to
∗ Corresponding author

young tiger

old car

Test

Recognizing unseen attribute-object pairs never appearing in the training data is a challenging task, since an object
often refers to a specific entity while an attribute is an abstract semantic description. Besides, attributes are highly
correlated to objects, i.e., an attribute tends to describe different visual features of various objects. Existing methods
mainly employ two classifiers to recognize attribute and object separately, or simply simulate the composition of attribute and object, which ignore the inherent discrepancy
and correlation between them. In this paper, we propose a
novel adversarial fine-grained composition learning model
for unseen attribute-object pair recognition. Considering
their inherent discrepancy, we leverage multi-scale feature
integration to capture discriminative fine-grained features
from a given image. Besides, we devise a quintuplet loss
to depict more accurate correlations between attributes and
objects. Adversarial learning is employed to model the discrepancy and correlations among attributes and objects.
Extensive experiments on two challenging benchmarks indicate that our method consistently outperforms state-of-theart competitors by a large margin.

Train

Abstract

old tiger

Figure 1. Overview of unseen attribute-object recognition. For example, it is expected to learn the concepts of “old” and “tiger”
from the training data, and predict “old tiger” in the test data.

successfully recognize an unseen sample of old tiger. It is a
challenging task due to: 1) attributes and objects are intrinsically different since objects are physical entities while attributes belong to semantic descriptions, and tend to present
different visual content. Therefore, it is difficult to capture
consistent features for attributes and objects simultaneously
and explicitly; 2) attributes are highly correlated to objects
and have larger visual diversity compared with objects. For
example, the attribute “old” in “old tiger” and “old car”
has totally distinct visual presentations. Such imbalance between attribute and object often results in more unsatisfactory results for recognizing unseen attribute-object pairs.
Traditional methods like [18] regard such problem as
general recognition task by separately training classifiers
for objects and attributes. These methods perform to learn
attribute and object features respectively, but neglect the

3741

