Visualizing the Invisible: Occluded Vehicle Segmentation and Recovery
Xiaosheng Yan1 ,Feigege Wang1 ,Wenxi Liu1∗ ,Yuanlong Yu1∗ ,Shengfeng He2 ,Jia Pan3
1
College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fuzhou University∗
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel iterative multi-task
framework to complete the segmentation mask of an occluded vehicle and recover the appearance of its invisible
parts. In particular, firstly, to improve the quality of the
segmentation completion, we present two coupled discriminators that introduce an auxiliary 3D model pool for sampling authentic silhouettes as adversarial samples. In addition, we propose a two-path structure with a shared network to enhance the appearance recovery capability. By
iteratively performing the segmentation completion and the
appearance recovery, the results will be progressively refined. To evaluate our method, we present a dataset, Occluded Vehicle dataset, containing synthetic and real-world
occluded vehicle images. Based on this dataset, we conduct
comparison experiments and demonstrate that our model
outperforms the state-of-the-arts in both tasks of recovering
segmentation mask and appearance for occluded vehicles.
Moreover, we also demonstrate that our appearance recovery approach can benefit the occluded vehicle tracking in
real-world videos.

1. Introduction
In recent years, segmentation techniques have made significant progress due to the development of deep learning [29, 49, 6, 16, 10, 5, 28]. Despite the achieved impressive performance, it is still difficult to accurately reason
about objects under occlusions in an image. On the contrary, according to the study on amodal perception [21], one
main strength of the human visual system is the ability to
reason about the invisible, occluded parts of objects with
high fidelity. To reduce the gap between the vision models
and the human visual system, recent works start to investigate the problem of inferring the invisible part of objects,
including amodal instance segmentation [25, 58] and generating the invisible part of objects [12].
In this paper, we focus on the task of appearance recovery for occluded vehicles. As we know, identifying vehicles is crucial for the applications of visual surveillance,
∗ Wenxi Liu and Yuanlong Yu are the corresponding authors.

(a) Input image with an occluded car

(b) Recovered appearance

(c) Tracking in original videos

(d) Tracking in recovered videos

Figure 1: (a-b) Given the input image with an occluded car, our
approach is capable of recovering the appearance of its invisible
part. Illustration of tracking occluded vehicles in the original video
(c) and the processed video (d) where the appearance of the target
vehicles from occlusions have been recovered.

intelligent traffic control, path prediction, and autonomous
driving. However, in scenarios with vehicles and pedestrians, the occlusions are often observed and they increase
the difficulty of learning visual representation of vehicles.
As shown in Fig. 1, the tracker fails to follow the target under occlusions, since the occlusions prevent the tracker from
learning the complete appearance representation of the target. In this situation, recovering the appearance of the invisible parts can mitigate such problem and benefit tracking.
To accomplish the appearance recovery, we propose an
iterative multi-task framework of segmentation completion
and appearance recovery for occluded vehicles. Our framework consists of two modules: a segmentation completion
network that aims at completing the incomplete segmentation mask of the occluded vehicle, and an appearance recovery network that aims to recover its appearance. In particular, to accurately recover the segmentation of the occluded vehicles, we propose two coupled discriminators,
i.e., one object discriminator and one instance discriminator, in the segmentation completion network (see Fig. 2).
17618

