DeepHuman: 3D Human Reconstruction From a Single Image
Zerong Zheng∗
∗

Tao Yu∗ †

Tsinghua University

Yixuan Wei∗ ‡
†

Beihang University

Qionghai Dai∗
‡

Yebin Liu∗

Orbbec Company

Abstract
We propose DeepHuman, an image-guided volume-tovolume translation CNN for 3D human reconstruction from
a single RGB image. To reduce the ambiguities associated
with the surface geometry reconstruction, even for the reconstruction of invisible areas, we propose and leverage a
dense semantic representation generated from SMPL model
as an additional input. One key feature of our network
is that it fuses different scales of image features into the
3D space through volumetric feature transformation, which
helps to recover accurate surface geometry. The visible surface details are further refined through a normal refinement
network, which can be concatenated with the volume generation network using our proposed volumetric normal projection layer. We also contribute THuman, a 3D real-world
human model dataset containing about 7000 models. The
network is trained using training data generated from the
dataset. Overall, due to the specific design of our network
and the diversity in our dataset, our method enables 3D human model estimation given only a single image and outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Image-based reconstruction of a human body is an important research topic for VR/AR content creation [7], image and video editing and re-enactment [19, 43], holoportation [40] and virtual dressing [42]. To perform full-body
3D reconstruction, currently available methods require the
fusion of multiview images [8, 25, 20] or multiple temporal
images [3, 2, 1] of the target. Recovering a human model
from a single RGB image remains a challenging task that
has so far attracted little attention. Using only a single image, available human parsing studies have covered popular
topics starting from 2D pose detection [41, 6, 39], advancing to 3D pose detection [33, 44, 64], and finally expanding
to body shape capture [27] using a human statistic template
such as SMPL [32]. However, the statistic template can capture only the shape and pose of a minimally clothed body
and lack the ability to represent a 3D human model under
a normal clothing layer. Although the most recent work,

Figure 1: Given only a single RGB image, our method automatically reconstructs the surface geometry of clothed human body.

BodyNet[52], has pioneered research towards this goal, it
only generates nearly undressed body reconstruction results
with occasionally broken body parts. We believe that 3D
human reconstruction under normal clothing from a single
image, which needs to be further studied, will soon be the
next hot research topic.
Technically, human reconstruction from a single RGB
image is extremely challenging, not only because of the requirement to predict the shape of invisible parts but also due
to the need for the geometry recovery for visible surface.
Therefore, a method capable of accomplishing such a task
should meet two requirements: first, the degrees of freedom
of the output space should be constrained to avoid unreasonable artifacts (e.g., broken body parts) in invisible areas;
second, the method should be able to efficiently extract geometric information from the input image, such as clothing
styles and wrinkles, and fuse them into the 3D space.
In this paper, we propose DeepHuman, a deep learningbased framework aiming to address these challenges.
Specifically, to provide a reasonable initialization for the
network and constrain the degrees of freedom of the output
space, we propose to leverage parametric body models by
generating a 3D semantic volume and a corresponding 2D
semantic map as a dense representation after estimating the
shape and pose parameters of a parametric body template
(e.g., SMPL[32]) for the input image. Note that the requirement of inferring a corresponding SMPL model for an image is not strict; rather, several accurate methods are available for SMPL prediction from a single image[5, 27]. The

7739

