Rescan: Inductive Instance Segmentation for Indoor RGBD Scans
Maciej Halber

Yifei Shi
Kai Xu
Thomas Funkhouser
Princeton University

Figure 1: The proposed method estimates a persistent, temporally-aware scene model Mi from a series of scene observations
Si , captured at sparse time intervals. Mi−1 is used to estimate an arrangement of objects in each novel observation Si . The
estimated arrangement is used to estimate the instance segmentation of Si , which is then used to update the model Mi .

Abstract

different viewpoints, will be available in the future, just like
photographs are today.

In depth-sensing applications ranging from home
robotics to AR/VR, it will be common to acquire 3D scans
of interior spaces repeatedly at sparse time intervals (e.g.,
as part of regular daily use). We propose an algorithm that
analyzes these “rescans” to infer a temporal model of a
scene with semantic instance information. Our algorithm
operates inductively by using the temporal model resulting
from past observations to infer an instance segmentation
of a new scan, which is then used to update the temporal model. The model contains object instance associations
across time and thus can be used to track individual objects,
even though there are only sparse observations. During experiments with a new benchmark for the new task, our algorithm outperforms alternate approaches based on stateof-the-art networks for semantic instance segmentation.

In this paper, we investigate how repeated, infrequent
scans captured with handheld RGBD cameras can be used
to build a spatio-temporal model of an interior environment,
complete with object instance semantics and associations
across time. The challenges are that: 1) each RGBD scan
captures the environment from different viewpoints, possibly with noisy data; and 2) scans separated by long time
intervals (once per day, every Tuesday, etc.) can have large
differences due to object motion, entry, or removal. Thus
simple algorithms that perform object detection individually for each scan and/or simply cluster object detections
and poses in space-time will not solve the problem. Moreover, since large training sets are not available for this task,
it is not practical to train a neural network to solve it.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of RGBD cameras, 3D data is now
more widely available than ever before [10, 25, 8]. As depth
capturing devices become smaller and more affordable, and
as they operate in everyday applications (AR/VR, home
robotics, autonomous navigation, etc.), it is plausible to
expect that 3D scans of most environments will be acquired
on a daily basis. We can expect that 3D reconstructions of
many spaces, visited at different times and captured from

We propose an inductive algorithm that infers information about new RGBD capture of a scene Si from a temporal
model Mi−1 obtained from previous observations of S (fig.
1). The input to the algorithm is the model Mi−1 , representing all previous scans and a novel scene scan Si . The output
is an updated model Mi that describes the set of objects O
appearing in the scene and an arrangement A of those objects at each time step, including the most recent. At every
iteration, our algorithm optimizes for the arrangement Ai
of objects in Si , and then uses Ai to infer the semantic instance segmentation of Si . Segmentation of Si is then used
to update object set O (see fig. 2).

2541

