Learning Across Tasks and Domains
Pierluigi Zama Ramirez , Alessio Tonioni, Samuele Salti, Luigi Di Stefano
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{pierluigi.zama, alessio.tonioni, samuele.salti, luigi.distefano}@unibo.it

Recent works have proven that many relevant visual
tasks are closely related one to another. Yet, this connection
is seldom deployed in practice due to the lack of practical
methodologies to transfer learned concepts across different
training processes. In this work, we introduce a novel adaptation framework that can operate across both task and domains. Our framework learns to transfer knowledge across
tasks in a fully supervised domain (e.g., synthetic data) and
use this knowledge on a different domain where we have
only partial supervision (e.g., real data). Our proposal is
complementary to existing domain adaptation techniques
and extends them to cross tasks scenarios providing additional performance gains. We prove the effectiveness of
our framework across two challenging tasks (i.e., monocular depth estimation and semantic segmentation) and four
different domains (Synthia, Carla, Kitti, and Cityscapes).

1. Introduction
Deep learning has revolutionized computer vision research and set forth a general framework to address a variety of visual tasks (e.g., classification, depth estimation,
semantic segmentation, . . . ). The existence of a common
framework suggests a close relationship between different
tasks that should be exploitable to alleviate the dependence
on huge labeled training sets. Unfortunately, most state-ofthe-art methods ignore these connections and instead focus
on a single task by solving it in isolation through supervised
learning on a specific domain (i.e., dataset). Should the domain or task change, common practice would require acquisition of a new annotated training set followed by retraining
or fine-tuning the model. However, any deep learning practitioner can testify that the effort to annotate a dataset is
usually quite substantial and does vary significantly across
tasks, potentially requiring ad-hoc acquisition modalities.
The question we try to answer is: would it be possible to
deploy the relationships between tasks to remove the dependence for labeled data on new domains?

Task
Transfer

Domain
Transfer

Transfer Learning

Domain B Domain A

Abstract

Task 1

Task 2
𝑮𝑨𝟏→𝟐

𝑮𝑨𝟏→𝟐

?

Figure 1: Our AT/DT framework transfers knowledge
across tasks and domains. Given two tasks (1 and 2) and
two domains (A and B), with supervision for both tasks in
A but only for one task in B, we learn the dependency between tasks in A and exploit this knowledge in B to solve
task 2 without the need of supervision.

A partial answer to this question has been provided
by [44], which formalizes the relationships between tasks
within a specific domain into a graph referred to as Taskonomy. This knowledge can be used to improve performance
within a fully supervised learning scenario, though it is not
clear how well may it generalize to new domains and to
which extent may it be deployed in a partially supervised
scenario (i.e., supervision on only some tasks/domains).
Generalization to new domains is addressed in the domain
adaptation literature [39], that, however, works under the
assumption of solving a single task in isolation, therefore
ignoring potential benefits from related tasks.
We fuse the two worlds by explicitly addressing a cross
domain and cross task problem where on one domain (e.g.,
synthetic data) we have annotations for many tasks, while
in the other (e.g., real data) annotations are available only
for a specific task, though we wish to solve many.
Purposely, we propose a new ‘Across Tasks and
Domains Transfer framework’ (shortened AT/DT) which
learns in a specific domain a function G1→2 to transfer
knowledge between a pair of tasks. After the training phase,
we show that the same function can be applied in a new domain to solve the second task while relying on supervision
18110

