Subspace Structure-aware Spectral Clustering for Robust Subspace Clustering
Masataka Yamaguchi, Go Irie, Takahito Kawanishi, Kunio Kashino
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Japan
{yamaguchi.masataka.up, go.irie.nv, takahito.kawanishi.fx, kunio.kashino.me}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
Subspace clustering is the problem of partitioning data
drawn from a union of multiple subspaces. The most popular subspace clustering framework in recent years is the
graph clustering-based approach, which performs subspace
clustering in two steps: graph construction and graph clustering. Although both steps are equally important for accurate clustering, the vast majority of work has focused
on improving the graph construction step rather than the
graph clustering step. In this paper, we propose a novel
graph clustering framework for robust subspace clustering.
By incorporating a geometry-aware term with the spectral
clustering objective, we encourage our framework to be robust to noise and outliers in given affinity matrices. We also
develop an efficient expectation-maximization-based algorithm for optimization. Through extensive experiments on
four real-world datasets, we demonstrate that the proposed
method outperforms existing methods.

1. Introduction
In many practical scenarios, high dimensional data often live in a union of low-dimensional linear subspaces.
The problem of partitioning such data so that each cluster
consists of all the data belonging to one subspace is called
Subspace Clustering. Subspace clustering has greatly attracted attention as it has important and wide-ranging applications in various fields such as computer vision [44, 28],
data mining [2, 35], network analysis [12, 8], system identification [46, 3], and biology [21, 29].
Over the past few decades, many subspace clustering
methods have been proposed, including algebraic methods [5, 9, 14, 20, 45, 30, 19], iterative methods [6, 41, 1, 52],
statistical methods [38, 37, 50, 36], and graph clusteringbased methods [49, 7, 10, 11, 25, 47, 27, 26, 43, 15, 22].
Ever since the celebrated self-representation based approach [10, 11] was proposed, many recent efforts have focused on graph clustering-based methods, because they often outperform the other methods in practical settings. Most
graph clustering-based methods are performed in two steps.

The first step, graph construction, is to compute an affinity matrix wherein a pair of data points belonging to the
same subspace has higher affinity than those in different
subspaces. The second step, graph clustering, is to cluster
data by applying a graph clustering method (e.g., spectral
clustering) to that affinity matrix.
Although both graph construction and graph clustering
are important for achieving accurate clustering, most previous work has focused on improving graph construction.
In fact, data can be correctly clustered by standard graph
clustering methods if one can obtain an affinity matrix M
that satisfies certain conditions (e.g., Mij > 0 if the ith and
jth data points belong to the same subspace and otherwise
Mij = 0), hence pursuing a better method for computing
an affinity matrix is important for correctly clustering data.
However, in practical settings, data contain noise and outliers, so no method will not always provide an affinity matrix that satisfies such conditions. To accurately cluster data,
it is equally important to improve the graph clustering step.
In the past decade, spectral clustering [32] has been the
de facto standard method for the graph clustering step. Although its effectiveness in the graph clustering-based subspace clustering methods has been empirically validated, its
performance deteriorates quickly as the intensity of noise in
the affinity matrix increases, since spectral clustering clusters data based on only a given affinity matrix. One way to
mitigate this problem is to use not only an affinity matrix
but also the data’s geometric structure in the ambient space
for graph clustering. However, to the best of our knowledge, no graph clustering method has considered the data’s
geometric structure in the ambient space for subspace clustering.
To accurately conduct subspace clustering, we propose a geometry-aware graph clustering method for graph
clustering-based subspace clustering. More specifically, we
propose a novel graph clustering objective that consists of
the spectral clustering objective and a new geometry-aware
term that encourages data in each cluster to lie in the same
low-dimensional subspace. We note that maximization of
the proposed objective can be interpreted as maximum a
posteriori (MAP) estimation problem of a variant of the

9875

