Localization of Deep Inpainting Using High-Pass Fully Convolutional Network
Haodong Li1,2 , Jiwu Huang1,2,∗
1
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing and Shenzhen Key
Laboratory of Media Security, and National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data
System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, China
{lihaodong,jwhuang}@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image inpainting has been substantially improved with
deep learning in the past years. Deep inpainting can fill
image regions with plausible contents, which are not visually apparent. Although inpainting is originally designed
to repair images, it can even be used for malicious manipulations, e.g., removal of specific objects. Therefore, it is
necessary to identify the presence of inpainting in an image.
This paper presents a method to locate the regions manipulated by deep inpainting. The proposed method employs a
fully convolutional network that is based on high-pass filtered image residuals. Firstly, we analyze and observe that
the inpainted regions are more distinguishable from the untouched ones in the residual domain. Hence, a high-pass
pre-filtering module is designed to get image residuals for
enhancing inpainting traces. Then, a feature extraction
module, which learns discriminative features from image
residuals, is built with four concatenated ResNet blocks.
The learned feature maps are finally enlarged by an upsampling module, so that a pixel-wise inpainting localization map is obtained. The whole network is trained end-toend with a loss addressing the class imbalance. Extensive
experimental results evaluated on both synthetic and realistic images subjected to deep inpainting have shown the
effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Inpainting is a kind of image editing technique aiming to repair the missing or damaged regions in an image
with alternative contents, which imitates the work of art
restoration experts. Since around 2000, a variety of inpainting approaches have been developed. Among them, there
are two main categories of conventional approaches, i.e.,
diffusion-based [5, 6, 19] and patch-based [11, 9, 3, 32].
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. The man with a bag in the original image (left) is removed by the method [16], producing the inpainted image (right).

The diffusion-based approaches can only fill small or narrow areas, such as scratches in old photos. Although the
patch-based approaches can fill larger areas, they lack the
ability to generate complicated structures or novel objects
that are not in the given image. To overcome the limitations
of conventional inpainting approaches, many deep learning
based inpainting approaches have been designed in recent
years [31, 38, 16, 35, 26, 37]. The deep inpainting approaches can not only infer image structures and produce
more fine details, but also create novel objects. With the
deep inpainting techniques, one can fill a targeted image region with photo-realistic contents.
Although inpainting is usually used for inoffensive purposes, it can also be exploited for malicious intentions. For
example, removing objects in an image to fabricate a fake
scene, and erasing visible copyright watermarks. Especially, by using the deep inpainting methods, the tampered
images could be visually plausible, and the tampered regions are not easy to be distinguished with human eyes. As
shown in Figure 1, a key object (the man) within the original image is removed by the inpainting method proposed
in [16], producing an inpainted image which still looks natural. If such inpainted images are shown in court as evidences or used to report fake news, it would inevitably lead
to many serious issues. Therefore, it is necessary to identify
whether an image is manipulated by deep inpainting and
locate the inpainted regions.
The identification of manipulated images has been studied in the field of image forensics [34, 18] for more than

8301

