Learning to Discover Novel Visual Categories via Deep Transfer Clustering
Kai Han
Andrea Vedaldi
Andrew Zisserman
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{khan, vedaldi, az}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Labelled training data

We consider the problem of discovering novel object categories in an image collection. While these images are unlabelled, we also assume prior knowledge of related but
different image classes. We use such prior knowledge to
reduce the ambiguity of clustering, and improve the quality of the newly discovered classes. Our contributions are
twofold. The first contribution is to extend Deep Embedded Clustering to a transfer learning setting; we also improve the algorithm by introducing a representation bottleneck, temporal ensembling, and consistency. The second
contribution is a method to estimate the number of classes
in the unlabelled data. This also transfers knowledge from
the known classes, using them as probes to diagnose different choices for the number of classes in the unlabelled
subset. We thoroughly evaluate our method, substantially
outperforming state-of-the-art techniques in a large number of benchmarks, including ImageNet, OmniGlot, CIFAR100, CIFAR-10, and SVHN.

1. Introduction
With modern supervised learning methods, machines
can recognize thousands of visual categories with high reliability; in fact, machines can outperform individual humans
when performance depends on extensive domain-specific
knowledge as required for example to recognize hundreds
of species of dogs in ImageNet [11]. However, it is also
clear that machines are still far behind human intelligence
in some fundamental ways. A prime example is the fact
that good recognition performance can only be obtained if
computer vision algorithms are manually supervised. Modern machine learning methods have little to offer in an
open world setting, in which image categories are not defined a-priori, or for which no labelled data is available. In
other words, machines lack an ability to structure data automatically, understanding concepts such as object categories
without external supervision.
In this paper, we study the problem of discovering
and recognizing visual categories automatically. However,

Cat

Model

Dog

Transfer
Model

Unlabelled data of novel categories

Clustering assignment

Figure 1. Learning to discover novel visual categories via deep
transfer clustering. We first train a model with labelled images
(e.g., cat and dog). The model is then applied to images of unlabelled novel categories (e.g., bird and monkey), which transfers
the knowledge learned from the labelled images to the unlabelled
images. With such transferred knowledge, our model can then simultaneously learn a feature representation and the clustering assignment for the unlabelled images of novel categories.

rather than considering a fully unsupervised setting, we assume that the machine already possesses certain knowledge
about some of the categories in the world. Then, given additional images that belong to new categories, the problem
is to tell how many new categories there are and to learn
to recognize them. The aim is to guide this process by
transferring knowledge from the old classes to the new ones
(see fig. 1).
This approach is motivated by the following observation.
Unlike existing machine learning models, a child can easily tell an unseen animal category (e.g., bird) after learning
a few other (seen) animal categories (e.g., cat, dog); and
an adult wandering around a zoo or wildlife park can effortlessly discover new categories of animals (e.g., okapi)
based on the many categories previously learnt. In fact,
while we can manually annotate some categories in the
world, we cannot annotate them all, even in relatively restricted settings. For example, consider the problem of recognizing products in supermarkets for the purpose of market research: hundreds of new products are introduced every
week and providing manual annotations for all is hopelessly
18401

