Transferable Representation Learning in Vision-and-Language Navigation
Haoshuo Huang∗

Vihan Jain∗
Harsh Mehta
Alexander Ku
Gabriel Magalhaes
Jason Baldridge
Eugene Ie
Google Research
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA 94043, United States

{haoshuo, vihan, harshm, alexku, gamaga, jridge, eugeneie}@google.com

Abstract
walk

Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) tasks such as
Room-to-Room (R2R) require machine agents to interpret
natural language instructions and learn to act in visually
realistic environments to achieve navigation goals. The overall task requires competence in several perception problems: successful agents combine spatio-temporal, vision
and language understanding to produce appropriate action
sequences. Our approach adapts pre-trained vision and language representations to relevant in-domain tasks making
them more effective for VLN. Specifically, the representations
are adapted to solve both a cross-modal sequence alignment
and sequence coherence task. In the sequence alignment task,
the model determines whether an instruction corresponds to
a sequence of visual frames. In the sequence coherence task,
the model determines whether the perceptual sequences are
predictive sequentially in the instruction-conditioned latent
space. By transferring the domain-adapted representations,
we improve competitive agents in R2R as measured by the
success rate weighted by path length (SPL) metric.

1. Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) requires computational agents to represent and integrate both modalities
and take appropriate actions based on their content, their
alignment and the agent’s position in the environment. VLN
datasets have graduated from simple virtual environments
[26] to photo-realistic environments, both indoors [2] and
outdoors [10, 7, 19]. To succeed, VLN agents must internalize the (possibly noisy) natural language instruction, plan action sequences, and move in environments that dynamically
change what is presented in their visual fields. These challenging settings bring simulation-based VLN work closer to
real-world, language-based interaction with robots [28].
Along with these challenges come opportunities: for ex∗ Authors contributed equally.

past
the
fireplace
:

:

glass
table

Figure 1: To overcome the scarcity of high-quality humanannotated data, we propose auxiliary tasks, CMA and NVS,
that can be created by simple and effective negative mining.
The representations learned by a model trained on both the
tasks simultaneously, with a combined loss αLalignment +(1−
α)Lcoherence , are transferred over to agents learning the VLN
navigation task. The RCM agent [39] so trained outperforms
the existing published state-of-the-art agents.

ample, pre-trained linguistic and visual representations can
be injected into agents before training them on example
instructions-path pairs. Work on the Room-to-Room (R2R)
dataset [2] typically uses GloVe word embeddings [30] and
features from deep image networks like ResNet [17] trained
on ImageNet [31]. Associations between the input modalities are based on co-attention, with text and visual representations conditioned on each other. Since a trajectory spans
multiple time steps, the visual context is often modeled using
recurrent techniques like LSTMs [20] that combine features
from the current visual field with historical visual signals
and agent actions. The fusion of both modalities constitutes
the agent’s belief state. The agent relies on this belief state to
decide which action to take, often relying on reinforcement
learning techniques like policy gradient [41].
Unfortunately, due to domain shift, the pre-trained models
are poor matches for R2R’s instructions and visual observa-

7404

