Spatio-Temporal Fusion based Convolutional Sequence Learning for Lip
Reading
Xingxuan Zhang, Feng Cheng, Shilin Wang*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com, klaus.cheng@qq.com, wsl@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art approaches for lip reading are
based on sequence-to-sequence architectures that are designed for natural machine translation and audio speech
recognition. Hence, these methods do not fully exploit the
characteristics of the lip dynamics, causing two main drawbacks. First, the short-range temporal dependencies, which
are critical to the mapping from lip images to visemes, receives no extra attention. Second, local spatial information
is discarded in the existing sequence models due to the use
of global average pooling (GAP). To well solve these drawbacks, we propose a Temporal Focal block to sufficiently
describe short-range dependencies and a Spatio-Temporal
Fusion Module (STFM) to maintain the local spatial information and to reduce the feature dimensions as well. From
the experiment results, it is demonstrated that our method
achieves comparable performance with the state-of-the-art
approach using much less training data and much lighter
Convolutional Feature Extractor. The training time is reduced by 12 days due to the convolutional structure and the
local self-attention mechanism.

1. Introduction
lip reading, the ability to recognize the speaker’s utterance based on the lip movements, is of great importance for
various applications in computer vision, natural language
processing and their intersection areas. For example, lip
reading can perform as a liveness detector against replay
attacks in identity authentication system [9]. Speech recognition performance can be boosted by integrating the visual
(lip reading) and audio information, especially in the noisy
environment [11]. Moreover, lip reading can also be applied
in audio-video synchronization [13], improving hearing aid
and silent dictation in public areas or a noisy environment.
*Corresponing author

Lip reading is also a difficult task for human and machines. Lip movements for different letters are visually similar to each other (e.g. b and p, d and t, etc). Hearingimpaired people can only get an accuracy less than 30%
even for a very limited subset of 30 words [34]. Machine lip
reading requires extracting spatio-temporal features from
the video and mapping such high dimensional features to
language, which is also a difficult learning task. Moreover,
the complex texture around the lip area, such as teeth, mustache and great variations in the color of the face and lip,
brings even more difficulties to lip reading.
Current state-of-the-art lip reading methods can
be divided into three categories, RNN-based approaches [11, 12, 36], Transformer self-attention architecture with sequence-to-sequence loss (Transformerseq2seq) and Transformer with Connectionist Temporal
Classification loss (Transformer-CTC) [1]. The first two
methods are originally developed for machine translation
and the last one is first designed for audio speech recognition [5, 21, 8, 38]. Despite the successes of the methods in
the fields they are designed for, directly apply these models
in lip reading will not achieve the best performance. In this
paper, we present a convolutional sequence-to-sequence
model based on a novel temporal connected block and
a Spatio-Temporal Fusion Module (STFM), which is
specifically designed for lip reading and can well exploit
the characteristics of the lip movements.
The first key factor of lip reading is to extract discriminative features to describe the lip movements from the input
video. In most current methods, the low dimensional features input into the sequence model are extracted directly
with the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) followed
by global average pooling [30]. To obtain global activation,
global average pooling consumes local spatial information,
which is critical to capture the subtle changes in the appearance and state of the lip. Considering the above issue, the
global average pooling is replaced by the newly proposed
STFM in our approach, which is able to reduce the feature
dimension without losing the spatial information.

713

