Cap2Det: Learning to Amplify Weak Caption Supervision for Object Detection
Keren Ye∗1 , Mingda Zhang1 , Adriana Kovashka1 , Wei Li†2 , Danfeng Qin2 , and Jesse Berent2
Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA, USA
2
Google Research, Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Learning to localize and name object instances is a fundamental problem in vision, but state-of-the-art approaches
rely on expensive bounding box supervision. While weakly
supervised detection (WSOD) methods relax the need for
boxes to that of image-level annotations, even cheaper supervision is naturally available in the form of unstructured textual descriptions that users may freely provide
when uploading image content. However, straightforward
approaches to using such data for WSOD wastefully discard captions that do not exactly match object names. Instead, we show how to squeeze the most information out
of these captions by training a text-only classifier that generalizes beyond dataset boundaries. Our discovery provides an opportunity for learning detection models from
noisy but more abundant and freely-available caption data.
We also validate our model on three classic object detection benchmarks and achieve state-of-the-art WSOD performance. Our code is available at https://github.
com/yekeren/Cap2Det.

{qind, jberent}@google.com

lwthucs@gmail.com

Input
(Training)

a small white dog
is looking at
ducks on water

a person at a fruit stand in
with a hat with an a on it
passing out samples of fruit.
a blue truck that is
sitting in the street.

man in apron standing in
front of oven with pans
and bakeware

Weakly supervised detection
from captions
bo
wl
cu
p

{yekeren, mzhang, kovashka}@cs.pitt.edu

bo
ttl
e

1

Proposal classification scores

Proposal detection scores

Pseudo label inference
man in apron
standing in front
of oven with pans
and bakeware

MLP

bottle
bowl
cup
dining table
oven
person
…
spoon

Figure 1: An overview of our approach. We leverage
a novel source of weak supervision for object detection,
namely natural language captions, by amplifying the signal these captions provide using a textual classifier. Even
though “bottle”, “bowl”, “cup” and “spoon” are not mentioned in the caption, they are actually in the image, and our
method correctly infers these image-level labels. We then
train a model that scores object proposals in iterative fashion, to localize objects as its final output.

1. Introduction
Learning to localize and classify visual is a fundamental
problem in computer vision. It has a wide range of applications, including robotics, autonomous vehicles, intelligent
video surveillance, and augmented reality. Since the renaissance of deep neural networks, object detection has been
revolutionized by a series of groundbreaking works, including Faster-RCNN [26], Mask-RCNN [13] and YOLO [25].
Modern detectors can run in real-time on mobile devices,
and have become the driving force for future technologies.
Despite these achievements, most modern detectors suffer from an important limitation: they are trained with ex∗ Work partially done during an internship at Google
† Now at Facebook Inc.

pensive supervision in the form of large quantities of bounding boxes meticulously drawn by a large pool of human
annotators. Due to the well-known domain shift problem
[8, 33, 19, 29, 12] and imperfect domain adaptation techniques, this means when detection is to be performed in a
novel domain, the expensive annotation procedure needs to
be repeated. Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD)
techniques aim to alleviate the burden of collecting such expensive box annotations. The classic WSOD problem formulation [4, 37, 31, 30] treats an image as a bag of proposals, and learns to assign instance-level semantics to these
proposals using multiple instance learning (MIL). WSOD
has shown great potential for object detection, and the stateof-the-art model has reached 40% mAP [30] on Pascal VOC

9686

