Adversarial Feedback Loop
Firas Shama1
Roey Mechrez1
Alon Shoshan1
Lihi Zelnik-Manor1,2
1
2
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Alibaba Group
{shfiras@campus,roey@campus,shoshan@campus,lihi@ee}.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Thanks to their remarkable generative capabilities,
GANs have gained great popularity, and are used abundantly in state-of-the-art methods and applications. In a
GAN based model, a discriminator is trained to learn the
real data distribution. To date, it has been used only for
training purposes, where it’s utilized to train the generator
to provide real-looking outputs. In this paper we propose a
novel method that makes an explicit use of the discriminator
in test-time, in a feedback manner in order to improve the
generator results. To the best of our knowledge it is the first
time a discriminator is involved in test-time. We claim that
the discriminator holds significant information on the real
data distribution, that could be useful for test-time as well,
a potential that has not been explored before.
The approach we propose does not alter the conventional
training stage. At test-time, however, it transfers the output
from the generator into the discriminator, and uses feedback
modules (convolutional blocks) to translate the features of
the discriminator layers into corrections to the features of
the generator layers, which are used eventually to get a better generator result. Our method can contribute to both
conditional and unconditional GANs. As demonstrated by
our experiments, it can improve the results of state-of-theart networks for super-resolution, and image generation.

1. Introduction
Adversarial training [6] has become one of the most popular tools for solving generation and manipulation problems. For example in image generation [6, 26], superresolution [19], image-to-image transformation [11, 34],
text-to-image [27] and others. Common to all these works
is the discriminator–generator information flow – via a loss
function. That is, the generator output images are fed into
the discriminator which produces a ‘real-fake’ score for
each image in terms of a pre-defined loss function. This
score is back-propagated to the generator through gradients.
Recent research in the GAN field discusses the design of
the loss function and regularization terms. For example, the

Figure 1: The adversarial feedback loop: Classic GAN
is composed of two components: the generator (G) and the
discriminator (D). In this setting, the information flow is
done purely by back-propagation, during training. We propose adding a third component – the feedback module that
transmits the discriminatory spatial information to the generator in a feedback manner at inference time.

basic cross-entropy loss [6], Wasserstein distance [1], spectral normalization [24] or relativistic discriminator [13].
Where latest state-of-the-art methods [14, 15] encourage to
use deeper GAN networks that are gradually trained. This
discussion has contributed significantly to the advancement
of GANs and using a discriminator has become highly effective. To date, after training, the discriminator is forsaken
and the deep understanding of the data distribution is lost.
This seems wasteful to us, hence, we seek a way to enjoy the
discriminator also during test-time. In addition, encapsulating the discriminator information into a single score looses
the spatial understanding of which regions are more ‘real’
and which are considered ‘fake’. In the current scheme only
limited spatial information flows with the back-propagation
because the gradients are averaged over each batch.
In this paper we propose a different approach that explicitly exploits the discriminator’s activations, in test-time,
in order to improve the generator output. We propagate the
discriminator information back to the generator utilizing an
iterative feedback loop, as illustrated in Figure 1. The overall framework is as follows: We start with classic training
of the generator and discriminator. Then, at test-time, the

3205

