Sequence Level Semantics Aggregation for Video Object Detection
Haiping Wu1

Yuntao Chen3,4 Naiyan Wang2 Zhaoxiang Zhang3,4,5
1
2
McGill University
TuSimple
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
5
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
haiping.wu2@mail.mcgill.ca {chenyuntao2016, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn winsty@gmail.com

Abstract
Video objection detection (VID) has been a rising research direction in recent years. A central issue of VID
is the appearance degradation of video frames caused by
fast motion. This problem is essentially ill-posed for a
single frame. Therefore, aggregating features from other
frames becomes a natural choice. Existing methods rely
heavily on optical flow or recurrent neural networks for
feature aggregation. However, these methods emphasize
more on the temporally nearby frames. In this work, we argue that aggregating features in the full-sequence level will
lead to more discriminative and robust features for video
object detection. To achieve this goal, we devise a novel Sequence Level Semantics Aggregation (SELSA) module. We
further demonstrate the close relationship between the proposed method and the classic spectral clustering method,
providing a novel view for understanding the VID problem. We test the proposed method on the ImageNet VID and
the EPIC KITCHENS dataset and achieve new state-of-theart results. Our method does not need complicated postprocessing methods such as Seq-NMS or Tubelet rescoring,
which keeps the pipeline simple and clean.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed fast progress in object detection using deep convolutional networks. Renewed detection paradigms [8, 25, 11], strong backbone [12, 34] and
large scale datasets [18, 16] jointly push forward the limit
of object detection.
Video Object Detection (VID) has now emerged as a new
challenge beyond object detection in still images. Thanks to
the fast progress in still image object detection, detectors’
performance on slow-moving objects in video object detection has somewhat saturated [36]. The main challenge now
lies in the scenario where objects or cameras are under fast

Figure 1. Challenges in video object detection. Motion blur, camera defocus and pose variation.

motion.
Fast motion brings up image degradation unseen in the
still image setting like motion blur, camera defocus and
large pose variation as shown in Figure 1. Still image detectors often fail in these cases. On the other hand, a video provides far richer visual information than a still image. When
the appearance of an object deteriorates in a frame, it is
natural to include information from the video (e.g. nearby
frames) to mitigate this degradation. The second and third
columns in Figure 1 show various difficult sequences in
VID. Though in these hard cases, there are still some frames
more salient than the others. A good video object detector should be able to identify the salient views to refine its
beliefs on those degraded views if they are (semantically)
similar, either to support its beliefs or deny them. Note that
useful information is not necessarily from temporal nearby
frames, any objects share high similarity with the object of
interest in any frames (even within the same frame) could
contribute.
Post-processing methods try to incorporate video-level
information by designing sophisticated rule set for linking
bounding boxes generated by still image detectors. These

9217

