Many Task Learning With Task Routing

Gjorgji Strezoski, Nanne van Noord and Marcel Worring
University of Amsterdam
{g.strezoski, n.j.e.vannoord, m.worring}@uva.nl

Abstract
Typical multi-task learning (MTL) methods rely on architectural adjustments and a large trainable parameter set
to jointly optimize over several tasks. However, when the
number of tasks increases so do the complexity of the architectural adjustments and resource requirements. In this
paper, we introduce a method which applies a conditional
feature-wise transformation over the convolutional activations that enables a model to successfully perform a large
number of tasks. To distinguish from regular MTL, we introduce Many Task Learning (MaTL) as a special case of MTL
where more than 20 tasks are performed by a single model.
Our method dubbed Task Routing (TR) is encapsulated in a
layer we call the Task Routing Layer (TRL), which applied
in an MaTL scenario successfully fits hundreds of classification tasks in one model. We evaluate on 5 datasets and the
Visual Decathlon (VD) challenge against strong baselines
and state-of-the-art approaches.

SHARED UNIT IN
A CONVOLUTIONAL LAYER

TASK SPECIFIC
OUTPUTS

DATA FLOW

MULTI-TASK DEEP NEURAL NETWORK
WITH 3 CONVOLUTIONAL LAYERS

INPUT

OUTPUT

Figure 1: Routing map and specialized subnets through a
three layer multi-task deep convolutional neural network
with 50% of the units being shared per task routing layer.

1. Introduction
Multi-tasking is ubiquitous. In everyday life, as well as
in computer science, performing multiple tasks at the same
time improves efficiency and resource utilization [32, 39].
By definition, MTL is a learning paradigm that seeks to
improve the generalization performance of machine learning models by optimizing for more than one task simultaneously [4]. Its counterpart, Single Task Learning (STL)
occurs when a model is optimized for performing a single
task only. STL models usually have an abundance of parameters that have the capacity to fit to more than one task
[14]. In MTL the aim is to make use of this extra capacity.
The simultaneously performed tasks can either help or hurt
each others execution by sharing the expertise the model develops for each of them during training. For example, in a
dataset of bird images, training a model to recognize white
head feathers and white underbelly can help in classifying a

Seagull bird. However, we cannot expect a bird size detector to help with Seagull classification as this bird appears in
many sizes in nature, so size is not relevant to its species.
As with any combinatorial problem, in MTL there exists an optimal combination of tasks and shared resources
which is unknown. Searching the space to find this combination is becoming increasingly inefficient, as modern models [6, 7, 28, 24] grow in depth, complexity and capacity.
This search duration grows proportionally with the number of tasks and parameters present in the model’s structure.
Previous works in both MTL and STL rely on evolutionary
algorithms [15] or factorization techniques [41] to discover
their optimal way of learning, however this takes time and
prolongs the training process. In our work, inspired by the
efficiency of Random Search [3] we enforce a structured
random solution to this problem by regulating the per-task

1375

