Elaborate Monocular Point and Line SLAM with Robust Initialization
Sang Jun Lee
School of Computer Science and Electrical
Engineering
Handong Global University, Korea

Sung Soo Hwang
School of Computer Science and Electrical
Engineering
Handong Global University, Korea

eowjd4@naver.com

sshwang@handong.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a monocular indirect SLAM system
which performs robust initialization and accurate
localization. For initialization, we utilize a matrix
factorization-based method. Matrix factorization-based
methods require that extracted feature points must be
tracked in all used frames. Since consistent tracking is
difficult in challenging environments, a geometric
interpolation that utilizes epipolar geometry is proposed.
For localization, 3D lines are utilized. We propose the use
of
line coordinates to represent geometric
information of lines. We also propose orthonormal
representation of
line coordinates and Jacobians
of lines for better optimization. Experimental results show
that the proposed initialization generates consistent and
robust map in linear time with fast convergence even in
challenging scenes. And localization using proposed line
representations is faster, more accurate and memory
efficient than other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, the interests of visual SLAM(Simultaneously
Localization and Mapping) has been increased since it has
been used for augmented reality, autonomous driving car,
and robotics as an important component. Moreover, the
monocular camera has been widely considered for the
visual SLAM due to not only its inexpensiveness but also a
widely used equipment in many industries. However,
monocular visual SLAM has several drawbacks such as
scale drift, pure rotation, etc., which come from the use of
single image to operate the system [1].
In particular, map initialization in monocular visual
SLAM is more challenging than sensor-based SLAMs.
Since map initialization is highly related with the system
performance, special efforts should be made on robust
initialization. Conventional initialization methods in
indirect (feature-based) monocular visual SLAM utilize
feature points to optimize the system by minimizing
geometric errors [10, 14]. These methods find
corresponding feature points between two frames, calculate

1121

relative camera pose, and then reconstruct 3D landmarks
using them. However, the estimated camera pose calculated
from the estimated fundamental matrix has multiple
solutions, or the one from homography is specified for
movement on planar scene only. Model selection between
fundamental matrix and homography is also tricky as
discussed in [2, 10]. In addition, highly restricted criterions
such as detecting low-parallax cases and twofold planar
ambiguity [3] causes initialization to fail. Moreover, frames
are simply abandoned when the initialization is failed which
may slow down convergence.
In contrast, direct (pixel-based) monocular visual SLAM
systems that use pixel-wise matching for minimizing
photometric errors generate random initial map and update
it using consecutively associated data. However, these
methods may generate unstable result as discussed in [4].
Besides, Direct-based methods are accurate only if the input
images are rectified by photometric calibration [5, 6].
Currently, Tang et al. [7] suggested robust initialization
based on rank-1 matrix factorization. This method
generates initial map free from model selection problem.
Furthermore, this method guarantees fast convergence with
linear time by optimizing all involved cameras and points
simultaneously. However, to operate matrix factorization,
all feature points that are used for matrix factorization must
be tracked in all using frames. To address this problem,
Tang et al. used KLT tracking-based system to track feature
points. However, this method is highly relied on the
performance of KLT tracking [8]. And it may be failed by
illumination change and large baseline movement as
discussed in [9]. Moreover, by the nature of KLT tracking,
lost features are hardly recovered. Therefore, KLT-based
SLAM only utilizes RANSAC-based n-points algorithms
[25, 26, 27] for pose estimation that is less accurate than
state-of-the-art indirect SLAM systems [10, 11].
Another critical issue in monocular SLAM is localization.
For robust localization, current methods utilize line and
point features simultaneously [12, 20]. Line is a geometric
primitive that has dual relation with point, thus it produces
valuable geometric information as important as point even
though the representation is different. Pumarola, et al.
proposed the state-of-the-art method using points and lines
[12]. This method represents a line segment with its two
endpoints, and reconstructs a 3D line by triangulating each

