Order-preserving Wasserstein Discriminant Analysis
Bing Su1 , Jiahuan Zhou2 , Ying Wu2
1
Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 60208
subingats@gmail.com, {jzt011, yingwu}@eecs.northwestern.edu

Abstract
Supervised dimensionality reduction for sequence data projects the observations in sequences onto a lowdimensional subspace to better separate different sequence
classes. It is typically more challenging than conventional
dimensionality reduction for static data, because measuring the separability of sequences involves non-linear procedures to manipulate the temporal structures. This paper
presents a linear method, namely Order-preserving Wasserstein Discriminant Analysis (OWDA), which learns the projection by maximizing the inter-class distance and minimizing the intra-class scatter. For each class, OWDA extracts
the order-preserving Wasserstein barycenter and constructs
the intra-class scatter as the dispersion of the training sequences around the barycenter. The inter-class distance is
measured as the order-preserving Wasserstein distance between the corresponding barycenters. OWDA is able to concentrate on the distinctive differences among classes by lifting the geometric relations with temporal constraints. Experiments show that OWDA achieves competitive results on
three 3D action recognition datasets.

1. Introduction
The sequence classification problem arises in a wide
range of real-world applications. A sequence is comprised
of a series of ordered observations, where each individual
observation is generally of no special interest, but the sequence as a whole represents the target object. The observations in the same sequence are not independent and their
relationship reveals the temporal structure of the sequence.
The similarity between sequences, which plays a crucial role in classification, should take not only all the pairwise vector-level distances between observations but also
such temporal dependencies into consideration. In most
similarity measures for sequences, the temporal dependencies and alignments need to be inferred from the matrix of
pairwise distances between observations under the tempo-

Figure 1. Top: the DTW [26] alignment. The alignment matrix is
shown on the right. The white grid in row i and column j indicates
that the i-th and j-th observations in the two sequences are aligned.
Bottom: the OPW [34] alignment. The transport matrix is shown
on the right. The grey value of a grid indicates the probability of
aligning the corresponding observations.

ral constraints. The complexity of constructing the pairwise distance matrix highly depends on the dimensionality of observations in sequences. Lower-dimensional representations have a significant effect on reducing the running
time of calculating the similarity and building the subsequent models or classifiers. Discriminative representations
that lead to small similarities for different patterns and large
similarities for the sequences from the same class generally
improve the classification performance.
Supervised dimensionality reduction for sequence data
(DRS) attempts to learn such low-dimensional discriminative representations for observations in sequences by transforming the observations in the noisy high-dimensional
space to a subspace. Generally, the transformation is
learned by measuring the similarity or separability among
sequences from different classes. However, unlike vector
data, the representations of observations not directly act on
the similarity between sequences but go through a nonlin-

9885

