SID4VAM: A Benchmark Dataset with Synthetic Images
for Visual Attention Modeling
David Berga1
1

Xosé R. Fdez-Vidal2

Xavier Otazu1

Xosé M. Pardo2

Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain
2
CiTIUS, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Spain

{dberga,xotazu}@cvc.uab.es

Abstract
A benchmark of saliency models performance with a
synthetic image dataset is provided. Model performance
is evaluated through saliency metrics as well as the influence of model inspiration and consistency with human psychophysics. SID4VAM is composed of 230 synthetic images, with known salient regions. Images were generated
with 15 distinct types of low-level features (e.g. orientation, brightness, color, size...) with a target-distractor popout type of synthetic patterns. We have used Free-Viewing
and Visual Search task instructions and 7 feature contrasts
for each feature category. Our study reveals that state-ofthe-art Deep Learning saliency models do not perform well
with synthetic pattern images, instead, models with Spectral/Fourier inspiration outperform others in saliency metrics and are more consistent with human psychophysical experimentation. This study proposes a new way to evaluate
saliency models in the forthcoming literature, accounting
for synthetic images with uniquely low-level feature contexts, distinct from previous eye tracking image datasets.

1. Introduction
Although eye movements are indicators of “where people look at”, a more complex question arises as a consequence for understanding bottom-up visual attention:
Are all eye movements equally valuable for determining
saliency? According to the initial hypotheses in visual attention [53, 58], we could define visual saliency as the perceptual quality that makes our human visual system (HVS)
to gaze towards certain areas that pop-out on a scene due
to their distinctive visual characteristics. Therefore, this capacity (saliency) cannot be influenced by top-down factors,
which seemingly guide eye movements regardless of stimulus characteristics [60]. Accounting for prior knowledge of
whether a stimulus area is salient or not, when it becomes
salient, and why, are issues that need to be accounted for

{xose.vidal,xose.pardo}@usc.es

saliency evaluation [7, 2].
Common frameworks for predicting saliency have been
created since Koch & Ullman’s seminal work [31]. This
framework defined a theoretical basis for modeling the early
visual stages of the HVS in order to obtain a representation
of the saliency map. By extracting sensory signals as feature maps, processing the conspicuous objects and selecting the maximally-active locations through winner-take-all
(WTA) mechanisms, it is possible to obtain a unique/master
saliency map. However, it was hypothesized that visual attention combines both bottom-up (saliency) and top-down
(relevance) mechanisms in a central representation (priority) [14, 17]. These top-down specificities (e.g. world,
object, task, etc.) were later accounted in the selective
tuning model as a hierarchy of WTA-like processes [54].
Despite the neural correlates simultaneously involved in
saliency have been investigated [55], the direct relation between saliency and eye movements defined in a unique
computational framework requires further study. Itti et al.
initially introduced a computational biologically-inspired
model [27] composed of 3 main steps: First, feature maps
are extracted using oriented linear DoG filters for each chromatic channel. Second, feature conspicuity is computed using center-surround differences. Third, conspicuity maps
are integrated with linear WTA mechanisms. This architecture has been the main inspiration for current saliency models [62, 43], that alternatively use distinct mechanisms (accounting for different levels of processing, context or tuning depending on the scene) but preserving same or similar
structure for these steps. Although current state-of-the-art
models precisely resemble eye-tracking fixation data [6, 9],
we question if these models represent saliency. We will test
this hypothesis with a novel synthetic image dataset.

1.1. Related Work
In order to determine whether an object or a feature attracts attention, initial experimentation was assessing feature discriminability upon display characteristics (e.g. dis-

8789

