Stochastic Attraction-Repulsion Embedding for Large Scale Image Localization
Liu Liu 1,2 , Hongdong Li 1,2 and Yuchao Dai 3
1
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
3
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian, China
{Liu.Liu; hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au; daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn

Competitive match-ability probability distribution

Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of large-scale imagebased localization (IBL) where the spatial location of a
query image is determined by finding out the most similar
reference images in a large database. For solving this problem, a critical task is to learn discriminative image representation that captures informative information relevant for
localization. We propose a novel representation learning
method having higher location-discriminating power.
It provides the following contributions: 1) we represent a place (location) as a set of exemplar images depicting the same landmarks and aim to maximize similarities among intra-place images while minimizing similarities
among inter-place images; 2) we model a similarity measure as a probability distribution on L2 -metric distances
between intra-place and inter-place image representations;
3) we propose a new Stochastic Attraction and Repulsion
Embedding (SARE) loss function minimizing the KL divergence between the learned and the actual probability distributions; 4) we give theoretical comparisons between SARE,
triplet ranking [2] and contrastive losses [25]. It provides
insights into why SARE is better by analyzing gradients.
Our SARE loss is easy to implement and pluggable to
any CNN. Experiments show that our proposed method improves the localization performance on standard benchmarks by a large margin. Demonstrating the broad applicability of our method, we obtained the 3rd place out of
209 teams in the 2018 Google Landmark Retrieval Challenge [1]. Our code and model are available at https:
//github.com/Liumouliu/deepIBL.

1. Introduction
The task of Image-Based Localization (IBL) is to estimate the geographic location of where a query image is
taken, based on comparing it against geo-tagged images
from a city-scale image database (i.e. a map). IBL has
attracted considerable attention recently due to the wide-

VGG16-Conv

pooling

l2

VGG16-Conv

pooling

l2

VGG16-Conv

pooling

l2

VGG16-Conv

pooling

l2

VGG16-Conv

pooling

l2

...

l2 distance

(0,1,0,0,0,…,0)
Kernel density
estimation

...
Kullback-Leibler
divergence loss

Figure 1: The pipeline of our method. We use the VGG16 net
[35] with only convolution layers as our architecture. NetVLAD
[2] pooling is used to obtain compact image representations. The
feature vectors are post L2 normalized. The L2 distance between
the query-positive and the query-negative images are calculated,
and converted to a probability distribution. The estimated probability distribution is compared with the ground-truth match-ability
distribution, yielding the Kullback-Leibler divergence loss.

spread potential applications such as in robot navigation
[20] and VR/AR [18, 39]. Depending on whether or not 3D
point-clouds are used in the map, existing IBL methods can
be roughly classified into two groups: image-retrieval based
methods [2, 12, 30, 21, 40, 25] and direct 2D-3D matching
based methods [27, 28, 14, 15, 5].
This paper belongs to the image-retrieval group for its
effectiveness at large scale and robustness to changing conditions [29]. For image-retrieval based methods, the main
challenge is how to discriminatively represent images so
that images depicting same landmarks would have similar
representations while those depicting different landmarks
would have dissimilar representations. The challenge is underpinned by the typically large-scale image database, in
which many images may contain repetitive structures and
similar landmarks, causing severe ambiguities.
Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) have demonstrated great success for the IBL task [2, 12, 21, 8, 9, 25].
Typically, CNNs trained for image classification task are
fine-tuned for IBL. As far as we know, all the state-of-theart IBL methods focus on how to effectively aggregate a

2570

