FAMNet: Joint Learning of Feature, Affinity and Multi-dimensional Assignment
for Online Multiple Object Tracking
Peng Chu
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA USA

Haibin Ling∗
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY USA

pchu@temple.edu

hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Data association-based multiple object tracking (MOT)
involves multiple separated modules processed or optimized
differently, which results in complex method design and requires non-trivial tuning of parameters. In this paper, we
present an end-to-end model, named FAMNet, where Feature extraction, Affinity estimation and Multi-dimensional
assignment are refined in a single network. All layers in
FAMNet are designed differentiable thus can be optimized
jointly to learn the discriminative features and higher-order
affinity model for robust MOT, which is supervised by the
loss directly from the assignment ground truth. In addition,
we integrate single object tracking technique and a dedicated target management scheme into the FAMNet-based
tracking system to further recover false negatives and inhibit noisy target candidates generated by the external detector. The proposed method is evaluated on a diverse set
of benchmarks including MOT2015, MOT2017, KITTI-Car
and UA-DETRAC, and achieves promising performance on
all of them in comparison with state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Tracking multiple objects in videos is critical for many
applications, ranging from vision-based surveillance to
autonomous driving. A current popular framework to
solve multiple object tracking (MOT) uses the tracking-bydetection strategy where target candidates generated from
an external detector are associated and connected to form
the target trajectories across frames [1, 15, 22, 35, 38, 49,
52, 54]. At the core of tracking-by-detection strategy lies
the data association problem, which is usually treated as
three separate parts: feature extraction for candidate representation, affinity metric to evaluate the reliability of each
association hypothesis and association algorithm to find the
optimal association. These parts involve multiple individual data-processing steps and are optimized differently from
∗ Corresponding author.

each other, which results in a complex method design and
extensive tuning parameters to adapt different target categories and tracking scenarios.
Recently, deep neural network (DNN) has been investigated intensively to learn the association cost function in a
unified architecture combining both feature extraction and
affinity metric [11, 27, 46]. Through training, the task and
scenario prior can be automatically adapted by the candidate representation and estimation metric without manually tuning the hyper-parameters. However, the association algorithm still stands outside the network, which requires dedicated affinity samples to be manually fabricated
from ground truth association for the training process. It
is not guaranteed that training and inference phases share
the same data distribution; consequently it may lead to the
degraded generalizability of the trained model. Moreover,
crowded targets, similar appearance and fast motion impose
great ambiguity for the association only considering pairs of
neighboring frames. Successful association requires global
optimization across multiple frames, where higher-order
discriminative clues such as appearance changes over time
and motion context could be included. Learning the robust
representation and affinity criteria without the cooperation
from the association procedure in this circumstance is even
more complicated.
Our objective in this paper is to formulate an end-to-end
model for MOT: the Feature representation, Affinity model
and Multi-dimensional assignment (MDA) are refined in a
single deep network named FAMNet, which is optimized
jointly to learn the task prior. In particular, feature subnetwork is used to extract features for candidates on each
frame, after which an affinity sub-network estimates the
higher-order affinity for all association hypothesis. With the
affinity, the MDA sub-network is to optimize globally and
obtain the optimal assignments. By all layers in FAMNet
designed differentiable, the feature and affinity sub-network
can be trained directly referring to the assignment ground
truth. To realize it, we make the following novel contributions in the FAMNet-based tracking system:
• We design an affinity sub-network that fuses discrim16172

