Progressive-X: Efficient, Anytime, Multi-Model Fitting Algorithm
Daniel Barath12 , and Jiri Matas1
1
VRG, Department of Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
2
Machine Perception Research Laboratory, MTA SZTAKI, Budapest, Hungary
barath.daniel@sztaki.mta.hu

Abstract
The Progressive-X algorithm, Prog-X in short, is proposed for geometric multi-model fitting. The method interleaves sampling and consolidation of the current data interpretation via repetitive hypothesis proposal, fast rejection, and integration of the new hypothesis into the kept
instance set by labeling energy minimization. Due to exploring the data progressively, the method has several beneficial properties compared with the state-of-the-art. First,
a clear criterion, adopted from RANSAC, controls the termination and stops the algorithm when the probability of
finding a new model with a reasonable number of inliers
falls below a threshold. Second, Prog-X is an any-time algorithm. Thus, whenever is interrupted, e.g. due to a time
limit, the returned instances cover real and, likely, the most
dominant ones. The method is superior to the state-of-theart in terms of accuracy in both synthetic experiments and
on publicly available real-world datasets for homography,
two-view motion, and motion segmentation.

(b) Putative instance

(c) Compound model

Propose

Re-assign,
maintain

Proposal
engine

(a) Input

Proposal
validation
Early instance
rejection
Iterate

Optimize
Remove
instances

(d) Instance set and
point assignments

Figure 1: The Prog-X multi-model fitting pipeline gets a
point set as input (a). It then repeats three steps. First,
proposal of putative hypotheses (b) considering the active
instance set (c), i.e. the compound model. In (b), the blue
points are inliers of the putative instance, and the green ones
are that of the compound one. Second, fast rejection of redundant hypotheses. Third, optimization by integrating new
hypotheses, re-assigning points, maintaining model parameters, and removing unnecessary instances. In (c) and (d),
the color codes the assignment to instances.

1. Introduction
The multi-class multi-model fitting problem is to interpret a set of input points as the mixture of noisy observations originating from multiple model instances which are
not necessarily of the same class. Examples of this problem
are the estimation of k planes and l spheres in a 3D point
cloud; multiple line segments and circles in 2D edge maps;
a number of homographies or fundamental matrices from
point correspondences; or multiple motions in videos. Robustness is achieved by considering the assignment to one
or multiple outlier classes.
Multi-model fitting has been studied since the early sixties. The Hough-transform [13, 14] perhaps is the first
popular method for finding multiple instances of a single
class [10, 21, 24, 33]. The RANSAC [9] algorithm was extended as well to deal with multiple instances. Sequential
RANSAC [29, 17] detects instances one after another by
searching in the point set from which the inliers of the de-

tected instances have been removed. The greedy approach
makes RANSAC a powerful tool for finding a single instance, is a drawback in multi-instance setting. Points are
assigned not to the best but to the first instance, typically
the one with the largest support, for which they cannot be
deemed outliers. MultiRANSAC [35] forms compound hypotheses about n instances. Besides requiring the number
n of the instances to be known a priori, the processing time
is high, since samples of size n times m are drawn in each
iteration, where m is the number of points required for estimating a model instance. Nevertheless, RANSAC-based
approaches have a desirable property of interleaving the hypothesis generation and verification steps. Moreover, they
have a justifiable termination criterion based on the inlieroutlier ratio in the data which provides a probabilistic guarantee of finding the best instance.
Recent approaches for multi-model fitting [32, 15, 23,
13780

