MIC: Mining Interclass Characteristics for Improved Metric Learning
Karsten Roth∗, Biagio Brattoli⋆ , Björn Ommer
HCI/IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
firstname.lastname@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Metric learning seeks to embed images of objects such
that class-defined relations are captured by the embedding
space. However, variability in images is not just due to different depicted object classes, but also depends on other
latent characteristics such as viewpoint or illumination. In
addition to these structured properties, random noise further obstructs the visual relations of interest. The common
approach to metric learning is to enforce a representation
that is invariant under all factors but the ones of interest. In
contrast, we propose to explicitly learn the latent characteristics that are shared by and go across object classes. We
can then directly explain away structured visual variability,
rather than assuming it to be unknown random noise.
We propose a novel surrogate task to learn visual characteristics shared across classes with a separate encoder.
This encoder is trained jointly with the encoder for class
information by reducing their mutual information. On five
standard image retrieval benchmarks the approach significantly improves upon the state-of-the-art. Code is available
at https://github.com/Confusezius/metric-learning-mininginterclass-characteristics.

1. Introduction
Images live in a high dimensional space rich of structured information and unstructured noise. Therefore an image can be described by a finite combination of latent characteristics. The goal of computer vision is then to learn the
relevant latent characteristics needed to solve a given task.
Particularly in object classification, discriminative characteristics (e.g. car shape) are used to group the images according to predefined classes. To tackle the intra-class variability, modern classifiers can easily learn to be invariant to
unstructured noise (e.g. random clutter, occlusion, image
brightness). However, a considerable part of the variability
is due to structured information shared among classes (e.g.
view points and notions of color)
∗ Indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. (Left) Images can be described by combinations of latent
characteristics and white noise. (Green) Standard metric learning encoders extract class-discriminative information α while disregarding object-specific properties β (e.g. color, orientation).
Achieving invariance to such characteristics requires substantial
training data. (Brown) Instead, the model can explain them away
by learning their structure explicitly. Our novel approach explicitly separates class-specific and shared properties during training
to boost the performance of the discriminative encoding.

For metric learning this becomes especially important.
As metric learning approaches project images into a highdimensional feature space to measure similarities between
images, every learned feature contributes. This means that
finding a strong set latent characteristics is crucial. Learning the characteristics shared across classes should therefore
benefit the model [20], as it can better explain the object
variance within a class. Take for example a model trained
only on white cars of a certain category. This model will
very likely not be able to recognize a blue car of the same
category (Fig.1 top-right). In this example, the encoder ignores the concept of ”color” for that particular class, even
though it can be learned from the data as a latent variable
shared across all cars (Fig.1 bottom-right). This is a typical
generalization problem and is traditionally solved by providing more labeled data. However, besides being a costly

8000

