Explicit Shape Encoding for Real-Time Instance Segmentation
Wenqiang Xu∗

Haiyang Wang∗

Fubo Qi

Cewu Lu†‡
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{vinjohn, wanghaiyang, 727749815, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Original Image

Predicted Shape

In this paper, we propose a novel top-down instance
segmentation framework based on explicit shape encoding, named ESE-Seg. It largely reduces the computational
consumption of the instance segmentation by explicitly decoding the multiple object shapes with tensor operations,
thus performs the instance segmentation at almost the same
speed as the object detection. ESE-Seg is based on a novel
shape signature Inner-center Radius (IR), Chebyshev polynomial fitting and the strong modern object detectors. ESESeg with YOLOv3 outperforms the Mask R-CNN on Pascal
VOC 2012 at mAPr @0.5 while 7 times faster.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a fundamental task in the computer vision, which is important for many real-world applications such as autonomous driving, robot manipulation.
As the task seeks to predict both the object location and
the shape, the methods for the instance segmentation are
generally not as efficient as the object detection frameworks. Forwarding each object instance through an upsampling network to obtain the instance shape, as mainstream
instance segmentation frameworks do [12, 22, 3, 19], is
quite computation-consuming, especially when compared
with the object detection which only needs to regress the
bounding box, i.e. a 4D vector for each object. Thus, if the
network can also regress the object shape to a short vector,
and decode the vector to the shape (see Fig. 1) in a simple way just like the bounding box, it can make the instance
segmentation reach almost equal computational efficiency
to the object detection. To achieve this goal, we propose a
novel instance segmentation framework based on Explicit
∗ these two authors have equal contributions.
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author.
‡ Cewu Lu is a member of MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI
Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and SJTU-SenseTime AI lab.

Figure 1. ESE-Seg learns to estimate the shapes of the detected
objects, it can be simutaneously obtained along with the bounding
boxes.

Shape Encoding and modern object detectors, named ESESeg.
Shape encoding is originally developed for instance retrieval [39, 17, 37], which encodes the object to a shape
vector. Recently, a number of works encode the shape implicitly [9, 29, 38], which is to project the shape content to
a latent vector, typically through a black-box design such
as deep CNN. Thus the decoding procedure under this approach should be also put through a network, which requires
several forwarding for multiple instances, and causes large
computation. In pursuit of fast decoding, we employ an
explicit shape encoding that involves only simple numeric
transformations.
However, designing a satisfactory explicit shape encoding method is non-trivial. Concerning the CNN training,
as it is known to regress with uncertainties, a preferred
shape vector should be relatively short but contains sufficient information, robust to the noise, and efficiently de-

5168

