LAP-Net: Level-Aware Progressive Network for Image Dehazing
Yunan Li1,2 Qiguang Miao1,2 ∗ Wanli Ouyang3 Zhenxin Ma1,2
Huijuan Fang1,2 Chao Dong4 Yining Quan1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian Univeristy, China
2
Xi’an Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Vision, China
3
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
4
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
yn li@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {qgmiao, ynquan}@xidian.edu.cn, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au,
longmao54sh@hotmail.com, hjfang95@163.com, chao.dong@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a level-aware progressive network (LAP-Net) for single image dehazing. Unlike previous
multi-stage algorithms that generally learn in a coarse-tofine fashion, each stage of LAP-Net learns different levels
of haze with different supervision. Then the network can
progressively learn the gradually aggravating haze. With
this design, each stage can focus on a region with specific
haze level and restore clear details. To effectively fuse the
results of varying haze levels at different stages, we develop
an adaptive integration strategy to yield the final dehazed
image. This strategy is achieved by a hierarchical integration scheme, which is in cooperation with the memory network and the domain knowledge of dehazing to highlight the
best-restored regions of each stage. Extensive experiments
on both real-world images and two dehazing benchmarks
validate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Outdoor images often suffer from the inclement weathers, such as fog and haze, leading to the degradation of color
and textures for distant objects. The problem caused by fog
and haze has become a critical issue in many applications like visual surveillance, remote sensing, and intelligent
transportation. Plenty of techniques are proposed for dehazing [26], and most of them are based on the atmospheric
scattering model [29]. Extra information [19, 32] and multiple images [37, 31, 10] are solutions in the early stage.
Then single image dehazing techniques [14, 54, 4] gradually become popular because of their efficiency. The powerful feature representation ability of deep learning also promotes the application of neural networks in haze removal
∗ Corresponding author

[34, 20, 35, 48].

Figure 1. The principle of LAP-Net and comparison with a general multi-stage scheme in a coarse-to-fine fashion. In (b), different
stages in the coarse-to-fine network have the same supervision and
can only refine the details of stage 1 as marked in the red box. It
cannot handle the condition where haze varies in close and distant
regions even in the last stage as marked in yellow. By contrast,
in (c), each stage in our LAP-Net focuses on haze removal in different regions with different supervision, and after an adaptive
weighted fusion, the final restoration exhibits a clear view on the
whole. (Best viewed in color and zooming in.)

In the real-world situation, different positions of one image can be influenced by different haze conditions. Correspondingly, the degradation levels vary a lot along with different haze levels and the scene depth. As shown in Fig.1,
regions far away from the camera like the buildings are degraded more than the close tree. That is because with the increasing of scene depth, the scattering mechanism becomes
more complex. In the distant regions, the scene radiance
should pass through more aerosol particles to the camera.
It is likely to be scattered among particles for many times
rather than reaching the camera after one time of scattering.
Therefore, more efforts should be made to handle the differ-

3276

