Meta R-CNN : Towards General Solver for Instance-level Low-shot Learning
Xiaopeng Yan1∗, Ziliang Chen1∗ , Anni Xu1 , Xiaoxi Wang1 , Xiaodan Liang1,2 , Liang Lin1,2,†
1

Sun Yat-sen University

2

DarkMatter AI Research

{yanxp3,wangxx35}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, c.ziliang@yahoo.com, 466783266@qq.com, xdliang328@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Resembling the rapid learning capability of human, lowshot learning empowers vision systems to understand new
concepts by training with few samples. Leading approaches
derived from meta-learning on images with a single visual
object. Obfuscated by a complex background and multiple
objects in one image, they are hard to promote the research
of low-shot object detection/segmentation. In this work, we
present a flexible and general methodology to achieve these
tasks. Our work extends Faster /Mask R-CNN by proposing meta-learning over RoI (Region-of-Interest) features instead of a full image feature. This simple spirit disentangles multi-object information merged with the background,
without bells and whistles, enabling Faster /Mask R-CNN
turn into a meta-learner to achieve the tasks. Specifically,
we introduce a Predictor-head Remodeling Network (PRN)
that shares its main backbone with Faster /Mask R-CNN.
PRN receives images containing low-shot objects with their
bounding boxes or masks to infer their class attentive vectors. The vectors take channel-wise soft-attention on RoI
features, remodeling those R-CNN predictor heads to detect or segment the objects consistent with the classes these
vectors represent. In our experiments, Meta R-CNN yields
the new state of the art in low-shot object detection and improves low-shot object segmentation by Mask R-CNN.Code:
https://yanxp.github.io/metarcnn.html.

1. Introduction
Deep learning frameworks dominate the vision community to date, due to their human-level achievements in supervised training regimes with a large amount of data. But
distinguished with human that excel in rapidly understanding visual characteristics with few demonstrations, deep
∗ indicate equal contribution (Xiaopeng Yan and Ziliang Chen). † indicates corresponding author: Liang Lin. This work was supported in part
by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under
Grant No. 2018YFC0830103, in part by National High Level Talents Special Support Plan (Ten Thousand Talents Program), and in part by National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant No. 61622214,
61836012, and 61876224, and in part by the Natural Science Foundation
of Guangdong Province under Grant No. 2017A030312006.

Figure 1. The illustration of labeled training images in low-shot setups for visual object recognition and class-aware object structure
(bounding-boxs or masks) prediction. Compared with recognition,
novel-class few objects in low-shot object detection/ segmentation
blend with other objects in diverse backgrounds, yet requiring a
low-shot learner to predict their classes and structure labels.

neural networks significantly suffer performance drop when
training data are scarce in a class. The exposed bottleneck
triggers many researches that rethink the generalization of
deep learning [46, 11], among which low(few)-shot learning [26] is a popular and very promising direction. Provided
with very few labeled data (1∼10 shots) in novel classes,
low-shot learners are trained to recognize the data-starveclass objects by the aid of base classes with sufficient labeled data (See Fig 1.a). Its industrial potential increasingly drives the emergence of solution, falling under the
umbrellas of Bayesian approaches [10, 26], similarity learning [25, 36] and meta-learning [40, 42, 41, 37].
However, recognizing a single object in an image is solely
a tip of the iceberg in real-world visual understanding. In
terms of instance-level learning tasks, e.g., object detection
[35, 33]/ segmentation [2], prior works in low-shot learning
contexts remain rarely explored (See Fig 1.b). Since learning the instance-level tasks requires bounding-box or masks
(structure labels) consuming more labors than image-level
annotations, it would be practically impactful if the novel
classes, object bounding boxes and segmentation masks can
be synchronously predicted by a low-shot learner. Unfortu19577

