A Comprehensive Overhaul of Feature Distillation
Byeongho Heo1,3∗ Jeesoo Kim2∗ Sangdoo Yun1 Hyojin Park2∗ Nojun Kwak2 Jin Young Choi3
{bhheo, kimjiss0305, wolfrun, nojunk, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr, sangdoo.yun@navercorp.com
1

Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp, Korea
GSCST, Seoul National University, Korea
3
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
2

Abstract
We investigate the design aspects of feature distillation methods achieving network compression and propose
a novel feature distillation method in which the distillation loss is designed to make a synergy among various aspects: teacher transform, student transform, distillation feature position and distance function. Our proposed distillation loss includes a feature transform with a newly designed
margin ReLU, a new distillation feature position, and a partial L2 distance function to skip redundant information giving adverse effects to the compression of student. In ImageNet, our proposed method achieves 21.65% of top-1 error
with ResNet50, which outperforms the performance of the
teacher network, ResNet152. Our proposed method is evaluated on various tasks such as image classification, object
detection and semantic segmentation and achieves a significant performance improvement in all tasks. The code is
available at bhheo.github.io/overhaul

1. Introduction
Experiencing remarkable advances in many machine
learning tasks using neural networks, researchers have
started to work on network compression and enhancement. Several approaches such as model pruning, model
quantization and knowledge distillation have been suggested to make the model smaller and cost-efficient. Among
them, knowledge distillation is being actively investigated.
Knowledge distillation refers to the method that helps the
training process of a smaller network (student) under the
supervision of a larger network (teacher). Unlike other compression methods, it can downsize a network regardless of
the structural difference between the teacher and the student
network. Allowing architectural flexibility, knowledge distillation is emerging as a next generation approach of net∗ This work was done when authors were in research internship at Clova
AI Research, NAVER corp.

78.31
Teacher (ResNet152)

Figure 1. Performance of distillation methods: AT [30], FT [13],
AB [7] and proposed method on ImageNet. The graph shows accuracy(%) of ResNet50 trained with each distillation method. Note
that ResNet152 with 78.31% accuracy is used as a teacher.

work compression.
Hinton et al. [8] proposed a knowledge distillation (KD)
method using the softmax output of the teacher network.
This method can be applied to any pair of network architectures since the dimensions of both outputs are the same.
However, the output of a high-performance teacher network
is not significantly different from the ground truth. Thus,
transferring only the output is similar to training the student with the ground truth, making the performance of output distillation limited. To make better use of the information contained in the teacher network, several approaches
have been proposed for feature distillation instead of output distillation. FitNets [22] have proposed a method that
encourages a student network to mimic the hidden feature
values of a teacher network. Although feature distillation
was a promising approach, the performance improvement
by FitNets was not significant.
After FitNets, variant methods of feature distillation
have been proposed as follows. The methods in [30, 28]
transform the feature into a representation having a reduced dimension and transfer it to the student. In spite of
the reduced dimension, it has been reported that the ab11921

