Temporal Recurrent Networks for Online Action Detection
Mingze Xu1∗ Mingfei Gao2∗ Yi-Ting Chen3 Larry S. Davis2 David J. Crandall1
1
Indiana University 2 University of Maryland 3 Honda Research Institute, USA
{mx6,djcran}@indiana.edu, {mgao,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu, ychen@honda-ri.com

Abstract
Most work on temporal action detection is formulated
as an offline problem, in which the start and end times of
actions are determined after the entire video is fully observed. However, important real-time applications including surveillance and driver assistance systems require identifying actions as soon as each video frame arrives, based
only on current and historical observations. In this paper, we propose a novel framework, the Temporal Recurrent
Network (TRN), to model greater temporal context of each
frame by simultaneously performing online action detection
and anticipation of the immediate future. At each moment
in time, our approach makes use of both accumulated historical evidence and predicted future information to better
recognize the action that is currently occurring, and integrates both of these into a unified end-to-end architecture.
We evaluate our approach on two popular online action detection datasets, HDD and TVSeries, as well as another
widely used dataset, THUMOS’14. The results show that
TRN significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
As we go about our lives, we continuously monitor the
social environment around us, making inferences about the
actions of others that might affect us. Is that child running
into the road or just walking towards the sidewalk? Is that
passerby outstretching his hand for a punch or a handshake?
Is that oncoming car turning left or doing a U-turn? These
and many other actions can occur at any time, without warning. In order to be able to react to the world around us, we
must make and update our inferences in real-time, updating and refining our hypotheses moment-to-moment as we
collect additional evidence over time.
In contrast, action recognition in computer vision is often studied as an offline classification problem, in which
the goal is to identify a single action occurring in a short
video clip given all of its frames [3, 5, 9, 18, 37, 53]. This
∗ The first two authors contributed equally. Part of this work was done
when MX and MG were interns at Honda Research Institute, USA.

Temporal Recurrent Networks
Previous Methods

BG

U-Turn

U-Turn

…
𝒙"

𝒙#

U-Turn

…
𝒙$

%$&"
𝒙

𝒕

𝒕+𝟏

%
𝒙$&#

%$&ℓ(
𝒙

Supervision Detection Anticipation
𝒕+𝟐

𝒕 + ℓ𝒅

Figure 1: Comparison between our proposed Temporal Recurrent Network (TRN) and previous methods. Previous
methods use only historical observations and learn representations for actions by optimizing current action estimation. Our approach learns a more discriminative representation by jointly optimizing current and future action recognition, and incorporates the predicted future information to
improve the performance of action detection in the present.
offline formulation simplifies the problem considerably: a
left turn can be trivially distinguished from a U-turn if the
end of the action can be observed. But emerging real-world
applications of computer vision like self-driving cars, interactive home virtual assistants, and collaborative robots require detecting actions online, in real-time. Several recent
papers have considered this online action detection problem [11,12,17,19,36,50], but accuracies are generally lower
than the offline case because using only current and past information makes the problem much more challenging.
Here we introduce the novel hypothesis that although future information is not available in an online setting, explicitly predicting the future can help to better classify actions
in the present. We propose a new model to estimate and use
this future information, and we present experimental results
showing that predicted future information indeed improves
the performance of online action recognition. This may
seem like a surprising result because at test time, a model

5532

