GODS: Generalized One-class Discriminative Subspaces for Anomaly Detection
Jue Wang∗
Australian National University, Canberra

Anoop Cherian
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, MA

jue.wang@anu.edu.au

cherian@merl.com

Abstract
One-class learning is the classic problem of fitting a
model to data for which annotations are available only for
a single class. In this paper, we propose a novel objective for one-class learning. Our key idea is to use a pair of
orthonormal frames – as subspaces – to “sandwich” the
labeled data via optimizing for two objectives jointly: i)
minimize the distance between the origins of the two subspaces, and ii) to maximize the margin between the hyperplanes and the data, either subspace demanding the data to
be in its positive and negative orthant respectively. Our proposed objective however leads to a non-convex optimization
problem, to which we resort to Riemannian optimization
schemes and derive an efficient conjugate gradient scheme
on the Stiefel manifold.
To study the effectiveness of our scheme, we propose
a new dataset Dash-Cam-Pose, consisting of clips with
skeleton poses of humans seated in a car, the task being
to classify the clips as normal or abnormal; the latter is
when any human pose is out-of-position with regard to say
an airbag deployment. Our experiments on the proposed
Dash-Cam-Pose dataset, as well as several other standard anomaly/novelty detection benchmarks demonstrate
the benefits of our scheme, achieving state-of-the-art oneclass accuracy.

1. Introduction
There are several real-world problems in which it may be
easy to characterize the normal operating behavior of a system or collect data for it, however may be difficult or sometimes even impossible to have data when a system is at fault
or is improperly used. Examples include but not limited to
an air conditioner making an unwanted vibration, a network
attacked by an intruder, abnormal patient conditions such
as heart rates, an accident captured in a video surveillance
camera, or a car engine firing at irregular intervals, among
others [11]. In machine learning literature, such problems
∗ Work done while interning at MERL.

(a) OC-SVM

(b) SVDD

(c) BODS (ours)

(d) GODS (ours)

Figure 1. A graphical illustration of classical OC-SVM and SVDD
in relation to our proposed BODS and GODS schemes. The
blue points show the given one-class data, the red-points are outliers, and decision boundary of each method is shown by orange
curves/lines.

are usually called one-class problems [4, 44], signifying the
fact that we may be able to have unlimited supply of labeled
training data for one-class (corresponding to the normal operation of the system), but do not have any labels or training data for situations corresponding to abnormalities. The
main goal of such problems is thus to learn a model that fits
to the normal set, such that abnormalities can be characterized as outliers of this model.
Classical solutions for one-class problems are mainly
extensions to support vector machines (SVMs), such as
the one-class SVM (OC-SVM) that maximizes the margin of the discriminative hyperplane from the origin [46].
There are extensions of this scheme, such as the leastsquares one-class SVM (LS-OSVM) [14] or its online variants [58] that learn to find a tube of minimal diameter that
includes all the labeled data. Another popular approach is
the support-vector data description (SVDD) that finds a hy18201

