Cost-Aware Fine-Grained Recognition for IoTs Based on Sequential Fixations
Hanxiao Wang, Venkatesh Saligrama, Stan Sclaroff, Vitaly Ablavsky
Boston University
{hxw,srv,sclaroff,ablavsky}@bu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of fine-grained classification on
an edge camera device that has limited power. The edge
device must sparingly interact with the cloud to minimize
communication bits to conserve power, and the cloud upon
receiving the edge inputs returns a classification label. To
deal with fine-grained classification, we adopt the perspective of sequential fixation with a foveated field-of-view to
model cloud-edge interactions. We propose a novel deep
reinforcement learning-based foveation model, DRIFT, that
sequentially generates and recognizes mixed-acuity images.
Training of DRIFT requires only image-level category labels and encourages fixations to contain task-relevant information, while maintaining data efficiency. Specifically, we
train a foveation actor network with a novel Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient by Conditioned Critic and Coaching (DDPGC3) algorithm. In addition, we propose to shape
the reward to provide informative feedback after each fixation to better guide RL training. We demonstrate the effectiveness of DRIFT on this task by evaluating on five
fine-grained classification benchmark datasets, and show
that the proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance with over 3X reduction in transmitted pixels.

1. Introduction
While edge camera IoT devices, which connect the physical world to the cloud, are revolutionizing data gathering in
many consumer and business applications, their limited resources place a significant burden on their service life and
operation, warranting cost-aware inference methods. For
low-powered IoT devices, transmit energy dominates all
other forms of battery usage [11, 17], and so, we are justified in considering the number of edge-cloud interactions
as a surrogate for battery usage. Our goal is to minimize
pixels transmitted while simultaneously ensuring accuracy
that is comparable to a fully trained state-of-art deep neural
network1 , which has access to the entire image. Our prototypical setup is an edge-device that sparingly transmits im1 The minimum amount of pixels for a standard Inception-V3 input size
is about 299 × 299 to achieve good accuracy. The pictures captured by
modern high resolution cameras are often larger than this size.

age regions to a cloud server equipped with abundant computational resources (e.g. a Inception-V3 network [37]), to
interpret received inputs2 .
Fine-grained classification poses fundamental challenges in the IoT setup and highlights a fundamental
dilemma between accuracy and cost: On the one hand an instance cannot be classified accurately, unless the cloud sees
the most discriminative parts. On the other hand an edge
device can neither transmit the entire image due to bandwidth/power constraints, nor can it locally identify those
parts due to lack of computational resources.
In this context we are compelled to adopt a novel interactive edge-cloud model. Our approach is a novel deep reinforcement learning-based foveation model, DRIFT, that
sequentially generates and recognizes mixed-acuity images.
Instead of transmitting the full details all at once, the edge
device first transmits a preliminary coarse thumbnail, e.g.
30 × 30, to the server, which then actively but sparingly interacts with the edge device to seek image regions of value
(see Fig.1), based only on the past received inputs. To
summarize, our method (1) operates on mixed-acuity inputs
whose resolution varies across the image, and more importantly, (2) actively and sequentially determines which image
regions should be perceived with more visual details based
on a low-acuity input, without access to the class label,
a process we humans perform naturally3 . While existing
trained deep network architectures are an option, they are
fundamentally ill-suited for this distributed task, and their
variants, namely, attention-based methods require the entire
high-acuity image to be available up-front.
Our DRIFT model consists of three neural networks: (1)
a backbone CNN to extract visual features from low/mixedacuity input images; (2) a foveation actor network to generate a sequence of fixation actions; and (3) an image classification network to predict the final class label. We pro2 This edge-cloud setup is a conventional model in IoTs (see [31]).
3 When we humans view a novel scene we do not perceive its full complexity at once, but rather, we foveate [26]. In doing so, our brain processes
information from high-acuity foveal regions and the coarser-resolution periphery. The ability to process mixed-acuity inputs and actively ‘choose’
where to fixate significantly increases our efficiency, particularly because
we do not need to observe every detail before recognizing a scene.

11252

