TASED-Net: Temporally-Aggregating Spatial Encoder-Decoder Network
for Video Saliency Detection
Kyle Min Jason J. Corso
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{kylemin,jjcorso}@umich.edu

Abstract
TASED-Net is a 3D fully-convolutional network architecture for video saliency detection. It consists of two
building blocks: first, the encoder network extracts lowresolution spatiotemporal features from an input clip of several consecutive frames, and then the following prediction
network decodes the encoded features spatially while aggregating all the temporal information. As a result, a single
prediction map is produced from an input clip of multiple
frames. Frame-wise saliency maps can be predicted by applying TASED-Net in a sliding-window fashion to a video.
The proposed approach assumes that the saliency map of
any frame can be predicted by considering a limited number of past frames. The results of our extensive experiments
on video saliency detection validate this assumption and
demonstrate that our fully-convolutional model with temporal aggregation method is effective. TASED-Net significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art approaches on
all three major large-scale datasets of video saliency detection: DHF1K, Hollywood2, and UCFSports. After analyzing the results qualitatively, we observe that our model is
especially better at attending to salient moving objects.

1. Introduction
Video saliency detection aims to model the gaze fixation
patterns of humans when viewing a dynamic scene. Because the predicted saliency map can be used to prioritize
the video information across space and time, this task has a
number of applications such as video surveillance [12, 41],
video captioning [27], video compression [11, 13], etc.
Previous state-of-the-art approaches for video saliency
detection [3, 19, 39] largely depend on LSTMs [16] to
aggregate information temporally. For example, OMCNN [19] feeds spatial features from YOLO [31] and temporal features from FlowNet [10] into a two-layer LSTM.
The leading state-of-the-art model, ACLNet [39], also uses

Figure 1: An illustration for the overall flow of TASEDNet. The encoder network extracts spatiotemporal features
from an input clip of T frames. The prediction network decodes spatially and also aggregates temporally the features
to produce a single saliency map of the last input frame.
This process is applied in a sliding window fashion with a
window size of T .
a LSTM to aggregate spatial features guided by frame-wise
image saliency maps. The strong performance of LSTMbased approaches over non-LSTM based ones suggests that
aggregating information temporally boosts performance on
video saliency detection.
However, all of these LSTM-based, existing video
saliency models fail to jointly process spatial and temporal information when predicting a saliency map from the
extracted features. Specifically, either spatial decoding and
temporal aggregation are performed separately, or only one
of these two processes is considered for the final prediction.
The existing works are hence unable to leverage the collective spatiotemporal information, which is expected to be
important to video saliency [9, 25].
To this end, we propose a novel 3D fully-convolutional
encoder-decoder network architecture for video saliency detection, which we call the Temporally-Aggregating Spatial Encoder-Decoder Network (TASED-Net). As described
in Figure 1, TASED-Net progressively reduces the temporal dimensionality within both the encoder and the decoder
subnetworks, which enables it to spatially upsample the encoded features and temporally aggregate all the information

2394

