Shape-Aware Human Pose and Shape Reconstruction Using Multi-View Images
Junbang Liang
Ming C. Lin
University of Maryland, College Park
{liangjb,lin}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
We propose a scalable neural network framework to reconstruct the 3D mesh of a human body from multi-view
images, in the subspace of the SMPL model [23]. Use of
multi-view images can significantly reduce the projection
ambiguity of the problem, increasing the reconstruction accuracy of the 3D human body under clothing. Our experiments show that this method benefits from the synthetic
dataset generated from our pipeline since it has good flexibility of variable control and can provide ground-truth for
validation. Our method outperforms existing methods on
real-world images, especially on shape estimations.

1. Introduction
Human body reconstruction, consisting of pose and
shape estimation, has been widely studied in a variety of
areas, including digital surveillance, computer animation,
special effects, and virtual/augmented environments. Yet, it
remains a challenging and popular topic of interest. While
direct 3D body scanning can provide excellent and sufficiently accurate results, its adoption is somewhat limited
by the required specialized hardware. We propose a practical method that can estimate body pose and shape directly
from a small set of images (typically 3 to 4) taken at several different view angles, which can be adopted in many
applications, such as Virtual Try-On. Compared to existing scanning-based reconstruction, ours is much easier to
use. Compared to previous image-based estimation methods, ours has a higher shape estimation accuracy when the
input human body is not within a normal range of bodymass index (BMI) and/or when the body is wearing loose
clothing. Furthermore, our framework is flexible in the
number of images used, which considerably extends its applicability.
In contrast to many existing methods, we use multi-view
images as input. We use the word “multi-view” to refer photos taken of the same person with similar poses from different view angles. They can be taken using specialized multiview cameras, but it is not necessary (Sec. 6.4). Single-view
images often lack the necessary and complete information

to infer the pose and shape of a human body, due to the
nature of projection transformation. Although applying a
predefined prior can alleviate this ambiguity, it is still insufficient in several cases, especially when a part of the body
is occluded by clothing, or when the pose direction is perpendicular to the camera viewing plane. For example, when
the human is walking towards the camera, it can be difficult
to distinguish the difference between a standing vs. walking pose using a direct front-view image, while a side-view
image could be more informative of the posture. By obtaining information from multiple view angles, the ambiguity
from projection can be considerably reduced, and the body
shape under loose garments can also be more accurately recovered.
Previous work on pose and shape estimation of a human
body (see Sec. 2) mostly rely on optimization. One of the
most important metrics used in these methods is the difference between the original and the estimated silhouette.
As a result, these methods cannot be directly applied to images where the human wears loose garments, e.g. long coat,
evening gown. The key insight of our method is: when estimating a person’s shape, how the human body is interacting
with the cloth, e.g. how a t-shirt is stretched out as pushed
by the stomach or the chest, provides more information than
the silhouette of the person. So image features, especially
those on clothes, play an important role in the shape estimation. With recent advances in deep learning, it is widely believed that the deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
structure can effectively capture these subtle visual details
as activation values. We propose a multi-view multi-stage
network structure to effectively capture visual features on
garments from different view angles to more accurately infer pose and shape information.
Given a limited number of images, we incorporate prior
knowledge about the human body shape to be reconstructed.
Specifically, we propose to use the Skinned Multi-Person
Linear (SMPL) model [23], which uses Principal Component Analysis (PCA) coefficients to represent human body
shapes and poses. In order to train the model to accurately output the coefficients for the SMPL model, a sufficient amount of data containing ground-truth information

4352

