Floor-SP: Inverse CAD for Floorplans by
Sequential Room-wise Shortest Path
Jiacheng Chen1
Chen Liu2
1
Simon Fraser University

2

{jca348,furukawa}@sfu.ca

Jiaye Wu2
Yasutaka Furukawa1
Washington University in St. Louis
{chenliu,jiaye.wu}@wustl.edu

Figure 1. The proposed system, dubbed Floor-SP, takes aligned panorama RGBD scans as input, finds room segments, solves an optimization problem to reconstruct a floorplan graph as multiple polygonal loops (one for each room), and merges them into a 2D graph via
simple post-processing heuristics. The optimization is the technical contribution of the paper, which employs the room-wise coordinate
descent strategy and sequentially solves shortest path problems to optimize the room structure.

Abstract
This paper proposes a new approach for automated
floorplan reconstruction from RGBD scans, a major milestone in indoor mapping research. The approach, dubbed
Floor-SP, formulates a novel optimization problem, where
room-wise coordinate descent sequentially solves shortest
path problems to optimize the floorplan graph structure.
The objective function consists of data terms guided by
deep neural networks, consistency terms encouraging adjacent rooms to share corners and walls, and the model complexity term. The approach does not require corner/edge
primitive extraction unlike most other methods. We have
evaluated our system on production-quality RGBD scans of
527 apartments or houses, including many units with nonManhattan structures. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate a significant performance boost over the
current state-of-the-art. Please refer to our project website
http:// jcchen.me/ floor-sp/ for code and data.

1. Introduction
Architectural floorplans play a crucial role in designing,
understanding, and remodeling indoor spaces. Automated
floorplan reconstruction from raw sensor data is a major
milestone in indoor mapping research. The core technical challenge lies in the inference of wall graph structure,
whose topology is unknown and varies per example.
Computer Vision has made remarkable progress in the
task of graph inference, for instance, human pose estima-

tion [3] and hand tracking [30]. Unfortunately, the success
has been limited to the cases of fixed known topology (e.g.,
a human has two arms). Inference of graph structure with
unknown varying topology is still an open problem.
A popular approach to graph reconstruction is primitive
detection and selection [11, 27, 22], for example, detecting
corners, selecting subsets of corners to form edges, and selecting subsets of edges to form regions. The major problem
of this bottom-up process is that it cannot recover from a
single false-negative in an earlier stage (i.e., a missing primitive). The task becomes increasingly more difficult as the
primitive space grows exponentially with their degrees of
freedom, especially for non-Manhattan scenes which most
existing methods do not handle [11, 2, 21, 20].
This paper seeks to make a breakthrough in the domain
of floorplan reconstruction with three key ideas.
• First, we start from room segmentation via instance semantic segmentation technique (we use Mask-RCNN [12]).
The room segmentation reduces the floorplan graph inference into the reconstruction of multiple polygonal loops,
one for each room. This reduction allows us to formulate
floorplan reconstruction as sound energy optimization over
multiple loops guided by room proposals.
• Second, we employ room-wise coordinate descent strategy in optimizing the objective function. By exploiting the
fact that the room topology is a simple loop, our formulation
finds the (near-)optimal graph structure by solving a shortest path problem for each room one by one sequentially,
while enforcing consistency with the other rooms.
12661

