FDA: Feature Disruptive Attack
R. Venkatesh Babu

Vivek B.S.

Aditya Ganeshan ∗
Preferred Networks Inc.,

Video Analytics Lab,

Video Analytics Lab,

Tokyo, Japan

Indian Institute of Science, India

Indian Institute of Science, India

aditya@preferred.jp

svivek@iisc.ac.in

venky@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Though Deep Neural Networks (DNN) show excellent
performance across various computer vision tasks, several
works show their vulnerability to adversarial samples, i.e.,
image samples with imperceptible noise engineered to manipulate the network’s prediction. Adversarial sample generation methods range from simple to complex optimization techniques. Majority of these methods generate adversaries through optimization objectives that are tied to the
pre-softmax or softmax output of the network. In this work
we, (i) show the drawbacks of such attacks, (ii) propose two
new evaluation metrics: Old Label New Rank (OLNR) and
New Label Old Rank (NLOR) in order to quantify the extent
of damage made by an attack, and (iii) propose a new adversarial attack FDA: Feature Disruptive Attack, to address
the drawbacks of existing attacks. FDA works by generating image perturbation that disrupt features at each layer of
the network and causes deep-features to be highly corrupt.
This allows FDA adversaries to severely reduce the performance of deep networks. We experimentally validate that
FDA generates stronger adversaries than other state-of-theart methods for image classification, even in the presence of
various defense measures. More importantly, we show that
FDA disrupts feature-representation based tasks even without access to the task-specific network or methodology.

1. Introduction
With the advent of deep-learning based algorithms, remarkable progress has been achieved in various computer vision applications. However, a plethora of existing
works [9, 49, 8, 39], have clearly established that Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are susceptible to adversarial samples: input data containing imperceptible noise specifically
crafted to manipulate the network’s prediction. Further,
Szegedy et al. [49] showed that adversarial samples transfer across models i.e., adversarial samples generated for one
∗ Work done as a member of Video Analytics Lab, IISc, India.

(a) Original image

(c) Clean sample’s inversion

(b) FDA-sample’s inversion

(d) PGD-sample’s inversion

Figure 1. Using feature inversion [34], we visualize the M ixed7b
representation of Inception-V3 [48]. The inversion of PGDattacked sample (d) is remarkably similar to inversion of clean
sample (c). In contrast, inversion of FDA-attacked sample (b)
completely obfuscates the clean sample’s information.

model can adversely affect other unrelated models as well.
This transferable nature of adversarial samples further increases the vulnerability of DNNs deployed in real world.
As DNNs become more-and-more ubiquitous, especially in
decision-critical applications, such as Autonomous Driving [2], the necessity of investigating adversarial samples
has become paramount.
Majority of existing attacks [49, 13, 33, 16], generate adversarial samples via optimizing objectives that are tied to
the pre-softmax or softmax output of the network. The sole
objective of these attacks is to generate adversarial samples
which are misclassified by the network with very high con-

8069

