Neural-Guided RANSAC: Learning Where to Sample Model Hypotheses
Eric Brachmann and Carsten Rother
Visual Learning Lab
Heidelberg University (HCI/IWR)

1. Introduction
Despite its simplicity and time of invention, Random
Sample Consensus (RANSAC) [12] remains an important
method for robust optimization, and is a vital component
of many state-of-the-art vision pipelines [39, 40, 29, 6].
RANSAC allows accurate estimation of model parameters
from a set of observations of which some are outliers. To
this end, RANSAC iteratively chooses random sub-sets of
observations, so called minimal sets, to create model hypotheses. Hypotheses are ranked according to their consensus with all observations, and the top-ranked hypothesis is
returned as the final estimate.
The main limitation of RANSAC is its poor performance
in domains with many outliers. As the ratio of outliers increases, RANSAC requires exponentially many iterations
to find an outlier-free minimal set. Implementations of
RANSAC therefore often restrict the maximum number of
iterations, and return the best model found so far [7].

Probability

RANSAC Result
Neural Guidance
NG-RANSAC Result

Abstract
We present Neural-Guided RANSAC (NG-RANSAC), an
extension to the classic RANSAC algorithm from robust optimization. NG-RANSAC uses prior information to improve
model hypothesis search, increasing the chance of finding
outlier-free minimal sets. Previous works use heuristic side
information like hand-crafted descriptor distance to guide
hypothesis search. In contrast, we learn hypothesis search
in a principled fashion that lets us optimize an arbitrary
task loss during training, leading to large improvements on
classic computer vision tasks. We present two further extensions to NG-RANSAC. Firstly, using the inlier count itself as training signal allows us to train neural guidance
in a self-supervised fashion. Secondly, we combine neural
guidance with differentiable RANSAC to build neural networks which focus on certain parts of the input data and
make the output predictions as good as possible. We evaluate NG-RANSAC on a wide array of computer vision tasks,
namely estimation of epipolar geometry, horizon line estimation and camera re-localization. We achieve superior or
competitive results compared to state-of-the-art robust estimators, including very recent, learned ones.

SIFT Correspondences

http://vislearn.de

Figure 1. RANSAC vs. NG-RANSAC. We extract 2000 SIFT correspondences between two images. With an outlier rate of 88%,
RANSAC fails to find the correct relative transformation (green
correct and red wrong matches). We use a neural network to predict a probability distribution over correspondences. Over 90% of
the probability mass falls onto 239 correspondences with an outlier rate of 33%. NG-RANSAC samples minimal sets according
to this distribution, and finds the correct transformation up to an
angular error of less than 1◦ .

In this work, we combine RANSAC with a neural network that predicts a weight for each observation. The
weights ultimately guide the sampling of minimal sets.
We call the resulting algorithm Neural-Guided RANSAC
(NG-RANSAC). A comparison of our method with vanilla
RANSAC can be seen in Fig. 1.

4322

