Sequential Adversarial Learning for Self-Supervised Deep Visual Odometry
Shunkai Li
Fei Xue∗
Xin Wang*
Zike Yan
Hongbin Zha
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
PKU-SenseTime Machine Vision Joint Lab
{lishunkai, feixue, xinwang cis, zike.yan}@pku.edu.cn

zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a self-supervised learning framework for visual odometry (VO) that incorporates correlation of consecutive frames and takes advantage of adversarial learning. Previous methods tackle self-supervised VO as a local
structure from motion (SfM) problem that recovers depth
from single image and relative poses from image pairs by
minimizing photometric loss between warped and captured
images. As single-view depth estimation is an ill-posed
problem, and photometric loss is incapable of discriminating distortion artifacts of warped images, the estimated depth is vague and pose is inaccurate. In contrast to
previous methods, our framework learns a compact representation of frame-to-frame correlation, which is updated
by incorporating sequential information. The updated representation is used for depth estimation. Besides, we tackle VO as a self-supervised image generation task and take
advantage of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN). The
generator learns to estimate depth and pose to generate a
warped target image. The discriminator evaluates the quality of generated image with high-level structural perception
that overcomes the problem of pixel-wise loss in previous
methods. Experiments on KITTI and Cityscapes datasets show that our method obtains more accurate depth with
details preserved and predicted pose outperforms state-ofthe-art self-supervised methods significantly.

1. Introduction
The ability for an agent to understand 3D environment
and infer ego-motion is crucial for many real-world applications, such as autonomous driving [7], robotics [14], and
virtual/augmented reality [30]. As the problem of simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and visual odometry (VO) has a clear meaning in 3D geometry, VO/SLAM
has been studied as a multi-view geometric problem for
decades. These classic methods [11, 12, 15, 25, 29] perfor∗ equal contribution

Figure 1. Overview of our method. The network extracts optical flow into a compact code, which is incorporated by LSTM to
aggregate historical information and refine previous estimations.
Depth and pose estimation is regarded as an image conditioned
generative task, and the refined code is provided as input signal.
The geometric inference is used to reconstruct a warped image by
view synthesis and evaluated by a discriminator.

m well in regular scenes, but fail in challenging conditions due to their inherent reliance on low-level feature correspondences. Since deep learning captures structural perception by extracting high-level features, a number of learningbased VO methods have been applied to break through the
limitations of classic approaches [19, 33, 34, 36, 37, 41].
However, supervised learning requires substantial labeled data, which is either tedious or impractical to obtain. Recent work has been trying to address this problem
by coupling depth and pose estimation in a self-supervised
manner [39, 42]. As image sequence is the only input, all
the estimations should be mapped to image space for selfsupervision. The mapping is typically made by view synthesis and photometric loss is defined to minimize the difference between synthesized image and the real one.
In self-supervised VO, estimation of depth and pose are
simultaneously learned in a coupled way, accurate depth
contributes to precise pose estimation and vice versa. Previous works on self-supervised VO estimate depth from single

2851

