Learning Perspective Undistortion of Portraits
Yajie Zhao1,* , Zeng Huang1,2,* , Tianye Li1,2 , Weikai Chen1 , Chloe LeGendre1,2 , Xinglei Ren1 , Ari
Shapiro1 , and Hao Li1,2,3
1

1

USC Institute for Creative Technologies
2
University of Southern California
3
Pinscreen

Beam splitter

Fixed camera
Sliding camera

(b) Input image

(a) Capture setting

(c) Undistorted image

(d) Reference

(e) Input image

(f) Undistorted image

(g) Reference

We propose a learning-based method to remove perspective distortion. We show input photos (b) (e), our undistortion results (c) (f), and
reference images (d) (g) captured simultaneously using a beam splitter rig (a). Our approach handles even extreme perspective distortions.

Abstract
Near-range portrait photographs often contain perspective distortion artifacts that bias human perception and
challenge both facial recognition and reconstruction techniques. We present the first deep learning based approach
to remove such artifacts from unconstrained portraits. In
contrast to the previous state-of-the-art approach [23], our
method handles even portraits with extreme perspective distortion, as we avoid the inaccurate and error-prone step of
first fitting a 3D face model. Instead, we predict a distortion correction flow map that encodes a per-pixel displacement that removes distortion artifacts when applied to the
input image. Our method also automatically infers missing
facial features, i.e. occluded ears caused by strong perspective distortion, with coherent details. We demonstrate that
our approach significantly outperforms the previous stateof-the-art [23] both qualitatively and quantitatively, particularly for portraits with extreme perspective distortion or
facial expressions. We further show that our technique benefits a number of fundamental tasks, significantly improving
the accuracy of both face recognition and 3D reconstruction and enables a novel camera calibration technique from
a single portrait. Moreover, we also build the first perspective portrait database with a large diversity in identities,
expression and poses.

1. Introduction
Perspective distortion artifacts are often observed in
portrait photographs, in part due to the popularity of the
“selfie” image captured at a near-range distance. The
inset images, where a person is photographed from distances of 160cm and 25cm, demonstrate these artifacts.
When
the
object-tocamera
distance
is
comparable to the size of
a human head, as in the
25cm distance example,
there is a large proportional difference between
the camera-to-nose and
camera-to-ear distances.
@160CM
@25CM
This difference creates
a face with unusual proportions, with nose and eyes
appearing larger and ears vanishing all together [56].
Perspective distortion in portraits not only influences the
way humans perceive one another [9], but also greatly impairs a number of computer vision-based tasks, such as face
verification and landmark detection. Prior research [39, 40]
has demonstrated that face recognition is strongly compromised by the perspective distortion of facial features. Additionally, 3D face reconstruction from such portraits is
highly inaccurate, as geometry fitting starts from biased facial landmarks and distorted textures.

7849

