Wavelet Domain Style Transfer for an Effective Perception-distortion Tradeoff in
Single Image Super-Resolution
Xin Deng
Imperial College London

Ren Yang
ETH Zurich

Mai Xu
Beihang University

x.deng16@imperial.ac.uk

reyang@ee.ethz.ch

maixu@buaa.edu.cn

Pier Luigi Dragotti
Imperial College London
p.dragotti@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In single image super-resolution (SISR), given a lowresolution (LR) image, one wishes to ﬁnd a high-resolution
(HR) version of it which is both accurate and photorealistic. Recently, it has been shown that there exists a
fundamental tradeoff between low distortion and high perceptual quality [3], and the generative adversarial network (GAN) is demonstrated to approach the perceptiondistortion (PD) bound effectively. In this paper, we propose a novel method based on wavelet domain style transfer (WDST), which achieves a better PD tradeoff than the
GAN based methods. Speciﬁcally, we propose to use 2D stationary wavelet transform (SWT) to decompose one image
into low-frequency and high-frequency sub-bands. For the
low-frequency sub-band, we improve its objective quality
through an enhancement network. For the high-frequency
sub-band, we propose to use WDST to effectively improve
its perceptual quality. By feat of the perfect reconstruction
property of wavelets, these sub-bands can be re-combined
to obtain an image which has simultaneously high objective
and perceptual quality. The numerical results on various
datasets show that our method achieves the best trade-off
between the distortion and perceptual quality among the existing state-of-the-art SISR methods.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to restore
a high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR)
one. In this context, some methods focus on improving
the objective image quality, through minimizing the mean
squared error (MSE) between the restored and the groundtruth images [6, 22, 12, 13, 15, 30, 31]. Other methods aim to improve the perceptual image quality, through
minimizing the perceptual loss using adversarial training
[14, 21, 19]. The methods driven by objective quality

can achieve low distortion but with poor perceptual quality,
while the other category can generate photo-realistic images
but with large MSE distortion. We wish to obtain a superresolved image which is both accurate and photo-realistic.
However, as pointed out in [3], there exists a tradeoff between the ability to achieve low MSE and high perceptual
quality.
A natural approach to achieve this tradeoff is to train a
generative adversarial network (GAN) to minimize a combined MSE and adversarial loss, which has been tried by
both SRGAN-MSE [14] and ENet [21]. However, the training process is extremely unstable. On the one hand, the
adversarial loss encourages the synthesis of high-frequency
details in the results [21]. On the other hand, since these
high-frequency details are not in the right place, the MSE
distortion is increased. This unstable training may lead to
many undesirable artifacts in the restored image, as shown
in Fig. 1. To avoid this, ESRGAN [27], which is the winner of the PIRM challenge [2], proposed to train two separate networks with the low MSE and high perceptual quality
targets, respectively. The two networks are then interpolated to achieve a compromise on the objective and perceptual quality. However, the network interpolation requires
that the two networks have exactly the same architectures,
which strongly limits their performance. Instead of the network interpolation, the image fusion method can be more
ﬂexible, since it has no constraint on the network structure.
Given one image with high objective quality and another
image with high perceptual quality, image fusion aims to
fuse them to obtain an image with both high objective and
perceptual quality. Recently, Deng [5] proposed to combine
the two images using image style transfer. However, since
the style transfer is performed in pixel domain, it is difﬁcult
to preserve the structure and texture information. As shown
in Fig. 1, the structure of the wall is severely affected.
Another disadvantage of Deng [5] is that it tries to op-

3076

