Conditional Recurrent Flow: Conditional Generation of Longitudinal Samples
with Applications to Neuroimaging
Seong Jae Hwang1

Zirui Tao

Won Hwa Kim2

Vikas Singh2

Univ. of Pittsburgh

Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison

Univ. of Texas at Arlington

Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison

1. Introduction
Consider a dataset of longitudinal or temporal sequences
of data samples {xt }N
i=1 where each sample xi comes with
sequential covariates {yt }N
i=1 , one for each time point
t. In other words, we assume that for each sequential
sample i, x1i , · · · , xTi = {xt }i , the sequential covariates
yi1 , · · · , yiT = {yt }i provide some pertinent auxiliary information associated with that sequential sample. For example, in a neuroimaging study, if the sequential samples
correspond to several longitudinal image scans of a participant over multiple years, the sequential covariate associated
1 : Work done while SJH was at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
2 : Shared senior authorship

High Cognition

Our Model

Med Cognition

Low Cognition

Conditional Recurrent Flow

≈

Generated
Sequence

≈

We develop a conditional generative model for longitudinal image datasets based on sequential invertible neural
networks. Longitudinal image acquisitions are common in
various scientific and biomedical studies where often each
image sequence sample may also come together with various secondary (fixed or temporally dependent) measurements. The key goal is not only to estimate the parameters of
a deep generative model for the given longitudinal data, but
also to enable evaluation of how the temporal course of the
generated longitudinal samples are influenced as a function
of induced changes in the (secondary) temporal measurements (or events). Our proposed formulation incorporates
recurrent subnetworks and temporal context gating, which
provide a smooth transition in a temporal sequence of generated data that can be easily informed or modulated by
secondary temporal conditioning variables. We show that
the formulation works well despite the smaller sample sizes
common in these applications. Our model is validated on
two video datasets and a longitudinal Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) dataset for both quantitative and qualitative evaluations of the generated samples. Further, using our generated longitudinal image samples, we show that we can capture the pathological progressions in the brain that turn out
to be consistent with the existing literature, and could facilitate various types of downstream statistical analysis.

Sequential
Condition

≈

Abstract

Real Data
Sequence

Figure 1: Conditional sequence generation illustration. 1) Given: a
sequential condition of decreasing cognition (i.e., a memory test score sequence yi1 → yi2 → yi3 indicating High→Medium→Low Cognition performance). 2) Model: Conditional Recurrent Flow (CRow). 3) Generate:
a sequence of brain image progression x1i → x2i → x3i corresponding to
the given cognition progression (i.e., brain regions with high (red) and low
(blue) disease pathology). The Generated Sequence follows the trend of
the Real Data Sequence (i.e., similar (≈) to the real brain image progression) from the subjects with similarly decreasing cognition scores.

with each time point may be an assessment of disease severity or some other clinical measurement.
Our high level goal is to design conditional generative
models for such sequential image data. In particular, we
want a model which provides us a type of flexibility that is
highly desirable in this setting. For instance, for a sample
drawn from the distribution after the generative model has
been estimated, we should be able to “adjust” the sequential
covariates, say at a time point t, dynamically to influence
the expected future predictions after t for that sample. It
makes sense that for a heart rate sequence, the appropriate
subsequence should be influenced by when the “violence”
stimulus was introduced as well as the default heart rate
pattern of the specific sample (participant) [2]. Notice that
when t = 1, this construction is similar to conditional generative models where the “covariate” or condition y may
simply denote an attribute that we may want to adjust for a
sample: for example, increase the smile or age attribute for
a face image sampled from the distribution as in [26].
We want our formulation to provide a modified set of xt s
adaptively, if we adjust sequential covariates yt s for that
110692

