Toward Real-World Single Image Super-Resolution:
A New Benchmark and A New Model

1

Jianrui Cai1,∗ , Hui Zeng1,∗ , Hongwei Yong1,3 , Zisheng Cao2 , Lei Zhang1,3,§
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 DJI Co.,Ltd, 3 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{csjcai, cshzeng, cshyong, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, zisheng.cao@dji.com

Abstract
Most of the existing learning-based single image superresolution (SISR) methods are trained and evaluated on
simulated datasets, where the low-resolution (LR) images
are generated by applying a simple and uniform degradation (i.e., bicubic downsampling) to their high-resolution
(HR) counterparts. However, the degradations in realworld LR images are far more complicated. As a consequence, the SISR models trained on simulated data become less effective when applied to practical scenarios.
In this paper, we build a real-world super-resolution (RealSR) dataset where paired LR-HR images on the same
scene are captured by adjusting the focal length of a digital camera. An image registration algorithm is developed
to progressively align the image pairs at different resolutions. Considering that the degradation kernels are naturally non-uniform in our dataset, we present a Laplacian
pyramid based kernel prediction network (LP-KPN), which
efficiently learns per-pixel kernels to recover the HR image.
Our extensive experiments demonstrate that SISR models
trained on our RealSR dataset deliver better visual quality
with sharper edges and finer textures on real-world scenes
than those trained on simulated datasets. Though our RealSR dataset is built by using only two cameras (Canon
5D3 and Nikon D810), the trained model generalizes well to
other camera devices such as Sony a7II and mobile phones.

(b) Bicubic

(a) Image captured by Sony a7II

(d) RCAN + MD

(e) RCAN + RealSR

(c) RCAN + BD

(f) LP-KPN + RealSR

Figure 1. The SISR results (×4) of (a) a real-world image captured by a Sony a7II camera. SISR results generated by (b) bicubic interpolator, RCAN models [64] trained using image pairs (in
DIV2K [46]) with (c) bicubic degradation (BD), (d) multiple simulated degradations (MD) [62], and (e) authentic distortions in our
RealSR dataset. (f) SISR result by the proposed LP-KPN model
trained on our dataset. Note that our RealSR dataset is collected
by Canon 5D3 and Nikon D810 cameras.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) [16] aims to recover a high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution
(LR) observation. SISR has been an active research topic
for decades [39, 59, 46, 48, 4, 6] because of its high practical values in enhancing image details and textures. Since
SISR is a severely ill-posed inverse problem, learning im∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
§ Corresponding author. This work is supported by China NSFC grant
(no. 61672446) and Hong Kong RGC GRF grant (PolyU 152216/18E).

age prior information from HR and/or LR exemplar images
[16, 14, 57, 20, 15, 8, 25, 58, 12, 21, 47, 42] plays an indispensable role in recovering details from an LR image.
Benefitting from the rapid development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [29], recent years have witnessed an explosive spread of training CNN models to perform SISR, and the performance has been consistently improved by designing new CNN architectures [10, 51, 43, 24,
45, 31, 65, 64] and loss functions [23, 30, 41].

3086

