SRM : A Style-based Recalibration Module for Convolutional Neural Networks
HyunJae Lee
Lunit Inc.

Hyo-Eun Kim
Lunit Inc.

Hyeonseob Nam
Lunit Inc.

hjlee@lunit.io

hekim@lunit.io

hsnam@lunit.io

Abstract
Following the advance of style transfer with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), the role of styles in CNNs
has drawn growing attention from a broader perspective. In
this paper, we aim to fully leverage the potential of styles to
improve the performance of CNNs in general vision tasks.
We propose a Style-based Recalibration Module (SRM),
a simple yet effective architectural unit, which adaptively
recalibrates intermediate feature maps by exploiting their
styles. SRM first extracts the style information from each
channel of the feature maps by style pooling, then estimates
per-channel recalibration weight via channel-independent
style integration. By incorporating the relative importance
of individual styles into feature maps, SRM effectively enhances the representational ability of a CNN. The proposed
module is directly fed into existing CNN architectures with
negligible overhead. We conduct comprehensive experiments on general image recognition as well as tasks related
to styles, which verify the benefit of SRM over recent approaches such as Squeeze-and-Excitation (SE). To explain
the inherent difference between SRM and SE, we provide an
in-depth comparison of their representational properties.

1. Introduction
The evolution of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
has constantly pushed the boundaries of complex vision
tasks [20, 23, 2]. Besides their superior performance, a
wide investigation has revealed that CNNs are capable of
handling not only the content (i.e. shape) but also the style
(i.e. texture) of an image. Gatys et al. [6] discovered that the
feature statistics of a CNN effectively encode the style information of an image, which laid the foundation of neural
style transfer [7, 17, 13]. Recent approaches also pointed
out that the styles play an unexpectedly significant role in
the decision making process by standard CNNs [1, 8]. Furthermore, Karras et al. [18] demonstrated that a generative CNN architecture solely based on style manipulation
achieves dramatic improvement in terms of realistic image
generation.

Inspired by the tight link between the style and CNN
representation, we aim to enhance the utilization of styles
in a CNN to boost its representational power. We propose a novel architectural unit, Style-based Recalibration
Module (SRM), which explicitly incorporates the styles into
CNN representations through a form of feature recalibration. Note that a CNN involves styles with varying levels
of significance. While certain styles play an essential role,
some are rather a nuisance factor to the task [25]. SRM
dynamically estimates the relative importance of individual
styles then reweights the feature maps based on the style importance, which allows the network to focus on meaningful
styles while ignoring unnecessary ones.
The overall structure of SRM is illustrated in Figure 1. It
consists of two main components: style pooling and style integration. The style pooling operator extracts style features
from each channel by summarizing feature responses across
spatial dimensions. It is followed by the style integration
operator, which produces example-specific style weights by
utilizing the style features via channel-wise operation. The
style weights finally recalibrate the feature maps to either
emphasize or suppress their information. Our proposed
module is seamlessly integrated into modern CNN architecture and trained in an end-to-end manner. While SRM
only imposes negligible additional parameters and computations, it remarkably improves the performance of the network. Beyond the practical improvements, SRM provides
an intuitive interpretation about the effect of channel-wise
recalibration: it controls the contribution of styles by adjusting the global statistics of feature responses while maintaining their spatial configuration.
Our experiments on image recognition [28, 19] verify the
effectiveness of SRM in general vision tasks. Throughout
the experiment, SRM outperforms recent approaches [12,
11] though it requires orders of magnitude less additional
parameters. Furthermore, we demonstrate the capability of
SRM in arranging the contribution of styles. To this end, we
conduct extensive experiments on style-related tasks such
as classification with a texture-shape cue conflict [8], multidomain classification [32], texture recognition [4], and style
transfer [17], where SRM brings exceptional performance

1854

