Moving Indoor: Unsupervised Video Depth Learning in Challenging
Environments
Junsheng Zhou1,* , Yuwang Wang2 , Kaihuai Qin1 , and Wenjun Zeng2
1

Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

zhoujs17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, qkh-dcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
yuwwan, wezeng@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recently unsupervised learning of depth from videos has
made remarkable progress and the results are comparable
to fully supervised methods in outdoor scenes like KITTI.
However, there still exist great challenges when directly applying this technology in indoor environments, e.g., large
areas of non-texture regions like white wall, more complex ego-motion of handheld camera, transparent glasses
and shiny objects. To overcome these problems, we propose a new optical-flow based training paradigm which reduces the difficulty of unsupervised learning by providing a
clearer training target and handles the non-texture regions.
Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that the result of
our method is comparable to fully supervised methods on
the NYU Depth V2 benchmark. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first quantitative result of purely unsupervised learning method reported on indoor datasets.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the structures of scenes from RGB images has long been a popular research topic. Depth estimation is an important step to reconstruct the scenes. It is easy
for human to perceive the depth of scenes from a RGB image since we have prior knowledge about the sizes of common objects and their layouts, but it is difficult for computer
to estimate accurate depth map from a single image due
to scale ambiguity. Classical methods like Structure-fromMotion and Stereo Matching [14, 18] were proposed and
achieved plausible results. In recent years, due to the surge
of deep learning, convolutional neural network was introduced to predict depth from monocular RGB images for its
* Work done as an intern at MSRA.

powerful capacity of feature extraction,which leads to great
progress in this field. These methods [31, 11, 10], treat the
neural networks as blackbox with strong fitting ability and
use the collected ground-truth annotation to supervise the
training. However, these fully supervised methods are limited by the huge demand of training samples.
Recently unsupervised depth learning [48, 17, 47] has
been proposed and attracted more and more interests. This
method is similar to traditional Structure-from-Motion that
leverages the disparity information contained in videos to
supervise the networks’ training. The key idea is novel view
synthesis based on simultaneously estimated depth of scene
and ego-motion of camera. The appearance difference between the synthesized view and real view is used as supervisory signal for the entire training pipeline. These unsupervised methods do not need ground-truth annotation and
achieve remarkable results on driving scenes like KITTI and
Cityscapes.
However, there still exist great challenges when directly
applying this technology in indoor environments. In our
experiments, we observed that the same model and same
training setting, which is able to achieve state-of-the-art performance on KITTI, soon collapse when training on indoor
datasets NYU V2[39] and Scannet [8]. The reason is that
indoor environments are more complicated than urban driving scenes. The main problems can be summarized below:
1) Large areas of non-texture regions. Unlike fully supervised methods in which each pixel has ground-truth supervision, the supervisory signal of unsupervised learning
only comes from the appearance difference between images
themselves. Non-texture regions seriously hinder the training since in these regions the photometric loss is always
close to zero. However we observed that there are considerable amount of images which have more than 50% nontexture areas in indoor datasets. White wall and carpets are

8618

