Structured Modeling of Joint Deep Feature and Prediction Refinement for
Salient Object Detection
Yingyue Xu1 , Dan Xu2 , Xiaopeng Hong3,7,1 , Wanli Ouyang4 , Rongrong Ji5,7 , Min Xu6 , Guoying Zhao1∗
University of Oulu† 2 University of Oxford 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
SenseTime Computer Vision Group, The University of Sydney
5
Xiamen University 6 University of Technology Sydney 7 Peng Cheng Laborotory
1

Abstract
Recent saliency models extensively explore to incorporate multi-scale contextual information from Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs). Besides direct fusion strategies, many approaches introduce message-passing to enhance CNN features or predictions. However, the messages are mainly transmitted in two ways, by feature-tofeature passing, and by prediction-to-prediction passing.
In this paper, we add message-passing between features
and predictions and propose a deep unified CRF saliency
model . We design a novel cascade CRFs architecture with
CNN to jointly refine deep features and predictions at each
scale and progressively compute a final refined saliency
map. We formulate the CRF graphical model that involves
message-passing of feature-feature, feature-prediction, and
prediction-prediction, from the coarse scale to the finer
scale, to update the features and the corresponding predictions. Also, we formulate the mean-field updates for joint
end-to-end model training with CNN through back propagation. The proposed deep unified CRF saliency model is
evaluated over six datasets and shows highly competitive
performance among the state of the arts.

1. Introduction
Visual saliency, born from psychology [18], refers to
the attentional selection process on the scenes by the human visual system (HVS). At its early stage, saliency detection models focus on highlighting the most conspicuous regions or eye fixations on a scene [12, 10, 16, 1, 47].
Later, the connotation of saliency is extended to object∗ Guoying Zhao is the corresponding author.
† This work is supported by the Academy of Finland ICT 2023 project
(313600), Tekes Fidipro program (Grant No.1849/31/2015), Business Finland project (Grant No.3116/31/2017), Infotech Oulu, and National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.61772419). Computational resources are supported by CSC-IT Center for Science, Finland and Nvidia.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Message-passing of (a) feature and feature, (b) prediction
and prediction, and (c) joint feature and prediction. fl and sl refer
to the features and the corresponding prediction map at the l-th
scale respectively. The orange curves indicate there are messagepassing between two nodes.

level prediction by emphasizing the most outstanding objects. As a result, many salient object detection models are
proposed [41, 49, 32, 15, 29, 39, 26, 11, 24, 46], which
may have a broad range of potential computer vision applications, such as segmentation [34], image cropping [36],
image fusion [9], image classification [38], crowd counting [31], video compression [8], etc.
Recently, CNN based saliency models extensively explore to incorporate multi-scale contextual information. Besides directly fusing feature representations, recent approaches introduce message-passing to refine the multiscale CNN contexts. Zhang et al. [50] propose a gated
bi-directional message-passing module to pass messages
among features, and thus to reinforce the multi-scale CNN
features for saliency detection (Figure 1-a). Other models
pass messages among predictions based on the conditional
random field (CRF). For instance, recent saliency models [23, 11, 21] tend to adopt Dense-CRF [19] that models
highly structured message-passing between pixels on prediction maps, as a post-processing method for saliency refinement. Further, Xu et al. [44] introduce the multi-scale
CRF to model message-passing between multi-scale prediction maps for depth estimation (Figure 1-b).
After close inspection, we notice that there are clear influences between features and predictions, and thus propose

3789

