Tag2Pix: Line Art Colorization Using Text Tag With SECat and Changing Loss

Hyunsu Kim∗, Ho Young Jhoo∗ , Eunhyeok Park, and Sungjoo Yoo
Seoul National University
{gustnxodjs, mersshs, eunhyeok.park, sungjoo.yoo}@gmail.com

Abstract
Line art colorization is expensive and challenging to automate. A GAN approach is proposed, called Tag2Pix, of
line art colorization which takes as input a grayscale line
art and color tag information and produces a quality colored image. First, we present the Tag2Pix line art colorization dataset. A generator network is proposed which consists of convolutional layers to transform the input line art,
a pre-trained semantic extraction network, and an encoder
for input color information. The discriminator is based on
an auxiliary classifier GAN to classify the tag information
as well as genuineness. In addition, we propose a novel
network structure called SECat, which makes the generator
properly colorize even small features such as eyes, and also
suggest a novel two-step training method where the generator and discriminator first learn the notion of object and
shape and then, based on the learned notion, learn colorization, such as where and how to place which color. We
present both quantitative and qualitative evaluations which
prove the effectiveness of the proposed method.

each object [4, 19], while others modified the color of a particular part of the image using sentences [6, 21]. Though
several studies exist for text-based colorization, none of
them have focused on line art colorization, which is more
difficult due to the relatively low amount of information
contained in the input image.
In the case of line art colorization, there are two typical
ways to give hints for colorization. In user-guided colorization [18, 25, 33, 36], short lines with the desired color are
drawn over target locations on the line art, and the output
is generated by naturally filling the remaining space. In
the style-transfer method [7, 9, 18, 35], an existing sample image is used as a hint for the generative network, and
the output is generated following the color distribution of
the given sample image. These methods successfully simplify the colorization process, but still require intervention
through either skilled professionals (user-guided case) or
images with similar patterns (style-transfer case), both of
which are expensive.

1. Introduction
Line art colorization is an expensive, time-consuming,
and labor-intensive task in the illustration industry. It is
also a very challenging task for learning methods because
the output is a fully colorized image, but the only input is a
monotone line art and a small amount of additional information for colorization (e.g., color strokes). The multimodal
learning of segmentation and colorization is essential.
Recently, various studies have been conducted on colorization. Most of those works are based on generative adversarial network (GAN) [8], and we focus on colorization
using text and line art. In researches on text hint colorization, some works tried to colorize a grayscale image with
information given by a text sentence describing the color of
∗ equal contribution

Figure 1. Example of tag-based colorization method.

As an alternative, we define a new problem for implementing line art colorization based on tag data, as shown
in Figure 1. The generator network receives input data as
a monotone line art and a corresponding color variant tag
(CVT), such as blue hair or red eyes, after which the network uses these two input data to colorize the monotone
line art based on the given tag information. This tag-based
method minimizes the effort of offering hints for colorization; thus it can provide high quality colorization output
without requiring the intervention of a skilled professional.
In this paper, we propose a GAN approach to tag-based

9056

