Attentional Feature-Pair Relation Networks for Accurate Face Recognition
Bong-Nam Kang1,3 , Yonghyun Kim2,3 , Bongjin Jun1 , Daijin Kim3
1
StradVision, Inc. 2 Kakao Corp. 3 POSTECH
{bongnam.kang, bongjin.jun}@stradvision.com, aiden.kyh@kakaocorp.com, dkim@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Human face recognition is one of the most important research areas in biometrics. However, the robust face recognition under a drastic change of the facial pose, expression, and illumination is a big challenging problem for its
practical application. Such variations make face recognition more difficult. In this paper, we propose a novel face
recognition method, called Attentional Feature-pair Relation Network (AFRN), which represents the face by the relevant pairs of local appearance block features with their
attention scores. The AFRN represents the face by all possible pairs of the 9×9 local appearance block features, the
importance of each pair is considered by the attention map
that is obtained from the low-rank bilinear pooling, and
each pair is weighted by its corresponding attention score.
To increase the accuracy, we select top-K pairs of local
appearance block features as relevant facial information
and drop the remaining irrelevant. The weighted top-K
pairs are propagated to extract the joint feature-pair relation by using bilinear attention network. In experiments, we
show the effectiveness of the proposed AFRN and achieve
the outstanding performance in the 1:1 face verification
and 1:N face identification tasks compared to existing stateof-the-art methods on the challenging LFW, YTF, CALFW,
CPLFW, CFP, AgeDB, IJB-A, IJB-B, and IJB-C datasets.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is one of the most important and interesting research areas in biometrics. However, the human
appearances would be drastically changed under the unconstrained environment and the intra-person variations could
overwhelm the inter-person variations, which make the face
recognition difficult. Therefore, better face recognition requires for reducing the intra-person variations while enlarging the inter-person differences under the unconstrained environment.
Recent studies have targeted the same goal that minimizes the inter-person variations and maximizes the intraperson variations, either explicitly or implicitly.
In

deep learning-based face recognition methods, the deeply
learned and embedded features are required to be not only
separable but also discriminative to classify face images
among different identities. This implies that the representation of a certain person A stays unchanged regardless of
who he/she is compared with, and it has to be discriminative enough to distinguish A from all other persons. Chen et
al. achieved good recognition performance [4] by extracting feature representations via the CNN. And then, those
features are applied to learn metric matrix to project the feature vector into a low-dimensional space in order to maximize the between-class variation and minimize within-class
variation via the joint Bayesian metric learning. Chowdhury et al. applied the bilinear CNN architecture [5] to
the face identification task. Hassner et al. proposed the
pooling faces [9] that aligned faces in the 3D and binned
them according to head pose and image quality. Masi et
al. proposed the pose-aware models (PAMs) [20] that handled pose variability by learning pose-aware models for
frontal, half-profile, and full-profile poses to improve face
recognition performance in an unconstrained environment.
Sankaranarayanan et al. [27] proposed the triplet probabilistic embedding (TPE) that coupled a CNN-based approach with a low-dimensional discriminative embedding
learned using triplet probability constraints. Crosswhite et
al. proposed the template adaptation (TA) [6] that was a
form of transfer learning to the set of media in a template,
which obtained better performance than the TPE on the
IJB-A dataset by combining the CNN features with template adaptation. Yang et al. proposed the neural aggregation network (NAN) [35] that produced a compact and
fixed dimension feature representation. It adaptively aggregated the features to form a single feature inside the convex
hull spanned by them and learned to advocate high-quality
face images while repelling low-quality face images such
as blurred, occluded and improperly exposed faces. Ranjan
et al. [24] added an L2-constraint to the feature descriptors which restricted them to lie on a hypersphere of a fixed
radius, where minimizing the softmax loss is equivalent to
maximizing the cosine similarity for the positive pairs and
minimizing it for the negative pairs. However, the above

5472

