Robust Person Re-identification by Modelling Feature Uncertainty
Tianyuan Yu1 , Da Li1,2 , Yongxin Yang1 , Timothy Hospedales2,3 , Tao Xiang1,2
1

University of Surrey 2 Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge 3 The University of Edinburgh

{tianyuan.yu, d.li, yongxin.yang, t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk

t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We aim to learn deep person re-identification (ReID)
models that are robust against noisy training data. Two
types of noise are prevalent in practice: (1) label noise
caused by human annotator errors and (2) data outliers
caused by person detector errors or occlusion. Both types of
noise pose serious problems for training ReID models, yet
have been largely ignored so far. In this paper, we propose a
novel deep network termed DistributionNet for robust ReID.
Instead of representing each person image as a feature vector, DistributionNet models it as a Gaussian distribution
with its variance representing the uncertainty of the extracted features. A carefully designed loss is formulated
in DistributionNet to unevenly allocate uncertainty across
training samples. Consequently, noisy samples are assigned
large variance/uncertainty, which effectively alleviates their
negative impacts on model fitting. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our model is more effective than alternative noise-robust deep models. The source code is available
at: https://github.com/TianyuanYu/DistributionNet.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match people
across a camera network with non-overlapping camera
views. When a person is captured by different cameras
with different viewing conditions, his/her appearance often
changes significantly. Meanwhile, there are many different
people in public spaces wearing similar clothes, making distinguishing them difficult. Most recent ReID models therefore employ deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
to learn a feature embedding space that is robust against
the appearance changes as well as discriminative against
impostors (different identities but of similar appearance)
[2, 3, 7, 10, 18, 24, 27, 30, 33, 39]. As the performance
of state-of-the-art ReID models on public benchmarks approaches saturation, more realistic real-world ReID challenges are being considered. For example, instead of using

Figure 1: Outlying samples in existing ReID benchmarks. Each
pair of images contain the same identity, with the left being an
inlier and right an outlier.

manually cropped person images, recent ReID benchmarks
all provide person images produced by off-the-shelf person
detectors. The open-world ReID problem has also started
to attract attention [38, 19, 1], whereby a small gallery set
is matched against a much larger probe set.
However, one important ReID challenge has largely been
ignored, that is, how to learn a robust ReID model with
noisy training data. There are two types of data noise in
practice. The first type is label noise, i.e., people assigned
with the wrong identities. Label noise is caused by human
errors [8]: matching people across camera views in the presence of impostors is a hard job even for humans who have
short attention spans, and mistakes are made. More subtly,
outliers provide a second source of noise. These are samples
that have the correct identity labels, but are visually outlying due to either imperfect person detection or occlusion,
as illustrated in Fig. 1. These outlying samples are found
to be prevalent in existing benchmarks. Having both types
of noisy samples in a training set inevitably has a detrimental effect on the learned feature embedding: Noisy samples
are often far from inliers of the same class in the input (image) space. To minimise intra-class distance and pull the
noisy samples close to their class centre, a ReID model often needs to sacrifice inter-class separability, leading to performance degradation (see Fig. 2(a) for an illustration).
In this paper, we propose a novel ReID model termed
DistributionNet to deal with both types of noisy samples.
With DistributionNet, each image is represented by a feature distribution, rather than a feature vector as in conventional deep models. Specifically, each image is now repre1552

