Collect and Select: Semantic Alignment Metric Learning for Few-Shot Learning
Fusheng Hao1,2 , Fengxiang He3 , Jun Cheng1,2∗ , Lei Wang1,2 , Jianzhong Cao4 , and Dacheng Tao3
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
4
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics, CAS, China
{fs.hao, jun.cheng, lei.wang1}@siat.ac.cn, {fengxiang.he, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au,
cjz@opt.ac.cn

Abstract
Few-shot learning aims to learn latent patterns from
few training examples and has shown promises in practice. However, directly calculating the distances between
the query image and support image in existing methods
may cause ambiguity because dominant objects can locate
anywhere on images. To address this issue, this paper
proposes a Semantic Alignment Metric Learning (SAML)
method for few-shot learning that aligns the semantically
relevant dominant objects through a “collect-and-select”
strategy. Specifically, we first calculate a relation matrix
(RM) to “collect” the distances of each local region pairs
of the 3D tensor extracted from a query image and the mean
tensor of the support images. Then, the attention technique
is adapted to “select” the semantically relevant pairs and
put more weights on them. Afterwards, a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) is utilized to map the reweighted RMs to
their corresponding similarity scores. Theoretical analysis
demonstrates the generalization ability of SAML and gives
a theoretical guarantee. Empirical results demonstrate that
semantic alignment is achieved. Extensive experiments on
benchmark datasets validate the strengths of the proposed
approach and demonstrate that SAML significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods. The source code
is available at https://github.com/haofusheng/SAML.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning aims to learn knowledge from few
training examples [21], in contrast to conventional methods which usually need large-scale datasets (such as Ima∗ Corresponding author.

Support

Query

Comparison between
(
,
)

Ambiguity!

Comparison between
(
,
)
Precise!

Figure 1. The two images shown belong to the same category,
while the key objects (dogs) appear in different locations. Directly
calculating the distance between the two images according to the
spatial indices introduces ambiguity that pairs between the dog’s
head (red boxes) and the dog’s tail (blue boxes). The proposed
method SAML aligns the local regions with the same semantic
information (see the comparison between red and yellow boxes).

geNet [7]). It addresses the problem that collecting such
large amounts of data is extremely time-consuming and
sometimes unrealistic in practice [37].
Recently, the features extracted from images by neural
networks have demonstrated profound representation ability in many computer vision tasks [42, 20, 23, 14]. Based
on the 3D tensors extracted from the images, metric learning methods have significantly prompted the frontier of fewshot learning. Specifically, metric learning first calculates
the distance between the 3D tensors respectively extracted
from the query and support images and then learn a classifier based on the distances.
However, most existing methods [48, 37, 16] calculate
the distance metric between each tensor pair directly ac-

8460

