Uncertainty-aware Audiovisual Activity Recognition using Deep Bayesian
Variational Inference
Mahesh Subedar∗, Ranganath Krishnan∗, Paulo Lopez Meyer, Omesh Tickoo, Jonathan Huang
{mahesh.subedar, ranganath.krishnan, paulo.lopez.meyer, omesh.tickoo, jonathan.huang}@intel.com

Intel Labs

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) provide state-of-the-art
results for a multitude of applications, but the approaches
using DNNs for multimodal audiovisual applications do not
consider predictive uncertainty associated with individual
modalities. Bayesian deep learning methods provide principled confidence and quantify predictive uncertainty. Our
contribution in this work is to propose an uncertainty aware
multimodal Bayesian fusion framework for activity recognition. We demonstrate a novel approach that combines deterministic and variational layers to scale Bayesian DNNs to
deeper architectures. Our experiments using in- and out-ofdistribution samples selected from a subset of Moments-inTime (MiT) dataset show a more reliable confidence measure as compared to the non-Bayesian baseline and the
Monte Carlo dropout (MC dropout) approximate Bayesian
inference. We also demonstrate the uncertainty estimates
obtained from the proposed framework can identify outof-distribution data on the UCF101 and MiT datasets. In
the multimodal setting, the proposed framework improved
precision-recall AUC by 10.2% on the subset of MiT dataset
as compared to non-Bayesian baseline.

1. Introduction
Vision and audio are complementary inputs and fusing
these modalities can greatly benefit an activity recognition
application. Multimodal audiovisual activity recognition
using deep neural network (DNN) architectures are not successful in modeling the inherent ambiguity in the correlation between two modalities. One of the modalities (e.g.,
sneezing in audio, writing in vision) can be more certain
about the activity class than the other modality. It is important to model reliable uncertainty estimates for the individual modalities to benefit from multimodal fusion.
DNNs trained on large datasets [23, 1, 30] have been successful in solving many perception tasks with state-of-the∗ Contributed equally.

Figure 1: Uncertainty-aware audiovisual activity recognition

art results. However, DNNs are trained to obtain the maximum likelihood estimates and disregard uncertainty around
the model parameters that eventually can lead to predictive
uncertainty. Deep learning models may fail in the case of
noisy or out-of-distribution data, leading to overconfident
decisions that could be erroneous as softmax probability
does not capture overall model confidence. Instead, it represents relative probability that an input is from a particular
class compared to the other classes.
Probabilistic Bayesian models provide principled ways
to gain insight about data and capture reliable uncertainty
estimates in predictions. Bayesian deep learning [32, 12]
has allowed bridging DNNs and probabilistic Bayesian
theory to leverage the strengths of both methodologies.
Bayesian deep learning framework with Monte Carlo (MC)
dropout approximate inference [13] is used in visual scene
understanding applications including camera relocalization
[25], semantic segmentation [24] and depth regression [26].
Activity recognition is an active area of research with
multiple approaches depending on the application domain
and the types of sensors [28]. Human activity recognition
using wearable sensors such as accelerometer/gyroscopes
and heart-rate monitors is used to recognize everyday human activities that include walking, running, and swimming. Human pose-based activity recognition [37, 40]
methods aggregate motion and appearance information
16301

