Deep Closest Point: Learning Representations for Point Cloud Registration
Yue Wang
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139

Justin M. Solomon
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139

yuewangx@mit.edu

jsolomon@mit.edu

Abstract
Point cloud registration is a key problem for computer
vision applied to robotics, medical imaging, and other applications. This problem involves finding a rigid transformation from one point cloud into another so that they align.
Iterative Closest Point (ICP) and its variants provide simple and easily-implemented iterative methods for this task,
but these algorithms can converge to spurious local optima.
To address local optima and other difficulties in the ICP
pipeline, we propose a learning-based method, titled Deep
Closest Point (DCP), inspired by recent techniques in computer vision and natural language processing. Our model
consists of three parts: a point cloud embedding network,
an attention-based module combined with a pointer generation layer to approximate combinatorial matching, and a
differentiable singular value decomposition (SVD) layer to
extract the final rigid transformation. We train our model
end-to-end on the ModelNet40 dataset and show in several
settings that it performs better than ICP, its variants (e.g.,
Go-ICP, FGR), and the recently-proposed learning-based
method PointNetLK. Beyond providing a state-of-the-art registration technique, we evaluate the suitability of our learned
features transferred to unseen objects. We also provide preliminary analysis of our learned model to help understand
whether domain-specific and/or global features facilitate
rigid registration.

1. Introduction
Geometric registration is a key task in many computational fields, including medical imaging, robotics, autonomous driving, and computational chemistry. In its most
basic incarnation, registration involves the prediction of a
rigid motion to align one shape to another, potentially obfuscated by noise and partiality.
Many modeling and computational challenges hamper the
design of a stable and efficient registration method. Given exact correspondences, singular value decomposition yields the

Figure 1. Left: a moved guitar. Right: rotated human. All methods
work well with small transformation. However, only our method
achieve satisfying alignment for objects with sharp features and
large transformation.

globally optimal alignment; similarly, computing matchings
becomes easier given some global alignment information.
Given these two observations, most algorithms alternate between these two steps to try to obtain a better result. The resultant iterative optimization algorithms, however, are prone
to local optima.
The most popular example, Iterative Closest Point (ICP)
[5, 40], alternates between estimating the rigid motion based
13523

