Learning Rich Features at High-Speed for Single-Shot Object Detection
Tiancai Wang1∗†, Rao Muhammad Anwer2∗ , Hisham Cholakkal2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2
Yanwei Pang1‡, Ling Shao2
1
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), UAE
1 {wangtc,pyw}@tju.edu.cn, 2 {rao.anwer,hisham.cholakkal,fahad.khan,ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org

a: RetinaNet (ResNet-101-FPN) [18]
b: Our Approach (VGG-16)
Figure 1: Qualitative detection results on an example image from UAVDT dataset [9]. (a) RetinaNet [18], using the powerful
ResNet-101-FPN backbone and (b) our detector, using the VGG-16 backbone under similar training and testing scale. Our
detector accurately detects all 61 vehicle (car, bus and truck) instances, including 45 small vehicles (defined as per MS COCO
criteria [19]), while operating at 91 frames per second (FPS) on a single Titan X GPU. See Fig. 5 for more examples.

Abstract
Single-stage object detection methods have received significant attention recently due to their characteristic realtime capabilities and high detection accuracies. Generally, most existing single-stage detectors follow two common practices: they employ a network backbone that is pretrained on ImageNet for the classification task and use a
top-down feature pyramid representation for handling scale
variations. Contrary to common pre-training strategy, recent works have demonstrated the benefits of training from
scratch to reduce the task gap between classification and
localization, especially at high overlap thresholds. However, detection models trained from scratch require significantly longer training time compared to their typical finetuning based counterparts. We introduce a single-stage detection framework that combines the advantages of both
fine-tuning pre-trained models and training from scratch.
Our framework constitutes a standard network that uses a
pre-trained backbone and a parallel light-weight auxiliary
∗ Equal contribution
† Work done at IIAI during Tiancai’s internship.
‡ Corresponding author

network trained from scratch. Further, we argue that the
commonly used top-down pyramid representation only focuses on passing high-level semantics from the top layers to
bottom layers. We introduce a bi-directional network that
efficiently circulates both low-/mid-level and high-level semantic information in the detection framework.
Experiments are performed on MS COCO and UAVDT
datasets. Compared to the baseline, our detector achieives
an absolute gain of 7.4% and 4.2% in average precision
(AP) on MS COCO and UAVDT datasets, respectively using VGG backbone. For a 300×300 input on the MS COCO
test set, our detector with ResNet backbone surpasses existing single-stage detection methods for single-scale inference achieving 34.3 AP, while operating at an inference time
of 19 milliseconds on a single Titan X GPU. Code is available at https://github.com/vaesl/LRF-Net.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant improvements in
detection performance thanks to the advances of deep learning, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [34,
23, 25, 22, 6]. Modern detectors can be divided into two categories: (i) single-stage methods [21, 26, 27, 28, 3, 4] and

1971

