Recursive Visual Sound Separation Using Minus-Plus Net
Xudong Xu
Bo Dai
Dahua Lin
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
xx018@ie.cuhk.edu.hk bdai@ie.cuhk.edu.hk dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Sounds provide rich semantics, complementary to visual
data, for many tasks. However, in practice, sounds from
multiple sources are often mixed together. In this paper
we propose a novel framework, referred to as MinusPlus
Network (MP-Net), for the task of visual sound separation.
MP-Net separates sounds recursively in the order of average energy 1 , removing the separated sound from the mixture at the end of each prediction, until the mixture becomes
empty or contains only noise. In this way, MP-Net could be
applied to sound mixtures with arbitrary numbers and types
of sounds. Moreover, while MP-Net keeps removing sounds
with large energy from the mixture, sounds with small energy could emerge and become clearer, so that the separation is more accurate. Compared to previous methods,
MP-Net obtains state-of-the-art results on two large scale
datasets, across mixtures with different types and numbers
of sounds.

1. Introduction
Besides visual cues, the sound that comes along with
what we see often provides complementary information,
which could be used for object detection [12, 13, 17, 18]
to clarify ambiguous visual cues, and description generation [6, 7, 26, 5] to enrich semantics. On the other hand,
as what we hear in most cases is the mixture of different
sounds, coming from different sources, it is necessary to
separate sounds and associate them to sources in the visual
scene, before utilizing sound data.
The difficulties of visual sound separation lie in several
aspects. 1) First, possible sound sources in the corresponding videos may not make any sound, which causes ambiguity. 2) Second, the mixture usually contains a large variance in terms of numbers and types. 3) More importantly,
sounds in the mixture often affect each other in multiple
ways. For example, sounds with large energy often dominate the mixture, making other sounds less distinguishable
or even sound like noise in some cases.
1 In this paper, average energy of sound stands for the average energy
of its spectrogram.

Existing works [10, 28] on visual sound separation
mainly separate each sound independently. They assume
either fixed types or fixed numbers of sounds, separating
sounds independently. Since strong assumptions in [10, 28]
have limited their applicability in generalized scenarios,
separating sounds independently could lead to inconsistency between the actual mixture and the mixture of separated sounds, e.g. some data in the actual mixture does not
appear in any sounds. Moreover, the separation of sounds
with small energy may be affected by sounds with large energy in such independent processes.
Facing these challenges, we propose a novel solution, referred to as MinusPlus Network (MP-Net), which identifies
each sound in the mixture recursively, in descending order
of average energy. It can be divided into two stages, namely
a minus stage and a plus stage. At each step of the minus
stage, MP-Net identifies the most salient sound from the
current mixture, then removes the sound therefrom. This
process repeats until the current mixture becomes empty or
contains only noise. Due to the removal of preceding separations, only one sound could obtain the component that
is shared by multiple sounds. Consequently, to compensate
such cases, MP-Net refines each sound in the plus stage,
which computes a residual based on the sound itself and the
mixture of preceding separated sounds. The final sound is
obtained by mixing the outputs of both stages.
MP-Net efficiently overcomes the challenges of visual
sound separation. By recursively separating sounds, it adaptively decides the number of sounds in the mixture, without knowing a priori the number and the types of sounds.
Moreover, in MP-Net, sounds with large energy will be removed from the mixture after they are separated. In this
way, sounds with relatively smaller energy naturally emerge
and become clearer, diminishing the effect of imbalanced
sound energy.
Overall, our contributions can be briefly summarized as
follows: (1) We propose a novel framework, referred to
as MinusPlus Network (MP-Net), to separate independent
sounds from the recorded mixture based on a corresponding
video. Unlike previous works which assume a fixed number
of sounds in the mixture, the proposed framework could dy-

882

