View Confusion Feature Learning for Person Re-identification
Fangyi Liu
Lei Zhang∗
School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University
Shazheng street NO.174, Shapingba District, Chongqing 400044, China
{FangyiLiu, LeiZhang}@cqu.edu.cn

Original Space

Abstract
Person re-identification is an important task in video
surveillance that aims to associate people across camera
views at different locations and time. View variability is
always a challenging problem seriously degrading person
re-identification performance. Most of the existing methods either focus on how to learn view invariant feature or
how to combine view-wise features. In this paper, we mainly focus on how to learn view-invariant features by getting
rid of view specific information through a view confusion
learning mechanism. Specifically, we propose an end-toend trainable framework, called View Confusion Feature
Learning (VCFL), for person Re-ID across cameras. To
the best of our knowledge, VCFL is originally proposed to
learn view-invariant identity-wise features, and it is a kind
of combination of view-generic and view-specific methods. Classifiers and feature centers are utilized to achieve
view confusion. Furthermore, we extract sift-guided features by using bag-of-words model to help supervise the
training of deep networks and enhance the view invariance
of features. In experiments, our approach is validated on
three benchmark datasets including CUHK01, CUHK03,
and MARKET1501, which show the superiority of the proposed method over several state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) is widely applied in
many situations such as long-term multi-camera tracking
and forensic search. However, due to the problem of
non-overlapping area between different camera views, reidentifying pedestrians using appearance features and analyzing their activities across cameras in time and space cues
become rather difficult. Results from the variability of camera view, inter-similarity under the same camera becomes
more significant than intra-similarity under different cameras. Just as is shown in Figure 1, we aim to solve cross∗ Corresponding author

View Classifier

Common View Space

View1

View2
Common View

View3

View4
Transform to common view

Figure 1. Dissimilarity is caused by view changes, and our goal is
to achieve view confusion. View confusion is achieved by drawing
the distance of each view close and expecting the view classifier to
identify each view to common view. Note that the common view
is obtained by the average of the 4 views.

view problems through view confusion mechanism.
In order to mitigate the influence caused by view variability, existing methods mainly focus on learning robust
and discriminative representations [15, 21], or robust similarity match metrics [34, 12, 21, 25] in a supervised manner.
Recently, deep learning has gained much attention for learning deep features and metrics in an end-to-end network, and
achieves promising results in re-id tasks. Powerful image
features should be invariant to variations in illumination,
image quality, and especially viewpoint. Many hand-crafted
feature types have been used for re-identification, e.g. color, textures, edges and shape, but the discrimination is unsatisfactory. Although deeply learned features have been
proved to be powerful in Re-ID tasks, the deep representation is still easily wrapped with view changes. We mainly
focus on methods solving cross view changes in deep neural network, which are usually achieved by either designing view-generic models or designing view-specific models
with camera view information. View-generic models aim to
learn view-invariant features without taking the view information (e.g. pose labels) into consideration, however, they

6639

