Significance-aware Information Bottleneck for Domain Adaptive
Semantic Segmentation
Yawei Luo1,2 , Ping Liu2 , Tao Guan1,4 , Junqing Yu1,5 *, Yi Yang2,3
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney 3 Baidu Research 4 Farsee2 Tech. Co.
5
Center of Network and Computation, Huazhong University of Science & Technology

Abstract

Task-independent Factors
Baseline：

For unsupervised domain adaptation problems, the strategy of aligning the two domains in latent feature space
through adversarial learning has achieved much progress in
image classification, but usually fails in semantic segmentation tasks in which the latent representations are overcomplex. In this work, we equip the adversarial network with a
“significance-aware information bottleneck (SIB)”, to address
the above problem. The new network structure, called SIBAN,
enables a significance-aware feature purification before the
adversarial adaptation, which eases the feature alignment
and stabilizes the adversarial training course. In two domain
adaptation tasks, i.e., GTA5 → Cityscapes and SYNTHIA →
Cityscapes, we validate that the proposed method can yield
leading results compared with other feature-space alternatives. Moreover, SIBAN can even match the state-of-the-art
output-space methods in segmentation accuracy, while the
latter are often considered to be better choices for domain
adaptive segmentation task.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to assign each image pixel a
category label. The recent adoption of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) yields various of best-performing methods [26, 6, 31] for this task, but the achievement is at the
price of a huge amount of dense pixel-level annotations
obtained by expensive human labor. An alternative would
be resorting to simulated data, such as computer-generated
scenes [37, 38, 29], which can make unlimited amounts of
labels available. However, models trained with the simulated
images, no matter how perfect they perform on the simulation environment, fail to achieve a same or even similar
* Corresponding author (yjqing@hust.edu.cn).

This work was done when Yawei Luo (royalvane@hust.edu.cn) was a
visiting student at University of Technology Sydney. Part of this work was
done when Yi Yang (yee.i.yang@gmail.com) was visiting Baidu Research
during his Professional Experience Program.

Task-dependent Semantics

Classifier
Source

Adversarial
Feature Alignment
Target

SIBAN：
𝑰 𝒙, 𝒛 ≤ 𝑰𝒄

Information
Bottleneck

Adversarial
Feature Alignment

Figure 1: Comparison of the baseline method and SIBAN.
The baseline method aligns the latent features directly. As
the crude features contain various of task-independent factors, these features are prone to be wrongly aligned between
two domains. SIBAN addresses this issue by employing an
information bottleneck before the adversarial feature adaptation. The information bottleneck ﬁlters out the nuisance
factors and maintains pure semantic information. Since the
two domains essentially overlap in semantic-level, such puriﬁed features can facilitate the following alignment and
stabilize the adversarial training course.
satisfactory performance on realistic images. The reason
behind this performance drop lies in the different data distributions of the two domains, typically known as domain
shift [43].
Domain Adaptation (DA) approaches [41, 49, 15, 53, 54,
52] are proposed to bridge the gap between the source and
target domains. These methods tend to align the two domains in latent feature space so that a classiﬁer trained on
source data can also be applied to target samples. Despite
the fact that great success has been made on the image level
task [27, 50, 34, 11, 23, 28, 33], applying the latent space
adaptation to semantic segmentation is non-trivial. The reasons are summarized as twofold. On the one hand, latent
space adaptation for semantic segmentation may suffer from
the complexity of high-dimensional features which encode

6778

