Everybody Dance Now
Caroline Chan∗

Shiry Ginosar

Tinghui Zhou†

Alexei A. Efros

UC Berkeley

Figure 1: “Do as I Do” motion transfer: given a YouTube clip of a ballerina (top), and a video of a graduate student performing various
motions, our method transfers the ballerina’s performance onto the student (bottom). Video: https://youtu.be/mSaIrz8lM1U

Abstract
This paper presents a simple method for “do as I do”
motion transfer: given a source video of a person dancing,
we can transfer that performance to a novel (amateur) target after only a few minutes of the target subject performing standard moves. We approach this problem as video-tovideo translation using pose as an intermediate representation. To transfer the motion, we extract poses from the
source subject and apply the learned pose-to-appearance
mapping to generate the target subject. We predict two consecutive frames for temporally coherent video results and
introduce a separate pipeline for realistic face synthesis.
Although our method is quite simple, it produces surprisingly compelling results (see video). This motivates us to
also provide a forensics tool for reliable synthetic content
detection, which is able to distinguish videos synthesized by
our system from real data. In addition, we release a firstof-its-kind open-source dataset of videos that can be legally
used for training and motion transfer.

∗ C. Chan is currently a graduate student at MIT CSAIL.
† T. Zhou is currently affiliated with Humen, Inc.

1. Introduction
Consider the two video sequences on Figure 1. The top
row is the input – it is a YouTube clip of a ballerina (the
source subject) performing a sequence of motions. The
bottom row is the output of our algorithm. It corresponds
to frames of a different person (the target subject) apparently performing the same motions. The twist is that the
target person never performed the same exact sequence of
motions as the source, and, indeed, knows nothing about
ballet. He was instead filmed performing a set of standard
moves, without specific reference to the precise actions of
the source. And, as is obvious from the figure, the source
and the target are of different genders, have different builds,
and wear different clothing.
In this work, we propose a simple but surprisingly effective approach for “Do as I Do” video retargeting – automatically transferring the motion from a source to a target subject. Given two videos – one of a target person
whose appearance we wish to synthesize, and the other of
a source subject whose motion we wish to impose onto
our target person – we transfer motion between these subjects by learning a simple video-to-video translation. With
our framework, we create a variety of videos, enabling un-

5933

