FaceForensics++: Learning to Detect Manipulated Facial Images
Andreas Rössler1
1

Davide Cozzolino2 Luisa Verdoliva2
Justus Thies1
Matthias Nießner1

Technical University of Munich

2

University Federico II of Naples

3

Christian Riess3

University of Erlangen-Nuremberg

Figure 1: FaceForensics++ is a dataset of facial forgeries that enables researchers to train deep-learning-based approaches
in a supervised fashion. The dataset contains manipulations created with four state-of-the-art methods, namely, Face2Face,
FaceSwap, DeepFakes, and NeuralTextures.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Manipulation of visual content has now become ubiquitous, and one of the most critical topics in our digital society. For instance, DeepFakes [1] has shown how computer graphics and visualization techniques can be used to
defame persons by replacing their face by the face of a different person. Faces are of special interest to current manipulation methods for various reasons: firstly, the reconstruction and tracking of human faces is a well-examined field
in computer vision [64], which is the foundation of these
editing approaches. Secondly, faces play a central role in
human communication, as the face of a person can emphasize a message or it can even convey a message in its own
right [27].
Current facial manipulation methods can be separated
into two categories: facial expression manipulation and facial identity manipulation (see Fig. 2). One of the most
prominent facial expression manipulation techniques is the
method of Thies et al. [56] called Face2Face. It enables the
transfer of facial expressions of one person to another person in real time using only commodity hardware. Follow-up
work such as “Synthesizing Obama” [52] is able to animate
the face of a person based on an audio input sequence.

The rapid progress in synthetic image generation and
manipulation has now come to a point where it raises significant concerns for the implications towards society. At best,
this leads to a loss of trust in digital content, but could potentially cause further harm by spreading false information
or fake news. This paper examines the realism of state-ofthe-art image manipulations, and how difficult it is to detect
them, either automatically or by humans.
To standardize the evaluation of detection methods, we
propose an automated benchmark for facial manipulation
detection1 . In particular, the benchmark is based on DeepFakes [1], Face2Face [56], FaceSwap [2] and NeuralTextures [54] as prominent representatives for facial manipulations at random compression level and size. The benchmark
is publicly available2 and contains a hidden test set as well
as a database of over 1.8 million manipulated images. This
dataset is over an order of magnitude larger than comparable, publicly available, forgery datasets. Based on this data,
we performed a thorough analysis of data-driven forgery
detectors. We show that the use of additional domainspecific knowledge improves forgery detection to unprecedented accuracy, even in the presence of strong compression, and clearly outperforms human observers.

1. kaldir.vc.in.tum.de/faceforensics_benchmark
2. github.com/ondyari/FaceForensics

11

