Learning to See Moving Objects in the Dark
Haiyang Jiang
University of Southern California
California, USA

Yinqiang Zheng∗
National Institue of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan

haiyangj@usc.edu

yqzheng@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
Video surveillance systems have wide range of utilities,
yet easily suffer from great quality degeneration under dim
light circumstances. Industrial solutions mainly use extra near-infrared illuminations, even though it doesn’t preserve color and texture information. A variety of researches
enhanced low-light videos shot by visible light cameras,
while they either relied on task specific preconditions or
trained with synthetic datasets. We propose a novel optical system to capture bright and dark videos of the exact
same scenes, generating training and ground truth pairs
for authentic low-light video dataset. A fully convolutional
network with 3D and 2D miscellaneous operations is utilized to learn an enhancement mapping with proper spatialtemporal transformation from raw camera sensor data to
bright RGB videos. Experiments show promising results
by our method, and it outperforms state-of-the-art low-light
image/video enhancement algorithms.

1. Introduction
Video surveillance systems have been vastly used
throughout industry, military, and academia. Nonetheless,
they commonly encounter situations with extremely low
level of illumination, e.g. security cameras at night [41],
and long time continuous wild animal monitoring for research purposes [5]. Under these circumstances, in order
not to expose recording devices and not to interfere with
photographed objects, extra visible-light source is usually
not a viable option.
Current solutions mainly involve near-infrared (NIR)
LED [42] or diodes [11] as shown in Figure 1 (a). Infrared illumination helps gain better vision in low-light environments, in the mean time, however, introducing several additional drawbacks compared to natural light camera systems. Inevitable are additional energy consumption
and heat generation with the presence of extra light sources,
∗ Corresponding Author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
Figure 1. Comparison between widely used industrial systems for
low-light situations and our proposed solution. (a) A surveillance
camera equipped with NIR diodes; (b) Texture on the sleeve is
visible in the RGB image; (c) Texture information disappears in
the NIR image; (d) Our low-light video enhancement solution.

which can increase operation and maintenance costs of a
system. More importantly, visible color and even texture information, which can be crucial in some cases e.g. patterns
on clothes of a suspect or physical properties of an animal’s
coat, suffer from extensive loss [25], as demonstrated by a
typical example in (b) and (c) of Figure 1. Besides, even
with NIR LED sources, there is still risk of becoming invasive recording, especially when target creatures have different spectra of visible light from human being. In such
situations, infrared radiation has potential to trigger uncontrollable animal reactions.
Based on these reasons, a more reasonable choice is to
directly enhance videos captured by ordinary camera systems. Researchers have proposed a variety of approaches to
enhance low light images and videos, including contrast enhancement [26, 1, 2, 20, 34], denoising [28, 15, 43], retinex
algorithms [37, 21, 22] and so on. Among all those re-

7324

