Prior-aware Neural Network for Partially-Supervised
Multi-Organ Segmentation
Yuyin Zhou1∗†
1

Zhe Li2†
Mei Han6∗

Song Bai3
Chong Wang4∗
Xinlei Chen5∗
7
1
Elliot Fishman
Alan L. Yuille

Johns Hopkins University 2 Google Research 3 University of Oxford 4 ByteDance Inc.
5
Facebook 6 PAII Inc. 7 The Johns Hopkins Medical Institute
Abstract

Accurate multi-organ abdominal CT segmentation is essential to many clinical applications such as computeraided intervention. As data annotation requires massive
human labor from experienced radiologists, it is common that training data are partially labeled, e.g., pancreas
datasets only have the pancreas labeled while leaving the
rest marked as background. However, these background labels can be misleading in multi-organ segmentation since
the “background” usually contains some other organs of
interest. To address the background ambiguity in these
partially-labeled datasets, we propose Prior-aware Neural Network (PaNN) via explicitly incorporating anatomical priors on abdominal organ sizes, guiding the training process with domain-specific knowledge. More specifically, PaNN assumes that the average organ size distributions in the abdomen should approximate their empirical
distributions, prior statistics obtained from the fully-labeled
dataset. As our training objective is difficult to be directly
optimized using stochastic gradient descent, we propose to
reformulate it in a min-max form and optimize it via the
stochastic primal-dual gradient algorithm. PaNN achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the MICCAI2015 challenge
“Multi-Atlas Labeling Beyond the Cranial Vault”, a competition on organ segmentation in the abdomen. We report an
average Dice score of 84.97%, surpassing the prior art by
a large margin of 3.27%.

1. Introduction
This work focuses on multi-organ segmentation in abdominal regions which contain multiple organs such as
liver, pancreas and kidneys. The segmentation of internal structures on medical images, e.g., CT scans, is an essential prerequisite for many clinical applications such as
∗ This work was partly done when Yuyin Zhou, Chong Wang, Xinlei
Chen and Mei Han were at Google.
† Equal Contribution.

Figure 1. 3D Visualization of several abdominal organs (liver,
spleen, left kidney, right kidney, aorta, inferior vena cava) to show
the similarity of patient-wise abdominal organ size distributions.

computer-aided diagnosis, computer-aided intervention and
radiation therapy. Compared with other internal structures
such as heart or brain, abdominal organs are much more
difficult to segment due to the morphological and structural
complexity, low contrast of soft tissues, etc.
With the development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), many medical image segmentation problems have achieved satisfactory results only when fullsupervision is available [33, 32, 45, 41, 30, 4]. Despite
the recent progress, the annotation of medical radiology images is extremely expensive, as it must be handled by experienced radiologists and carefully checked by additional
experts. This results in the lack of high-quality labeled
training data. More critically, how to efficiently incorporate domain-specific expertise (e.g., anatomical priors) with
segmentation models [10, 25], such as organ shape, size,
remains an open issue.
Our key observation is that, in medical image analysis domain, instead of scribbles [17, 36, 37] , points [3]
and image-level tags [26, 27, 40], there exists a considerable number of datasets in the form of abdominal CT
scans [31, 33, 34]. To meet different research goals or practical usages, these datasets are annotated to target different organs (a subset of abdominal organs), e.g., pancreas
datasets [31] only have the pancreas labeled while leaving
the rest marked as background.

10672

