Controllable Artistic Text Style Transfer via Shape-Matching GAN
Shuai Yang1,2 , Zhangyang Wang2 , Zhaowen Wang3 , Ning Xu3 , Jiaying Liu∗1 and Zongming Guo1
1
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Texas A&M University 3 Adobe Research

Legibility

Artistry

Increasing deformation degree

(a) source image

(c) stylized text

(b) adjustable stylistic degree of glyph

(e) liquid artistic text rendering

(d) application

(f) smoke artistic text rendering

Figure 1: We propose a novel style transfer framework for rendering artistic text from a source style image in a scale-controllable manner.
Our framework allows users to (b) adjust the stylistic degree of the glyph (i.e. deformation degree) in a continuous and real-time way, and
therefore to (c) select the artistic text that is most ideal for both legibility and style consistency. The generated diverse artistic text will
facilitate users to design (d) exquisite posters and (e)(f) dynamic typography.

Abstract
Artistic text style transfer is the task of migrating the
style from a source image to the target text to create artistic typography. Recent style transfer methods have considered texture control to enhance usability. However, controlling the stylistic degree in terms of shape deformation
remains an important open challenge. In this paper, we
present the first text style transfer network that allows for
real-time control of the crucial stylistic degree of the glyph
through an adjustable parameter. Our key contribution is
a novel bidirectional shape matching framework to establish an effective glyph-style mapping at various deformation
levels without paired ground truth. Based on this idea, we
propose a scale-controllable module to empower a single
network to continuously characterize the multi-scale shape
features of the style image and transfer these features to the
target text. The proposed method demonstrates its superiority over previous state-of-the-arts in generating diverse,
∗ Corresponding author
The work was done when Shuai Yang was a visiting student at TAMU.

controllable and high-quality stylized text.

1. Introduction
Artistic text style transfer aims to render text in the style
specified by a reference image, which is widely desired in
many visual creation tasks such as poster and advertisement
design. Depending on the reference image, text can be stylized either by making analogy of existing well-designed
text effects [28], or by imitating the visual features from
more general free-form style images [30]: the latter provides more flexibility and creativity.
For general style images as reference, since text is significantly different from and more structured than natural
images, more attention should be paid to its stroke shape in
the stylization of text. For example, one needs to manipulate the stylistic degree or shape deformations of a glyph to
resemble the style subject flames in Fig. 1(b). Meanwhile,
the glyph legibility needs to be maintained so that the stylized text is still recognizable. Such a delicate balance is
subjective and hard to attain automatically. Therefore, a

4442

