Customizing Student Networks From Heterogeneous Teachers
via Adaptive Knowledge Amalgamation
Chengchao Shen1,* , Mengqi Xue1,* , Xinchao Wang2 , Jie Song1,3 , Li Sun1 , Mingli Song1,3
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology,
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
{chengchaoshen,mqxue,sjie,lsun,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn,xinchao.w@gmail.com

Abstract

Accept - 0321

A massive number of well-trained deep networks have
been released by developers online. These networks may
focus on different tasks and in many cases are optimized
for different datasets. In this paper, we study how to exploit such heterogeneous pre-trained networks, known as
teachers, so as to train a customized student network that
tackles a set of selective tasks defined by the user. We assume no human annotations are available, and each teacher may be either single- or multi-task. To this end, we
introduce a dual-step strategy that first extracts the taskspecific knowledge from the heterogeneous teachers sharing the same sub-task, and then amalgamates the extracted
knowledge to build the student network. To facilitate the
training, we employ a selective learning scheme where, for
each unlabelled sample, the student learns adaptively from
only the teacher with the least prediction ambiguity. We
evaluate the proposed approach on several datasets and experimental results demonstrate that the student, learned by
such adaptive knowledge amalgamation, achieves performances even better than those of the teachers.

1. Introduction
Deep networks have been applied to almost all computer vision tasks and have achieved state-of-the-art performances, such as image classification [17, 29, 6, 11], semantic segmentation [21, 2, 1] and object detection [25, 19, 37].
This tremendous success is in part attributed to the large
amount of human annotations utilized to train the parameters of the deep networks. In many cases, however, such
training annotations are unavailable to the public due to
for example privacy reasons. To reduce the re-training effort and enable the plug-and-play reproduction, many researchers have therefore shared online their pre-trained networks, which focus on different tasks or datasets.
* Equal contribution

Source Nets
Task A

Component Nets
Task A

Task A & Task B

AmalgaModule

Target Net

Task A & Task D

AmalgaModule

Task C & Task D

Task D

Task D & Task E

AmalgaModule

AmalgaModule

Knowledge Amalgamation Module

Figure 1. The dual-stage knowledge amalgamation strategy for
customizing student networks. Given four source nets working
on heterogeneous tasks, each of which may be either single- or
multi-task, we cluster them into two groups, one for Task A and
the other for Task D. We then conduct the first-round knowledge
amalgamation for each group to derive the two components nets,
based on which the second-round amalgamation is further carried
out to produce the final student model specified by the user.

In this paper, we investigate how to utilize such pretrained networks that focus on different tasks, which we
term as heterogeneous teachers, to learn a customized and
multitalented network, termed as the student. We assume
that we are given a pool of well-trained teachers, yet have no
access to any human annotation; each teacher can be either
single- or multi-task, and may or may not overlap in tasks.
Our goal is to train a compact and versatile student network
that tackles a set of selective tasks defined by the user, via
learning from the heterogeneous teachers. In other words,
the student is expected to amalgamate the multidisciplinary

3504

