Adaptive Density Map Generation for Crowd Counting
Jia Wan and Antoni Chan
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong kong
jiawan1998@gmail.com, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Crowd counting is an important topic in computer vision
due to its practical usage in surveillance systems. The typical design of crowd counting algorithms is divided into two
steps. First, the ground-truth density maps of crowd images are generated from the ground-truth dot maps (density
map generation), e.g., by convolving with a Gaussian kernel. Second, deep learning models are designed to predict a
density map from an input image (density map estimation).
Most research efforts have concentrated on the density map
estimation problem, while the problem of density map generation has not been adequately explored. In particular, the
density map could be considered as an intermediate representation used to train a crowd counting network. In the
sense of end-to-end training, the hand-crafted methods used
for generating the density maps may not be optimal for the
particular network or dataset used. To address this issue,
we first show the impact of different density maps and that
better ground-truth density maps can be obtained by refining the existing ones using a learned refinement network,
which is jointly trained with the counter. Then, we propose
an adaptive density map generator, which takes the annotation dot map as input, and learns a density map representation for a counter. The counter and generator are trained
jointly within an end-to-end framework. The experiment results on popular counting datasets confirm the effectiveness
of the proposed learnable density map representations.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting is important task for understanding
crowded scenes, and it can be used to prevent accidents
caused by overcrowding and to estimate the crowd flows in
stations. Given an image as input, the aim of crowd counting is to estimate the number of people in the image. Crowd
counting is a difficult task since the scale of people varies
dramatically in images, and the congested crowds frequently contains partial occlusions among people. One of the
traditional methods is to detect each individual in the image, which does not work well in highly congested scenes

Density
estimation
Input image

Density
generation
Density map

Dot map

Figure 1. Counting by crowd density maps: the ground-truth
crowd density map is generated from the ground-truth dot annotations of people. Given an input image, a model is trained to predict
the density map, which is summed to obtain the predicted count.
Current approaches treat the density map generation as a fixed intermediate representation, which is based on hand-crafted designs.
In this paper, we propose to jointly learn the density estimator and
the density generator.

[17, 39]. Another method is to directly estimate the final
count based on hand-crafted features, which can only be
applied to simple scenarios [4, 6].
Current state-of-the-art methods use crowd density maps
to achieve superior counting performance [8, 7, 36]. Density maps are an intermediate representation, where the sum
over any region in the density map indicates the number
of people in the region. First, the density maps are generated from the dot annotations, where each dot indicates
a person’s location. Second, given the input image, algorithms are designed to predict the density map (see Figure
1), which is then summed to obtain the count. In this paper, we call these two steps density map generation and
density map estimation, respectively. Most works focus on
density map estimation and ignore density map generation.
Many different deep networks have been proposed to improve density map estimation, e.g., using different kernel
sizes [42] or image pyramids [14] to handle scale variations, or using context [33] or prior information [23] to handle occlusions. Although density map estimation is wellstudied, the generation of density maps is often overlooked
and uses handcrafted designs without adequate investigation and analysis. The simplest approach to obtain a density
map is to convolve the annotation dot map with a Gaussian
with fixed width [18], i.e., place a Gaussian on each dot.
Other works scale the Gaussian bandwidth according to the
scene perspective [41], or adaptively use the local congestion level (or distance to nearest neighbors) [42]. [41] uses
human-shaped kernels, composed of two Gaussians, but is
less popular since the body of the person is often occluded

1130

