Pose-Guided Feature Alignment for Occluded Person Re-Identification
Jiaxu Miao1,2 Yu Wu1,2 Ping Liu2 Yuhang Ding1 Yi Yang2†
1
Baidu Research 2 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
{jiaxu.miao,yu.wu-3}@student.uts.edu.au,dyh.ustc.uts@gmail.com, {ping.liu,yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Persons are often occluded by various obstacles in person retrieval scenarios. Previous person re-identification
(re-id) methods, either overlook this issue or resolve it
based on an extreme assumption. To alleviate the occlusion
problem, we propose to detect the occluded regions, and
explicitly exclude those regions during feature generation
and matching. In this paper, we introduce a novel method
named Pose-Guided Feature Alignment (PGFA), exploiting pose landmarks to disentangle the useful information
from the occlusion noise. During the feature constructing
stage, our method utilizes human landmarks to generate attention maps. The generated attention maps indicate if a
specific body part is occluded and guide our model to attend
to the non-occluded regions. During matching, we explicitly partition the global feature into parts and use the pose
landmarks to indicate which partial features belonging to
the target person. Only the visible regions are utilized for
the retrieval. Besides, we construct a large-scale dataset
for the Occluded Person Re-ID problem, namely OccludedDukeMTMC, which is by far the largest dataset for the Occlusion Person Re-ID. Extensive experiments are conducted
on our constructed occluded re-id dataset, two partial reid datasets, and two commonly used holistic re-id datasets.
Our method largely outperforms existing person re-id methods on three occlusion datasets, while remains top performance on two holistic datasets.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id), who aims at retrieving
a probe person image from a collection of images, has
achieved a great progress in recent years [31, 13, 32, 38, 24,
42, 16, 4]. Generally, previous person re-id approaches extract features from whole images and utilize those features
as visual representations to match gallery candidates. To
construct an effective representation, previous methods ei† Corresponding author.
‡ Part of this work was done when Jiaxu Miao and Yu Wu were interns
at Baidu Research.

Failure Cases When the Target Person is Occluded

Probe
Images

Retrieval Results

Figure 1: Some failure retrieval examples of previous re-id approaches [32] when the target person is occluded. Green and red
rectangles indicate correct and error retrieval results, respectively.
When an occlusion exists, previous methods fail to achieve a satisfactory result since it does not suppress the noise introduced by
the occlusions.

ther directly utilize global person features [31, 13] or combine local features of body parts [32, 38, 24, 42].
However, the methods proposed in those previous
works [31, 13, 32, 38, 24, 42] did not consider a situation
that the target person is occluded by various obstructions
like cars, trees, or other people. When a person is partially
occluded, the representation extracted from the whole image might involve distractive information. It might lead to
wrong retrieval results if a model does not differentiate the
obstruction region and the person region. For instance, as illustrated in Fig.1, given a query image of a person occluded
by a white car, previous methods may retrieve wrong person
images with a similar car by mistake.
Recently, some works [45, 11, 12] attempt to solve the
occlusion issue. As shown in the first row of Fig. 2, in
their Partial Re-ID problem setting, the probe images are
occluded by obstructions while the gallery images are still
holistic. To depress the unexpected information introduced
by the occlusion, they first manually crop the occluded target person in probe images and then use the non-occluded

542

