A Differential Volumetric Approach to Multi-View Photometric Stereo
Fotios Logothetis1,2 ,

Roberto Mecca2 ,

Roberto Cipolla1

fl302@cam.ac.uk, roberto.mecca@crl.toshiba.co.uk, rc10001@cam.ac.uk
1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
2
Toshiba Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom

Abstract
Highly accurate 3D volumetric reconstruction is still an
open research topic where the main difficulty is usually
related to merging some rough estimations with high frequency details. One of the most promising methods is the fusion between multi-view stereo and photometric stereo images. Beside the intrinsic difficulties that multi-view stereo
and photometric stereo in order to work reliably, supplementary problems arise when considered together.
In this work, we present a volumetric approach to the
multi-view photometric stereo problem. The key point of our
method is the signed distance field parameterisation and its
relation to the surface normal. This is exploited in order to
obtain a linear partial differential equation which is solved
in a variational framework, that combines multiple images
from multiple points of view in a single system. In addition, the volumetric approach is naturally implemented on
an octree, which allows for fast ray-tracing that reliably alleviates occlusions and cast shadows.
Our approach is evaluated on synthetic and real datasets and achieves state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Recovering the 3D geometry of an object is still a quite
open challenge in computer vision as most of the techniques provide good results in specific frameworks only. In
particular, two well-known approaches namely multi-view
(MVS) and photometric stereo (PS) have been developed to
produce great results considering some key complementary
assumptions. Indeed, while MVS is assumed to provide
rough 3D volumetric reconstructions of textured objects,
PS is supposed to retrieve highly detailed surfaces from a
single view. High quality volumetric reconstruction of objects achieved by refining coarse multi-view reconstruction
[10, 40] with shading information [14, 47, 42] is a classical
way [6] of combining complementary information.
Multi-View Photometric Stereo (MVPS) approaches
have been developed so as to overcome constraints coming
from both sides, in order to deal with: specular highlights

Figure 1. Top: 3D reconstruction of a three (toy) house scene with
and without albedo, respectively left and right side. Bottom row:
sample images. The scene scale is indicated by the coin on left bottom image. Our approach is capable of dealing with the near-field
effects (point light sources, out-of-focus shapes (middle)), occlusions and cast shadows.

[16, 1], dynamic scenes [44], visibility and occlusions [7]
and mapping of the PS views onto the volume [37, 35].
Since implicit parameterisation of volumes has been developed using level-set approaches [27, 34], recent advances in parameterising volumes with signed distance
functions (SDFs) [53, 32] have made the multi-view approach prone to be merged with differential formulation
of irradiance equation providing shading information [26].
On the other hand, recent photometric stereo approaches
have moved towards more realistic assumptions considering point light sources [29, 36] that make the acquisition
11052

