Sampling-free Epistemic Uncertainty Estimation Using Approximated Variance
Propagation
Janis Postels1,2
Francesco Ferroni2
1
Technical University Munich

Huseyin Coskun1
Nassir Navab1
Federico Tombari1,3
3
Autonomous Intelligent Driving GmbH
Google

2

{janis.postels, huseyin.coskun, nassir.navab}@tum.de

francesco.ferroni@aid-driving.eu

tombari@in.tum.de

Image

Abstract
We present a sampling-free approach for computing the
epistemic uncertainty of a neural network. Epistemic uncertainty is an important quantity for the deployment of deep
neural networks in safety-critical applications, since it represents how much one can trust predictions on new data.
Recently promising works were proposed using noise injection combined with Monte-Carlo (MC) sampling at inference time to estimate this quantity (e.g. MC dropout).
Our main contribution is an approximation of the epistemic
uncertainty estimated by these methods that does not require sampling, thus notably reducing the computational
overhead. We apply our approach to large-scale visual
tasks (i.e., semantic segmentation and depth regression) to
demonstrate the advantages of our method compared to
sampling-based approaches in terms of quality of the uncertainty estimates as well as of computational overhead.

Prediction

Ours: 0.14s

0.13s
0.54s
2.39s
2 samples
10 samples
50 samples
Monte-Carlo Dropout [9]

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Qualitative results of uncertainty estimation for Bayesian
SegNet (white: small, black: large). Upper: Original image (left),
prediction using Monte-Carlo (MC) sampling (middle) and proposed uncertainty prediction (right, with average runtime per prediction). Lower: Uncertainty using MC dropout [9] using 2 (left),
10 (middle) and 50 (right) samples, each with its average runtime
per prediction. We cache results prior to the first dropout layer to
optimize performance of MC dropout.

Quantifying the uncertainty associated with the prediction of neural networks is a prerequisite for their deployment and use in safety-critical applications. Whether used
to detect road users and make driving decisions in an autonomous vehicle, or in a medical setting within a surgical
robot, neural networks must be able not just to predict accurately, but also to quantify how certain they are regarding
predictions. Moreover, it is important that uncertainty is
provided during inference in real-time, so that the uncertainty can be exploited by a real-time safety-critical system.
One can estimate two types of uncertainty of a machine
learning model [8]: aleatoric and epistemic. Aleatoric uncertainty is inherent to the data itself, e.g. uncertainty resulting from noisy sensors. This type of uncertainty can
be incorporated into the deep model itself by applying e.g.
mixture density networks [2]. Epistemic uncertainty is the
uncertainty in the chosen model parameters. In order to
detect situations which are unfamiliar for a given machine

learning model, and consequently quantify how much one
can trust predictions on the given data, one has to determine
the latter of the two types of uncertainty.
Recently many approaches have been proposed that
make it possible to estimate epistemic uncertainty for large
scale neural network architectures[9, 27, 20, 23]. A promising research direction is the use of noise injection [9, 27]
via, e.g., stochastic regularization techniques. The underlying idea is to train a neural network while injecting noise at
certain layers. During training, the network learns how to
compensate the noise on the training data distribution, and
thus minimize the variance of the prediction. At inference
time, one can then use the variance in the prediction generated by different noise samples as an epistemic uncertainty
estimate, since the neural network only learned to compensate the noise on the training data distribution.
Unfortunately, while these methods are conceptually

2931

