Occlusion Robust Face Recognition Based on Mask Learning With Pairwise
Differential Siamese Network
Lingxue Song12 , Dihong Gong1 , Zhifeng Li∗1 , Changsong Liu2 and Wei Liu1
1
2
Tencent AI Lab
Tsinghua University
songlx15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn gongdihong@gmail.com michaelzfli@tencent.com
lcs@tsinghua.edu.cn wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been
pushing the frontier of face recognition over past years.
However, existing general CNN face models generalize
poorly for occlusions on variable facial areas. Inspired by
the fact that the human visual system explicitly ignores the
occlusion and only focuses on the non-occluded facial areas, we propose a mask learning strategy to find and discard corrupted feature elements from recognition. A mask
dictionary is firstly established by exploiting the differences
between the top conv features of occluded and occlusionfree face pairs using innovatively designed pairwise differential siamese network (PDSN). Each item of this dictionary captures the correspondence between occluded facial areas and corrupted feature elements, which is named
Feature Discarding Mask (FDM). When dealing with a
face image with random partial occlusions, we generate
its FDM by combining relevant dictionary items and then
multiply it with the original features to eliminate those corrupted feature elements from recognition. Comprehensive
experiments on both synthesized and realistic occluded face
datasets show that the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art systems.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have recently made a remarkable improvement in unconstrained
face recognition problem. Researchers are racing in ways
to boost the performance using advanced network architectures [25, 3, 27, 6, 32] or designing new loss functions to facilitate discriminative feature learning [24, 33, 13, 31, 2, 42,
30]. Some of them even surpass human recognition ability
on certain benchmark database [7].
∗ Corresponding author

Despite the huge success of deep learning models under general face recognition scenario, the deep features
still show imperfect invariance to uncontrollable variations
like pose, facial expression, illumination, and occlusion.
Among all these factors, occlusion has been considered a
highly challenging one. In real-life images or videos, facial
occlusions can often be observed, e.g. facial accessories including sunglasses, scarves, and masks or other random objects like books and cups. As indicated in [17], without
specifically trained with a large number of occluded face
images, deep CNN-based models indeed cannot function
well because of the larger intra-class variation and higher
inter-class similarity that caused by occlusions.
One possible approach to improve the performance of
CNN models under partial occlusions is to train the network
with occluded faces. Daniel et al. [28] proposed to augment training data with synthetic occluded faces in a strategic manner and observed improved performance. However,
it does not solve the problem intrinsically because it only
ensures the features are more locally and equally extracted,
as analyzed in [21]. The inconsistency between features of
two faces with different occlusion situations still exists. For
example, features of an occlusion-free face bear much more
information in eyes area than that of a face wearing a pair
of sunglasses unless the network is trained not to utilize the
eyes area at all, which is unreasonable.
Inspired by the fact that the human visual system pays attention to the non-occluded facial areas for recognition (and
ignores the occluded areas), we propose to discard feature
elements that have been corrupted by occlusions. A core
question would be: given a face image with random partial occlusions, how to locate those corrupted feature elements? It is not a big deal for traditional low-level features
like LBP, HOG or SIFT because there is a clear correspondence between image pixels and final feature elements, but
what about the deep CNN features? Therefore, the core of
this work is to find corrupted feature elements under random partial occlusion and eliminate the response of these

773

