A Camera That CNNs: Towards Embedded Neural Networks on
Pixel Processor Arrays
Laurie Bose1

Jianing Chen2 Stephen J. Carey2 Piotr Dudek2 Walterio Mayol-Cuevas1
1
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom
2
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom

Abstract
We present a convolutional neural network implementation for pixel processor array (PPA) sensors. PPA hardware
consists of a fine-grained array of general-purpose processing elements, each capable of light capture, data storage,
program execution, and communication with neighboring
elements. This allows images to be stored and manipulated
directly at the point of light capture, rather than having to
transfer images to external processing hardware. Our CNN
approach divides this array up into 4x4 blocks of processing elements, essentially trading-off image resolution for increased local memory capacity per 4x4 ”pixel”. We implement parallel operations for image addition, subtraction
and bit-shifting images in this 4x4 block format. Using these
components we formulate how to perform ternary weight
convolutions upon these images, compactly store results of
such convolutions, perform max-pooling, and transfer the
resulting sub-sampled data to an attached micro-controller.
We train ternary weight filter CNNs for digit recognition
and a simple tracking task, and demonstrate inference of
these networks upon the SCAMP5 PPA system. This work
represents a first step towards embedding neural network
processing capability directly onto the focal plane of a
sensor.

1. Introduction
The application of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) has been done with striding success in a variety
of visual tasks. While most of these applications require
significant computational effort, and therefore substantial
computer hardware resources (GPUs, FPGAs, cloud-based
servers, etc), there is also much interest in applying visual
CNN-based inference in scenarios where computing hardware is severely restricted, such as for mobile and small
footprint systems. The requirements of neural network algorithms, however, usually surpass the computational capabilities of embedded microprocessors used in these cir-

Figure 1: The SCAMP5, a sensor-processor that does true
end-to-end capture and processing with a CNN on its massively parallel pixel-processor array. Here it demonstrates
digit prediction from hand-drawn input (left) using inference of a MNIST trained CNN to produce the correct output
(bottom-right corner).

cumstances. This has led to the emergence of a plethora of
hardware acceleration engines. The solutions range from
mainstream devices adapted for neural network computations, such as GPUs, to custom processor hardware optimised for neural network acceleration [11, 25, 1, 12, 8, 13].
Bringing the computation closer to the sensor offers distinct
advantages in terms of data reduction and power efficiency.
This efficiency is essential in many applications, e.g. mobile robots, autonomous vehicles, wearable computing, Internet of Things, among others.
At the same time, a new class of vision sensors is emerging. These devices integrate processors and image sensors
in a single integrated circuit. In some cases, the processing
circuitry can be incorporated directly into the pixels of the
image sensor, resulting in so-called focal-plane processor
devices [27]. Some of these compute relatively simple operations, for example extract temporal contrast in each pixel
[21, 4]. Some implement more elaborate computations,
such as convolution kernels [19]. The advantage of tight
sensor-processor integration is the massive bandwidth available at the sensor interface, enabling high rate of operation
at low-power, as power-hungry data communications are re11335

