Learning with Unsure Data for Medical Image Diagnosis
Botong Wu1 , Xinwei Sun2 (B), Lingjing Hu3,5 (B) and Yizhou Wang1,4,5
1
Computer Science Dept., Peking University
2
Microsoft Research, Asia
3
Yanjing Medical College, Capital Medical University
4
Deepwise AI Lab 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{botongwu, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, Xinwei.Sun@microsoft.com, hulj@ccmu.edu.cn

Abstract

Radiologist rating

g(ξ−1 )

In image-based disease prediction, it can be hard to give
certain cases a deterministic “disease/normal” label due to
lack of enough information, e.g., at its early stage. We call
such cases “unsure” data. Labeling such data as unsure
suggests follow-up examinations so as to avoid irreversible
medical accident/loss in contrast to incautious prediction.
This is a common practice in clinical diagnosis, however,
mostly neglected by existing methods. Learning with unsure data also interweaves with two other practical issues:
(i) data imbalance issue that may incur model-bias towards
the majority class, and (ii) conservative/aggressive strategy
consideration, i.e., the negative (normal) samples and positive (disease) samples should NOT be treated equally - the
former should be detected with a high precision (conservativeness) and the latter should be detected with a high
recall (aggression) to avoid missing opportunity for treatment. Mixed with these issues, learning with unsure data
becomes particularly challenging.
In this paper, we raise “learning with unsure data” problem and formulate it as an ordinal regression and propose
a unified end-to-end learning framework, which also considers the aforementioned two issues: (i) incorporate costsensitive parameters to alleviate the data imbalance problem, and (ii) execute the conservative and aggressive strategies by introducing two parameters in the training procedure. The benefits of learning with unsure data and validity of our models are demonstrated on the prediction of
Alzheimer’s Disease and lung nodules.

1. Introduction
The early-prediction of disease in medical image analysis often assumes that a deterministic “disease/normal” label can be given to each sample. However, there can be
many cases violating such an assumption, since they do not
exhibit obvious evidence for determination at early stage.
For example, many patients with Alzheimer’s Disease (AD)

h(γ−1 )

h(γ1 ) g(ξ1 )

Malignant
Unsure
Benign

Predict score

Figure 1. Illustration of our main idea of this work. The red, blue
and green points denote the data points of positive, unsure and
negative. The points in the region between two dashed lines are
predicted as unsure. As shown, the thresholds marked by black are
biased towards the majority (unsure) class. Such an effect can be
measured by g(ξ±1 ). In addition, there is a gap between the conventional classification and the task in medical image diagnosis, in
which the benign class should be predicted with cautious, whereas
the malignant should be predicted with high recall. Such a gap can
be measured by h(γ±1 ). We then introduce cost-sensitive parameters ξ±1 and γ±1 to alleviate imbalanced problem and incorporate
conservative/aggressive strategies during learning, respectively.

ever experienced an intermediate stage called mild cognitive impairment (MCI) between normal control (NC) and
AD. However, MCI does not necessarily convert to AD. The
prediction of MCI progression is very difficult at early stage
since the MRI/PET of those samples do not show many
changes in the lesion regions (e.g. two-side hippo-campus).
The accurate prediction for these data needs follow-up examinations, as illustrated by the case in Fig. 2 that it cannot
be determined as positive until it converts to AD after 24
months. In contrast, the incautious prediction at early stages
for these cases can cause irreversible loss, such as missing
golden opportunity for treatment. In this paper, we call
these cases as “unsure data”, which should be considered
but has been largely neglected in the literature.

10590

