Accurate Monocular 3D Object Detection via Color-Embedded 3D
Reconstruction for Autonomous Driving
Xinzhu Ma1 , Zhihui Wang1, 2 , Haojie Li1, 2, * , Pengbo Zhang1 , Wanli Ouyang3 , Xin Fan1, 2
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, China
3
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
{maxinzhu@mail., zhwang@, hjli@, bobo96@mail., xin.fan}dlut.edu.cn
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a monocular 3D object detection framework in the domain of autonomous driving.
Unlike previous image-based methods which focus on RGB
feature extracted from 2D images, our method solves this
problem in the reconstructed 3D space in order to exploit
3D contexts explicitly. To this end, we first leverage a standalone module to transform the input data from 2D image
plane to 3D point clouds space for a better input representation, then we perform the 3D detection using PointNet
backbone net to obtain objects’ 3D locations, dimensions
and orientations. To enhance the discriminative capability
of point clouds, we propose a multi-modal features fusion
module to embed the complementary RGB cue into the generated point clouds representation. We argue that it is more
effective to infer the 3D bounding boxes from the generated
3D scene space (i.e., X,Y, Z space) compared to the image
plane (i.e., R,G,B image plane). Evaluation on the challenging KITTI dataset shows that our approach boosts the
performance of state-of-the-art monocular approach by a
large margin.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the development of technologies in
computer vision and deep learning [12, 34, 36], numerous
impressive methods are proposed for accurate 2D object detection [9, 8, 11, 32, 17, 24, 41, 18]. However, beyond
getting 2D bounding boxes or pixel masks, 3D object detection is eagerly in demand in many applications such as
autonomous driving and robotic applications because it can
describe objects in a more realistic way. Now, this problem
received more and more the concern of scholars. Because
* Corresponding author: hjli@dlut.edu.cn

Figure 1. Different representations of input data. Top left: RGB
image. Top right: Depth map. Bottom left: Point cloud. Bottom
right: RGB augmenting point cloud (only R-channel is mapped
for this visualization). Note that all the representations we mentioned can be generated by a single RGB image.

LiDAR provides reliable depth information that can be used
to accurately localize objects and characterize their shapes,
many approaches [14, 19, 21, 27, 5, 33, 40] use LiDAR
point clouds as their input, and get impressive detection results in autonomous driving scenarios. In contrast, some
other studies [1, 4, 3, 37, 23, 35, 15] are devoted to replace
the LiDAR with cheaper monocular cameras, which are
readily available in daily life. As LiDAR is much more expensive and inspired by the remarkable progress in imagebased depth prediction techniques, this paper focuses on
the high performance detection of 3D object utilizing only
monocular images. However, image-based 3D detection is
very challenging, and there is a huge gap between the performance of image-based methods and LiDAR-based methods. We show in this work that we can largely boost the
performance of image-based 3D detection by transforming
the input data representation.
Typical image-based 3D object detection approaches
[1, 3, 4, 35] adopted the pipeline similar to 2D detectors and
mainly focused on RGB features extracted from 2D images.
However, these features are not suitable for 3D related tasks

6851

