KPConv: Flexible and Deformable Convolution for Point Clouds
Hugues Thomas1
1

Charles R. Qi2 Jean-Emmanuel Deschaud1
François Goulette1 Leonidas J. Guibas2,3

Mines ParisTech

2

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We present Kernel Point Convolution1 (KPConv), a new
design of point convolution, i.e. that operates on point
clouds without any intermediate representation. The convolution weights of KPConv are located in Euclidean space by
kernel points, and applied to the input points close to them.
Its capacity to use any number of kernel points gives KPConv more flexibility than fixed grid convolutions. Furthermore, these locations are continuous in space and can be
learned by the network. Therefore, KPConv can be extended
to deformable convolutions that learn to adapt kernel points
to local geometry. Thanks to a regular subsampling strategy, KPConv is also efficient and robust to varying densities.
Whether they use deformable KPConv for complex tasks, or
rigid KPconv for simpler tasks, our networks outperform
state-of-the-art classification and segmentation approaches
on several datasets. We also offer ablation studies and
visualizations to provide understanding of what has been
learned by KPConv and to validate the descriptive power
of deformable KPConv.

1. Introduction
The dawn of deep learning has boosted modern computer
vision with discrete convolution as its fundamental building
block. This operation combines the data of local neighborhoods on a 2D grid. Thanks to this regular structure, it can
be computed with high efficiency on modern hardware, but
when deprived of this regular structure, the convolution operation has yet to be defined properly, with the same efficiency as on 2D grids.
Many applications relying on such irregular data have
grown with the rise of 3D scanning technologies. For example, 3D point cloud segmentation or 3D simultaneous
localization and mapping rely on non-grid structured data:
point clouds. A point cloud is a set of points in 3D (or
higher-dimensional) space. In many applications, the points
1 Project page: https:// github.com/ HuguesTHOMAS/ KPConv

3

Beatriz Marcotegui1

Stanford University

are coupled with corresponding features like colors. In this
work, we will always consider a point cloud as those two elements: the points P ∈ RN ×3 and the features F ∈ RN ×D .
Such a point cloud is a sparse structure that has the property
to be unordered, which makes it very different from a grid.
However, it shares a common property with a grid which
is essential to the definition of convolutions: it is spatially
localized. In a grid, the features are localized by their index in a matrix, while in a point cloud, they are localized by
their corresponding point coordinates. Thus, the points are
to be considered as structural elements, and the features as
the real data.
Various approaches have been proposed to handle such
data, and can be grouped into different categories that we
will develop in the related work section. Several methods fall into the grid-based category, whose principle is to
project the sparse 3D data on a regular structure where a
convolution operation can be defined more easily [23, 28,
33]. Other approaches use multilayer perceptrons (MLP) to
process point clouds directly, following the idea proposed
by [47, 25].
More recently, some attempts have been made to design
a convolution that operates directly on points [2, 44, 19, 14,
13]. These methods use the spatial localization property of

Figure 1. KPConv illustrated on 2D points. Input points with a
constant scalar feature (in grey) are convolved through a KPConv
that is defined by a set of kernel points (in black) with filter weights
on each point.

6411

