Discrete Laplace Operator Estimation for Dynamic 3D Reconstruction
Xiangyu Xu, Enrique Dunn
Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ, USA
{xxu24, edunn}@stevens.edu

Abstract
We present a general paradigm for dynamic 3D reconstruction from multiple independent and uncontrolled image
sources having arbitrary temporal sampling density and
distribution. Our graph-theoretic formulation models the
spatio-temporal relationships among our observations in
terms of the joint estimation of their 3D geometry and its
discrete Laplace operator. Towards this end, we define a
tri-convex optimization framework that leverages the geometric properties and dependencies found among a Euclidean
shape-space and the discrete Laplace operator describing
its local and global topology. We present a reconstructability
analysis, experiments on motion capture data and multi-view
image datasets, as well as explore applications to geometrybased event segmentation and data association.

1. Introduction
Image-based dynamic reconstruction addresses the modeling and estimation of the spatio-temporal relationships
among non-stationary scene elements and the sensors observing them. This work tackles estimating the geometry
(i.e. the Euclidean coordinates) of a temporally evolving
set of 3D points using as input unsynchronized 2D feature
observations with known imaging geometry. Our problem,
which straddles both trajectory triangulation and image sequencing, naturally arises in the context of uncoordinated
distributed capture of an event (e.g. crowd-sourced images
or video) and highlights a pair of open research questions:
How to characterize and model spatio-temporal relationships among the observations in a data-dependent manner?
What role (if any) may available spatial and temporal priors
play within the estimation process? The answer to both these
questions is tightly coupled to the level of abstraction used
to define temporal associations and the scope of the assumptions conferred upon our observations. More specifically, the
temporal abstraction level may be quantitative or ordinal (i.e.
capture time-stamps vs. sequencing), while the scope of the
assumptions may be domain-specific (i.e. temporal sampling
periodicity/frequency, choice of shape/trajectory basis) or

Figure 1: Multi-view capture produces a set of unorganized
2D observations. Our graph formulation of dynamic reconstruction jointly estimates sequencing and 3D geometry.
Imagery adapted from [27].

cross-domain (physics-based priors on motion estimates).
Estimating either absolute or relative temporal values for
our observations would require explicit assumptions on the
observed scene dynamics and/or the availability of sampling
temporal information (e.g. image time-stamps or sampling
frequency priors). In the absence of such information or
priors, we strive to estimate observation sequencing based
on data-dependent adjacency relations defined by a pairwise
affinity measure. Towards this end, we make the following
assumptions: A1) 2D observations are samples of the continuous motion of a 3D point set; A2) the (unknown and
arbitrary) temporal sampling density allows approximate local linear interpolation of 3D geometry; and A3) temporal
proximity implies spatial proximity, but not vice-versa (e.g.
repetitive or self-intersecting motion). Under such tenets,
we can address multi-view capture scenarios comprised of
unsynchronized image streams or the more general case of

1548

