Compact Trilinear Interaction for Visual Question Answering
Tuong Do1† , Thanh-Toan Do2† , Huy Tran1 , Erman Tjiputra1 , Quang D. Tran1
1

AIOZ Pte Ltd, Singapore 2 University of Liverpool

Abstract
In Visual Question Answering (VQA), answers have a
great correlation with question meaning and visual contents. Thus, to selectively utilize image, question and answer information, we propose a novel trilinear interaction model which simultaneously learns high level associations between these three inputs. In addition, to overcome the interaction complexity, we introduce a multimodal
tensor-based PARALIND decomposition which efficiently
parameterizes trilinear interaction between the three inputs. Moreover, knowledge distillation is first time applied in Free-form Opened-ended VQA. It is not only for
reducing the computational cost and required memory but
also for transferring knowledge from trilinear interaction
model to bilinear interaction model. The extensive experiments on benchmarking datasets TDIUC, VQA-2.0, and
Visual7W show that the proposed compact trilinear interaction model achieves state-of-the-art results when using a
single model on all three datasets. The source code is available at https://github.com/aioz-ai/ICCV19_
VQA-CTI.

1. Introduction
The aim of VQA is to find out a correct answer for a
given question which is consistent with visual content of a
given image [25, 3, 10]. There are two main variants of
VQA which are Free-Form Opened-Ended (FFOE) VQA
and Multiple Choice (MC) VQA. In FFOE VQA, an answer
is a free-form response to a given image-question pair input,
while in MC VQA, an answer is chosen from an answer list
for a given image-question pair input.
Traditional approaches to both VQA tasks mainly aim to
learn joint representations between images and questions,
while the answers are treated in a “passive” form, i.e., the
answers are only considered as classification targets. However, an answer is expected to have high correlation with its
corresponding question-image input, hence a jointly and explicitly information extraction from these three inputs will
give a highly meaningful joint representation. In this paper,
† indicates equal contribution.

we propose a novel trilinear interaction model which simultaneously learns high level associations between all three
inputs, i.e., image, question, and answer.
The main difficulty in trilinear interaction is the dimensionality issue which causes expensive computational cost
and huge memory requirement. To tackle this challenge, we
propose to use PARALIND decomposition [6] which factorizes a large tensor into smaller tensors which reduces the
computational cost and the usage memory.
The proposed trilinear interaction takes images, questions and answers as inputs. However, answer information
in FFOE VQA [1, 40, 26, 39] is only available in the training phase but not in the testing phase. To apply the trilinear
interaction for FFOE VQA, we propose to use knowledge
distillation to transfer knowledge from trilinear model to
bilinear model. The distilled bilinear model only requires
pairs of image and question as inputs, hence it can be used
for the testing phase. For MC VQA [47, 19, 27, 15, 30, 44],
the answer information can be easily extracted, thanks to
the given answer list that contains few candidate answers
for each image-question pair and is available in both training and testing phases. Thus, the proposed trilinear interaction can be directly applied to MC VQA. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed model, the extensive
experiments are conducted on the benchmarking datasets
TDIUC, VQA-2.0, and Visual7W. The results show that the
proposed model achieves state-of-the-art results on all three
datasets.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows. (i)
We propose a novel trilinear interaction model which simultaneously learns high level joint presentation between
image, question, and answer information in VQA task. (ii)
We utilize PARALIND decomposition to deal with the dimensionality issue in trilinear interaction. (iii) To make the
proposed trilinear interaction applicable for FFOE VQA,
we propose to use knowledge distillation for transferring
knowledge from trilinear interaction model to bilinear interaction model. The remaining of this paper is organized
as follows. Section 2 presents the related work. Section 3
presents the proposed compact trilinear interaction (CTI).
Section 4 presents the proposed models when applying CTI
to FFOE VQA and MC VQA. Section 5 presents ablation
studies, experimental results and analysis.
1392

