Towards Interpretable Face Recognition
Bangjie Yin1∗ Luan Tran1∗ Haoxiang Li2† Xiaohui Shen3† Xiaoming Liu1
1
Michigan State University 2 Wormpex AI Research 3 ByteDance AI Lab

Abstract
Deep CNNs have been pushing the frontier of visual
recognition over past years. Besides recognition accuracy,
strong demands in understanding deep CNNs in the research community motivate developments of tools to dissect
pre-trained models to visualize how they make predictions.
Recent works further push the interpretability in the network learning stage to learn more meaningful representations. In this work, focusing on a specific area of visual
recognition, we report our efforts towards interpretable face
recognition. We propose a spatial activation diversity loss
to learn more structured face representations. By leveraging the structure, we further design a feature activation diversity loss to push the interpretable representations to be
discriminative and robust to occlusions. We demonstrate
on three face recognition benchmarks that our proposed
method is able to achieve the state-of-art face recognition
accuracy with easily interpretable face representations.

1. Introduction
In the era of deep learning, one major focus in the research community has been on designing network architectures and objective functions towards discriminative feature
learning [19, 20, 29, 34, 54, 59]. Meanwhile, given its superior even surpassing-human recognition accuracy [18, 36],
there is a strong demand from both researchers and general
audiences to interpret its successes and failures [15, 41], to
understand, improve, and trust its decisions. Increased interests in visualizing CNNs lead to a set of useful tools to
dissect their prediction paths to identify the important visual
cues [41]. While it is interesting to see the visual evidences
for predictions from pre-trained models, what’s more interesting is to guide the learning towards better interpretability.
CNNs trained towards discriminative classification may
learn filters with wide-spreading attentions – usually hard
to interpret for human. Prior work even empirically demon∗ Denotes equal contribution by the authors. † Dr. Li and Dr. Shen
contributed to this work while employed by Adobe Inc. Project page is at
http://cvlab.cse.msu.edu/project-interpret-FR

Figure 1. An example on the behaviors of an interpretable face
recognition system: left most column is three faces of the same
identity and right six columns are filter responses from six filters;
each filter captures a clear and consistent semantic face part, e.g.,
eyes, nose, and jaw; heavy occlusions, eyeglass or scarf, alternate
responses of corresponding filters and make the responses being
more scattered, as shown in red bounding boxes.

strate models and human attend to different image areas in
visual understanding [11]. Without design to harness interpretability, even when filters are observed to actively respond to certain local structure across several images, there
is nothing preventing them to simultaneously capture a different structure; and the same structure may activate other
filters too. One potential solution to address this issue is
to provide annotations to learn locally activated filters and
construct a structured representation from bottom-up. However, in practice, this is rarely feasible. Manual annotations
are expensive to collect, difficult to define in certain tasks,
and sub-optimal compared with end-to-end learned filters.
A desirable solution would keep the end-to-end training pipeline intact and encourage the interpretability with a
model-agnostic design. However, in the recent interpretable
CNNs [68], where filters are trained to represent object parts
to make the network representation interpretable, they observe degraded recognition accuracy after introducing interpretability. While the work is seminal and inspiring, this
drawback largely limits its practical applicability.
In this paper, we study face recognition and strive to
learn an interpretable face representation (Fig. 1). We define
interpretability in this way that when each dimension of the
representation is able to represent a face structure or a face
part, the face representation is of higher interpretability. Although the concept of part-based representations has been
19348

