Counterfactual Critic Multi-Agent Training for Scene Graph Generation
Long Chen1 Hanwang Zhang2 Jun Xiao1∗ Xiangnan He3 Shiliang Pu4 Shih-Fu Chang5
1
DCD Lab, College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
MReal Lab, Nanyang Technological University 3 University of Science and Technology of China
4
Hikvision Research Institute 5 DVMM Lab, Columbia University

Abstract
Scene graphs — objects as nodes and visual relationships as edges — describe the whereabouts and interactions of objects in an image for comprehensive scene understanding. To generate coherent scene graphs, almost
all existing methods exploit the fruitful visual context by
modeling message passing among objects. For example,
“person” on “bike” can help to determine the relationship
“ride”, which in turn contributes to the confidence of the
two objects. However, we argue that the visual context is
not properly learned by using the prevailing cross-entropy
based supervised learning paradigm, which is not sensitive
to graph inconsistency: errors at the hub or non-hub nodes
should not be penalized equally. To this end, we propose
a Counterfactual critic Multi-Agent Training (CMAT) approach. CMAT is a multi-agent policy gradient method that
frames objects into cooperative agents, and then directly
maximizes a graph-level metric as the reward. In particular,
to assign the reward properly to each agent, CMAT uses a
counterfactual baseline that disentangles the agent-specific
reward by fixing the predictions of other agents. Extensive
validations on the challenging Visual Genome benchmark
show that CMAT achieves a state-of-the-art performance
by significant gains under various settings and metrics.

jacket
on
Scene Graph
Generation woman

tire

basket window

has

on

laptop

shoe

on

on

on
near

bike

building

near

bag

near

tree

Ground-Truth Scene Graph

(a)
basket

tire

woman

on
near

on

man

building

near

near

man

bag

(b) Graph-level metric for graph-coherent objective

bike

near
watching

of

non-bike
carrying (person)

(c) Counterfactual critic for local-sensitive objective

Figure 1: (a) An input image and its ground-truth scene graph. (b)
For graph-coherent objective, a graph-level metric will penalize
the red node more than (>) the blue one, even though both are
misclassified as man. (c) For local-sensitive objective, the individual reward for predicting the red node as bike can be identified
by excluding (−) the reward from non-bike predictions.

1. Introduction
Visual scene understanding, e.g., what and where the
things and stuff are, and how they relate with each other,
is one of the core tasks in computer vision. With the maturity of object detection [49, 34] and segmentation [35, 16],
computers can recognize object categories, locations, and
visual attributes well. However, scene understanding goes
beyond the whereabouts of objects. A more crucial step is to
infer their visual relationships — together with the objects,
they offer comprehensive and coherent visually-grounded
knowledge, called scene graphs [23]. As shown in Figure 1
∗ Corresponding Author.

(a), the nodes and edges in scene graphs are objects and visual relationships, respectively. Moreover, scene graph is
an indispensable knowledge representation for many highlevel vision tasks such as image captioning [69, 66, 68, 24],
visual reasoning [53, 14], and VQA [42, 19].
A straightforward solution for Scene Graph Generation
(SGG) is in an independent fashion: detecting object bounding boxes by an existing object detector, and then predicting the object classes and their pairwise relationships separately [37, 74, 67, 52]. However, these methods overlook
the fruitful visual context, which offers a powerful inductive bias [9] that helps object and relationship detection. For

4613

