Progressive Differentiable Architecture Search:
Bridging the Depth Gap between Search and Evaluation
Xin Chen1∗
Lingxi Xie2
Jun Wu1†
Qi Tian2 †
1
2
Tongji University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
1410452@tongji.edu.cn

198808xc@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, differentiable search methods have made major progress in reducing the computational costs of neural architecture search. However, these approaches often report lower accuracy in evaluating the searched architecture or transferring it to another dataset. This is
arguably due to the large gap between the architecture
depths in search and evaluation scenarios. In this paper, we present an efficient algorithm which allows the
depth of searched architectures to grow gradually during
the training procedure. This brings two issues, namely,
heavier computational overheads and weaker search stability, which we solve using search space approximation and
regularization, respectively. With a significantly reduced
search time (∼7 hours on a single GPU), our approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance on both the proxy
dataset (CIFAR10 or CIFAR100) and the target dataset (ImageNet). Code is available at https://github.com/
chenxin061/pdarts

1. Introduction
Image recognition is a fundamental task in the computer
vision community. In the deep learning era, state-of-theart classification performance is mostly achieved by handcrafted deep neural networks [14, 30, 9, 35, 10]. Recently,
the development of neural architecture search (NAS) has
changed the convention of model design from manual to automatic, achieving remarkable success in various perceptual
tasks [16, 3, 37] including image recognition [38].
Early works on NAS focused on the optimal configuration of layer type, filter size and number, activation function, etc., to construct a complete network [1, 29]. Inspired
by successful handcrafted architectures such as ResNet [9]
and DenseNet [11], follow-up works started to explore the
∗ This work was done when the first author was an intern at Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab.
† Corresponding authors: Jun Wu and Qi Tian.

wujun@tongji.edu.cn

tian.qi1@huawei.com

CIFAR10 Test Error : 2.83%

CIFAR10 Test Error : 2.50%

8
Cells

Cell
Arch.

Search Net.

20
Cells

Eval. Net.

(a) DARTS

5

11

17

Cells

Cells

Cells

Cell
Arch.

Search Net.

20
Cells

Eval. Net.

(b) P-DARTS

Figure 1: Difference between DARTS and P-DARTS (our
approach), with the former searching architectures in a shallow setting and evaluating them in a deep one, and the latter
progressively increasing the searching depth to bridge the
depth gap between search and evaluation. Green and blue
indicate search and evaluation, respectively.

possibility of searching for network building blocks, or socalled cells with reinforcement learning (RL) [36, 38] and
evolutionary algorithm (EA) [33, 23]. The discovered cells
are then stacked orderly to construct the network for specific tasks. However, those RL-based and EA-based approaches share a common pipeline to sample and evaluate
(from scratch) numerous architectures in the search space,
which results in a barely affordable computational overhead, e.g., hundreds or even thousands of GPU-days.
Recently, Liu et al. proposed a differentiable scheme
called DARTS [19] to get rid of the time-consuming process of architecture sampling and evaluating. It achieved
comparable performance to RL-based and EA-based methods while only requiring a search cost of a few GPU-days.
In DARTS, a cell is composed of multiple nodes, connected
with several kinds of operations, e.g., convolution, pooling.
Those operations are weighted by a few architecture parameters, which are learned in the search scenario. Limited by
the size of GPU memory, DARTS has to search the architecture in a shallow network while evaluating in a deeper one.
This brings an issue named the depth gap (see Figure 1(a)),
which means that the search stage finds some operations
that work well in a shallow architecture, but the evaluation

1294

