Deep Restoration of Vintage Photographs From Scanned Halftone Prints
Qifan Gao
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Xiao Shu
McMaster University

Xiaolin Wu†
McMaster University

gaoqifan@sjtu.edu.cn

shux@mcmaster.ca

xwu@ece.mcmaster.ca

Abstract
A great number of invaluable historical photographs unfortunately only exist in the form of halftone prints in old
publications such as newspapers or books. Their original continuous-tone films have long been lost or irreparably damaged. There have been attempts to digitally restore
these vintage halftone prints to the original film quality or
higher. However, even using powerful deep convolutional
neural networks, it is still difficult to obtain satisfactory results. The main challenge is that the degradation process
is complex and compounded while almost no paired real
data is available for machine learning. In this research, we
develop a novel learning strategy, in which the restoration
task is divided into two stages: the removal of printing artifacts and the inverse of halftoning. The advantage of our
technique is that only the simple first stage, which makes
the method adapt to real halftone prints, requires unsupervised training, while the more complex second stage of inverse halftoning only uses synthetic training data. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed
technique for real halftone prints; the new technique significantly outperforms the existing ones in visual quality.

1. Introduction
In late 1830s camera photographs were first successfully
developed on paper sensitised with silver salt [22]. To mass
reproduce these photographs on regular paper with black
ink, William Henry Fox Talbot invented halftone printing,
a technique that uses ink dots of different sizes to simulate different greyscales, shortly after the birth of photography [38]. The first examples of printed photos using this
technique appeared in an American periodical as early as
in 1873. Since then, countless of valuable historical photographs have been preserved in the form of halftone prints,
while their originals were irreversibly damaged or lost. ToThis research is supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
† The work was done during this author’s visit to Shanghai Jiao Tong
University.

(a) Original

(b) Cleaned

(c) Restored

Figure 1: The proposed technique divides the task of real
halftone print restoration into two stages: the removal of
printing artifacts (a)→(b) and the inverse of halftoning
(b)→(c). Only the relatively simple first stage requires unsupervised training. The second stage of inverse halftoning
can be easily trained with synthetic data.

day, the only possibility to reproduce these lost original
photographs is the process of inverse halftoning.
Recently much publicized successes of deep learning in
image restoration stimulated interests in the use of machine
learning methods for inverse halftoning. Several deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) based techniques have
been proposed to tackle the problem [14, 42, 41, 19]. Their
general idea is to train an end-to-end mapping using fabricated image pairs (Y, X), where Y is the digital halftoning result of the latent continuous-tone photograph X. This
practice is, however, a seriously flawed expediency. None
of the DCNN methods can satisfactorily invert scanned
halftone prints of historical photographs, because the dot
patterns of relief halftone printing process from the 1880s to
the 1950s are very different from those of digital halftoning.
A notorious weakness of the black box DCNN methods for
image restoration is that even very small deviations between
the images for training and inference can cause them to
fail. To aggravate the problem further, scanned old halftone
prints have other blemishes as well, such as ink smear, pa-

4120

