Progressive Reconstruction of Visual Structure for Image Inpainting
Jingyuan Li1 , Fengxiang He2 , Lefei Zhang∗1 , Bo Du1 , Dacheng Tao2
1

2

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering
The University of Sydney, Australia

{jingyuanli, zhanglefei, remoteking}@whu.edu.cn, {fengxiang.he, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Conv Feature

Conv Feature

Encoding VSR
Layer

Decoding VSR
Layer

⊕

Discriminator

⊕

⊕

⊕

Masked Edge

Reconstructed Edge
Encoding VSR
Layer

Decoding VSR
Layer

Conv Feature

Conv Feature

Figure 1: Progressive Reconstruction of Visual Structure. A small part of the new structure is produced in each VSR layer.
At the beginning, the known information is limited and so the encoding layers only estimate the outer parts of the missing
structure. As the information accumulates during the feeding forward procedure, the decoding layers can have the capability
to restore the missing inner parts. The generated parts are collected and sent to discriminator simultaneously.
⌘
⇣
Abstract
tion error upper bound of the PRVS network is O p1N ,
which theoretically guarantees its performance. Extensive
Inpainting methods aim to restore missing parts of corempirical evaluations and comparisons on Places2, Paris
rupted images and play a critical role in many computer
Street View and CelebA datasets validate the strengths of
vision applications, such as object removal and image
the proposed approach and demonstrate that the model
restoration. Although existing methods perform well on imoutperforms current state-of-the-art methods. The source
ages with small holes, restoring large holes remains elucode package is available at https://github.com/
sive. To address this issue, this paper proposes a Progresjingyuanli001/PRVS-Image-Inpainting.
sive Reconstruction of Visual Structure (PRVS) network that
progressively reconstructs the structures and the associated
visual feature. Specifically, we design a novel Visual Struc1. Introduction
ture Reconstruction (VSR) layer to entangle reconstructions
of the visual structure and visual feature, which benefits
Image inpainting aims to restore missing parts in coreach other by sharing parameters. We repeatedly stack
rupted images. Recently, it has become an important task in
four VSR layers in both encoding and decoding stages of
computer vision and shows promising performance in many
a U-Net like architecture to form the generator of a genapplications, such as object removal and image restoration
erative adversarial network (GAN) for restoring images
[22, 24, 1].
with either small or large holes. We prove the generalizaPrevious studies [28, 32, 29] based on texture search∗ Corresponding Author
ing produced reasonable results on images with small holes.

5962

