Semi-supervised Skin Detection by Network with Mutual Guidance
Yi He1∗

Jiayuan Shi2∗ Chuan Wang2† Haibin Huang2
Guanbin Li3 Risheng Liu1 Jue Wang2

Jiaming Liu2

1

2

Dalian University of Technology, {heyi@mail.,rsliu@}dlut.edu.cn
Megvii Technology, {shijiayuan,wangchuan,huanghaibin,liujiaming,wangjue}@megvii.com
3
Sun Yat-sen University, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Input

Abstract
In this paper we present a new data-driven method for
robust skin detection from a single human portrait image.
Unlike previous methods, we incorporate human body as a
weak semantic guidance into this task, considering acquiring large-scale of human labeled skin data is commonly expensive and time-consuming. To be specific, we propose
a dual-task neural network for joint detection of skin and
body via a semi-supervised learning strategy. The dualtask network contains a shared encoder but two decoders
for skin and body separately. For each decoder, its output
also serves as a guidance for its counterpart, making both
decoders mutually guided. Extensive experiments were conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of our network with
mutual guidance, and experimental results show our network outperforms the state-of-the-art in skin detection.

1. Introduction
Skin detection is the process of finding skin-colored pixels and regions from images and videos. It is a very interesting problem and typically serves as a pre-processing step for
further applications like face detection, gestures detection,
semantic filtering of web contents and so on [5, 21, 2, 13, 9].
Skin detection has been proven quite challenging with
large variation in skin appearance, depending on its own
color proprieties and illumination conditions. Previous
methods like [8, 31] tried to model skin color in different
color spaces and train skin classifiers in those spaces. However, these methods heavily rely on the distribution of skin
color, and with no sematic information involved, they suffer
from a limited performance. In recent years, with the development of deep neural networks, skin detection methods
have been proposed by adaption of networks used for other
detection tasks [12, 4, 22]. Although these DNN based
∗ Equal Contributors
† Corresponding Author

GMM

UNet

Ours

23.83%

82.05%

89.14%

83.01%

84.15%

89.89%

60.80%

89.32%

93.44%

85.97%

86.59%

90.04%

GT

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Skin detection results by our approach vs. solutions
of a UNet and a tradition Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). The
intersection-over-union (IoU) rates demonstrate our approach has
a better performance.

skin detection methods reveal promising accuracy improvements, they are still limited by annotated skin data which is
expensive and time-consuming to collect.
To this end, we propose to improve skin detection by introducing body detection as a guidance. If a body mask is
available, it could potentially facilitate the skin detection in
two-folds. First, it provides a prior information for a skin
detector where higher probability of skin is located. Second, after a skin mask is detected, it can filtered out the false
positive pixels in the background. Meanwhile, with skin
mask as a guidance, a body detector is also provided with
more information. To enable the mutual guidance scheme,
we designed a dual-task neural network for jointly detection of skin and body. The entire network contains a shared
encoder but two decoders for skin and body detection separately. The output from each decoder would be fed to the
12111

