Exploring the Limitations of Behavior Cloning for Autonomous Driving
Felipe Codevilla ∗
Computer Vision Center (CVC)
Campus UAB, Barcelona, Spain

Eder Santana
Toyota Research Institute (TRI)
Los Altos, CA, USA.

fcodevilla@cvc.uab.es

edercsjr@gmail.com

Antonio M. López
Computer Vision Center (CVC)
Campus UAB, Barcelona, Spain

Adrien Gaidon
Toyota Research Institute (TRI)
Los Altos, CA, USA.

antonio@cvc.uab.es

adrien.gaidon@tri.global

Figure 1. Driving scenarios from our new benchmark, based on the CARLA simulator, where the agent needs to react to dynamic changes
in the environment, handle clutter (only part of the environment is causally relevant), and predict complex sensorimotor controls (lateral
and longitudinal). We show that Behavior Cloning yields state-of-the-art policies in these complex scenarios and investigate its limitations.

Abstract
Driving requires reacting to a wide variety of complex
environment conditions and agent behaviors. Explicitly
modeling each possible scenario is unrealistic. In contrast,
imitation learning can, in theory, leverage data from large
fleets of human-driven cars. Behavior cloning in particular
has been successfully used to learn simple visuomotor
policies end-to-end, but scaling to the full spectrum of
driving behaviors remains an unsolved problem. In this
paper, we propose a new benchmark to experimentally
investigate the scalability and limitations of behavior
cloning. We show that behavior cloning leads to state-ofthe-art results, executing complex lateral and longitudinal
maneuvers, even in unseen environments, without being
explicitly programmed to do so. However, we confirm some
limitations of the behavior cloning approach: some wellknown limitations (e.g., dataset bias and overfitting), new
generalization issues (e.g., dynamic objects and the lack of
a causal modeling), and training instabilities, all requiring
further research before behavior cloning can graduate to
real-world driving. The code, dataset, benchmark, and
agent studied in this paper can be found at http://
github.com/felipecode/coiltraine/blob/
master/docs/exploring_limitations.md
∗ Work done during an internship at TRI.

1. Introduction
End-to-end behavior cloning for autonomous driving has
recently attracted renewed interest [10, 8, 12, 43, 30] as a
simple alternative to traditional modular approaches used
in industry [13, 24]. In this paradigm, perception and control are learned simultaneously using a deep neural network.
Explicit sub-tasks are not defined, but may be implicitly
learned from data. These sensorimotor controllers are typically obtained by imitation learning from human demonstrations [2, 33, 1, 39]. The deep neural network learns,
without being explicitly programmed, to recognize patterns
associating sensory input (e.g., a single RGB image) with a
desired reaction in terms of vehicle control parameters producing a target maneuver. Behavior cloning can directly
learn from large fleets of human-driven vehicles without requiring a fixed ontology and extra manually labeled data.
Finally, end-to-end imitation systems can be learned offline in a safe way, in contrast to reinforcement learning
approaches that typically require millions of trial and error
runs in the target environment [25] or a faithful simulation.
End-to-end imitation systems can suffer a domain shift
between the off-line training experience and the on-line behavior [35]. This problem, however, can be partially addressed in practice by data augmentation [8, 12]. Nonetheless, in spite of the early and recent successes of behavior
cloning for end-to-end driving [32, 23, 10, 8, 12], it has not

9329

