Joint Learning of Saliency Detection and
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Yu Zeng, Yunzhi Zhuge, Huchuan Lu∗, Lihe Zhang
Dalian University of Technology, China
{zengyu, zgyz}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {lhchuan, zhanglihe}@dlut.edu.cn,

Abstract
Existing weakly supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) methods usually utilize the results of pre-trained
saliency detection (SD) models without explicitly modelling
the connections between the two tasks, which is not the most
efficient configuration. Here we propose a unified multi-task
learning framework to jointly solve WSSS and SD using a
single network, i.e. saliency and segmentation network (SSNet). SSNet consists of a segmentation network (SN) and
a saliency aggregation module (SAM). For an input image,
SN generates the segmentation result and, SAM predicts the
saliency of each category and aggregating the segmentation
masks of all categories into a saliency map. The proposed
network is trained end-to-end with image-level category labels and class-agnostic pixel-level saliency labels. Experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation dataset and
four saliency benchmark datasets show the performance
of our method compares favorably against state-of-the-art
weakly supervised segmentation methods and fully supervised saliency detection methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation is an important and challenging task of computer vision, of which the goal is to predict a category label for every image pixel. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in semantic image segmentation [33, 8, 7, 31, 2, 6].
Due to the expensive cost for annotating semantic segmentation labels to train CNNs, weakly supervised learning has
attracted increasing interest, resulting in various weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) methods. Saliency
detection (SD) aims at identifying the most distinct objects or regions in an image, which has helped many computer vision tasks such as scene classification [41], image
retrieval [16], visual tracking [34], to name a few. With
the success of deep CNNs, it has been made a lot of at∗ Corresponding author.

tempts to use deep CNNs or deep features for saliency detection [14, 57, 58, 64, 56, 24, 12, 11].
The two tasks both require to generate accurate pixelwise masks. Hence, they have close connections. On the
one hand, given the saliency map of an image, the computation load of a segmentation model can be reduced because
of avoiding processing background. On the other hand,
given the segmentation result of an image, the saliency
map can be readily derived by selecting the salient category. Therefore, many existing WSSS [23, 49, 50, 36,
18, 51, 48, 13] methods have greatly benefited from SD.
It is a widespread practice to exploit class activation maps
(CAMs) [63] for locating the objects of each category and
use SD methods for selecting background regions. For example, Wei et al. [51] use CAMs of a classification network
with different dilated convolutional rates to find object regions, and use saliency maps of [52] to find background
regions for training a segmentation model. Wang et al. [48]
use saliency maps of [19] to refine object regions produced
by classification networks.
However, those WSSS methods simply utilize the results
of pre-trained saliency detection models, which is not the
most efficient configuration. On the one hand, they use SD
methods as a pre-processing step to generate annotations for
training their segmentation models while ignoring the interactions between SD and WSSS, which blocks the WSSS
models from fully exploiting the segmentation cues of the
strong saliency annotations. On the other hand, heuristic
rules are usually required for selecting background regions
according to the results of SD models, thereby complicating
the training process and leading to a not end-to-end manner.
In this paper, we propose a unified, end-to-end training
framework to solve both SD and WSSS tasks jointly. Unlike
most existing WSSS methods that used pre-trained saliency
detection models, we directly take advantage of pixel-level
saliency labels. The core motive is to utilize semantic information of the image-level category labels and the segmentation cues of the category-agnostic saliency labels. The
image-level category labels can make a CNN recognize the
17223

