Siamese Networks: The Tale of Two Manifolds
Soumava Kumar Roy1,4 , Mehrtash Harandi2,4 , Richard Nock1,3,4 , Richard Hartley1
1
The Australian National University; 2 Monash University;
3
The University of Sydney; 4 DATA61-CSIRO, Australia
Soumava.KumarRoy@anu.edu.au, Mehrtash.Harandi@monash.edu,
Richard.Nock@data61.csiro.au, Richard.Hartley@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Siamese networks are non-linear deep models that have
found their ways into a broad set of problems in learning
theory, thanks to their embedding capabilities. In this paper, we study Siamese networks from a new perspective and
question the validity of their training procedure. We show
that in the majority of cases, the objective of a Siamese network is endowed with an invariance property. Neglecting
the invariance property leads to a hindrance in training the
Siamese networks. To alleviate this issue, we propose two
Riemannian structures and generalize a well-established accelerated stochastic gradient descent method to take into
account the proposed Riemannian structures. Our empirical
evaluations suggest that by making use of the Riemannian
geometry, we achieve state-of-the-art results against several algorithms for the challenging problem of fine-grained
image classification.

1. Introduction
Siamese networks, introduced in 90s by Bromley [4], are
ubiquitous in machine learning and one can find their trace
in similarity/metric learning [15, 40, 43, 45], hashing [37],
clustering [28], and zero/one/few shot learning [21, 52, 65].
Perhaps a glimpse at computer vision literature can provide a
better picture as to why Siamese networks are essential these
days. Siamese networks have been successfully employed
to address face recognition/verification [5, 17, 49, 47, 41],
person re-identification [10, 54], image/patch/point descriptors [64, 25, 42, 63], localization [51, 32], image
retrieval [12], stereo matching [35], Deep Metric Learning (DML) [8, 33, 53, 61, 22] and even object tracking [50, 2, 44].
In majority of cases, a Siamese Neural Network (SiNN)
realizes a non-linear embedding of data with the objective being to attain a semantically meaningful space where related
patterns (e.g., faces of the same person) are close to each
other while proximity of semantically-unrelated patterns
(e.g., faces of different people) are avoided. The non-linear

embedding is accomplished in two stages; 1. Feature extraction performed by two sister networks (usually with shared
weights), 2. followed by an embedding parameterized by a
positive semi-definite matrix.
Previous studies on Siamese networks mainly focus on
the following challenges;
1. Design Challenges. For a given problem, what is the
right design of the network?
2. Training Challenges. It may sound surprising but as
evidenced by a large body of works (e.g., [41, 40, 43,
45, 61, 26]), proper sampling/mining of data plays a
crucial role in successful training of Siamese networks.
We will discuss this point in more details later in the
paper.
In this work, we will address an important and to a great
extent a neglected issue in training Siamese networks. We
will show that the objective function of a Siamese network
comes with a form of invariance. As a result, the geometry
of the search space is no longer Euclidean. Studies in the
field of Riemannian geometry suggest that better outcomes
can be yield if the true geometry of the search space is taken
into account during the optimization [1, 19]. As such, in this
work we develop tools and algorithms to take into account
the invariance in Siamese networks. Our contributions in
this work are
• We propose and develop a novel matrix manifold and
its associated manifold operations that offer invariance
to the structure of siamese networks.
• As an alternative solution, we show that the required invariance can also be attained by using a Stiefel manifold
to model the true geometry of the search space.
• We also make another contribution by incorporating
a Riemannian form of the stochastic gradient descent
with momentum into the backprop algorithm. This is
required to preserve the geometry during training the
network.
13046

