Agile Depth Sensing Using Triangulation Light Curtains
Joseph R. Bartels1 , Jian Wang1,2 , William “Red” Whittaker1 , and Srinivasa G. Narasimhan1
1
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Snap Research
{josephba, red, srinivas}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Depth sensors like LIDARs and Kinect use a fixed depth
acquisition strategy that is independent of the scene of interest. Due to the low spatial and temporal resolution of these
sensors, this strategy can undersample parts of the scene
that are important (small or fast moving objects), or oversample areas that are not informative for the task at hand
(a fixed planar wall). In this paper, we present an approach
and system to dynamically and adaptively sample the depths
of a scene using the principle of triangulation light curtains.
The approach directly detects the presence or absence of
objects at specified 3D lines. These 3D lines can be sampled sparsely, non-uniformly, or densely only at specified
regions. The depth sampling can be varied in real-time,
enabling quick object discovery or detailed exploration of
areas of interest. These results are achieved using a novel
prototype light curtain system that is based on a 2D rolling
shutter camera with higher light efficiency, working range,
and faster adaptation than previous work, making it useful
broadly for autonomous navigation and exploration.

1. Introduction
A light curtain is a safety device that detects nearby obstacles (e.g., a human) to stop the operation of a machine.
Light curtains are ubiquitous. They are used in garage doors
and elevators to stop the doors from closing when an object
blocks them. They are used on factory floors around dangerous machinery. Light curtains operate on a simple principle
that an object is detected when it obstructs the line of sight
between a source and a sensor. Light curtains are highly reliable, yet are very simple devices. However, light curtain
systems are specifically customized for each machine and
task, hindering their broad use for vision and robotics.
Recently, Wang et al. [20] extended this principle to generate light curtains along any ruled surface using a line sensor and a line source. Here, an obstacle is detected when it
For videos and supplemental material please see our website:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/˜ILIM/agile_depth_sensing

jwang4@snap.com

intersects both the plane of illumination generated from the
line source and the imaging plane captured by the line sensor. The illumination and imaging planes are rotated using
steerable mirrors at different velocities to sweep out an arbitrary ruled curtain surface in 3D. Such triangulating light
curtains are highly flexible and can be useful for obstacle
detection and avoidance for autonomous navigation.
In this paper, we build upon the idea of triangulation
light curtains [20] and develop a general framework for agile depth sensing for vision and robotics. Note that the triangulation light curtain intersects the scene along 3D lines.
Thus, instead of capturing 3D data of the scene in the entire
volume of interest (using say, a LIDAR [16] or Kinect [22]),
this framework allows us to flexibly sample the depths along
3D lines in a scene over time. The depth sampling detects
the presence or absence of objects at these locations in realtime without any additional computation. The depth sampling could be sparse, non-uniform (including random), or
dense only at specified 3D surfaces. The sparse sampling
can be used to adaptively increase the spatial density of the
depths only in the regions of interest as specified by an application. Alternatively, objects in the scene can be discovered quickly by initial random sampling followed by adaptive sampling of depths. The depth sampling can be rapidly
varied over time depending on the task at hand.
Our agile depth sensing framework has several advantages over traditional depth sensing that uses a fixed acquisition strategy independent of the scene. First, we show
that it is possible to capture small, thin, and fast moving
objects that are difficult for low frequency uniform angular resolution LIDAR, or low spatial resolution Kinect-like
sensors. Example objects include thin wires or meshes, or
balls thrown at high speed. We also demonstrate fast and
dense 3D capture of objects far away from the sensor when
they are barely visible in a LIDAR point cloud, allowing for
better detection, recognition and tracking of such objects.
Our framework also allows a robot to explore a region of
interest based on initial sparse depth estimates. By continuously sampling the scene as the robot moves, it is possible
to simultaneously detect obstacles and map the scene.

7900

