StartNet: Online Detection of Action Start in Untrimmed Videos
Mingfei Gao1∗ Mingze Xu2 Larry S. Davis1 Richard Socher3 Caiming Xiong3†
1
University of Maryland 2 Indiana University 3 Salesforce Research
{mgao,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu, mx6@indiana.edu, {rsocher,cxiong}@salesforce.com

Abstract
We propose StartNet to address Online Detection of Action Start (ODAS) where action starts and their associated
categories are detected in untrimmed, streaming videos.
Previous methods aim to localize action starts by learning
feature representations that can directly separate the start
point from its preceding background. It is challenging due
to the subtle appearance difference near the action starts
and the lack of training data. Instead, StartNet decomposes
ODAS into two stages: action classification (using ClsNet)
and start point localization (using LocNet). ClsNet focuses
on per-frame labeling and predicts action score distributions online. Based on the predicted action scores of the
past and current frames, LocNet conducts class-agnostic
start detection by optimizing long-term localization rewards
using policy gradient methods. The proposed framework
is validated on two large-scale datasets, THUMOS’14 and
ActivityNet. The experimental results show that StartNet
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art by 15%-30%
p-mAP under the offset tolerance of 1-10 seconds on THUMOS’14, and achieves comparable performance on ActivityNet with ×10 smaller time offset.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) in untrimmed videos
has been widely studied in offline settings, where start and
end times of an action are recognized after the action is
fully observed [4, 7, 8, 13, 32, 42]. With the emerging applications that require identifying actions in real time, e.g.,
autonomous driving, surveillance system, and collaborative
robots, online action detection (OAD) methods [9,12,31,41]
have been proposed. They typically pose the TAL problem
as a per-frame class labeling task.
However, in some time-sensitive scenarios, detecting accurate action starts in a timely manner is more important
than successfully detecting every frame containing actions.
∗ Work done when the author was an intern at Salesforce Research.
† Corresponding author.

t
AS

Action Score

(a) Previous Method
Action Classification

Unseen

t

Action Start

Start Point Localization

No
No
No No No No

No Start

No Yes

(b) StartNet

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) the previous method [31] and
(b) the proposed framework. [31] aims to generate an action score
sequence which produces low score for background and high score
for the correct action immediately when the action starts. We propose a two-stage framework: the first stage only focuses on perframe action classification and the second stage learns to localize
the start points given the historical trend of the action scores generated by the first stage.

For example, an autonomous driving car needs to detect
the start of “pedestrian crossing” as soon as it happens to
avoid collision; a surveillance system should generate alert
as soon as a dangerous event is initiated. Online Detection
of Action Start (ODAS) was proposed to address this problem specifically [31]. Instead of classifying every frame,
ODAS detects the occurrence and category of an action start
as soon as possible. Thus, it addresses two sub-tasks: (i) if
an action starts at time t and (ii) its associated action class.
The existing method [31] handles the two sub-tasks
jointly by training a classification network that is capable of
localizing the starts of different action classes. The network
attempts to make the representation of a start point close to
that of its associated action class and far from its preceding
background. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), the network is encouraged to react immediately when an action starts. However,
it is hard to achieve this goal due to the subtle appearance
difference near start points and the lack of labeled training
data (one action only contains one start point).
Our method is inspired by three key insights. First, de-

5542

