Explaining the Ambiguity of Object Detection and 6D Pose From Visual Data
Fabian Manhardt1,∗

Diego Martin Arroyo1,∗

Christian Rupprecht2

fabian.manhardt@tum.de

martin.arroyo@tum.de

chrisr@robots.ox.ac.uk

Benjamin Busam1,3

Tolga Birdal4

Nassir Navab1

Federico Tombari1,5

benjamin.busam@huawei.com

tbirdal@stanford.edu

nassir.navab@tum.de

tombari@in.tum.de

1

Technical University of Munich

2

University of Oxford

3

Huawei

4

Stanford University

5

Google

Abstract
3D object detection and pose estimation from a single image are two inherently ambiguous problems. Oftentimes,
objects appear similar from different viewpoints due to
shape symmetries, occlusion and repetitive textures. This
ambiguity in both detection and pose estimation means that
an object instance can be perfectly described by several
different poses and even classes. In this work we propose
to explicitly deal with these ambiguities. For each object
instance we predict multiple 6D pose outcomes to estimate
the specific pose distribution generated by symmetries and
repetitive textures. The distribution collapses to a single
outcome when the visual appearance uniquely identifies
just one valid pose. We show the benefits of our approach
which provides not only a better explanation for pose
ambiguity, but also a higher accuracy in terms of pose
estimation.

Figure 1: Pose ambiguities. External or self-occlusion can
cause the 6DoF pose of an object to become ambiguous.
Our method is able to detect and predict these ambiguities
automatically without additional supervision. The antipodally symmetric Bingham distributions show that the model
has understood the full range of valid poses.

1. Introduction
Driven by deep learning, image-based object detection
has recently made a tremendous leap forward in both accuracy as well as efficiency [39, 16, 31, 38]. An emerging research direction in this field is the estimation of the object’s
pose in 3D space over the existing 6-Degrees-of-Freedom
(DoF) rather than on the 2D image plane [24, 37, 46, 51,
34, 29, 49, 33]. This is motivated by a strong interest in
achieving robust and accurate monocular 6D pose estimation for applications in the field of robotic grasping, scene
understanding and augmented/mixed reality, where the use
of a 3D sensor is not feasible [36, 26, 50, 45].
Nevertheless, 6D pose estimation from RGB is a challenging problem due to the intrinsic ambiguity caused by
visual appearance of objects under different viewpoints and
occlusion. Indeed, most common objects exhibit shape ambiguities and repetitive patterns that cause their appearance
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

to be very similar under different viewpoints, thus rendering
pose estimation a problem with multiple correct solutions.
Furthermore, also occlusion (from the same object or from
others) can cause pose ambiguity.
For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, the cup is identical from every viewpoint in which the handle is not visible.
Thus, from a single image, it is impossible to univocally estimate the current object pose. Moreover, object symmetry
can also induce visual ambiguities leading to multiple poses
with the same visual appearance. However, most datasets
do not reflect this ambiguity, as the ground truth pose annotations are mostly uniquely defined at each frame. This is
problematic for a proper optimization of the rotation, since
a visually correct pose still results in a high loss. Thus,
many recent 3D detectors avoid regressing the rotation directly and, instead, explicitly model the solution space in an
unambiguous fashion [37, 24].
Essentially, in [24], the authors train their convolutional

6841

