See-Through-Text Grouping for Referring Image Segmentation
Ding-Jie Chen1 , Songhao Jia2 , Yi-Chen Lo2 , Hwann-Tzong Chen2 , and Tyng-Luh Liu1
1
2

Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan

Abstract
Motivated by the conventional grouping techniques to
image segmentation, we develop their DNN counterpart to
tackle the referring variant. The proposed method is driven
by a convolutional-recurrent neural network (ConvRNN)
that iteratively carries out top-down processing of bottomup segmentation cues. Given a natural language referring
expression, our method learns to predict its relevance to
each pixel and derives a See-through-Text Embedding Pixelwise (STEP) heatmap, which reveals segmentation cues
of pixel level via the learned visual-textual co-embedding.
The ConvRNN performs a top-down approximation by converting the STEP heatmap into a refined one, whereas the
improvement is expected from training the network with a
classification loss from the ground truth. With the refined
heatmap, we update the textual representation of the referring expression by re-evaluating its attention distribution
and then compute a new STEP heatmap as the next input
to the ConvRNN. Boosting by such collaborative learning,
the framework can progressively and simultaneously yield
the desired referring segmentation and reasonable attention distribution over the referring sentence. Our method
is general and does not rely on, say, the outcomes of object
detection from other DNN models, while achieving state-ofthe-art performance in all of the four datasets in the experiments.

1. Introduction
The rapid development of deep neural networks (DNNs)
and the availability of large-scale image/video datasets have
prompted significant research progress on segmentation
problems such as semantic segmentation [4, 34], instance
segmentation [9, 21], and interactive segmentation [42].
However, while high accuracy on semantic labeling for
these tasks can be achieved by state-of-the-art methods, a
notable shortcoming of such applications is that the label semantics are usually predefined by restricted object classes.

In practical scenarios, referring to an object or objects
of interest through natural language expressions instead of
the predefined class labels should be more attractive to
users. Since a natural language expression may comprise
attributes, actions, spatial relationship, and interaction for
characterizing the visual entities, the abundant expression
thus provides flexibility. The field of natural language processing (NLP) has developed several useful language models for extracting language features [2, 30, 31, 32]. Benefited from such convenience, language-based visual understanding also gains much attention and has been applied to
the tasks of visual question answering [1, 11, 27, 47], referring object localization [14, 20, 44], image captioning [15,
38], and referring image segmentation [12, 13, 19, 23, 29].
We aim to address the problem of referring image segmentation, in which a natural language referring expression
is provided to guide pixel-level image segmentation. Referring image segmentation can be treated as richer-class semantic segmentation. This kind of technique serves as a versatile human-machine interaction mechanism for interactive
image segmentation. With the interaction mechanism, users
can provide natural language sentences as descriptions via
typing or speaking for guiding the machine to select the
region of interest [17]. However, the flexibility of natural
language expressions for referring rich object classes also
means that referring image segmentation is challenging—a
region (or regions) being referred to can be anywhere the
natural language expressions are able to describe.
Previous results [12, 13, 19, 23, 29] on referring image
segmentation often follow a “concatenation-convolution”
procedure. These methods mainly concatenate visual and
language features extracted from the given image and referring expression, respectively. The procedure is followed
by applying convolution operations to the concatenated features. Such techniques essentially seek an optimal weighted
average, along the channel dimension of the concatenated
features, for yielding the segmentation. They do not jointly
consider how visual features of the pixels in a referred region correlate with the natural language expression, but still
achieve reasonable performance with powerful DNNs.

7454

