SparseMask: Differentiable Connectivity Learning for Dense Image Prediction
Huikai Wu∗ Junge Zhang Kaiqi Huang†
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

In this paper, we aim at automatically searching an efficient network architecture for dense image prediction. Particularly, we follow the encoder-decoder style and focus
on designing a connectivity structure for the decoder. To
achieve that, we design a densely connected network with
learnable connections, named Fully Dense Network, which
contains a large set of possible final connectivity structures.
We then employ gradient descent to search the optimal connectivity from the dense connections. The search process
is guided by a novel loss function, which pushes the weight
of each connection to be binary and the connections to be
sparse. The discovered connectivity achieves competitive
results on two segmentation datasets, while runs more than
three times faster and requires less than half parameters
compared to the state-of-the-art methods. An extensive experiment shows that the discovered connectivity is compatible with various backbones and generalizes well to other
dense image prediction tasks.

𝐷"

𝐷"

𝐷"

𝐷%

𝐷%

𝐷%

𝐷#

𝐷#

G

G

G
𝐸#

𝐸#

𝐸#

𝐸%

𝐸%

𝐸%

𝐸"

𝐸"

𝐸"

(a) Encoder

Abstract

(b) Decoder

{huikai.wu, jgzhang, kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

(a) Step 1

(b) Step 2

(c) Step 3

Figure 1: Framework Overview. (a) Transform the pretrained image classifier into a Fully Dense Network with
learnable connections. (b) Search the optimal connectivity
with the proposed sparse loss in a differentiable manner. (c)
Drop the useless connections and stages to obtain the final
architecture. Best viewed in color.

1. Introduction
Dense image prediction is a collection of computer vision tasks that produce a pixel-wise label map for a given
image. Such tasks range from low-level vision to highlevel vision, including edge detection [40], saliency detection [16] and semantic segmentation [28]. To address
these tasks, Long et al. propose fully convolutional networks (FCNs), which follow an encoder-decoder style [28].
The encoder is transformed from a pre-trained image classifier, while the decoder combines low-level and high-level
features of the encoder to generate the final output. As follows, various methods based on FCNs are proposed, which
focus on adjusting the architecture of the decoder manually to achieve a better fusion of multi-level encoder fea∗ This paper is based on the results obtained from the author’s internship
at Preferred Networks, Inc.
† Also with CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology.

tures [40, 32, 20, 16, 12, 41, 44, 30]. However, designing the architecture remains a laborious task, which requires
lots of expert knowledge and takes ample time.
Inspired by the success of neural architecture search
(NAS) in image classification [49, 50, 24, 26], we aim at
automatically designing a decoder for dense image prediction tasks. However, directly employing the methods from
image classification is not sufficient, because (1) dense image prediction requires producing a pixel-wise label map,
while image classification focuses on predicting a class label, (2) the key to dense image prediction is encoding multilevel features, while image classification aims at extracting
global features, and (3) dense image prediction usually requires a pre-trained image classifier for faster training and
better performance, while the network for image classification can be designed and trained from scratch. Thus, we
face two major challenges: (1) We are required to design

6768

