Learning Fixed Points in Generative Adversarial Networks:
From Image-to-Image Translation to Disease Detection and Localization
Md Mahfuzur Rahman Siddiquee1 , Zongwei Zhou1,3 , Nima Tajbakhsh1 , Ruibin Feng1 ,
Michael B. Gotway2 , Yoshua Bengio3 , and Jianming Liang1,3
1
Arizona State University; 2 Mayo Clinic; 3 Mila – Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute

Fig. 1: [Better viewed on-line in color and zoomed in for details] Comparing our Fixed-Point GAN with StarGAN [8], the state of the art
in multi-domain image-to-image translation, by translating images into five domains. Combining the domains may yield a same-domain
(e.g., black to black hair) or cross-domain (e.g., black to blond hair) translation. For clarity, same-domain translations are framed in red
for StarGAN and in green for Fixed-Point GAN. As illustrated, during cross-domain translations, and especially during same-domain
translations, StarGAN generates artifacts: introducing a mustache (Row 1, Col. 2; light blue arrow), changing the face colors (Rows 2–5,
Cols. 2–6), adding more hair (Row 5, Col. 2; yellow circle), and altering the background (Row 5, Col. 3; blue arrow). Our Fixed-Point
GAN overcomes these drawbacks via fixed-point translation learning (see Sec. 3) and provides a framework for disease detection and
localization with only image-level annotation (see Fig. 2).

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have ushered in
a revolution in image-to-image translation. The development and proliferation of GANs raises an interesting
question: can we train a GAN to remove an object, if
present, from an image while otherwise preserving the image? Specifically, can a GAN “virtually heal” anyone by
turning his medical image, with an unknown health status (diseased or healthy), into a healthy one, so that diseased regions could be revealed by subtracting those two
images? Such a task requires a GAN to identify a minimal
subset of target pixels for domain translation, an ability that
we call fixed-point translation, which no GAN is equipped

with yet. Therefore, we propose a new GAN, called FixedPoint GAN, trained by (1) supervising same-domain translation through a conditional identity loss, and (2) regularizing cross-domain translation through revised adversarial,
domain classification, and cycle consistency loss. Based on
fixed-point translation, we further derive a novel framework
for disease detection and localization using only imagelevel annotation. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms the state
of the art in multi-domain image-to-image translation and
that it surpasses predominant weakly-supervised localization methods in both disease detection and localization.
Implementation is available at https://github.com/
jlianglab/Fixed-Point-GAN .
1191

