Patchwork: A Patch-wise Attention Network for
Efficient Object Detection and Segmentation in Video Streams
Yuning Chai∗
Google Inc.
chaiy@google.com

Abstract
Recent advances in single-frame object detection and
segmentation techniques have motivated a wide range of
works to extend these methods to process video streams. In
this paper, we explore the idea of hard attention aimed for
latency-sensitive applications. Instead of reasoning about
every frame separately, our method selects and only processes a small sub-window of the frame. Our technique
then makes predictions for the full frame based on the subwindows from previous frames and the update from the current sub-window. The latency reduction by this hard attention mechanism comes at the cost of degraded accuracy. We
made two contributions to address this. First, we propose
a specialized memory cell that recovers lost context when
processing sub-windows. Secondly, we adopt a Q-learningbased policy training strategy that enables our approach
to intelligently select the sub-windows such that the staleness in the memory hurts the performance the least. Our
experiments suggest that our approach reduces the latency
by approximately four times without significantly sacrificing
the accuracy on the ImageNet VID video object detection
dataset and the DAVIS video object segmentation dataset.
We further demonstrate that we can reinvest the saved computation into other parts of the network, and thus resulting in an accuracy increase at a comparable computational
cost as the original system and beating other recently proposed state-of-the-art methods in the low latency range.

1. Introduction
The human visual system is confronted with an overwhelming amount of information in a constant visual
stream. Fortunately, our brain is capable enough to remember our environment from previous experiences and can instantly find the best sequence of visual attention decisions to
achieve a seemingly effortless perception of our visual surroundings. As [4, 26] pointed out, we do not perceive our
∗ Now at Waymo LLC.

entire environment at once, and the “secret” to our success
lies in a clever interplay between our ability to remember
the bigger picture while focusing our attention to the objects
of interests.
In recent years, there has been tremendous progress in
object detection [9, 11, 25, 31] and segmentation [5, 6, 14]
techniques thanks to the emergence of deep convolutional
networks [15, 21, 35, 38]. It is natural to extend these powerful methods to applications that require continuous stream
processing. However, our own human visual perception experience suggests that it is not efficient to naively apply
single-frame detectors to every frame of a video at a fixed
time interval without any temporal context.
Inspired by the human visual attention system [26], we
introduce Patchwork, a model that explores the subtle interplay between memory and attention for efficient video
stream processing. Fig. 1a illustrates an overview of Patchwork. At each time step, Patchwork crops a small window
from the input frame and feeds it into the feature extractor network, which has been modified to contain a set of
specialized memory cells scattered throughout the body of
the network. The network eventually predicts task-specific
outputs: a set of boxes for object detection or a mask for
segmentation. Besides, the network predicts the attention
window for the next frame that is most likely to contain
useful information for the task.
The primary motivation for Patchwork is efficient stream
processing. In other words, we aim to achieve the highest possible detection or segmentation quality while reducing latency and computational cost. For applications where
there is no need to reduce the latency, we can re-invest the
saved resources and boost quality. We demonstrate this
latency reduction and quality improvement on two benchmark datasets: ImageNet VID [32] for video object detection, and DAVIS [29] for video object segmentation. This
latency reduction is controlled a priori by a pair of hyperparameters. We explain a few hyperparameter choices in the
experimental section. Some choices significantly reduce latency but take a hit in quality, and others save resources but
achieve similar quality. There are also configurations where
13415

