Non-Local ConvLSTM for Video Compression Artifact Reduction
Yi Xu1∗
Longwen Gao2
Kai Tian1
Shuigeng Zhou1†
Huyang Sun2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of
Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Bilibili, Shanghai, China
{yxu17,ktian14,sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn

{gaolongwen,sunhuyang}@bilibili.com

Abstract
Video compression artifact reduction aims to recover
high-quality videos from low-quality compressed videos.
Most existing approaches use a single neighboring frame
or a pair of neighboring frames (preceding and/or following the target frame) for this task. Furthermore, as frames
of high quality overall may contain low-quality patches,
and high-quality patches may exist in frames of low quality
overall, current methods focusing on nearby peak-quality
frames (PQFs) may miss high-quality details in low-quality
frames. To remedy these shortcomings, in this paper we
propose a novel end-to-end deep neural network called
non-local ConvLSTM (NL-ConvLSTM in short) that exploits
multiple consecutive frames. An approximate non-local
strategy is introduced in NL-ConvLSTM to capture global
motion patterns and trace the spatiotemporal dependency
in a video sequence. This approximate strategy makes the
non-local module work in a fast and low space-cost way.
Our method uses the preceding and following frames of the
target frame to generate a residual, from which a higher
quality frame is reconstructed. Experiments on two datasets
show that NL-ConvLSTM outperforms the existing methods.

1. Introduction
Video compression algorithms are widely used due to
limited communication bandwidth and storage space in
many real (especially mobile) application senarios [34].
While significantly reducing the cost of transmission and
storage, lossy video compression also leads various compression artifacts such as blocking, edge/texture floating,
mosquito noise and jerkiness [48]. Such visual distortions often severely impact the quality of experience (QoE).
Consequently, video compression artifact reduction has
∗ This author did most work during his internship at Bilibili.
† Corresponding author.

index of frame

patch from 140𝑡ℎ frame

patch from 142𝑡ℎ frame

patch from 143𝑡ℎ frame

Figure 1. An example of high-quality patches existing in lowquality frames. Here, though the 140th and 143th frames have
better full-frame SSIM than the 142th frame, the cropped patch
from the 142th frame has the best patch SSIM. The upper part
shows the SSIM values of the fames and cropped patches; the
lower images are the cropped patches from three frames. Also,
comparing the details in the boxes of the same color, we can see
that the cropped patches from the 142th frame are of better quality.

emerged as an important research topic in multimedia and
computer vision areas [26, 43, 45].
In recent years, significant advances in compressed image/video enhancement have been achieved due to the successful applications of deep neural networks. For example,
[11, 12, 36, 49] directly utilize deep convolutional neural
networks to remove compression artifacts of images without considering the characteristics of underlying compression algorithms. [16, 38, 43, 44] propose models that are
fed with compressed frames and output the enhanced ones.
These models all use a single frame as input, do not consider the temporal dependency of neighboring frames. To
exploit the temporal correlation of neighboring frames, [26]
proposes the deep kalman filter network, [42] employs task
oriented motions, and [45] uses two motion-compensated
nearest PQFs. However, [26] uses only the preceding
frames of the target frame, while [42, 45] adopt only a pair
of neighboring frames, which may miss high-quality details
of some other neighbor frames (will be explained later).

7043

