CapsuleVOS: Semi-Supervised Video Object Segmentation Using Capsule
Routing
Kevin Duarte

Yogesh S Rawat

Mubarak Shah

kevin duarte@knights.ucf.edu

yogesh@crcv.ucf.edu

shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816

Abstract
In this work we propose a capsule-based approach for
semi-supervised video object segmentation. Current video
object segmentation methods are frame-based and often require optical flow to capture temporal consistency across
frames which can be difficult to compute. To this end,
we propose a video based capsule network, CapsuleVOS,
which can segment several frames at once conditioned on
a reference frame and segmentation mask. This conditioning is performed through a novel routing algorithm for
attention-based efficient capsule selection. We address two
challenging issues in video object segmentation: 1) segmentation of small objects and 2) occlusion of objects across
time. The issue of segmenting small objects is addressed
with a zooming module which allows the network to process small spatial regions of the video. Apart from this,
the framework utilizes a novel memory module based on
recurrent networks which helps in tracking objects when
they move out of frame or are occluded. The network is
trained end-to-end and we demonstrate its effectiveness on
two benchmark video object segmentation datasets; it outperforms current offline approaches on the Youtube-VOS
dataset while having a run-time that is almost twice as fast
as competing methods. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/KevinDuarte/CapsuleVOS.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised video object segmentation aims to segment objects in a video, given their segmentation masks for
the first frame. This is a challenging problem because of issues like occlusion, changes in object appearance over time,
motion blur, fast motions, and scale variations of different objects. Deep learning approaches have achieved impressive results and the recent release of the Youtube-VOS
dataset [37] has allowed for the training and evaluation of

new methods on a wider variety of videos and objects.
The majority of current approaches can be divided into
two categories. The first are detection-based methods [2, 4,
14] that learn representations of the object segmented in the
first frame and attempt to perform the pixel-wise detection
of this object in future frames; the second is propagationbased methods [7, 12, 28, 33, 36] that formulate the task
as a tracking problem and attempt to propagate the mask
to fit the object over time. The first set of methods tends
to segment single frames independently and rarely employ
temporal information, while the later set segments single
frames sequentially and makes use of temporal information,
usually in the form of optical flow or RNNs. There has been
some work on hybrid methods, that attempt to unify both
approaches [32, 19, 38].
We propose a hybrid method that makes use of a video
capsule network to segment a video conditioned on the segmented object in the first frame. A capsule is a group of
neurons that represents an object, or part of an object. Layers in capsule networks undergo a routing-by-agreement algorithm that finds similarities between these capsules, and
allow for the modeling of part-to-whole relationships. Capsule networks have performed well in image classification
[26, 11], and have shown outstanding results in various segmentation tasks [18, 8]. In this paper, we leverage the segmentation ability of capsule networks and the ability of the
routing algorithm to find similarity between capsules for the
task of semi-supervised video object segmentation.
Our video capsule network, CapsuleVOS, contains two
branches: a video branch and a frame branch. The video
branch processes several frames at once and produces a set
of video capsules. This allows the network learn temporal/motion information without the reliance of optical flow.
The frame branch processes the first frame and object segmentation and generates a set of frame capsules, which
model the object of interest. The frame branch makes use
of a recurrent memory module that allows the network to
18480

