Universal Adversarial Perturbation via Prior Driven Uncertainty Approximation
Hong Liu1 , Rongrong Ji12∗, Jie Li1 , Baochang Zhang3 , Yue Gao4 , Yongjian Wu5 , Feiyue Huang5
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 2 Peng Cheng Lab
3
Beihang University, 4 Tsinghua University, 5 Tencent Youtu Lab

Abstract
Deep learning models have shown their vulnerabilities
to universal adversarial perturbations (UAP), which are
quasi-imperceptible. Compared to the conventional supervised UAPs that suffer from the knowledge of training data,
the data-independent unsupervised UAPs are more applicable. Existing unsupervised methods fail to take advantage
of the model uncertainty to produce robust perturbations.
In this paper, we propose a new unsupervised universal
adversarial perturbation method, termed as Prior Driven
Uncertainty Approximation (PD-UA), to generate a robust
UAP by fully exploiting the model uncertainty. Specifically, a Monte Carlo sampling method is deployed to activate more neurons to increase the model uncertainty for a
better adversarial perturbation. Thereafter, a textural bias
prior revealing a statistical uncertainty is proposed, which
helps to improve the attacking performance. The UAP is
crafted by the stochastic gradient descent algorithm with
a boosted momentum optimizer, and a Laplacian pyramid
frequency model is finally used to maintain the statistical
uncertainty. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method achieves well attacking performances on the ImageNet validation set, and significantly improves the fooling
rate compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning models [11] have been witnessed in various computer vision tasks, such as image classification [14], instance segmentation [20] and objective detection [6]. However, existing deep models have shown to
be sensitive to adversarial examples [2, 12, 31], i.e., adding
a perturbation to the input image. In general, given a convolutional neural network (CNN) f (x), which maps the input
image x to a class label y, the target of the adversarial attacking is to find an optimal perturbation δ to fool f (x) as:
f (x + δ) 6= f (x), s.t. kδkp < ǫ,
∗ R. Ji (rrji@xmu.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

(1)

where ǫ is a positive number to control the magnitude of
perturbation, and k · kp is the p-norm.
The perturbation δ is quasi-imperceptible, which is designed to fool the model to misclassify the perturbed image
[1], or to force to output a wrong target class [13]. Various
approaches have been proposed, such as model distilling
[26], transfer learning [19] and gradient updating [1]. However, the effectiveness and efficiency remains an open problem in many practical applications, as such approaches are
not universal and require specific and complex optimization
algorithms for crafting the adversarial perturbation online.
Recently, universal adversarial perturbations (UAP) has
been introduced in [21] that employs a single noise to adversarially perturb the corresponding CNN outputs for different images. UAP is also capable of conducting transfer
attacking, i.e., cross-model and cross-data attacking, which
is suitable for both white-box and black-box attacking tasks
[1, 19]. Two kinds of UAP methods, data-dependent and
data-independent, are available for extensive applications.
The data-dependent methods craft UAP using an objective
function as shown in Eq.1, where both the training data and
the model architecture must be known beforehand [21]. The
performance of data-dependent methods is thereby sensitive
to the number of training samples [15, 24]. On the contrary,
the data-independent UAP is more flexible [23, 24], which
only needs the model architecture and parameters, without
knowing the training samples in use. By maximizing the activation of convolutional neurons based on a random Gaussian initialization, it can optimize the UAP by directly attacking the stability of a given CNN model. It is thus given
much more attention than the data-dependent UAP.
In essence, UAP leverages the uncertainty of a CNN
model to disturb its output reliability under input observations. Thus, the vital issue of UAP lies in how to estimate such model uncertainty, which innovates us to investigate data-independent UAP from a new perspective. It is
also supported by recent works [7, 18, 29] that it is possible to obtain the estimation of model uncertainty by casting
dropout technology in CNNs.
There exists two major types of uncertainty one can
model: the Epistemic uncertainty and the Aleatoric uncer-

2941

