A Bayesian Optimization Framework for Neural Network Compression
Xingchen Ma∗a , Amal Rannen Triki ∗ †a , Maxim Bermana , Christos Sagonasb , Jacques Cali ‡c , and
Matthew B. Blaschkoa
a

KU Leuven
b
Onfido
c
Blue Prism

Abstract
Neural network compression is an important step for
deploying neural networks where speed is of high importance, or on devices with limited memory. It is necessary to
tune compression parameters in order to achieve the desired
trade-off between size and performance. This is often done
by optimizing the loss on a validation set of data, which
should be large enough to approximate the true risk and
therefore yield sufficient generalization ability. However, using a full validation set can be computationally expensive.
In this work, we develop a general Bayesian optimization
framework for optimizing functions that are computed based
on U-statistics. We propagate Gaussian uncertainties from
the statistics through the Bayesian optimization framework
yielding a method that gives a probabilistic approximation
certificate of the result. We then apply this to parameter
selection in neural network compression. Compression objectives that can be written as U-statistics are typically based
on empirical risk and knowledge distillation for deep discriminative models. We demonstrate our method on VGG
and ResNet models, and the resulting system can find optimal compression parameters for relatively high-dimensional
parametrizations in a matter of minutes on a standard desktop machine, orders of magnitude faster than competing
methods.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have had an explosion in practical applications in the past six years. Often, the larger the network,
the higher the performance. This means that during development, neural networks are often constructed to fill available
∗ Authors with equal contribution
† This author is currently affiliated with Deepmind.
‡ Contribution to this research project was entirely made while this coauthor was at Onfido, UK.

computational resources in a high performance computing
setting. However, at the time of deployment, lower power
usage, or cheaper computational components mean there is
an imperative to achieve the same performance at reduced
computational cost. This has led to the growing field of
neural network compression [15, 10].
In this work, we present a Bayesian optimization (BO)
framework [2] for neural network compression with several
novel contributions that assist in the speed and accuracy of
the compression process:
1. Neural network compression with BO using novel objectives that allows for fast approximate evaluation of the
quality criterion. This enables a faster search through the
parameter space of a compression algorithm. Based on Ustatistics, we can show that finite sample estimators of these
quality measures have Gaussian distribution, making it compatible to propagate their uncertainty through the Gaussian
Process (GP) model used in BO.
2. A novel acquisition function for BO ([2, 44]) that directly
optimizes a probabilistic approximation criterion incorporating our measurement of uncertainty resulting from efficient, subsampled quality measures. We show that this
acquisition function improves computational performance,
has natural convergence parameters that are easy to set, and
is a compelling drop-in replacement for the main acquisition
functions that are currently employed in BO.
We demonstrate our framework in two settings: (i) Supervised compression minimizing risk; and (ii) a knowledge distillation framework where a compressed network
is trained to produce similar outputs to the uncompressed
output. In each setting, we demonstrate that our framework
can compute probably (under the probabilistic model used
in BO) approximately optimal compression in a matter of
minutes on real-world neural networks including ResNet18,
ResNet50, and VGG-16 (Section 4).
110274

