Learning to Jointly Generate and Separate Reflections
Daiqian Ma1,2 , Renjie Wan3 , Boxin Shi2,4 , Alex C. Kot3 , Ling-Yu Duan1,2,4∗
The SECE of Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China1
The National Engineering Lab for Video Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China2
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore3
The Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China4
{madaiqian, shiboxin, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn, {rjwan,eackot}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing learning-based single image reflection removal
methods using paired training data have limitations about
the generalization capability of dealing with real-world reflections due to the limited variations in training pairs. In
this work, we propose to jointly generate and separate reflections within a weakly-supervised learning framework,
aiming to model the reflection image formation more comprehensively with abundant unpaired supervision. By imposing the entanglement and disentanglement mechanisms,
the proposed framework elegantly integrates two independent stages of reflection generation and separation into a
unified model. For better performance, the image gradient constraint is incorporated into the concurrent training
process of the multi-task learning as well. In particular,
we built up an unpaired reflection dataset with 4,027 images, which is useful for investigating the problem of reflection removal in the weakly supervised learning manner,
and further improving model performance. Extensive experiments on a public benchmark dataset show that our framework performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods
and consistently produces visually appealing results.

1. Introduction
When taking photos through a piece of transparent glass,
the presence of reﬂections accompanied with the background image is undesirable. In addition to the visual quality degradation, the reﬂections hinder the performance of
computer vision systems by obstructing and deforming the
background scene behind the glass. The classical representation for image formation with reﬂections is formulated as,
M = αB + βR,
∗ Ling-Yu Duan is the corresponding author.

(1)

Figure 1. Illustration of two different training pipelines. S and G
denote the separator and generator in our framework. M, B, and
R represent the mixture image, background and reﬂection, respectively. * represents the generated images in the training procedure.

where M, B, and R represent observed mixture images
with reﬂections, background, and reﬂection images, respectively. Here, α and β are the mixing coefﬁcients [5, 27, 26].
Reﬂection removal aims at removing the reﬂections R from
M, such that the visibility of the background scenes B is
enhanced. In this scenario, image priors such as different
blur levels between the background and reﬂection [26, 17],
ghosting effects [22], and the non-local similarity in the images [25], have been explored. However, these low-level
image priors are constrained by limited phenomena causing
reﬂections, which may often be impractical in real-world
applications. Moreover, these methods mainly rely on the

2444

