Confidence Regularized Self-Training
Yang Zou1∗ Zhiding Yu2∗ Xiaofeng Liu1 B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar1 Jinsong Wang3†
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 NVIDIA 3 General Motors R&D
B yzou2@andrew.cmu.edu, zhidingy@nvidia.com, liuxiaofeng@cmu.edu

Abstract

Network output before
self-training
Car

Recent advances in domain adaptation show that deep
self-training presents a powerful means for unsupervised
domain adaptation. These methods often involve an iterative process of predicting on target domain and then taking
the confident predictions as pseudo-labels for retraining.
However, since pseudo-labels can be noisy, self-training
can put overconfident label belief on wrong classes, leading
to deviated solutions with propagated errors. To address the
problem, we propose a confidence regularized self-training
(CRST) framework, formulated as regularized self-training.
Our method treats pseudo-labels as continuous latent variables jointly optimized via alternating optimization. We
propose two types of confidence regularization: label regularization (LR) and model regularization (MR). CRST-LR
generates soft pseudo-labels while CRST-MR encourages
the smoothness on network output. Extensive experiments
on image classification and semantic segmentation show
that CRSTs outperform their non-regularized counterpart
with state-of-the-art performance. The code and models of
this work are available at https://github.com/yzou2/CRST.

1. Introduction
Transferring knowledge learned by deep neural networks
from label-rich domains to a new target domain is an important but challenging problem. Such domain change naturally occurs in many applications, such as synthetic data training [42, 46] and simulation for robotics/autonomous driving. The existence of cross-domain differences often leads
to considerably decreased model performance, and unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to address this problem by adapting source model to target domain with the aid
of unlabeled target data. To this end, a predominant stream
of adversarial learning based UDA methods have been proposed to reduce the discrepancy between source and target
domain features [9, 10, 23, 26, 34, 38, 44, 50, 53, 60].
∗ The authors contributed equally.
† Work done during the affiliation with General Motors R&D.
B Contact emails of corresponding authors.

Network output after
self-training

Pseudo-label

(a) Self-training without confidence regularization
Pseudo-label
generation

Person
Bus

Network
retraining

(b) Label regularized self-training
Label regularization
Network
retraining

Backbone
Network

(c) Model regularized self-training
Network
retraining
Image label: car

Model regularization

Figure 1: Illustration of proposed confidence regularization.
(a) Self-training without confidence regularization generates and retrains with hard pseudo-labels, resulting in sharp
network output. (b) Label regularized self-training introduces soft pseudo-labels, therefore enabling outputs to be
smooth. (c) Model regularized self-training also retrains
with hard pseudo-labels, but incorporates a regularizer to
directly promote output smoothness.
More recently, self-training with networks emerged as a
promising alternative towards domain adaptation [4, 5, 25,
29, 49, 54, 69]. Self-training iteratively generates a set of
one-hot (or hard) pseudo-labels corresponding to large selection scores (i.e., prediction confidence) in target domain,
and then retrains network based on these pseudo-labels with
target data. Recently, [69] proposes class-balanced selftraining (CBST), formulating self-training as unified loss
minimization with pseudo-labels that can be solved in an
end-to-end manner. Instead of reducing domain gap by minimizing both the task loss and domain adversarial loss, the
self-training loss implicitly encourages cross-domain feature alignment for each class by learning from both labeled
source data and pseudo-labeled target data.
Early work [29] shows that the essence of deep selftraining is entropy minimization - pushing network output
to be as sharp as hard pseudo-label. However, 100% accuracy cannot always be guaranteed for pseudo-labels. Trusting all selected pseudo-labels as “ground truth” by encoding
them as hard labels can lead to overconfident mistakes and

5982

