DANet: Divergent Activation for Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Haolan Xue† , Chang Liu† , Fang Wan†∗ , Jianbin Jiao† , Xiangyang Ji‡ and Qixiang Ye†∗
†

‡

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.  Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

{xuehaolan17,liuchang615,wanfang13}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn
{jiaojb,qxye}@ucas.ac.cn,

Abstract

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised learning refers to methods that utilize training data with incomplete annotations to learn
recognition models. Weakly supervised object localization
(WSOL) requires solely the image-level annotations indicating the presence or absence of a class of objects in images to learn localization models [39]. It can leverage rich
Web images with tags as a data source for model learning.
To tackle the WSOL problem with convolutional neural
∗ Corresponding author.
1 The code is available at https://github.com/xuehaolan/DANet

CAM

Ă

Ă

Ă
DANet

Weakly supervised object localization remains a challenge when learning object localization models from image category labels. Optimizing image classification tends
to activate object parts and ignore the full object extent,
while expanding object parts into full object extent could
deteriorate the performance of image classification. In this
paper, we propose a divergent activation (DA) approach,
and target at learning complementary and discriminative
visual patterns for image classification and weakly supervised object localization from the perspective of discrepancy. To this end, we design hierarchical divergent activation (HDA), which leverages the semantic discrepancy to
spread feature activation, implicitly. We also propose discrepant divergent activation (DDA), which pursues object
extent by learning mutually exclusive visual patterns, explicitly. Deep networks implemented with HDA and DDA,
referred to as DANets, diverge and fuse discrepant yet discriminative features for image classification and object localization in an end-to-end manner. Experiments validate
that DANets advance the performance of object localization
while maintaining high performance of image classification
on CUB-200 and ILSVRC datasets 1 .

Ă
Training Procedure

Results

Figure 1: Evolution of the activation maps during training.
In the early stages of training, both the CAM [39] and our
DANet activate partial objects. Along with the learning procedure, the activated region of CAM shrinks to a small object part while that of our approach diverges to full object
extent. (Best viewed in color)
network (CNN), people resort to the discriminative localization method [39], i.e., learning class activation maps for object localization using excitation back-propagation from image category supervision[36]. In the forward-propagation
procedure the convolutional ﬁlters in CNN act as object detectors and in the back-propagation procedure the feature
maps are excited to produce class activation maps, which
identify discriminative regions for speciﬁc object classes.
Discriminative localization methods are simple yet efﬁcient for weakly supervised object localization. However,
they are usually observed to activate object parts instead of
full object extent, as shown in the ﬁrst row of Fig. 1. Speciﬁc activated object parts are capable of minimizing image
classiﬁcation loss, but experience difﬁcultly in optimizing
object localization. Existing approach has explored graph

6589

