Transferability and Hardness of Supervised Classification Tasks
Anh T. Tran∗
VinAI Research

Cuong V. Nguyen
Amazon Web Services

Tal Hassner∗
Facebook AI

anstar1111@gmail.com

nguycuo@amazon.com

talhassner@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for estimating the difficulty and transferability of supervised classification tasks.
Unlike previous work, our approach is solution agnostic
and does not require or assume trained models. Instead,
we estimate these values using an information theoretic approach: treating training labels as random variables and
exploring their statistics. When transferring from a source
to a target task, we consider the conditional entropy between two such variables (i.e., label assignments of the two
tasks). We show analytically and empirically that this value
is related to the loss of the transferred model. We further
show how to use this value to estimate task hardness. We
test our claims extensively on three large scale data sets—
CelebA (40 tasks), Animals with Attributes 2 (85 tasks), and
Caltech-UCSD Birds 200 (312 tasks)—together representing 437 classification tasks. We provide results showing that
our hardness and transferability estimates are strongly correlated with empirical hardness and transferability. As a
case study, we transfer a learned face recognition model to
CelebA attribute classification tasks, showing state of the
art accuracy for tasks estimated to be highly transferable.

1. Introduction
How easy is it to transfer a representation learned for one
task to another? How can we tell which of several tasks is
hardest to solve? Answers to these questions are vital in
planning model transfer and reuse, and can help reveal fundamental properties of tasks and their relationships in the
process of developing universal perception engines [3]. The
importance of these questions is therefore driving research
efforts, with several answers proposed in recent years.
Some of the answers to these questions established
task relationship indices, as in the Taskonomy [69] and
Task2Vec [1, 2] projects. Others analyzed task relationships
in the context of multi-task learning [30, 36, 59, 66, 71].
Importantly, however, these and other efforts are computa∗ Work at Amazon Web Services, prior to joining current affiliation.

tional in nature, and so build on specific machine learning
solutions as proxy task representations.
By relying on such proxy task representations, these approaches are naturally limited in their application: Rather
than insights on the tasks themselves, they may reflect relationships between the specific solutions chosen to represent
them, as noted by previous work [69]. Some, moreover, establish task relationships by maintaining model zoos, with
existing trained models already available. They may therefore also be computationally expensive [1, 69]. Finally,
in some scenarios, establishing task relationships requires
multi-task learning of the models, to measure the influence
different tasks have on each other [30, 36, 59, 66, 71].
We propose a radically different, solution agnostic approach: We seek underlying relationships, irrespective of
the particular models trained to solve these tasks or whether
these models even exist. We begin by noting that supervised
learning problems are defined not by the models trained to
solve them, but rather by the data sets of labeled examples and a choice of loss functions. We therefore go to the
source and explore tasks directly, by examining their data
sets rather than the models they were used to train.
To this end, we consider supervised classification tasks
defined over the same input domain. As a loss, we assume the cross entropy function, thereby including most
commonly used loss functions. We offer the following surprising result: By assuming an optimal loss on two tasks,
the conditional entropy (CE) between the label sequences
of their training sets provides a bound on the transferability
of the two tasks—that is, the log-likelihood on a target task
for a trained representation transferred from a source task.
We then use this result to obtain a-priori estimates of task
transferability and hardness.
Importantly, we obtain effective transferability and hardness estimates by evaluating only training labels; we do not
consider the solutions trained for each task or the input domain. This result is surprising considering that it greatly
simplifies estimating task hardness and task relationships,
yet, as far as we know, was overlooked by previous work.
We verify our claims with rigorous tests on a total of
437 tasks from the CelebA [34], Animals with Attributes 2
11395

