MVSCRF: Learning Multi-view Stereo with Conditional Random Fields
Youze Xue, Jiansheng Chen∗, Weitao Wan, Yiqing Huang, Cheng Yu, Tianpeng Li, Jiayu Bao
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
xueyz19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jschenthu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
{wwt16, huang-yq17, yuc18, ltp16, bjy19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a deep-learning architecture for multi-view
stereo with conditional random fields (MVSCRF). Given an
arbitrary number of input images, we first use a U-shape
neural network to extract deep features incorporating both
global and local information, and then build a 3D cost volume for the reference camera. Unlike previous learningbased methods, we explicitly constraint the smoothness of
depth maps by using conditional random fields (CRFs) after the stage of cost volume regularization. The CRFs module is implemented as recurrent neural networks so that
the whole pipeline can be trained end-to-end. Our results show that the proposed pipeline outperforms previous state-of-the-arts on large-scale DT U dataset. We also
achieve comparable results with state-of-the-art learningbased methods on outdoor T anks and T emples dataset
without fine-tuning, which demonstrates our method’s generalization ability.

1. Introduction
In a multi-view stereo (MVS) system, images of the
same scene or object taken from different views are processed to reconstruct the 3D model. Traditional MVS
methods formulate the task as an optimization problem by
utilizing the projection relationship among multiple views
[21][22]. Recent success of deep learning has inspired researchers to exploit learning-based MVS methods. Some
research exploit the volumetric representation of 3D models, and regress each voxel’s occupancy with deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13][14][6]. However, restricted by its huge memory consumption, volumetric representation cannot be scaled up and thus leads to very low
resolution of the reconstructed space. Another approach to
reconstruct a 3D scene is to first estimate depth map per
view, and then fuse depth maps to form the point cloud. Recent work [29][30][10][5] based on depth map estimation
∗ Corresponding author

(a) Family

(b) Horse

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison between MVSNet (top) and
the proposed MVSCRF (bottom) on two selected scenes of the
T anks and T emples dataset. The visual results of MVSNet are
directly cited from the original paper [29].

have achieved excellent results on public MVS benchmarks
such as DT U [12] and T anks and T emples [15], demonstrating the effectiveness of using depth maps as intermediate representations in MVS.
A commonly used pipeline in binocular stereo was extended to deep learning based MVS in [29], in which Yao
et al. proposed an end-to-end architecture MVSNet. The
MVSNet first extracts deep features of input images, then
builds a 3D cost volume for the reference camera using
differentiable homography warping, and finally regularizes
the cost volume to regress the depth map. The MVSNet
achieves comparable or even better performance compared
to optimization based traditional methods on public benchmarks. Recently, Yao et al. further proposed the R-MVSNet
[30] which essentially reduces the inference memory requirement by re-designing the cost volume regularization of
MVSNet as recurrent neural networks. As such, depth sampling rate can be significantly increased, leading to preciser
3D predictions as expected.
Another way to improve the performance of depth estimation, which may be orthogonal to that used in RMVSNet, is to further exploit the intrinsic characteristics
of depth maps of natural scenes. Inspired by semantic seg-

4312

