Predicting the Future: A Jointly Learnt Model for Action Anticipation
Harshala Gammulle
Simon Denman
Sridha Sridharan
Clinton Fookes
Image and Video Research Lab, SAIVT, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Australia
{pranali.gammule, s.denman, s.sridharan, c.fookes}@qut.edu.au

Observed

Abstract
Inspired by human neurological structures for action anticipation, we present an action anticipation model that enables the prediction of plausible future actions by forecasting both the visual and temporal future. In contrast to current state-of-the-art methods which first learn a model to
predict future video features and then perform action anticipation using these features, the proposed framework jointly
learns to perform the two tasks, future visual and temporal
representation synthesis, and early action anticipation. The
joint learning framework ensures that the predicted future
embeddings are informative to the action anticipation task.
Furthermore, through extensive experimental evaluations
we demonstrate the utility of using both visual and temporal
semantics of the scene, and illustrate how this representation synthesis could be achieved through a recurrent Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) framework. Our model
outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods on multiple datasets: UCF101, UCF101-24, UT-Interaction and TV
Human Interaction. 1

1. Introduction
We propose an action anticipation model that uses visual
and temporal data to predict future behaviour, while also
predicting a frame-wise future representation to support the
learning. Unlike action recognition where the recognition
is carried out after the event, by observing the full video
sequence (Fig. 1(a)), the aim of action anticipation (Fig.
1(b)) is to predict the future action as early as possible by
observing only a portion of the action [3]. Therefore, for
the prediction we only have partial information in the form
of a small number of frames, so the available information
is scarce. Fig. 1(c) shows the intuition behind our proposed model. The action anticipation task is accomplished
by jointly learning to predict the future embeddings (both
visual and temporal) along with the action anticipation task,
where the anticipation task provides cues to help compen1 This research was supported by an Australian Research Council
(ARC) Linkage grant LP140100221

Action?

(a) Action Recognition
Unobserved

Observed

?

?

?

Action?

(b) Typical Action Anticipation
Unobserved

Observed

?

?

?

Action?

highFive

Predicted Future Embeddings

(c) Proposed Action Anticipation Method

Figure 1. Action anticipation through future embedding prediction. Action recognition approaches (a) carry out the recognition
task via fully observed video sequences while the typical action
anticipation methods (b) are based on predicting the action from a
small portion of the frames. In our proposed model (c) we jointly
learn the future frame embeddings to support the anticipation task.

sate for the missing information from the unobserved frame
features. We demonstrate that joint learning of the two tasks
complements each other.
This approach is inspired by recent theories of how humans achieve the action predictive ability. Recent psychology literature has shown that humans build a mental image of the future, including future actions and interactions
(such as interactions between objects) before initiating muscle movements or motor controls [10, 17, 31]. These representations capture both the visual and temporal information
of the expected future. Mimicking this biological process,

5562

