Convolutional Character Networks
Linjie Xing1,2 , Zhi Tian3 , Weilin Huang∗1,2 , and Matthew R. Scott1,2
1

2

Malong Technologies, Shenzhen, China
Shenzhen Malong Artificial Intelligence Research Center, Shenzhen, China
3
University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
Recent progress has been made on developing a unified
framework for joint text detection and recognition in natural images, but existing joint models were mostly built on
two-stage frameworks by involving ROI pooling, which can
degrade the performance on recognition tasks. In this work,
we propose convolutional character networks (”CharNet”),
which is a one-stage model that can process two tasks simultaneously in one pass. CharNet directly outputs bounding
boxes of words and characters, with corresponding character labels. We utilize a character as basic element, allowing us to overcome the main difficulty of existing approaches that attempted to optimize text detection jointly
with a RNN-based recognition branch. In addition, we
develop an iterative character detection approach able to
transform the ability of character detection learned from
synthetic data to real-world images. These technical improvements result in a simple, compact, yet powerful onestage model that works reliably on multi-orientation and
curved text. We evaluate CharNet on three standard benchmarks, where it consistently outperforms the state-of-theart approaches [26, 25] by a large margin, e.g., with improvements of 65.33%→71.08% (with generic lexicon) on
ICDAR 2015, and 54.0%→69.23% on Total-Text, on endto-end text recognition. Code is available at: https://
github.com/MalongTech/research-charnet.

1. Introduction
Text reading in natural images has long been considered
as two separate tasks: text detection and recognition, which
are implemented sequentially. The two tasks have been advanced individually by the success of deep neural networks.
Text detection aims to predict a bounding box for each text
instance (e.g., typically a word) in natural images, and cur∗ Corresponding author: whuang@malong.com.

Figure 1: The proposed CharNet can directly output bounding boxes of
words and characters, with corresponding character labels in one pass.

rent leading approaches are mainly extended from object
detection or segmentation frameworks, such as [26, 41, 25].
Built on text detection, the goal of text recognition is to recognize a sequence of character labels from a cropped image
patch including a text instance. Generally, it can be cast into
a sequence labeling problem, where various recurrent models with CNN-extracted features have been developed, with
state-of-the-art performance achieved [34, 4, 32, 10].
However, the two-step pipeline often suffers from a number of limitations. First, learning the two tasks independently would result in a sub-optimization problem, making
it difficult to fully explore the potential of text nature. For
example, text detection and recognition can work collaboratively by providing strong context and complementary
information to each other, which is critical to improving
the performance, as substantiated by recent work [12, 25].
Second, it often requires to implement multiple sequential
steps, resulting in a relatively complicated system, where
the performance of text recognition is heavily relied on text
detection results.

9126

