Monocular 3D Human Pose Estimation by Generation and Ordinal Ranking
Saurabh Sharma∗1
1

Pavan Teja Varigonda2,3

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken

Prashast Bindal2
2

Abhishek Sharma3
3

Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay

Arjun Jain2,3

Axogyan AI
Bangalore

Generated 3D Samples

P̂ 23D

P̂13D

MultiPoseNet

P̂ K3D

z ∼ N(0,1)

2DPoseNet

…

P̂2 D
CVAE Decoder

…

Joint Heatmaps
2D Pose

OrdinalNet

! kj
OM

OrdinalScore

M̂

RGB Image
…

Ordinal Maps

=

>

>

>

<

=

<

<

<

>

=

>

<

>

<

=

P̂3D

Oracle

Pˆ Oracle
3D

Ordinal Matrix

Figure 1: A schematic illustration of our modular framework. We tackle the ambiguity in the 2D-to-3D mapping by training
a CVAE to generate 3D-pose samples conditioned on the 2D-pose, that are scored and weighted-averaged using joint-ordinal
relations, which are regressed together with the 2D-pose. Our upper-bound performance is obtained by using an Oracle.

Abstract

1. Introduction

tual/augmented reality, surveillance, and human computer
interaction. The diverse variations in background, clothing, pose, occlusions, illumination, and camera parameters in real-world scenarios makes it a challenging problem. The popular 3D-pose annotated datasets do not cover
these variations appropriately. Recent advancements in
real-world 2D-pose estimation [22, 42] has led to several
multi-stage architectures, where the 3D-pose is regressed
either from both the image features and an intermediate 2D
representation [3, 8, 23, 45], or only the estimated 2D-pose
[1, 19, 20, 27, 46]. Unfortunately, regression based approaches using only the estimated 2D-pose, ignore the ambiguity in lifting 2D human-pose to 3D: an inherently illposed problem. Motivated by this shortcoming, we propose
to learn a generative 3D-pose model conditioned on the corresponding 2D-pose that affords sampling diverse samples
from the learnt 3D-pose distribution. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to employ a Deep Conditional
Variational Autoencoder [32] (CVAE for short) for 2D-to3D generative human-pose modeling and demonstrate its
advantages over direct regression based approaches. We
also show that our generative 2D-to-3D module can be

Accurate 3D human-pose estimation from a monocular RGB image finds applications to robotics, vir-

∗ Majority of this work was done while author was at Indian Institute
of Technology, Bombay.

Monocular 3D human-pose estimation from static images is a challenging problem, due to the curse of dimensionality and the ill-posed nature of lifting 2D-to-3D. In
this paper, we propose a Deep Conditional Variational Autoencoder based model that synthesizes diverse anatomically plausible 3D-pose samples conditioned on the estimated 2D-pose. We show that CVAE-based 3D-pose sample set is consistent with the 2D-pose and helps tackling
the inherent ambiguity in 2D-to-3D lifting. We propose
two strategies for obtaining the final 3D pose- (a) depthordering/ordinal relations to score and weight-average the
candidate 3D-poses, referred to as OrdinalScore, and (b)
with supervision from an Oracle. We report close to stateof-the-art results on two benchmark datasets using OrdinalScore, and state-of-the-art results using the Oracle. We
also show that our pipeline yields competitive results without paired image-to-3D annotations. The training and
evaluation code is available at https://github.com/
ssfootball04/generative_pose.

2325

