Joint Demosaicking and Denoising by Fine-Tuning of Bursts of Raw Images
Thibaud Ehret
Axel Davy
Pablo Arias
Gabriele Facciolo
CMLA, CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay, Université Paris-Saclay
Université Paris-Saclay, 94235 Cachan, France
thibaud.ehret@ens-cachan.fr

Original

Gharbi et al.: 36.1dB

Kokkinos et al.: 35.5dB

Ours: 37.3dB

Figure 1: Using a burst, our fine-tuning (starting from the network from Gharbi et al. [16]) is able to not only denoise well
(σ = 5) but also doesn’t show any artifacts like zipper or moire in the difficult regions. Best visualized on a screen.

Abstract
Demosaicking and denoising are the first steps of any
camera image processing pipeline and are key for obtaining high quality RGB images. A promising current research trend aims at solving these two problems jointly using convolutional neural networks. Due to the unavailability of ground truth data these networks cannot be currently
trained using real RAW images. Instead, they resort to simulated data. In this paper we present a method to learn
demosaicking directly from mosaicked images, without requiring ground truth RGB data. We apply this to learn joint
demosaicking and denoising only from RAW images, thus
enabling the use of real data. In addition we show that for
this application fine-tuning a network to a specific burst improves the quality of restoration for both demosaicking and
denoising.

1. Introduction
Most camera sensors capture a single color at each photoreceptor, determined by a color filter array (CFA) located

on top of the sensor. The most commonly used CFA is the
so-called Bayer pattern, consisting of a regular subsampling
of each color channel. This means, not only that each pixel
of the resulting raw image contains one third of the necessary information, but also that the color channels are never
sampled at the same positions. The problem of interpolating
the missing colors is called demosaicking and is a challenging ill-posed inverse problem. To further complicate things,
the captured data is contaminated with noise.
For these reasons the first two steps of a camera processing pipeline are demosaicking and denoising. Traditionally,
these problems have been treated separately, but this is suboptimal. Demosaicking first a noisy RAW image correlates
the noise making its subsequent denoising harder [35]. Alternatively, if denoising is applied on the mosaicked data
it becomes harder to exploit the cross-color correlations,
which are useful for color image denoising [10, 11].
Until recently, state-of-the-art methods for joint demosaicking and denoising were based on carefully crafted
heuristics, such as avoiding interpolation across image
edges [23, 35, 2]. Other methods resort to variational principles where the heuristics are encoded as a prior model [8,
18868

