Linearly Converging Quasi Branch and Bound Algorithms for Global Rigid
Registration
Nadav Dym
Duke University

Shahar Ziv Kovalsky
Duke University

nadavd@math.duke.edu

shaharko@math.duke.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Rigid registration is a fundamental problem in computer
vision and related fields. The input to this problem are two
similar shapes and the goal is to find the rigid motion that
best aligns the two shapes, as well as a good mapping between the aligned shapes. There are several different formulations of the rigid registration problem. In this paper
we focus on two popular formulations, the rigid closest
point (rigid-CP) [6] problem which is appropriate for partial matching problems (e.g. where a partial point cloud obtained from a scanning device is mapped to a reconstructed
model), and the rigid-bijective problem [28] which is applicable to full matching problems where it naturally defines a
distance between shapes [3].
Both of these rigid registration formulations optimize an
appropriate energy E(g, π) that depends on the chosen rigid
motion g and a correspondence π between the two given
point clouds. This energy is typically non-convex, however
it is conditionally tractable in that there exist efficient al-

d=2

2 12
28
2

2

qBnB
BnB

10

6

y

1 x+
= 2

evaluations

2

evaluations

In recent years, several branch-and-bound (BnB) algorithms have been proposed to globally optimize rigid registration problems. In this paper, we suggest a general framework to improve upon the BnB approach, which we name
Quasi BnB. Quasi BnB replaces the linear lower bounds
used in BnB algorithms with quadratic quasi-lower bounds
which are based on the quadratic behavior of the energy
in the vicinity of the global minimum. While quasi-lower
bounds are not truly lower bounds, the Quasi-BnB algorithm is globally optimal. In fact we prove that it exhibits
linear convergence – it achieves ǫ-accuracy in O(log(1/ǫ))
time while the time complexity of other rigid registration
BnB algorithms is polynomial in 1/ǫ. Our experiments verify that Quasi-BnB is significantly more efficient than stateof-the-art BnB algorithms, especially for problems where
high accuracy is desired.

b

24

d=3

25

2 20
2 15

y=

3 x+
2

b

2 10
25

22

0

5

10
15
tree depth

20

25

0

2

4

10 12 14
6 8
tree depth

Figure 1: Comparing the proposed qBnB algorithm and the
BnB algorithm of [21] for rigid bijective problems. The
colored shapes illustrate the alignment and correspondence
maps obtained for a pair of 2D and 3D shapes. The graphs
demonstrate the preferable complexity of our qBnB approach, dashed lines illustrating the asymptotic behavior derived in our analysis (Theorem 2).
gorithms for globally optimizing for either of its variables
when the other is fixed. This is put to good use by the wellknown iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm [6] that optimizes E using a very efficient alternating approach. It converges, however, to a local minimum and thus it strongly
depends on a good initialization.
Conditional tractability can also be useful for global optimization algorithms. For a fixed rigid motion g it is possible to compute
F (g) = min E(g, π)
π

and so to optimize E globally it suffices to optimize F . Figure 2(a) shows an example function F derived from a 2D
rigid registration problem. The function F is non-convex
and non-differentiable, and the complexity of global optimization algorithms for optimizing F is typically exponential in the dimension D of the rigid motion space. However,
in many cases of interest D is a small constant and so these
algorithms are in fact tractable. Thus, while high dimen11628

