Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Based Frame Sampling for Effective
Untrimmed Video Recognition

1

Wenhao Wu 1,2∗ Dongliang He 3 Xiao Tan 3 Shifeng Chen 1† Shilei Wen 3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., China

{wh.wu,shifeng.chen}@siat.ac.cn

{hedongliang01,tanxiao01,wenshilei}@baidu.com

Abstract
Video Recognition has drawn great research interest and
great progress has been made. A suitable frame sampling
strategy can improve the accuracy and efficiency of recognition. However, mainstream solutions generally adopt handcrafted frame sampling strategies for recognition. It could
degrade the performance, especially in untrimmed videos,
due to the variation of frame-level saliency. To this end,
we concentrate on improving untrimmed video classification via developing a learning-based frame sampling strategy. We intuitively formulate the frame sampling procedure as multiple parallel Markov decision processes, each
of which aims at picking out a frame/clip by gradually adjusting an initial sampling. Then we propose to solve the
problems with multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL).
Our MARL framework is composed of a novel RNN-based
context-aware observation network which jointly models
context information among nearby agents and historical
states of a specific agent, a policy network which generates
the probability distribution over a predefined action space
at each step and a classification network for reward calculation as well as final recognition. Extensive experimental
results show that our MARL-based scheme remarkably outperforms hand-crafted strategies with various 2D and 3D
baseline methods. Our single RGB model achieves a comparable performance of ActivityNet v1.3 champion submission with multi-modal multi-model fusion and new state-ofthe-art results on YouTube Birds and YouTube Cars.

1. Introduction
Recently, video recognition has attracted great research
interest in the computer vision community, due to its importance in real-world applications such as video surveillance,
∗ This work was done when Wenhao Wu was a research intern at Baidu.
† Corresponding author (e-mail: shifeng.chen@siat.ac.cn).

Untrimmed
video

•••

Observation
Step by step

Agent 1

Observation Observation
Agent 2

Action

Agent 3

Action

•••

Action

All agents
stop
•••

Predicted as Hopscotch

Figure 1. A demonstration of our approach. At each time step,
each agent relies on context information among nearby agents to
take action for adjusting its sampling location. When all agents
stop, the prediction is emitted by the classification decision.

video search, and video recommendation. A video contains
a sequence of frames, both spatial information, and temporal relation are important for accurate recognition. Compared to recognizing well-trimmed clips, untrimmed videos
pose a more critical challenge since not all the frames consistently respond to the specified ground-truth label. Picking out the most informative frames can be an effective
method for recognition.
Existing research efforts [45, 36, 12, 10, 13, 7, 11, 41, 3,
52, 33, 47, 8, 1, 16, 29, 35, 42, 44, 56, 5, 20] mainly focus
on building effective and efficient video modeling networks.
Generally speaking, they can be divided into two directions,
namely, (1) two-stage solutions [8, 1, 16, 29, 35] which extract spatial feature vectors from video frames and then integrate the obtained local feature sequence into one compact
video descriptor for recognition; (2) the 2D [45, 36, 10, 7]
or 3D convolution based [41, 11, 3, 52, 33, 47, 42, 44, 56, 5]

6222

