Recursive Cascaded Networks for Unsupervised Medical Image Registration
Shengyu Zhao2,3
1

Yue Dong2

Eric I-Chao Chang3

Yan Xu1,3∗

School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering and Beijing Advanced
Innovation Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University
2
IIIS, Tsinghua University
3
Microsoft Research

zsyzzsoft@gmail.com, dongyue8@gmail.com, echang@microsoft.com, xuyan04@gmail.com

Abstract
We present recursive cascaded networks, a general architecture that enables learning deep cascades, for deformable image registration. The proposed architecture is
simple in design and can be built on any base network.
The moving image is warped successively by each cascade
and finally aligned to the fixed image; this procedure is
recursive in a way that every cascade learns to perform
a progressive deformation for the current warped image.
The entire system is end-to-end and jointly trained in an
unsupervised manner. In addition, enabled by the recursive architecture, one cascade can be iteratively applied
for multiple times during testing, which approaches a better fit between each of the image pairs. We evaluate our
method on 3D medical images, where deformable registration is most commonly applied. We demonstrate that recursive cascaded networks achieve consistent, significant
gains and outperform state-of-the-art methods. The performance reveals an increasing trend as long as more cascades are trained, while the limit is not observed. Code
is available at https://github.com/zsyzzsoft/
Recursive-Cascaded-Networks.

1. Introduction
Deformable image registration has been studied in plenty
of works and raised great importance. The non-linear correspondence between a pair of images is established by pre∗ Corresponding author. This work is supported by the National Science
and Technology Major Project of the Ministry of Science and Technology
in China under Grant 2017YFC0110903, Microsoft Research under the
eHealth program, the National Natural Science Foundation in China under
Grant 81771910, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China under Grant SKLSDE-2017ZX-08 from the State Key
Laboratory of Software Development Environment in Beihang University
in China, the 111 Project in China under Grant B13003.

dicting a deformation field under the smoothness constraint.
Among traditional algorithms, an iterative approach is commonly suggested [2, 3, 4, 7, 10, 18, 27, 52], where they formulate each iteration as a progressive optimization problem.
Image registration has drawn growing interests in terms
of deep learning techniques. A closely related area is optical
flow estimation, which is essentially a 2D image registration
problem but the flow fields are discontinuous across objects
and the tracking is mainly about motion with rare color difference. Occlusions and folding areas requiring a guess are
inevitable in optical flow estimation (but not expected in
deformable image registration). Automatically generated
datasets (e.g., Flying Chairs [24], Flying Things 3D [41])
are of great help for supervising convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in such settings [24, 29, 30, 54, 55]. Some
studies also try to stack multiple networks. They assign different tasks and inputs to each cascade in a non-recursive
way and train them one by one [30, 45], but their performance approaches a limit with only a few (no more than 3)
cascades. On the other hand, cascading may not help much
when dealing with discontinuity and occlusions. Thus by
intuition, we suggest that cascaded networks with a recursive architecture fits the setting of deformable registration.
Learning-based methods are also suggested as an approach in deformable image registration. Unlike optical
flow estimation, intersubject registration with vague correspondence of image intensity is usually demanded. Some
initial works rely on the dense ground-truth flows obtained
by either traditional algorithms [14, 56] or simulating intrasubject deformations [36, 53], but their performance is
restricted due to the limited quality of training data.
Unsupervised learning methods with comparable performance to traditional algorithms have been presented recently [8, 9, 19, 20, 37, 38]. They only require a similarity
measurement between the warped moving image and the
fixed image, while the gradients can backpropagate through
the differentiable warping operation (a.k.a. spatial trans-

10600

