Kernel Modeling Super-Resolution on Real Low-Resolution Images
Ruofan Zhou
IC, EPFL

Sabine Süsstrunk
IC, EPFL

ruofan.zhou@epfl.ch

sabine.susstrunk@epfl.ch

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), trained on
corresponding pairs of high- and low-resolution images,
achieve state-of-the-art performance in single-image superresolution and surpass previous signal-processing based
approaches. However, their performance is limited when
applied to real photographs. The reason lies in their training data: low-resolution (LR) images are obtained by bicubic interpolation of the corresponding high-resolution (HR)
images. The applied convolution kernel significantly differs
from real-world camera-blur. Consequently, while current
CNNs well super-resolve bicubic-downsampled LR images,
they often fail on camera-captured LR images.
To improve generalization and robustness of deep superresolution CNNs on real photographs, we present a kernel modeling super-resolution network (KMSR) that incorporates blur-kernel modeling in the training. Our proposed KMSR consists of two stages: we first build a pool
of realistic blur-kernels with a generative adversarial network (GAN) and then we train a super-resolution network
with HR and corresponding LR images constructed with
the generated kernels. Our extensive experimental validations demonstrate the effectiveness of our single-image
super-resolution approach on photographs with unknown
blur-kernels.

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed kernel modeling
super-resolution (KMSR) framework. The first stage consists of blur-kernel estimation from real photographs, which
are used in training a GAN to generate a large pool of realistic blur-kernels. These generated blur-kernels are then
utilized to create a paired dataset of corresponding HR and
LR images for the training of a deep CNN.

1. Introduction
Single-image super-resolution methods aim to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) image from a single, lowresolution (LR) image by recovering high-frequency details. Classic super-resolution (SR) algorithms [40, 41, 57]
analytically model the blur-kernel and real-image properties in order to recover the HR images. In contrast, many
modern SR methods [21, 45, 49] attempt to learn a mapping from LR images to HR images. Lately, several convolutional neural network (CNN) based SR models were developed [8, 17, 26, 31, 42, 55]. All these learning-based
methods require large sets of paired LR and HR images for
training.

It is non-trivial to obtain such paired LR and HR groundtruth images of real scenes. Current CNN-based SR networks thus rely on synthetically generated LR images [44].
The most common technique is to apply bicubic interpolation [25] to the HR image. However, the bicubic convolution kernel is different from real camera-blur [32]. The
loss of high-frequency details in camera-captured images
is due to several factors, such as optical blur, atmospheric
blur, camera shake, and lens aberrations [34]. As a result,
even though these CNN-based SR networks perform well
on bicubic-downsampled LR images, their performance is
limited on real photographs as they operate under a wrong

2433

