Self-Supervised Deep Depth Denoising
Vladimiros Sterzentsenko ∗
Leonidas Saroglou ∗
Anargyros Chatzitofis ∗
Spyridon Thermos ∗
Nikolaos Zioulis ∗
Alexandros Doumanoglou
Dimitrios Zarpalas
Petros Daras
Information Technologies Institute (ITI), Centre for Research and Technology Hellas (CERTH), Greece

Abstract
Depth perception is considered an invaluable source
of information for various vision tasks. However, depth
maps acquired using consumer-level sensors still suffer
from non-negligible noise. This fact has recently motivated researchers to exploit traditional filters, as well as
the deep learning paradigm, in order to suppress the aforementioned non-uniform noise, while preserving geometric
details. Despite the effort, deep depth denoising is still
an open challenge mainly due to the lack of clean data
that could be used as ground truth. In this paper, we propose a fully convolutional deep autoencoder that learns to
denoise depth maps, surpassing the lack of ground truth
data. Specifically, the proposed autoencoder exploits multiple views of the same scene from different points of view
in order to learn to suppress noise in a self-supervised endto-end manner using depth and color information during
training, yet only depth during inference. To enforce selfsupervision, we leverage a differentiable rendering technique to exploit photometric supervision, which is further
regularized using geometric and surface priors. As the
proposed approach relies on raw data acquisition, a large
RGB-D corpus is collected using Intel RealSense sensors.
Complementary to a quantitative evaluation, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed self-supervised denoising approach on established 3D reconstruction applications. Code is avalable at https://github.com/
VCL3D/DeepDepthDenoising

1. Introduction
Depth sensing serves as an important information cue
for all vision related tasks. Upon the advent of consumer
grade depth sensors, the research community has exploited
the availability of depth information to make performance
leaps in a variety of domains. These include SLAM technology for robotics navigation, static scene capture or track∗ Equal contribution

Figure 1. An abstract representation of the proposed method. Our
model exploits depth-image-based rendering in a multi-view setting to achieve self-supervision using photometric consistency and
geometrical and surface priors. A denoising example is visualized
in the lower part (right-most), compared to a traditional filtering
result (middle).

ing for augmented reality applications [42], dynamic human
performance capture [2], autonomous driving [7].
Depth sensors can be categorized based on either their
interaction with the observed scene in passive (pure observation) and active (observation after actuation), or their
technological basis in stereo, structured light (SL) and timeof-flight (ToF) respectively. While the latter two are active
by definition, stereo-based sensors can operate in both passive and active mode as they estimate depth via binocular
observation and triangulation. Given that they are driven by
correspondence establishment, the active projection of textured patterns into the scene improves performance in low
textured areas. However, the aforementioned sensor types
suffer from high levels of noise and structural artifacts.

1242

