Disentangling Monocular 3D Object Detection
Andrea Simonelli ,⋆ , Samuel Rota Bulò , Lorenzo Porzi , Manuel López-Antequera , Peter Kontschieder
Mapillary Research

⋆

University of Trento, Fondazione Bruno Kessler

research@mapillary.com

Figure 1: Results obtained from our single image, monocular 3D object detection network MonoDIS on a KITTI3D test
image with corresponding birds-eye view, showing its ability to estimate size and orientation of objects at different scales.

Abstract
In this paper we propose an approach for monocular 3D
object detection from a single RGB image, which leverages
a novel disentangling transformation for 2D and 3D detection losses and a novel, self-supervised confidence score for
3D bounding boxes. Our proposed loss disentanglement
has the twofold advantage of simplifying the training dynamics in the presence of losses with complex interactions
of parameters, and sidestepping the issue of balancing independent regression terms. Our solution overcomes these
issues by isolating the contribution made by groups of parameters to a given loss, without changing its nature. We
further apply loss disentanglement to another novel, signed
Intersection-over-Union criterion-driven loss for improving
2D detection results. Besides our methodological innovations, we critically review the AP metric used in KITTI3D,
which emerged as the most important dataset for comparing 3D detection results. We identify and resolve a flaw in
the 11-point interpolated AP metric, affecting all previously
published detection results and particularly biases the results of monocular 3D detection. We provide extensive experimental evaluations and ablation studies and set a new
state-of-the-art on the KITTI3D Car class.

1. Introduction
Recent developments in object recognition [17] have
led to near-human performance on monocular 2D detection tasks. For applications with given, realistic accuracy
requirements or constraints on computational budget, it

is possible to choose general-purpose 2D object detectors
from a large pool [26, 18, 25, 16, 12].
The performance situation considerably changes in the
3D object detection case. Even though there are promising
methods based on multi-sensor fusion (usually exploiting
LIDAR information [14, 33, 30] next to RGB images), 3D
detection results produced from a single, monocular RGB
input image lag considerably behind. This can be attributed
to the ill-posed nature of the problem, where a lack of explicit knowledge about the unobserved depth dimension introduces ambiguities in 3D-to-2D mappings and hence significantly increases the task complexity.
To still enable 3D object detection from monocular images, current works usually make assumptions about the
scene geometry, camera setup or the application (e.g. that
cars cannot fly [24]). The implementation of such priors determines the encoding of extent and location/rotation of the
3D boxes, the corresponding 2D projections or their 3D box
center depths. The magnitudes of these parameters have different units and therefore non-comparable meanings, which
can negatively affect the optimization dynamics when error terms based on them are directly combined in a loss
function. As a consequence, state-of-the-art, CNN-based
monocular 3D detection methods [19, 24] report to train
their networks in a stage-wise way. First the 2D detectors
are trained until their performance stabilizes, before 3D reasoning modules can be integrated. While stage-wise training per se is not unusual in the context of deep learning, it
could be an indication that currently used loss functions are
yet sub-optimal.
A significant amount of recent works are focusing their
experimental analyses on the KITTI3D dataset [6], and in

1991

