Object-Driven Multi-Layer Scene Decomposition From a Single Image
Helisa Dhamo 1

Nassir Navab 1

Federico Tombari 1,2

helisa.dhamo@tum.de

nassir.navab@tum.de

tombari@in.tum.de

1

2

Technische Universität München

Google
Object-driven decomposition

Abstract
We present a method that tackles the challenge of predicting color and depth behind the visible content of an image. Our approach aims at building up a Layered Depth
Image (LDI) from a single RGB input, which is an efficient representation that arranges the scene in layers, including originally occluded regions. Unlike previous work,
we enable an adaptive scheme for the number of layers
and incorporate semantic encoding for better hallucination
of partly occluded objects. Additionally, our approach is
object-driven, which especially boosts the accuracy for the
occluded intermediate objects. The framework consists of
two steps. First, we individually complete each object in
terms of color and depth, while estimating the scene layout. Second, we rebuild the scene based on the regressed
layers and enforce the recomposed image to resemble the
structure of the original input. The learned representation
enables various applications, such as 3D photography and
diminished reality, all from a single RGB image.

1. Introduction
Completing a scene beyond the partial occlusion of its
components is a strongly desired property for many computer vision applications. For instance, in robotic manipulation, the ability to see the full target object despite the
presence of occluding elements can lead to a more successful and precise grasping. In the autonomous driving context
the estimation of the full profile and location of potential
obstacles occluded by the car in front of us would prove
useful to increase the robustness of the trajectory planning
and safety control.
Scene completion beyond occlusion is important not just
to improve higher-level perception systems, but also to enhance the fruition of captured visual data. 3D photography
uses image content behind occlusion to enhance the user
experience while looking at a photo by synthesizing novel
unseen views. When changing the vantage point the picture
was originally taken from, the visual content around object

input image
object-wise layers

a)

layout layer

b)

novel view

"remove the sofas"

Figure 1. Overview of our method and its applications. (Top):
Given a single color image, we infer a layered representation that
consists of a set of RGB and depth images for every object in the
scene, as well as the scene layout. (Bottom): Illustration of two
applications, a) view synthesis and b) object removal.

borders gets dis-occluded, thus enabling the image fruition
to become more immersive. The combination of 3D photography with a virtual reality (VR) display, such as a Head
Mounted Display (HMD), holds the potential to generate a
visually effective application.
Layered Depth Image (LDI), pioneered by Shade et al.
[35], is a data representation distinctively suitable for the
aforementioned applications. To augment a single view into
a 3D photo, a single depth image is not enough, since it is
not designed to store visual and geometric information beyond that of the visible object parts in the scene. On the
other hand, having a fully completed 3D model of the scene
is often an unnecessary complication, since most of the information present in such model would never be used if
the novel vantage points are either nearby the original one
and/or small in number. It is worth noting that generating
such completed 3D scenes typically comes with high computational and memory cost [51, 11, 37, 44].
Therefore, a layered structure of the original view represents an interesting trade-off between simplicity in the
representation and capacity of storing all necessary infor-

5369

