No Fear of the Dark:
Image Retrieval under Varying Illumination Conditions
Tomas Jenicek
Ondřej Chum
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
Image retrieval under varying illumination conditions,
such as day and night images, is addressed by image preprocessing, both hand-crafted and learned. Prior to extracting
image descriptors by a convolutional neural network, images are photometrically normalised in order to reduce the
descriptor sensitivity to illumination changes. We propose
a learnable normalisation based on the U-Net architecture,
which is trained on a combination of single-camera multiexposure images and a newly constructed collection of similar views of landmarks during day and night. We experimentally show that both hand-crafted normalisation based
on local histogram equalisation and the learnable normalisation outperform standard approaches in varying illumination conditions, while staying on par with the state-ofthe-art methods on daylight illumination benchmarks, such
as Oxford or Paris datasets.

1. Introduction
Since the first successful image retrieval methods [28,
18], the field went through a rapid development. Numerous methods based on local features [14, 13] and their
descriptors [12] were improved in many directions, including spatial verification [21, 7, 19], descriptor aggregation [9, 20], and convolutional neural network (CNN) based
feature detectors [34] and descriptors [31, 17]. Recently,
image retrieval approaches based on global CNN descriptors [1, 5, 25] started to dominate due to their efficiency
both in the search time and memory footprint.
The challenges of image and particular object retrieval
lie mainly in increasing the efficiency for large collections
of images and in improving the quality of retrieved results. Scaling up to very large collections of images is
addressed by efficient extraction of global CNN features
and consequent efficient encoding [8] and nearest neighbour
search [2, 10]. Another direction of research considers retrieval of instances that exhibit significant geometric and/or
photometric changes with respect to the query.
Various types of geometric changes appear in image col-

Figure 1. An example of a night query where learned photometric
normalisation improves the results of image retrieval. For a query
image (top left), images from Oxford 5k [22] retrieved by VGG
GeM [25] are shown (top row). When using a learned normalisation, the query image is first normalised (bottom left) and then
used to retrieve images using the same procedure (bottom row).

lections, for example change of scale, such as when the
query object covers only a small part of the database image, change in the view-point, and severe occlusion. Methods based on local features and efficient geometric verification [29] have shown good retrieval performance on significant geometric changes [15, 16].
Image retrieval with photometric changes is partially addressed by local-feature based approaches, as the localfeature descriptor extraction typically contains a local photometric normalisation step. It has been shown, e.g. in [23],
that local features are able to connect day and night images
through (a sequence of) images with gradual change of illumination. For CNN based approaches, it has been shown
that the state-of-the-art methods fail under severe illumination changes, even though relevant information is preserved
(e.g. in the form of edges) [24]. This can be attributed to
the lack of training data, as it is difficult to obtain large
amount of day-night image pairs in sufficient quality and
diversity. In this paper, we address CNN-based image retrieval with significant photometric changes. The goal is
to provide a mapping from images to a descriptor space,
where nearest neighbour search will be capable of retrieving
instances with significantly different illumination. At the
same time, the performance on day-to-day retrieval should
remain competitive with the state of the art. In other words,

9696

