Robust Change Captioning
Dong Huk Park, Trevor Darrell, Anna Rohrbach
University of California, Berkeley
<Before>

Abstract
Describing what has changed in a scene can be useful to
a user, but only if generated text focuses on what is semantically relevant. It is thus important to distinguish distractors (e.g. a viewpoint change) from relevant changes (e.g.
an object has moved). We present a novel Dual Dynamic
Attention Model (DUDA) to perform robust Change Captioning. Our model learns to distinguish distractors from
semantic changes, localize the changes via Dual Attention
over “before” and “after” images, and accurately describe
them in natural language via Dynamic Speaker, by adaptively focusing on the necessary visual inputs (e.g. “before”
or “after” image). To study the problem in depth, we collect a CLEVR-Change dataset, built off the CLEVR engine,
with 5 types of scene changes. We benchmark a number of
baselines on our dataset, and systematically study different
change types and robustness to distractors. We show the superiority of our DUDA model in terms of both change captioning and localization. We also show that our approach
is general, obtaining state-of-the-art results on the recent
realistic Spot-the-Diff dataset which has no distractors.

1. Introduction
We live in a dynamic world where things change all the
time. Change detection in images is a long-standing research problem, with applications in a variety of domains
such as facility monitoring, medical imaging, and aerial
photography [17, 46, 50]. A key challenge in change detection is to distinguish the relevant changes from the irrelevant
ones [49] since the former are those that should likely trigger a notification. Existing systems aim to sense or localize a change, but typically do not convey detailed semantic
content. This is an important limitation for a realistic application, where analysts would benefit from such knowledge,
helping them to better understand and judge the significance
of the change. Alerting a user on every detected difference
likely will lead to a frustrated operator; moreover, it is desirable to have a change detection system that does not output
a binary indicator of change/no-change, but instead outputs

<After>

<Change Captions>

“the tiny
cylinder changed
its location”

“the people in the
parking lot are no
longer there”

Figure 1: Robust Change Captioning requires semantic visual understanding in which scene change must be distinguished from mere viewpoint shift (top row). Not only does
it require accurate localization of a change, but it also requires communicating the change via language. Our Dual
Dynamic Attention Model (DUDA) demonstrates such capacity via a specialized attention mechanism.

a concise description of what has changed, and where.
Expressing image content in natural language is an active area of Artificial Intelligence research, with numerous
approaches to image captioning having been recently proposed [3, 12, 38, 59]. These methods have the benefit of
conveying visual content to human users in a concise and
natural way. They can be especially useful, when tailored
to a specific task or objective, such as e.g. explaining the
model’s predictions [20, 45] or generating non-ambiguous
referring expressions for specific image regions [40, 61].
In this work we investigate robust Change Captioning, where an important scene change has to be identified
and conveyed using language in the presence of distractors
(where only an illumination or viewpoint change occurred).
We aim to generate detailed and informative descriptions
that refer to the changed objects in complex scenes (see Figure 1).
To distinguish an irrelevant distractor from an actual
change (e.g. an object moved), one needs to “compare” the
two images and find correspondences and disagreements.
We propose a Dual Dynamic Attention Model (DUDA) that

4624

