Omni-Scale Feature Learning for Person Re-Identification
Kaiyang Zhou1∗ Yongxin Yang1
1

Andrea Cavallaro2

Tao Xiang1,3

University of Surrey 2 Queen Mary University of London
3
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge

{k.zhou, yongxin.yang, t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk

a.cavallaro@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
As an instance-level recognition problem, person reidentification (ReID) relies on discriminative features,
which not only capture different spatial scales but also
encapsulate an arbitrary combination of multiple scales.
We callse features of both homogeneous and heterogeneous scales omni-scale features. In this paper, a novel
deep ReID CNN is designed, termed Omni-Scale Network (OSNet), for omni-scale feature learning. This is
achieved by designing a residual block composed of multiple convolutional feature streams, each detecting features at a certain scale. Importantly, a novel unified aggregation gate is introduced to dynamically fuse multiscale features with input-dependent channel-wise weights.
To efficiently learn spatial-channel correlations and avoid
overfitting, the building block uses both pointwise and
depthwise convolutions. By stacking such blocks layerby-layer, our OSNet is extremely lightweight and can be
trained from scratch on existing ReID benchmarks. Despite its small model size, our OSNet achieves state-ofthe-art performance on six person-ReID datasets. Code
and models are available at: https://github.com/
KaiyangZhou/deep-person-reid.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID), a fundamental task in
distributed multi-camera surveillance, aims to match people
appearing in different non-overlapping camera views. As an
instance-level recognition problem, person ReID faces two
major challenges as illustrated in Fig. 1. First, the intraclass (instance/identity) variations are typically big due to
the changes of camera viewing conditions. For instance,
both people in Figs. 1(a) and (b) carry a backpack; the view
change across cameras (frontal to back) brings large appearance changes in the backpack area, making matching the
same person difficult. Second, there are also small inter∗ Work done as an intern at Samsung AI Center, Cambridge.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Person ReID is a hard problem, as exemplified by the
four triplets of images above. Each sub-figure shows, from left to
right, the query image, a true match and an impostor/false match.

class variations – people in public space often wear similar
clothes; from a distance as typically in surveillance videos,
they can look incredibly similar (see the impostors for all
four people in Fig. 1).
To overcome these two challenges, key to ReID is to
learn discriminative features. We argue that such features
need to be of omni-scales, defined as a combination of variable homogeneous scales and heterogeneous scales, each of
which is composed of a mixture of multiple scales. The
need for omni-scale features is evident from Fig. 1. To
match people and distinguish them from impostors, features corresponding both small local regions (e.g. shoes,
glasses), and global whole body regions are important. For
example, given the query image in Fig. 1(a) (left), looking at the global-scale features (e.g. young man, a white-Tshirt + grey-shorts combo) would narrow down the search
to the true match (middle) and an impostor (right). Now
the local-scale features come into play – the shoe region
gives away the fact that the person on the right is an impostor (trainers vs. sandals). However, for more challenging
cases, even features of variable homogeneous scales would
not be enough. More complicated and richer features that
span multiple scales are required. For instance, to eliminate
the impostor in Fig. 1(d) (right), one needs features that represent a white T-shirt with a specific logo in the front. Note
13702

