DUAL-GLOW: Conditional Flow-Based Generative Model for Modality Transfer
Haoliang Sun1,2,3 , Ronak Mehta1 , Hao H. Zhou1 , Zhichun Huang1 ,
Sterling C. Johnson1 , Vivek Prabhakaran1 , and Vikas Singh1
haolsun.cn@gmail.com, ronakrm@cs.wisc.edu, {hzhou97,zhuang294,prabhakaran}@wisc.edu,
scj@medicine.wisc.edu, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu
1
2
3
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Shandong University
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging is an
imaging modality for diagnosing a number of neurological diseases. In contrast to Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI), PET is costly and involves injecting a radioactive
substance into the patient. Motivated by developments in
modality transfer in vision, we study the generation of certain types of PET images from MRI data. We derive new
flow-based generative models which we show perform well
in this small sample size regime (much smaller than dataset
sizes available in standard vision tasks). Our formulation,
DUAL-GLOW, is based on two invertible networks and a relation network that maps the latent spaces to each other. We
discuss how given the prior distribution, learning the conditional distribution of PET given the MRI image reduces to
obtaining the conditional distribution between the two latent codes w.r.t. the two image types. We also extend our
framework to leverage “side” information (or attributes)
when available. By controlling the PET generation through
“conditioning” on age, our model is also able to capture
brain FDG-PET (hypometabolism) changes, as a function
of age. We present experiments on the Alzheimers Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset with 826 subjects,
and obtain good performance in PET image synthesis, qualitatively and quantitatively better than recent works.

1. Introduction
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) images provide a
three-dimensional image volume reflecting metabolic activity in the tissues, e.g., brain regions, which is a key
imaging modality for a number of diseases (e.g., Dementia,
Epilepsy, Head and Neck Cancer). Compared with Magnetic Resonance (MR) imaging, the typical PET imaging
procedure usually involves radiotracer injection and a high
cost associated with specialized hardware and tools, logistics, and expertise. Due to these factors, Magnetic Reso-

nance (MR) imaging is much more ubiquitous than PET
imaging in both clinical and research settings. Clinically,
PET imaging is often only considered much further down
the pipeline, after information from other non-invasive approaches has been collected. It is not uncommon for many
research studies to include MR images for all subjects, and
acquire specialized PET images only for a smaller subset of
participants.
Other use cases. Leaving aside the issue of disparity in
costs between MR and PET, it is not uncommon to find that
due to a variety of reasons other than cost, a (small or large)
subset of individuals in a study have one or more image
scans unavailable. Finding ways to “generate” one type of
imaging modality given another is attracting a fair bit of
interest in the community and a number of ideas have been
presented [34]. Such a strategy, if effective, can increase the
sample sizes available for statistical analysis and possibly,
even for training downstream learning models for diagnosis.
Related Work. Modality transfer can be thought of
“style transfer” [6, 11, 15, 16, 19, 22, 24, 25, 27, 30, 31,
42, 43, 49, 50] in the context of medical images and a
number of interesting results in this area have appeared
[13, 17, 23, 28, 32, 34, 44]. Existing methods, mostly based
on deep learning for modality transfer, can be roughly divided into two categories: Auto-encoders and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [3, 12, 18]. Recall that autoencoders are composed of two modules, encoder and decoder. The encoder maps the input to a hidden code h, and
the decoder maps the hidden code to the output. The model
is trained by minimizing the loss in the output Euclidean
space with standard norms (`1 , `2 ). A U-Net structure, introduced in [36], is typically used for leveraging local and
hierarchical information to achieve an accurate reconstruction. Although the structure in auto-encoders is elegant
with reasonable efficiency and a number of authors have
reported good performance [32, 37], constructions based on
minimizing the `2 loss often produce blurry outputs, as has

10611

