Spatiotemporal Feature Residual Propagation for Action Prediction
He Zhao
York University, Toronto

Richard P. Wildes
York University, Toronto

zhufl@eecs.yorku.ca

wildes@cse.yorku.ca

Abstract
Recognizing actions from limited preliminary video observations has seen considerable recent progress. Typically, however, such progress has been had without explicitly modeling fine-grained motion evolution as a potentially
valuable information source. In this study, we address this
task by investigating how action patterns evolve over time in
a spatial feature space. There are three key components to
our system. First, we work with intermediate-layer ConvNet
features, which allow for abstraction from raw data, while
retaining spatial layout, which is sacrificed in approaches
that rely on vectorized global representations. Second, instead of propagating features per se, we propagate their
residuals across time, which allows for a compact representation that reduces redundancy while retaining essential
information about evolution over time. Third, we employ a
Kalman filter to combat error build-up and unify across prediction start times. Extensive experimental results on the
JHMDB21, UCF101 and BIT datasets show that our approach leads to a new state-of-the-art in action prediction.

1. Introduction
The human visual system is capable of both recognizing complete actions as well as anticipating future outcomes
based on preliminary observations. For example, high performance athletes in multi-player sports respond to the actions of their opponents before they complete their executions [47]. In contrast, computational modeling of visionbased action prediction has received far less attention than
action recognition. Action prediction shares many challenges with action recognition, e.g. the need to deal with
viewpoint and execution variations as well as the fact that
the evolution of actions across a video tends to be entangled
with distracting information, e.g. clutter, camera motion,
occlusion and motion blur. Additional challenges present
themselves for the case of prediction, e.g. certain action
categories share similar sub-components at different stages
(e.g. pushing and patting both start with stretching of arms),
which makes distinctions especially difficult when only partial information is available. More generally, incomplete

!"

!"#$

!"#%

!"#&

!"#'

!"#(

!"#)

…

PFeature

CNN
Feature

!"#*

Kalman Filter Update
CNN
Residual

PResidual

…

Residual Generator Network

Figure 1: Overview of Proposed Feature Residual Propagation Approach to Action Prediction.
Intermediate layer ConvNet features are extracted from an initial set of input frames; in the depicted example, these
are given as [Xt , Xt+1 , Xt+2 ]; subsequent frames (e.g.
[Xt+3 , . . . , Xt+7 ] are not seen by the system during testing (although they are during training) and are shown here
merely for context. Inital feature residuals, CNN Residuals, are extracted via pointwise differencing of temporally
adjacent feature maps. A generative model, Residual Generator Network (RGN), then recursively estimates future
residuals, P-Residuals. Predicted features, P-Features,
are recovered via addition of residuals to the initial reference feature map. A Kalman Filter serves to minimize
error accumulation across time. The Kalman Filter operates across an entire video sequence during training, but
only across the initially observed partial sequence during
testing. Final action classification (not shown in figure) is
performed with reference to both the initially observed and
predicted features.
executions resulting from lack of extended temporal context can lead to data that is not discriminitive enough for
ready classification.
Traditionally, the problem of action prediction is formulated by transferring between full video information and
partial observations. These approaches often overlook the
rich motion patterns contained in videos, which has been
demonstrated to play a pivotal role in action recognition
[33, 3, 25, 21]. With the recent success of deep networks
17003

