Privacy Preserving Image Queries for Camera Localization
Pablo Speciale1,2

Johannes L. Schönberger2
1

Sudipta N. Sinha2
2

ETH Zürich

Marc Pollefeys1,2

Microsoft

Abstract
Augmented/mixed reality and robotic applications are
increasingly relying on cloud-based localization services,
which require users to upload query images to perform camera pose estimation on a server. This raises significant privacy concerns when consumers use such services in their
homes or in confidential industrial settings. Even if only
image features are uploaded, the privacy concerns remain
as the images can be reconstructed fairly well from feature
locations and descriptors. We propose to conceal the content of the query images from an adversary on the server
or a man-in-the-middle intruder. The key insight is to replace the 2D image feature points in the query image with
randomly oriented 2D lines passing through their original
2D positions. It will be shown that this feature representation hides the image contents, and thereby protects user
privacy, yet still provides sufficient geometric constraints to
enable robust and accurate 6-DOF camera pose estimation
from feature correspondences. Our proposed method can
handle single- and multi-image queries as well as exploit
additional information about known structure, gravity, and
scale. Numerous experiments demonstrate the high practical relevance of our approach.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 6-DOF camera pose from an image is a
fundamental problem in computer vision. It is crucial for
localization and navigation tasks in augmented/mixed reality (AR/MR) and robotics. Structure-based camera pose
estimation methods are now quite mature [28, 38, 40, 54, 79]
and deployed in many products (e.g., Microsoft HoloLens,
Windows MR Headsets, Magic Leap One, Oculus Quest,
Google Maps AR). These methods first match local feature
points in a query image to a pre-computed 3D point cloud
of the scene. Each 2D–3D point correspondence provides
two geometric constraints for estimating camera pose.
Recently, Pittaluga et al. [46] showed that sparse 3D
point clouds and descriptors can be inverted to synthesize
detailed and recognizable images of the scene. Their work
emphasizes the inherent privacy risks associated with the
persistent storage and sharing of 3D point clouds models.
Speciale et al. [60] proposed the first solution to address
this problem by developing a privacy preserving camera
pose estimation technique. They propose to transform 3D
point clouds to 3D line clouds in a way that obfuscates the

(a) Query Image

(b) 2D Feature Points

(c) 2D Feature Lines

Figure 1: Main Idea. Replace each 2D feature point in the query
image with a randomly oriented 2D feature line passing through it.

scene geometry while retaining sufficient constraints for robust and accurate camera pose estimation in many settings.
Their representation [60] thus makes it possible to share
maps with client devices without compromising privacy and
enables privacy preserving localization on a local device.
Alternatively, learning-based methods [13, 30, 71, 73] partially avoid the privacy issues associated with sharing confidential 3D point clouds, as they do not explicitly store 3D
models. However, model inversion [41] poses privacy risks
even for these methods and they are still not efficient and
accurate enough [55, 71] for deployment in products.
Recently launched commercial cloud-based localization
services such as Microsoft Azure Spatial Anchors [12],
Google Visual Positioning System [2], 6D.AI [1], and
Scape Technologies [3] require mobile devices to upload
images or features to a server. A prominent example is the
Google Maps AR navigation feature [23], which combines
GPS- and VPS-based localization and has already been deployed in 93 countries. Protecting the privacy of the map is
less critical for such services as the map data remains on the
server. However, uploading the query images or features to
a server poses serious privacy risks to the user, because the
images could reveal confidential information in the scene to
an adversary on the server or a man-in-the-middle attacker.
As localization might be running in the background
without users being consciously aware, the privacy implications are relevant for all kinds of users, ranging from enterprise users keen to avoid confidential corporate information from accidentally leaking to third parties to home users
who want images from their home to remain private. These
privacy risks are present even when sending only local image features instead of the full image, as the adversary can
easily reconstruct the original image using feature inversion
methods [16, 17]. Note that, for server-side localization,
Speciale et al.’s work [60] and learning-based approaches
cannot protect the user’s privacy as they are unable to conceal the uploaded images or features on the server.
11486

