Global-Local Temporal Representations For Video Person Re-Identification
Jianing Li1 , Jingdong Wang1 , Qi Tian2 , Wen Gao1 , Shiliang Zhang1
1

School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
2
Huawei Noahs Ark Lab

Abstract
This paper proposes the Global-Local Temporal Representation (GLTR) to exploit the multi-scale temporal cues
in video sequences for video person Re-Identification (ReID). GLTR is constructed by first modeling the short-term
temporal cues among adjacent frames, then capturing the
long-term relations among inconsecutive frames. Specifically, the short-term temporal cues are modeled by parallel dilated convolutions with different temporal dilation
rates to represent the motion and appearance of pedestrian. The long-term relations are captured by a temporal
self-attention model to alleviate the occlusions and noises
in video sequences. The short and long-term temporal cues
are aggregated as the final GLTR by a simple single-stream
CNN. GLTR shows substantial superiority to existing features learned with body part cues or metric learning on four
widely-used video ReID datasets. For instance, it achieves
Rank-1 Accuracy of 87.02% on MARS dataset without reranking, better than current state-of-the art.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification aims to identify a probe person
in a camera network by matching his/her images or video
sequences and has many real applications, including smart
surveillance and criminal investigation. Image person ReID has achieved significant progresses in terms of both solutions [38, 20, 24] and large benchmark dataset construction [23, 57, 44]. Recently, video person ReID, the interest
of this paper, has been attracting a lot of attention because
the availability of video data is easier than before, and video
data provides richer information than image data. Being
able to explore plenty of spatial and temporal cues, video
person ReID has potentials to address some challenges in
image person ReID, e.g., distinguishing different persons
wearing visually similar clothes.
The key focus of existing studies for video person ReID
lies on the exploitation of temporal cues. Existing works can be divided into three categories according to their
ways of temporal feature learning: (i) extracting dynamic

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

time/s

Figure 1. Illustrations of two video sequences from two different
pedestrians with similar appearance on MARS dataset (we cover
the face for privacy purpose). Local temporal cues among adjacent frames, e.g., motion pattern or speed helps to differentiate
those two pedestrians. The global contextual cues among adjacent
frames can be applied to spot occlusions and noises, e.g., occluded
frames show smaller similarity to other frames.

features from additional CNN inputs, e.g., through optical
flow [30, 5]; (ii) extracting spatial-temporal features by regarding videos as 3-dimensional data, e.g., through 3D CNN [27, 19]. (iii) learning robust person representations by
temporally aggregating frame-level features, e.g., through
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [50, 30, 5], and temporal pooling or weight learning [26, 59, 22];
The third category, which our work belongs to, is currently dominant in video person ReID. The third category exhibits two advantages: (i) person representation techniques developed for image ReID can be easily explored
compared to the first category; (ii) it avoids the estimation
of optical flows, which is still not reliable enough due to
misalignment errors between adjacent frames. Current studies have significantly boosted the performance on existing datasets, however they still show certain limitations in
the aspects of either efficiency or the capability of temporal cues modeling. For instance, RNN model is complicated to train for long sequence videos. Feature temporal
pooling could not model the order of video frames, which
also conveys critical temporal cues. It is appealing to explore more efficient and effective way of acquiring spatialtemporal feature through end-to-end CNN learning.
This work targets to learn a discriminative Global-Local

3958

