Clustered Object Detection in Aerial Images
Fan Yang1
1

Heng Fan1 Peng Chu1

Erik Blasch2

Haibin Ling3,1∗

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, USA
2
Air Force Research Lab, USA
3
Department Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.

{fyang,hengfan,pchu}@temple.edu, erik.blasch@us.af.mil, hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the advance of deep neural networks, object detection (e.g., Faster R-CNN [27], YOLO [25], SSD [23]) has
witnessed great progress for natural images (e.g., 600×400
images in MS COCO [22]) in recent years. Despite the

Aerial Image
Evenly

Cluster-wise

Total Chips

Detecting objects in aerial images is challenging for at
least two reasons: (1) target objects like pedestrians are
very small in pixels, making them hardly distinguished from
surrounding background; and (2) targets are in general
sparsely and non-uniformly distributed, making the detection very inefficient. In this paper, we address both issues
inspired by observing that these targets are often clustered.
In particular, we propose a Clustered Detection (ClusDet)
network that unifies object clustering and detection in an
end-to-end framework. The key components in ClusDet include a cluster proposal sub-network (CPNet), a scale estimation sub-network (ScaleNet), and a dedicated detection
network (DetecNet). Given an input image, CPNet produces
object cluster regions and ScaleNet estimates object scales
for these regions. Then, each scale-normalized cluster region is fed into DetecNet for object detection. ClusDet has
several advantages over previous solutions: (1) it greatly
reduces the number of chips for final object detection and
hence achieves high running time efficiency, (2) the clusterbased scale estimation is more accurate than previously
used single-object based ones, hence effectively improves
the detection for small objects, and (3) the final DetecNet
is dedicated for clustered regions and implicitly models the
prior context information so as to boost detection accuracy.
The proposed method is tested on three popular aerial image datasets including VisDrone, UAVDT and DOTA. In all
experiments, ClusDet achieves promising performance in
comparison with state-of-the-art detectors.

Sparse

Common

Clustered

Object Coverage per Chip (ratio of objects in chip to whole image)

Figure 1: Comparison of grid-based uniform partition and
the proposed cluster-based partition. For the narrative purpose, we intentionally classify a chip into three types:
sparse, common, and clustered. We observe that, for gridbased uniform partition, more than 73% chips are sparse
(including 23% chips with zero objects), around 25% chips
are common, and about 2% chips are clustered. By contrast,
for cluster-based partition, around 50% chips are sparse,
35% are common, and about 15% belong to clustered chips,
which is 7× more than that of grid-based partition.

promising results for general object detection, the performance of these detectors on the aerial images (e.g.,
2,000×1,500 pixels in VisDrone [37]) are far from satisfactory in both accuracy and efficiency, which are caused
by two challenges: (1) targets typically have small scales
relative to the images; and (2) targets are generally sparsely
and non-uniformly distributed in the whole image.
Compared with objects in natural images, the scale chal-

∗ Corresponding author.

8311

