Parametric Majorization for Data-Driven Energy Minimization Methods
Jonas Geiping
Michael Moeller
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Siegen
{jonas.geiping, michael.moeller}@uni-siegen.de

Abstract
Energy minimization methods are a classical tool in a
multitude of computer vision applications. While they are
interpretable and well-studied, their regularity assumptions
are difficult to design by hand. Deep learning techniques on
the other hand are purely data-driven, often provide excellent results, but are very difficult to constrain to predefined
physical or safety-critical models. A possible combination
between the two approaches is to design a parametric energy and train the free parameters in such a way that minimizers of the energy correspond to desired solution on a set
of training examples. Unfortunately, such formulations typically lead to bi-level optimization problems, on which common optimization algorithms are difficult to scale to modern requirements in data processing and efficiency. In this
work, we present a new strategy to optimize these bi-level
problems. We investigate surrogate single-level problems
that majorize the target problems and can be implemented
with existing tools, leading to efficient algorithms without
collapse of the energy function. This framework of strategies enables new avenues to the training of parameterized
energy minimization models from large data.

1. Introduction
Energy minimization methods, also referred to as variational methods, are a classical tool in computer vision
[74, 14, 27, 12]. The idea is to define a data-dependent cost
function E that assigns a value to each candidate solution
x. The desired optimal solution is then the target solution
with the lowest energy value. This methodology has several
advantages, for one, it is characterized by an explicit model
- namely the energy function to be minimized - and an implicit inference method - how we compute the minimizer
of this energy is a separate problem. This duality allows a
fruitful analysis, leading to controllable methods with provable guarantees that are paramount in many critical applications [71, 69, 88]. Furthermore, explicit knowledge over
the model structure allows for explainable and clear modifications when the method is applied in a related task [22].

Conversely, deep learning approaches [53], specifically
deep feed-forward neural networks work by very different
principles. The methodology of deep learning is characterized by implicit models and explicit inference. The solution to the problem at hand is given directly by the output
of the learned feed-forward structure. This is advantageous
in practice and crucial for the efficient training of neural
networks, however the underlying model of the problem
structure is now only implicitly contained in the responses
of the network. Deep neural networks have fundamentally
changed the state-of-the-art in various computer vision applications, due to these properties as the inference operations are learned directly from large amounts of training
data. These approaches are able to learn expressive and
convincing mechanisms, examples of which can be found
not only in recognition tasks (e.g. [49]), but also in denoising [89], optical flow [63, 43] or segmentation tasks
[57, 72, 17]. Yet, as the underlying model is only implicitly
defined and ’hidden’ in the network structure, it is difficult
to modify it for applications in other domains or to guarantee specific outputs. Domain adaptation is still an active
field of research and several examples, for instance in medical imaging [3, 33], have demonstrated the need for possibly model-based physically plausible output restrictions.
This problem is most strikingly demonstrated by the phenomenon of adversarial examples [79] - the existence of
input data, that, when fed through the network, leads to
highly erroneous solutions. While one would expect that
such behaviour is possibly unavoidable in recognition tasks
[77, 64], it should not be a factor in low-level computer vision applications.
Reviewing these two methodologies, we would - of
course - prefer to have the best of both worlds. We would
like to use both the large amounts of data at our disposal and
our far-reaching domain knowledge in many tasks to train
explicit models with a significant number of free parameters, so that their optimal solutions are similar to directly
trained feed-forward networks.
A promising candidate for such a combination of
learning- and model based approaches are parametrized energy minimization methods. The idea of such methods is to

10262

