Attacking Optical Flow
Anurag Ranjan† Joel Janai†‡ Andreas Geiger†‡ Michael J. Black†
†
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
‡
University of Tübingen
{aranjan, jjanai, ageiger, black}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Deep neural nets achieve state-of-the-art performance
on the problem of optical flow estimation. Since optical
flow is used in several safety-critical applications like selfdriving cars, it is important to gain insights into the robustness of those techniques. Recently, it has been shown that
adversarial attacks easily fool deep neural networks to misclassify objects. The robustness of optical flow networks to
adversarial attacks, however, has not been studied so far.
In this paper, we extend adversarial patch attacks to optical
flow networks and show that such attacks can compromise
their performance. We show that corrupting a small patch
of less than 1% of the image size can significantly affect optical flow estimates. Our attacks lead to noisy flow estimates
that extend significantly beyond the region of the attack, in
many cases even completely erasing the motion of objects
in the scene. While networks using an encoder-decoder architecture are very sensitive to these attacks, we found that
networks using a spatial pyramid architecture are less affected. We analyse the success and failure of attacking both
architectures by visualizing their feature maps and comparing them to classical optical flow techniques which are robust to these attacks. We also demonstrate that such attacks
are practical by placing a printed pattern into real scenes.

1. Introduction
Optical flow refers to the apparent 2D motion of each
pixel in an image sequence. It is denoted by a vector
field (u, v) that corresponds to the displacement of each
pixel in the image plane. The classical formulation [12]
seeks the optical flow (u, v) between two consecutive images I(x, y, t) and I(x + u, y + v, t + 1) in a sequence that
minimizes the brightness constancy (i.e. photometric) error
at each pixel, ρ(I(x, y, t) − I(x + u, y + v, t + 1)), for some
robust function ρ, subject to spatial coherence constraints
that regularize the solution [4].
The estimation of flow from pairs of images has a long

Figure 1. Overview. The first column shows the optical flow results using an encoder-decoder architecture, FlowNetC [8], a spatial pyramid architecture, SpyNet [20], and a classical method,
LDOF [6]. In the second column, a small circular patch is added
to both frames at the same location and orientation (highlighted
by the red box for illustration purposes). SpyNet and LDOF are
barely affected by the patch. In contrast, FlowNetC is strongly
affected, even in regions far away from the patch.

history [12] and is used in many applications spanning
medicine, special effects, video analysis, action recognition,
navigation, and robotics to name a few. A large number of
methods [3] have approached the problem and steadily improved the results on current benchmarks [7, 10]. However, classical optical flow methods typically require extensive hand engineering [26] and computationally intensive optimization. Recent methods [8, 13, 20] have therefore approached optical flow estimation using deep neural
networks. These methods typically run in real time and
produce results that are competitive with, or even surpass,
classical optimization-based approaches. Given the performance of recent optical flow networks, they could become
an important component in applications such as self-driving
cars. The safety issues surrounding many of these systems
implies that the robustness of the algorithms must be well
understood. To date, there has not been any study to mea-

2404

