Floorplan-Jigsaw: Jointly Estimating Scene Layout and Aligning Partial Scans
Cheng Lin

Changjian Li

Wenping Wang

The University of Hong Kong
{clin, cjli, wenping}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
We present a novel approach to align partial 3D reconstructions which may not have substantial overlap. Using
floorplan priors, our method jointly predicts a room layout
and estimates the transformations from a set of partial 3D
data. Unlike the existing methods relying on feature descriptors to establish correspondences, we exploit the 3D
“box” structure of a typical room layout that meets the
Manhattan World property. We first estimate a local layout for each partial scan separately and then combine these
local layouts to form a globally aligned layout with loop
closure. Without the requirement of feature matching, the
proposed method enables some novel applications ranging
from large or featureless scene reconstruction and modeling
from sparse input. We validate our method quantitatively
and qualitatively on real and synthetic scenes of various
sizes and complexities. The evaluations and comparisons
show superior effectiveness and accuracy of our method.

1. Introduction
Indoor scene understanding and reconstruction have
been extensively researched in computer vision. In recent
years, the development of consumer RGB-D sensors has
greatly facilitated 3D data capture and enabled high-quality
reconstruction of indoor scenes. Although many methods
have been proposed for continuous camera localization to
register 3D depth data, it remains a challenge to scan some
scenes in a single pass. The main difficulty is caused by
interruptions in camera tracking, which results in a number
of partial scans with little overlap. This frequently occurs
in the following typical scenarios: (1) a large-scale scene
is scanned region-by-region rather than in a single pass to
reduce the workload or to meet the memory limit of a computer; (2) when scanning featureless areas or doorways,
camera tracking often fails and so leads to several partial
scans without sufficient overlap or feature points; (3) when
a large scene is scanned using multiple robots, the scene is
usually explored by different agents in disjoint sub-regions

Figure 1: We present a method to jointly align a set of unordered partial reconstructions and estimate a room layout.
which have little overlap [38], leading to a set of partial
scans. The alignment of such unordered partial 3D data is
an under-explored problem and it is challenging to the existing methods because of their requirements on the large
overlap and dense feature points for scan registration.
In this paper, we propose a method for registering partial reconstructions of an indoor scene which may not have
sufficient overlap, as shown in Fig. 1. Our key observation is that the local layouts of partial reconstructions can
be viewed as the fragments of a global room layout which
typically has the following two characteristics: (1) the room
layout is a set of perpendicular or parallel walls, which is
referred to the Manhattan World (MW) property; (2) the
room layout forms a closed loop on a 2D floorplan. We
exploit these properties to develop an efficient method for
jointly predicting a room layout that has the above layout
properties and estimating the transformations from a set of
unordered partial reconstructions.
Most of the existing methods [2, 17] use boundary loop
detection to estimate a room layout because their input is
a long sequence of scans that have substantial overlap and
complete coverage of the indoor scene. In contrast, the
input to our method can be partially scanned data without clear boundaries. By taking noises and occlusions
into consideration, our method is capable of reconstructing scenes with incomplete, disconnected or even occluded
walls. Given such a set of partial scans with detected lay15674

