Anchor Diffusion for Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation
Zhao Yang∗
University of Oxford

Qiang Wang∗
CASIA

Luca Bertinetto
Five AI

zhao.yang@eng.ox.ac.uk

qiang.wang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

luca@robots.ox.ac.uk

Weiming Hu
CASIA

Song Bai
University of Oxford

Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford

wmhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

songbai.site@gmail.com

philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Unsupervised video object segmentation has often been
tackled by methods based on recurrent neural networks and
optical flow. Despite their complexity, these kinds of approach tend to favour short-term temporal dependencies
and are thus prone to accumulating inaccuracies, which
cause drift over time. Moreover, simple (static) image segmentation models, alone, can perform competitively against
these methods, which further suggests that the way temporal
dependencies are modelled should be reconsidered. Motivated by these observations, in this paper we explore simple
yet effective strategies to model long-term temporal dependencies. Inspired by the non-local operators of [63], we
introduce a technique to establish dense correspondences
between pixel embeddings of a reference “anchor” frame
and the current one. This allows the learning of pairwise
dependencies at arbitrarily long distances without conditioning on intermediate frames. Without online supervision,
our approach can suppress the background and precisely
segment the foreground object even in challenging scenarios, while maintaining consistent performance over time.
With a mean IoU of 81.7%, our method ranks first on the
DAVIS-2016 leaderboard of unsupervised methods, while
still being competitive against state-of-the-art online semisupervised approaches. We further evaluate our method
on the FBMS dataset and the video saliency dataset ViSal,
showing results competitive with the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is a fundamental task
in many important areas such as autonomous driving [11,
37, 15], robotic manipulation [23], video surveillance [54]
and video editing [43]. Contemporary literature typically
∗ Equal contribution.

considers this problem in either the semi-supervised or the
unsupervised setting. In both cases, the objective is to predict in every frame pixel-level masks delineating certain objects of interest.
Under the semi-supervised setting, at test time methods
can rely on a mask that specifies the object to segment. In
contrast, the unsupervised setting does not provide any initialisation. Without online supervision, the task might be
considered ambiguous, as different objects could be considered of interest for different reasons, according to the application. Among researchers, the current consensus is to
segment foreground objects where a human gaze is more
likely to focus [4]. In more practical terms, an object is
generally considered as foreground if it is sufficiently large,
in motion and centred in the scene. In certain datasets
(e.g., FBMS [39] and ViSal [61]), in the same video, multiple foreground objects are considered, while in DAVIS2016 [45] only a single object is considered.
With the aim of tracking temporal changes in target objects, current state-of-the-art unsupervised approaches generally model motion cues in a video sequence via optical
flow [29, 28, 47, 22, 52, 51, 20, 9] or recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [16, 28, 52]. Typically, these methods sequentially propagate features from the previous steps to the
current one, making the current prediction dependent on the
entire history of the video. Though having the potential of
exploiting informative temporal cues, these approaches suffer from several limitations. RNNs often rely on training
techniques such as truncated backpropagation through time
to reduce the cost of parameter updates, which limits their
long-term modelling capability [49]. Moreover, while the
gating mechanism in LSTMs alleviates the issue of vanishing gradients [1, 42], these can still have exploding gradients, which often requires clipping or rescaling the norm
of the gradients during training [50]. Optical flow vectors
only predict one-step motion cues at each frame in a video,
which can accumulate errors over time. What is more, mod1931

