ATTENTION RNN: A Structured Spatial Attention Mechanism
Siddhesh Khandelwal1,2 and Leonid Sigal1,2,3
1
2
3
University of British Columbia
Vector Institute for AI
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
{skhandel, lsigal}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Visual attention mechanisms have proven to be integrally
important constituent components of many modern deep
neural architectures. They provide an efficient and effective way to utilize visual information selectively, which has
shown to be especially valuable in multi-modal learning
tasks. However, all prior attention frameworks lack the
ability to explicitly model structural dependencies among
attention variables, making it difficult to predict consistent
attention masks. In this paper we develop a novel structured
spatial attention mechanism which is end-to-end trainable
and can be integrated with any feed-forward convolutional
neural network. This proposed AttentionRNN layer explicitly enforces structure over the spatial attention variables by
sequentially predicting attention values in the spatial mask
in a bi-directional raster-scan and inverse raster-scan order. As a result, each attention value depends not only on
local image or contextual information, but also on the previously predicted attention values. Our experiments show
consistent quantitative and qualitative improvements on a
variety of recognition tasks and datasets; including image
categorization, question answering and image generation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, computer vision has made tremendous
progress across many complex recognition tasks, including
image classification [17, 44], image captioning [4, 14, 38,
40], image generation [30, 41, 43] and visual question answering (VQA) [2, 5, 13, 22, 27, 31, 37, 39]. Arguably,
much of this success can be attributed to the use of visual
attention mechanisms which, similar to the human perception, identify the important regions of an image. Attention
mechanisms typically produce a spatial mask for the given
image feature tensor. In an ideal scenario, the mask is expected to have higher activation values over the features corresponding to the regions of interest, and lower activation
values everywhere else. For tasks that are multi-modal in
nature, like VQA, a query (e.g., a question) can additionally
be used as an input to generate the mask. In such cases, the

Figure 1: AttentionRNN. Illustration of the proposed structured attention network as a module for down stream task.
attention activation is usually a function of similarity between the corresponding encoding of the image region and
the question in a pre-defined or learned embedding space.
Existing visual attention mechanisms can be broadly
characterized into two categories: global or local; see Figure 2a and 2b respectively for illustration. Global mechanisms predict all the attention variables jointly, typically
based on a dense representation of the image feature map.
Such mechanisms are prone to overfitting and are only
computationally feasible for low-resolution image features.
Therefore, typically, these are only applied at the last convolutional layer of a CNN [22, 45]. The local mechanisms
generate attention values for each spatial attention variable independently based on corresponding image region
[5, 27, 28] (i.e., feature column) or with the help of local
context [28, 35, 43]. As such, local attention mechanisms
can be applied at arbitrary resolution and can be used at various places within a CNN network (e.g., in [28] authors use
them before each sub-sampling layer and in [35] as part of
each residual block). However, all the aforementioned models lack explicit structure in the generated attention masks.
This is often exhibited by lack of coherence or sharp discontinuities in the generated attention activation values [28].
Consider a VQA model attending to regions required to
answer the question, “Do the two spheres next to each other
have the same color?”. Intuitively, attention mechanisms
should focus on the two spheres in question. Furthermore,
attention region corresponding to one sphere should inform
the attention region estimates for the other, both in terms of
shape and size. However, most traditional attention mechanisms have no ability to encode such dependencies. Recent

3425

