Permutation-Invariant Feature Restructuring for Correlation-Aware
Image Set-based Recognition
Xiaofeng Liu1,2 , Zhenhua Guo1,4 , Site Li1 , Lingsheng Kong3 ,
Ping Jia3 , Jane You5 , B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar1∗
1

Carnegie Mellon University; 2 Harvard University; 3 CIOMP, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University; 5 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
kumar@ece.cmu.edu

Image-based

Video Still
frames images
Video frames only

…
Similarity
measurement

Gallery set 2

Gallery set 3

Image set-based

…

Many research studies focus on using a single image
[33, 35, 32] or video [27, 30] as shown in Fig. 1. However,
in many practical applications, a set of images of a subject
(consisting of still images, or frames from a video, or a mixture of both) can usually be collected from different checkpoints, segments in videos, mugshot history of a criminal
and lifetime enrollment images for identity documents etc
[28]. These can contain extreme rotations, complex expressions and illumination variations [25, 40, 61]. This setting
is more similar to the real-world biometric scenarios [15].
Compared to the case of a single image [24, 37, 31, 38,
29, 26], richer and complementary information can be expected in a set, because the samples are captured from mul-

Similarity
measurement

Video-based

…

1. Introduction

Similarity
measurement

…

We consider the problem of comparing the similarity of
image sets with variable-quantity, quality and un-ordered
heterogeneous images. We use feature restructuring to
exploit the correlations of both inner&inter-set images.
Specifically, the residual self-attention can effectively restructure the features using the other features within a set
to emphasize the discriminative images and eliminate the
redundancy. Then, a sparse/collaborative learning-based
dependency-guided representation scheme reconstructs the
probe features conditional to the gallery features in order to
adaptively align the two sets. This enables our framework
to be compatible with both verification and open-set identification. We show that the parametric self-attention network
and non-parametric dictionary learning can be trained endto-end by a unified alternative optimization scheme, and
that the full framework is permutation-invariant. In the
numerical experiments we conducted, our method achieves
top performance on competitive image set/video-based face
recognition and person re-identification benchmarks.

Gallery set 1

Still images

Abstract

Still images only

Corresponding author:

Probe Set

∗

Video frames

4

Figure 1. Illustration of the single image-based, video sequencebased and image set-based open-set face identiﬁcation.

tiple views [36]. However, it also poses several challenges
including a) variable number of samples within a set, b)
larger inner-set variability than its video-based recognition counterpart, and c) order-less data.
The conventional approaches to set-based recognition
N
aggregate all images X= {xn }n=1 in a set with N images to a single feature vector. The aggregation is achieved
through max/average pooling [21, 43, 5]. More formally,
f (X) = ρ(max/average pooling({ϕ(x1 ), · · · , ϕ(xN )}),
where ρ, ϕ are any appropriate mapping functions. Considering that the importance of each image maybe different,
their weights are calculated independently by ϕ as the soft
attention score in pooling operation [61, 40]. By doing this,
the high quality (i.e., clear and frontal) faces are favored
in these models. These methods are not sensitive to the order of images with in a set (i.e., permutation-invariant), but
their weight selection procedures for each image in the set
do not pay attention to the other images. Without inner-set
correlation can result in redundant weights as in Fig. 2.
The inter-set correlation is also important for similarity
measurements [62]. If we are given a query set consisting
of clear proﬁle face images, it should be more reasonable to
emphasize the proﬁle face images in the gallery set rather
than the high-quality frontal face images.
How to model the inner/inter-set correlations in image

4986

