Beyond Human Parts: Dual Part-Aligned Representations
for Person Re-Identification
Jianyuan Guo1† , Yuhui Yuan2,3,4† , Lang Huang1 , Chao Zhang1∗, Jin-Ge Yao2 , Kai Han5
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), Peking University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
3
Institute of Computing Technology 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Noah’s Ark Lab
1

{jyguo, laynehuang}@pku.edu.cn, chzhang@cis.pku.edu.cn
{yuhui.yuan, jinge.yao}@microsoft.com, kai.han@huawei.com

Abstract
Person re-identification is a challenging task due to various complex factors. Recent studies have attempted to integrate human parsing results or externally defined attributes
to help capture human parts or important object regions.
On the other hand, there still exist many useful contextual
cues that do not fall into the scope of predefined human
parts or attributes. In this paper, we address the missed
contextual cues by exploiting both the accurate human parts
and the coarse non-human parts. In our implementation,
we apply a human parsing model to extract the binary human part masks and a self-attention mechanism to capture
the soft latent (non-human) part masks. We verify the effectiveness of our approach with new state-of-the-art performance on three challenging benchmarks: Market-1501,
DukeMTMC-reID and CUHK03. Our implementation is
available at https://github.com/ggjy/P2Net.pytorch.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification has attracted increasing attention
from both the academia and the industry in the past decade
due to its significant role in video surveillance. Given an
image for a particular person captured by one camera, the
goal is to re-identify this person from images captured by
different cameras from various viewpoints.
The task of person re-identification is inherently challenging because of the significant visual appearance
changes caused by various factors such as human pose
variations, lighting conditions, part occlusions, background
cluttering and distinct camera viewpoints. All these factors
make the misalignment problem become one of the most
important problems for person re-identification task. With
the surge of interest in deep representation learning, various
approaches have been developed to address the misalignment problem, which could be roughly summarized as the
following streams: (1) Hand-crafted partitioning, which re∗ Corresponding author. † Equal contribution.

lies on manually designed splits of the input image or the
feature maps into grid cells [15, 38, 56] or horizontal stripes
[1, 4, 41, 43, 51], based on the assumption that the human
parts are well-aligned in the RGB color space. (2) The attention mechanism, which tries to learn an attention map
over the last output feature map and constructs the aligned
part features accordingly [55, 33, 50, 45]. (3) Predicting a
set of predefined attributes [13, 37, 20, 2, 36] as useful features to guide the matching process. (4) Injecting human
pose estimation [5, 11, 22, 35, 50, 54, 27] or human parsing
results [10, 18, 34] to extract the human part aligned features based on the predicted human key points or semantic
human part regions, while the success of such approaches
heavily counts on the accuracy of human parsing models or
pose estimators. Most of the previous studies mainly focus on learning more accurate human part representations,
while neglecting the influence of potentially useful contextual cues that could be addressed as “non-human” parts.
Existing human parsing based approaches [50, 54] utilize an off-the-shelf semantic segmentation model to divide
the input image into K predefined human parts, according
to a predefined label set.1 Beyond these predefined part categories, there still exist many objects or parts which could
be critical for person re-identification, but tend to be recognized as background by the pre-trained human parsing models. For example, we illustrate some failure cases from human parsing results on the Market-1501 dataset in Figure 1.
We can find that the objects belonging to undefined categories such as backpack, reticule and umbrella are in fact
helpful and sometimes crucial for person re-identification.
The existing human parsing datasets are mainly focused on
parsing human regions, and most of these datasets fail to include all possible identifiable objects that could help person
re-identification. Especially, most of the previous attention
1 E.g., the label set in [18]: background, hat, hair, glove, sunglasses,
upper-clothes, dress, coat, socks, pants, jumpsuits, scarf, skirt, face, rightarm, left-arm, right-leg, left-leg, right-shoe and left-shoe.

13642

