SoftTriple Loss: Deep Metric Learning Without Triplet Sampling
Qi Qian1

Lei Shang2 Baigui Sun2 Juhua Hu3 Hao Li2 Rong Jin1
1
Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA, 98004, USA
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Engineering and Technology
University of Washington, Tacoma, WA, 98402, USA

{qi.qian, sl172005, baigui.sbg, lihao.lh, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com, juhuah@uw.edu

Abstract
Distance metric learning (DML) is to learn the embeddings where examples from the same class are closer than
examples from different classes. It can be cast as an optimization problem with triplet constraints. Due to the vast
number of triplet constraints, a sampling strategy is essential for DML. With the tremendous success of deep learning
in classifications, it has been applied for DML. When learning embeddings with deep neural networks (DNNs), only a
mini-batch of data is available at each iteration. The set of
triplet constraints has to be sampled within the mini-batch.
Since a mini-batch cannot capture the neighbors in the original set well, it makes the learned embeddings sub-optimal.
On the contrary, optimizing SoftMax loss, which is a classification loss, with DNN shows a superior performance in
certain DML tasks. It inspires us to investigate the formulation of SoftMax. Our analysis shows that SoftMax loss is
equivalent to a smoothed triplet loss where each class has
a single center. In real-world data, one class can contain
several local clusters rather than a single one, e.g., birds
of different poses. Therefore, we propose the SoftTriple loss
to extend the SoftMax loss with multiple centers for each
class. Compared with conventional deep metric learning
algorithms, optimizing SoftTriple loss can learn the embeddings without the sampling phase by mildly increasing the
size of the last fully connected layer. Experiments on the
benchmark fine-grained data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed loss function.

1. Introduction
Distance metric learning (DML) has been extensively
studied in the past decades due to its broad range of applications, e.g., k-nearest neighbor classification [29], image retrieval [24] and clustering [31]. With an appropriate
distance metric, examples from the same class should be

FC in SoftMax

FC in SoftTriple

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed SoftTriple loss. In conventional SoftMax loss, each class has a representative center in the
last fully connected layer. Examples in the same class will be collapsed to the same center. It may be inappropriate for the realworld data as illustrated. In contrast, SoftTriple loss keeps multiple centers (e.g., 2 centers per class in this example) in the fully
connected layer and each image will be assigned to one of them.
It is more flexible for modeling intra-class variance in real-world
data sets.

closer than examples from different classes. Many algorithms have been proposed to learn a good distance metric [15, 16, 21, 29].
In most of conventional DML methods, examples are
represented by hand-crafted features, and DML is to learn a
feature mapping to project examples from the original feature space to a new space. The distance can be computed as
the Mahalanobis distance [11]
distM (xi , xj ) = (xi − xj )⊤ M (xi − xj )
where M is the learned distance metric. With this formulation, the main challenge of DML is from the dimensionality
of input space. As a metric, the learned matrix M has to be
positive semi-definite (PSD) while the cost of keeping the
matrix PSD can be up to O(d3 ), where d is the dimensionality of original features. The early work directly applies PCA
to shrink the original space [29]. Later, various strategies
are developed to reduce the computational cost [16, 17].
Those approaches can obtain the good metric from the
16450

