Spatio-Temporal Filter Adaptive Network for Video Deblurring
Shangchen Zhou1∗ Jiawei Zhang1∗ Jinshan Pan2† Haozhe Xie1,3 Wangmeng Zuo3 Jimmy Ren1
1
SenseTime Research 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
https://shangchenzhou.com/projects/stfan

Abstract
Video deblurring is a challenging task due to the spatially variant blur caused by camera shake, object motions,
and depth variations, etc. Existing methods usually estimate optical flow in the blurry video to align consecutive
frames or approximate blur kernels. However, they tend to
generate artifacts or cannot effectively remove blur when
the estimated optical flow is not accurate. To overcome the
limitation of separate optical flow estimation, we propose a
Spatio-Temporal Filter Adaptive Network (STFAN) for the
alignment and deblurring in a unified framework. The proposed STFAN takes both blurry and restored images of the
previous frame as well as blurry image of the current frame
as input, and dynamically generates the spatially adaptive
filters for the alignment and deblurring. We then propose
the new Filter Adaptive Convolutional (FAC) layer to align
the deblurred features of the previous frame with the current frame and remove the spatially variant blur from the
features of the current frame. Finally, we develop a reconstruction network which takes the fusion of two transformed features to restore the clear frames. Both quantitative and qualitative evaluation results on the benchmark
datasets and real-world videos demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against state-of-the-art
methods in terms of accuracy, speed as well as model size.

1. Introduction
Recently, the hand-held and onboard video capturing devices have enjoyed widespread popularity, e.g., smartphone,
action camera, unmanned aerial vehicle. The camera shake
and high-speed movement in dynamic scenes often generate undesirable blur and result in blurry videos. The lowquality video not only leads to visually poor quality but
also hampers some high-level vision tasks such as tracking [12, 21], video stabilization [20] and SLAM [18]. Thus,
it is of great interest to develop an effective algorithm to
deblur videos for above mentioned human perception and
high-level vision tasks.
∗ Equal contribution

† Corresponding author: sdluran@gmail.com.

(a) Blurry frame

(b) SRN [38]

(c) GVD [9]

(d) OVD [10]

(e) DVD [36]

(f) w/o FAC

(g) Ours

(h) Ground truth

Figure 1: One challenging example of video deblurring.
Due to the large motion and spatially variant blur, the existing image (b) [38] and video deblurring (c, d, e) [9, 10, 36]
methods are less effective. By using the proposed filter
adaptive convolutional (FAC) layer for frame alignment and
deblurring, our method generates a much clearer image.
When the FAC layers are removed (f), our method cannot
perform well anymore.

Unlike single-image deblurring, video deblurring methods can exploit additional information that exists across
neighboring frames. Significant progress has been made
due to the use of sharper regions from neighboring
frames [20, 3] or the optical flow from consecutive
frames [9, 32]. However, directly utilizing sharp regions
of surrounding frames usually generates significant artifacts
because the neighboring frames are not fully aligned. Although using the motion field from two adjacent frames,
such as optical flow, is able to overcome the alignment problem or approximate the non-uniform blur kernels, the estimation of motion field from blurry adjacent frames is quite
challenging.
Motivated by the success of the deep neural networks in
low-level vision, several algorithms have been proposed to
solve video deblurring [10, 36]. Kim et al. [10] concatenate
the multi-frame features to restore the current image by a
deep recurrent network. However, this method fails to make
full use of the information of neighboring frames without
explicitly considering alignment, and cannot perform well

2482

