Universal Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Tarun Kalluri1
1

Girish Varma1

Manmohan Chandraker2

C V Jawahar1

Center for Visual Information Technology, IIIT Hyderabad
2
University of California, San Diego
tarun.05.kalluri@gmail.com

Abstract
In recent years, the need for semantic segmentation has
arisen across several different applications and environments. However, the expense and redundancy of annotation
often limits the quantity of labels available for training in
any domain, while deployment is easier if a single model
works well across domains. In this paper, we pose the novel
problem of universal semi-supervised semantic segmentation and propose a solution framework, to meet the dual
needs of lower annotation and deployment costs. In contrast to counterpoints such as fine tuning, joint training or
unsupervised domain adaptation, universal semi-supervised
segmentation ensures that across all domains: (i) a single
model is deployed, (ii) unlabeled data is used, (iii) performance is improved, (iv) only a few labels are needed and
(v) label spaces may differ. To address this, we minimize
supervised as well as within and cross-domain unsupervised
losses, introducing a novel feature alignment objective based
on pixel-aware entropy regularization for the latter. We
demonstrate quantitative advantages over other approaches
on several combinations of segmentation datasets across
different geographies (Germany, England, India) and environments (outdoors, indoors), as well as qualitative insights
on the aligned representations.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the task of pixel level classification of an image into a predefined set of categories. Stateof-the-art semantic segmentation architectures [35, 3, 8] pretrain deep networks for a classification task on datasets like
ImageNet [13, 53] and then fine-tune on finely annotated labeled examples [12, 64]. The availability of such large-scale
labeled datasets has been crucial to achieve high accuracies for semantic segmentation in applications ranging from
natural scene understanding [18] to medical imaging [51].
However, performance often suffers even in the presence of
a minor domain shift. For example, a segmentation model

Domain A
specific model

Domain A

Traditional ﬁne-tuning
approach

Labeled Images

Unlabeled Images

Domain B
Proposed Approach
Unlabeled Images

Traditional ﬁne-tuning
approach

Labeled Images

Domain B
specific model

Figure 1: Proposed universal segmentation model can be jointly
trained across datasets with different label spaces, making use
of the large amounts of unlabeled data available. Traditional
transfer learning based approaches typically require training
separate models for each domain.

trained on a driving dataset from a specific geographic location may not generalize to a new city due to differences in
weather, lighting or traffic density. Further, a segmentation
model trained on traffic scenes for outdoor navigation may
not be applicable for an indoor robot.
While such domain shift is a challenge for any machine
learning problem, it is particularly exacerbated for segmentation where human annotation is highly prohibitive and
redundant for different locations and tasks. Thus, there is
a growing interest towards learning segmentation representations that may be shared across domains. A prominent
line of work addresses this through unsupervised domain
adaptation from a labeled source to an unlabeled target domain [25, 61, 10, 42, 6]. But there remain limitations. For
instance, unsupervised domain adaptation usually does not
leverage target domain data to improve source performance.
Further, it is designed for the restrictive setting of large-scale
labeled source domain and unlabeled target domain. While

5259

