Face Video Deblurring using 3D Facial Priors
Wenqi Ren1†∗, Jiaolong Yang2†, Senyou Deng1 , David Wipf2 , Xiaochun Cao1,3‡, and Xin Tong2
1
SKLOIS, IIE, CAS 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Existing face deblurring methods only consider single
frames and do not account for facial structure and identity
information. These methods struggle to deblur face videos
that exhibit significant pose variations and misalignment.
In this paper we propose a novel face video deblurring
network capitalizing on 3D facial priors. The model consists of two main branches: i) a face video deblurring subnetwork based on an encoder-decoder architecture, and ii)
a 3D face reconstruction and rendering branch for predicting 3D priors of salient facial structures and identity knowledge. These structures encourage the deblurring branch to
generate sharp faces with detailed structures. Our method
leverages both image intensity and high-level identity information derived from the reconstructed 3D faces to deblur the input face video. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Face videos captured by hand-held cameras in amateur
filming often contain significant camera shake, which results in unpleasant blurry frames in the captured videos.
Even for a fixed camera, active people may lead to motion
blur that can significantly degrade the video quality. Removing blur and recovering sharp faces from blurry videos
are highly desirable under such situations.
Traditional image deblurring algorithms have designed
various sharp image priors (e.g., sparsity gradient constraints [43], patch prior [22, 29, 38], and dark channel prior
[26, 46]) to constrain the solution space. However, these
priors are less effective for face images as the gradient distributions and patch recurrences do not closely follow the
generic statistics of natural images.
Given that many studies deblur images based on intermediate salient edges or sharp gradients estimation [8], a
sensible way to solve face deblurring is also to implicitly
or explicitly extract salient edges or structures from blurred
∗ This work was done while W. Ren was a visiting scholar at MSRA.
† Equal contributions
‡ Corresponding author

(a) Blurred frame

(b) Semantic labels [35]

(c) Our rendered face

(d) Video deblurring [36]

(e) Face deblurring [35]

(f) Our deblurred result

Figure 1. (a) Blurred frame of a face sequence. (b) Predicted semantic labels by [35]. (c) Rendered face by our pipeline, which
has clear and sharp facial structure that provides guided spatial
location and intensity information of face components. (d) Deblurred result by the video deblurring approach [36]. (e) Deblurred
face by [35]. (f) Our deblurred result.

faces [11, 24]. To this end, Pan et al. [24] collect an exemplar dataset of face images and select an exemplar from the
dataset with the closest structural similarity to the blurred
input, and then use the matched structure to reconstruct
salient edges and guide the kernel estimation process. However, this method involves manual image annotations for the
exemplar images. Furthermore, it is computationally expensive due to the searching process and the iterative optimization of latent images and blur kernels.
Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
been successfully applied to natural image deblurring [9,
37]. In this context, some face deblurring networks have
been proposed to build a mapping between blurry and sharp
faces using large-scale datasets [15, 4, 48]. Shen et al. [35]
use CNNs to generate semantic face labels for guiding the
deblurring process. The semantic face segmentation serves
as global priors and local constraints to determine which
component should be in the corresponding region. However, semantic labels can only provide global component
regions, but not the detailed edges or other low-level im19388

