Modeling Inter and Intra-Class Relations in the Triplet Loss for
Zero-Shot Learning
Yannick Le Cacheux
CEA LIST

Hervé Le Borgne
CEA LIST

Michel Crucianu
CEDRIC – CNAM

yannick.lecacheux@cea.fr

herve.le-borgne@cea.fr

michel.crucianu@cnam.fr

Abstract
Recognizing visual unseen classes, i.e. for which no
training data is available, is known as Zero Shot Learning (ZSL). Some of the best performing methods apply the
triplet loss to seen classes to learn a mapping between visual representations of images and attribute vectors that
constitute class prototypes. They nevertheless make several implicit assumptions that limit their performance on
real use cases, particularly with fine-grained datasets comprising a large number of classes. We identify three of these
assumptions and put forward corresponding novel contributions to address them. Our approach consists in taking into
account both inter-class and intra-class relations, respectively by being more permissive with confusions between
similar classes, and by penalizing visual samples which
are atypical to their class. The approach is tested on four
datasets, including the large-scale ImageNet, and exhibits
performances significantly above recent methods, even generative methods based on more restrictive hypotheses.

1. Introduction
The task of zero-shot recognition, also referred to as
zero-shot learning (ZSL) [1, 18, 20, 26], consists in classifying samples belonging to unseen classes, for which
no training sample is available. Instead, the only training samples available are from different classes, called the
seen classes; for each such class, a “semantic” representation is also provided along with the training samples. At
testing time, the semantic representations of unseen classes
can be used to make predictions. Although ZSL can be
applied in many different contexts, it often refers to tasks
where samples are of visual nature and the semantic representations, also called class prototypes, consist in vectors of
attributes. For example, if one considers images of animals,
attributes may be the number of legs or wings, the presence
of fur or stripes.
In their seminal work, Lampert et al. [18] used a com-

Figure 1. t-SNE [23] visualization of 300 samples from the first 8
training classes from CUB [37]. Classes 6 and 7 look quite similar
and appear closer than classes 6 and 2, which are more dissimilar;
the nestling from class 2 is far from the other samples in the same
class. We propose to explicitly take these inter-class and intraclass relations into account. Best viewed in color.

bination of simple classifiers to estimate the probabilities
of attributes and classes given visual features. Other approaches [31, 32] use least-square regression models to predict one modality from the other. Triplet loss methods are
closer to the final classification goal. They consider that
each visual sample should be “much” more similar to the
prototype corresponding to its class than to all the others.
How “much” more similar is specified by a given fixed margin, included in an adequate penalty as described in more
details in Sec. 3.1. D E V I SE [12] makes the most direct use
of this idea by simply summing the penalty over all training samples and all candidate classes; SJE [3] only keeps
the largest such penalty among all classes; ALE [2] adds

10333

