RankSRGAN: Generative Adversarial Networks with Ranker
for Image Super-Resolution
†

Yu Qiao1
Wenlong Zhang1
Yihao Liu1,2
Chao Dong1,
1
ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{wl.zhang1, yh.liu4, chao.dong, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) have demonstrated the potential to recover realistic details for single
image super-resolution (SISR). To further improve the visual quality of super-resolved results, PIRM2018-SR Challenge employed perceptual metrics to assess the perceptual
quality, such as PI, NIQE, and Ma. However, existing methods cannot directly optimize these indifferentiable perceptual metrics, which are shown to be highly correlated with
human ratings. To address the problem, we propose SuperResolution Generative Adversarial Networks with Ranker
(RankSRGAN) to optimize generator in the direction of perceptual metrics. Specifically, we first train a Ranker which
can learn the behavior of perceptual metrics and then introduce a novel rank-content loss to optimize the perceptual quality. The most appealing part is that the proposed
method can combine the strengths of different SR methods
to generate better results. Extensive experiments show that
RankSRGAN achieves visually pleasing results and reaches
state-of-the-art performance in perceptual metrics. Project
page: https://wenlongzhang0724.github.io/
Projects/RankSRGAN

1. Introduction
Single image super resolution aims at reconstructing/generating a high-resolution (HR) image from a lowresolution (LR) observation. Thanks to the strong learning
capability, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
demonstrated superior performance [10, 24, 42] to the conventional example-based [40] and interpolation-based [41]
algorithms. Recent CNN-based methods can be divided into
two groups. The ﬁrst one regards SR as a reconstruction
problem and adopts MSE as the loss function to achieve
† Corresponding author (e-mail: chao.dong@siat.ac.cn)

SRGAN 1.96/24.02

ESRGAN 1.88/23.87

RankSRGAN 1.83/24.08

GT NIQE/PSNR

Figure 1. The comparison of RankSRGAN and the state-of-theart perceptual SR methods on ×4. NIQE: lower is better. PSNR:
higher is better.

high PSNR values. However, due to the conﬂict between
the reconstruction accuracy and visual quality, they tend to
produce overly smoothed/sharpened images. To favor better visual quality, the second group casts SR as an image
generation problem [22]. By incorporating the perceptual
loss [6, 18] and adversarial learning [22], these perceptual
SR methods have potential to generate realistic textures and
details, thus attracted increasing attention in recent years.
The most challenging problem faced with perceptual SR
methods is the evaluation. Most related works resort to user
study for subjectively evaluating the visual quality [2, 34].
However, without an objective metric like PSNR/SSIM, it
is hard to compare different algorithms on a fair platform,
which largely prevents them from rapid development. To
address this issue, a number of no-reference image quality
assessment (NR-IQA) metrics are proposed, and some of
them are proven to be highly correlated with human ratings
[2], such as NIQE [29] (correlation 0.76) and PI [2] (correlation 0.83). Specially, the PIRM2018-SR challenge [2]
introduced the PI metric as perceptual criteria and successfully ranked the entries. Nevertheless, most of these NRIQA metrics are not differentiable (e.g., they include handcrafted feature extraction or statistic regression operation),
making them infeasible to serve as loss functions. Without

3096

