Unsupervised Domain Adaptation via Regularized Conditional Alignment
Safa Cicek, Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
{safacicek,soatto}@ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose a method for unsupervised domain adaptation that trains a shared embedding to align the joint distributions of inputs (domain) and outputs (classes), making
any classifier agnostic to the domain. Joint alignment ensures that not only the marginal distributions of the domains
are aligned, but the labels as well. We propose a novel objective function that encourages the class-conditional distributions to have disjoint support in feature space. We further exploit adversarial regularization to improve the performance of the classifier on the domain for which no annotated data is available.

1. Introduction
In the context of classification, unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) consists of modifying a classifier trained
on a labeled dataset, called the “source,” so it can function
on data from a different “target” domain, for which no annotations are available. More in general, we want to train a
model to operate on input data from both the source and target domains, despite absence of annotated data for the latter.
For instance, one may have a synthetic dataset, where annotation comes for free, but wish for the resulting model to
work well on real data, where manual annotation is scarce
or absent [30].
The most successful methods learn the parameters of a
deep neural network using adversarial (min-max) criteria.
The idea is to simultaneously recognize the class (output) as
well as the domain (e.g., “real vs. synthetic”) by training the
classifier to work as well as possible on both while encoder
is fooling the discriminator for the latter. In a sense, the
classifier becomes agnostic to the domain. This can be understood as aligning the marginal distribution of the inputs
from the two domains. Unfortunately, this does not guarantee successful transfer, for it is possible that the source
(say synthetic images) be perfectly aligned with the target
(say natural images), and yet a natural image of a cat map
to a synthetic image of a dog. It would be desirable, there-

Encoder:
Set it to dog

Class Predictor:
Set it to dog
Class label
Dog
Cat
...

Source
(target)
dog
image

Encoder:
Set it to target
(source) dog

Consistency
Joint
Loss
domain-class
label
Source Dog
Source Cat
...
Target Dog
Target Cat
...

Joint Predictor:
Set it to source (target) dog

Figure 1. The network structure of the proposed approach. We
propose to learn a joint distribution P (d, y) over domain label d
and class label y by a joint predictor (purple). The encoder (orange) is trained to confuse this joint predictor by matching the
features corresponding to the same category samples of both domains. Since labels for the target data is not known, predictions of
the class predictor (blue) on the target data is used with the help
of consistency loss. Unlabeled data is further exploited with input
smoothing algorithm VAT [26] from the SSL literature.

fore, for the adaptation to align the outputs, along with the
inputs. This prompted other methods to align, instead of
the marginal distributions, the joint or conditional distribution of domain and class. This creates two problems: First,
the target class labels are unknown; second, since there is a
shared representation of the inputs, aligning the joint distributions may cause them to collapse thus losing the discriminative power of the model.
To address these problems, we propose a method to perform the alignment of the joint distribution (Sect. 2.2). We
employ ideas from semi-supervised learning (SSL) to improve generalization performance (Sect. 2.3). We propose
an optimization scheme that uses a two-folded label space.
The resulting method performs at the state of the art without
pushing the limits of hyperparameter optimization (Sect. 3).
We analyze the proposed objective function in the supervised setting and prove that the optimal solution conditionally aligns the distributions while keeping them discriminative (Sect. 4). Finally, we discuss our contribution in

1416

