Deep Elastic Networks with Model Selection for Multi-Task Learning
Chanho Ahn∗
Dept. of ECE and ASRI
Seoul National University

Eunwoo Kim∗
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford

Songhwai Oh
Dept. of ECE and ASRI
Seoul National University

mychahn@snu.ac.kr

ekim@robots.ox.ac.uk

songhwai@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this work, we consider the problem of instance-wise
dynamic network model selection for multi-task learning.
To this end, we propose an efficient approach to exploit a
compact but accurate model in a backbone architecture for
each instance of all tasks. The proposed method consists
of an estimator and a selector. The estimator is based on a
backbone architecture and structured hierarchically. It can
produce multiple different network models of different configurations in a hierarchical structure. The selector chooses
a model dynamically from a pool of candidate models given
an input instance. The selector is a relatively small-size
network consisting of a few layers, which estimates a probability distribution over the candidate models when an input instance of a task is given. Both estimator and selector are jointly trained in a unified learning framework in
conjunction with a sampling-based learning strategy, without additional computation steps. We demonstrate the proposed approach for several image classification tasks compared to existing approaches performing model selection
or learning multiple tasks. Experimental results show that
our approach gives not only outstanding performance compared to other competitors but also the versatility to perform instance-wise model selection for multiple tasks.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) [5] simultaneously learns
multiple tasks to improve generalization performance for
the tasks. Most of recent MTL approaches [22–24, 29]
are based on deep neural networks (DNNs) which have
outstanding performance compared to traditional machine
learning methods in computer vision and machine learning,
such as image classification [10, 37], object detection [21],
and pose estimation [26], to name a few.
Since it is believed that MTL methods using a DNN
require a huge number of parameters and computing re∗ Indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed framework, which consists
of an estimator and a selector. The estimator, whose structure is
identical to the backbone network, includes multiple internal networks (models) of different configurations and scales. The selector
outputs a probability distribution over the candidate models given
an instance from a task. The model with the highest probability is
chosen from the estimator to perform the assigned task.

sources, a compact network with a small number of parameters and low computational complexity is highly desirable
for many practical applications, such as mobile and embedded platforms [13]. To address this, there have been studies on designing compact DNNs, such as network pruning
[9,34], knowledge distillation [12,28], network architecture
search [39], and adaptive model compression [3, 20, 35].
However, these prior works have been applied to a single
task problem and multiple tasks have been little considered
in a single framework.
The MTL problem has a potential issue that the required
number of parameters may increase depending on the number of tasks [5]. However, a single shared model for multiple tasks may cause performance degradation when associ-

6529

