Weakly Supervised Energy-Based Learning for Action Segmentation
Jun Li
Oregon State University

Peng Lei∗
Amazon.com Services, Inc.

Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University

liju2@oregonstate.edu

leipeng@amazon.com

sinisa@oregonstate.edu

Abstract

to estimate loss (and subsequently train the segmenter) over
multiple valid segmentations.

This paper is about labeling video frames with action
classes under weak supervision in training, where we have
access to a temporal ordering of actions, but their start
and end frames in training videos are unknown. Following
prior work, we use an HMM grounded on a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) for frame labeling. Our key contribution
is a new constrained discriminative forward loss (CDFL)
that we use for training the HMM and GRU under weak supervision. While prior work typically estimates the loss on
a single, inferred video segmentation, our CDFL discriminates between the energy of all valid and invalid frame labelings of a training video. A valid frame labeling satisfies
the ground-truth temporal ordering of actions, whereas an
invalid one violates the ground truth. We specify an efficient
recursive algorithm for computing the CDFL in terms of the
logadd function of the segmentation energy. Our evaluation
on action segmentation and alignment gives superior results
to those of the state of the art on the benchmark Breakfast
Action, Hollywood Extended, and 50Salads datasets.†

Motivation: Prior work [8, 12, 20, 7, 22] typically uses
a temporal model (e.g., deep neural network, or HMM) to
infer a single, valid, optimal video segmentation, and takes
this inference result as a pseudo ground truth for estimating the incurred loss. However, a particular training video
may exhibit a significant variation (not yet captured by the
model along the course of training), which may negatively
affect estimation of the pseudo ground truth, such that the
inferred action segmentation is significantly different from
the true one. In turn, the loss estimated on the incorrect
pseudo ground truth may corrupt training by reducing, instead of maximizing, the discriminative margin between the
ground truth and other valid segmentations. In this paper,
we seek to alleviate these issues.

1. Introduction
This paper presents an approach to weakly supervised
action segmentation by labeling video frames with action
classes. Weak supervision means that in training our approach has access only to the temporal ordering of actions,
but their ground-truth start and end frames are not provided.
This is an important problem with a wide range of applications, since the more common fully supervised action segmentation typically requires expensive manual annotations
of action occurrences in every video frame.
Our fundamental challenge is that the set of all possible segmentations of a training video may consist of multiple distinct valid segmentations that satisfy the provided
ground-truth ordering of actions, along with invalid segmentations that violate the ground truth. It is not clear how
∗ The work was done at the Oregon State University before Peng
Lei joined Amazon. † The code is available at https://github.com/JunLiGalios/CDFL.

Contributions: Prior work shows that a statistical language model is useful for weakly supervised learning and
modeling of video sequences [17, 9, 19, 22, 3]. Following [22], we also adopt a Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
grounded on a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [4] for labeling video frames. The major difference is that we do not
generate a unique pseudo ground truth for training. Instead,
we efficiently account for all candidate segmentations of a
training video when estimating the loss. To this end, we
formulate a new Constrained Discriminative Forward Loss
(CDFL) as a difference between the energy of valid and invalid candidate video segmentations. In comparison with
prior work, the CDFL improves robustness of our training, because minimizing the CDFL amounts to maximizing
the discrimination margin between candidate segmentations
that satisfy and violate ground truth, whereas prior work
solely optimizes a score of the inferred single valid segmentation. Robustness of training is further improved when the
CDFL takes into account only hard invalid segmentations
whose edge energy is lower than that of valid ones. Along
with the new CDFL formulation, our key contribution is a
new recursive algorithm for efficiently estimating the CDFL
in terms of the logadd function of the segmentation energy.
Our Approach: Fig. 1 shows an overview of our weakly
supervised training of the HMM with GRU that consists of

6243

