Few-Shot Image Recognition with Knowledge Transfer
Zhimao Peng† , Zechao Li†∗, Junge Zhang‡ , Yan Li‡ , Guo-Jun Qi♯ , Jinhui Tang†
†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
‡
♯
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Huawei Cloud
{zhimaopeng, guojunq}@gmail.com, {zechao.li, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn
jgzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, yan.li@cripac.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Human can well recognize images of novel categories
just after browsing few examples of these categories. One
possible reason is that they have some external discriminative visual information about these categories from their
prior knowledge. Inspired from this, we propose a novel
Knowledge Transfer Network architecture (KTN) for fewshot image recognition. The proposed KTN model jointly
incorporates visual feature learning, knowledge inferring
and classifier learning into one unified framework for their
optimal compatibility. First, the visual classifiers for novel categories are learned based on the convolutional neural network with the cosine similarity optimization. To fully explore the prior knowledge, a semantic-visual mapping
network is then developed to conduct knowledge inference,
which enables to infer the classifiers for novel categories
from base categories. Finally, we design an adaptive fusion
scheme to infer the desired classifiers by effectively integrating the above knowledge and visual information. Extensive experiments are conducted on two widely-used MiniImageNet and ImageNet Few-Shot benchmarks to evaluate
the effectiveness of the proposed method. The results compared with the state-of-the-art approaches show the encouraging performance of the proposed method, especially on
1-shot and 2-shot tasks.

1. Introduction
Recently classical deep learning models have achieved
remarkable success on many computer vision and image
understanding tasks [11, 7, 16, 27, 15]. To further improve
the performance, the neural networks become deeper, which
usually requires more labeled data in richer categories. Unfortunately, not only the human-labeled data is often very
expensive, but the classical deep learning methods easily
have the problems of overfitting and poor generalization ca∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Given a labeled tiger image, people have some prior knowledge about tiger (such as “cat specie” and “dark vertical stripes”) and then conduct knowledge inference to generate the discriminative visual information for tiger. The proposed
method imitates this process to improve few-shot recognition performance.

pability with limited labeled data.
To alleviate the demand of labeled data for deep model training, few-shot learning has attracted wide attention
recently [33, 3, 24, 29, 39, 18, 36, 6, 23, 5]. The goal of
few-shot learning is to recognize novel categories with only
one or few labeled examples. The key idea is to transfer visual patterns obtained from base categories to describe the
novel categories. Most existing few-shot learning methods
combined with deep learning can be roughly divide into two
groups: metric-learning based methods [10, 33, 29, 39] and
meta-learning based methods [3, 24, 18, 36, 39]. Metriclearning based methods mainly focus on learning an appropriate visual feature embedding space with deep networks
and choosing a well-defined metric to calculate the similarities between the few examples of novel categories and
testing examples. Meta-learning based methods try to learn
some transferable “meta knowledge” from past experiences

441

