PointCloud Saliency Maps
Tianhang Zheng
Changyou Chen
Junsong Yuan
State University of New York at Buffalo

Bo Li
Kui Ren
Zhejiang University

{tzheng4, changyou, jsyuan}@buffalo.edu

{boli, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
3D point-cloud recognition with PointNet and its variants has received remarkable progress. A missing ingredient, however, is the ability to automatically evaluate pointwise importance w.r.t. classification performance, which is
usually reflected by a saliency map. A saliency map is an
important tool as it allows one to perform further processes
on point-cloud data. In this paper, we propose a novel
way of characterizing critical points and segments to build
point-cloud saliency maps. Our method assigns each point
a score reflecting its contribution to the model-recognition
loss. The saliency map explicitly explains which points are
the key for model recognition. Furthermore, aggregations of
highly-scored points indicate important segments/subsets in
a point-cloud. Our motivation for constructing a saliency
map is by point dropping, which is a non-differentiable
operator. To overcome this issue, we approximate pointdropping with a differentiable procedure of shifting points
towards the cloud centroid. Consequently, each saliency
score can be efficiently measured by the corresponding gradient of the loss w.r.t the point under the spherical coordinates. Extensive evaluations on several state-of-the-art
point-cloud recognition models, including PointNet, PointNet++ and DGCNN, demonstrate the veracity and generality of our proposed saliency map. Code for experiments
is released on https://github.com/tianzheng4/
PointCloud-Saliency-Maps.

1. Introduction
Point clouds, which comprise raw outputs of many 3D
data acquisition devices such as radars and sonars, are an
important 3D data representation for computer-vision applications [6, 17, 12, 11]. Real applications such as object classification and segmentation usually require highlevel processing of 3D point clouds [16, 3, 1, 5]. Recent
research has proposed to employ Deep Neural Network
(DNN) for high-accuracy and high-level processing of point
clouds, achieving remarkable success. Representative DNN
models for point-cloud data classification include PointNet

Figure 1. Drop the 5% most critical points identified by our
saliency map from a bench point cloud can easily change the prediction outcome (even can trick human vision!).

[9], PointNet++ [10] and DGCNN [19], which successfully
handled the irregularity of point clouds and achieved high
classification accuracy. Beyond that, a notable characteristic of PointNet and its variants is their robustness to furthest/random point dropping. [9] owes the robustness to the
max pooling layer in PointNet, which only concentrates on
a critical subset of a point cloud. In other words, the recognition result is mainly determined by those critical points
such that dropping some other non-critical points does not
change the prediction. We refer to the corresponding theory given in [9] as critical-subset theory. Despite identifying such an important subset, we observed that the criticalsubset theory is too ambiguous, as it does not specify the importance of each point and subset. In this paper, we propose
a simple method to construct a general saliency map for
point-level and subset-level saliency assessment. Note in
[13, 14, 8], saliency map is constructed for images to characterize the contribution of each pixel value to the recognition result. We extend this concept to point cloud, aiming
at studying importance of each single point. Specifically,
our method assigns a saliency score for each point, reflecting the contribution of a point to the corresponding modelprediction loss. A saliency map is important to better understand point-cloud data, in that: On the one hand, if one
drops points with the highest saliency scores, model performance would decrease significantly, endowing the potential
to build an adversarial attack model. On the other hand, if
only points with the lowest scores are dropped, model performance would not change a lot. Somewhat surprisingly,
we find dropping points with negative scores even leads to
better recognition performance.
Despite simplicity in concept, how to construct such a

1598

