Hallucinating IDT Descriptors and I3D Optical Flow Features for Action
Recognition with CNNs
Lei Wang∗,1,2
Piotr Koniusz∗,1,2
Du Q. Huynh3
1
Data61/CSIRO, 2 Australian National University, 3 University of Western Australia
firstname.lastname@{data61.csiro.au1 , anu.edu.au2 , uwa.edu.au3 }
Abstract
In this paper, we revive the use of old-fashioned handcrafted video representations for action recognition and put
new life into these techniques via a CNN-based hallucination step. Despite of the use of RGB and optical flow
frames, the I3D model (amongst others) thrives on combining its output with the Improved Dense Trajectory (IDT)
and extracted with its low-level video descriptors encoded
via Bag-of-Words (BoW) and Fisher Vectors (FV). Such a
fusion of CNNs and handcrafted representations is timeconsuming due to pre-processing, descriptor extraction, encoding and tuning parameters. Thus, we propose an endto-end trainable network with streams which learn the IDTbased BoW/FV representations at the training stage and are
simple to integrate with the I3D model. Specifically, each
stream takes I3D feature maps ahead of the last 1D conv.
layer and learns to ‘translate’ these maps to BoW/FV representations. Thus, our model can hallucinate and use such
synthesized BoW/FV representations at the testing stage.
We show that even features of the entire I3D optical flow
stream can be hallucinated thus simplifying the pipeline.
Our model saves 20–55h of computations and yields stateof-the-art results on four publicly available datasets.

1. Introduction
Action Recognition (AR) pipelines have transitioned
from the use of handcrafted descriptors [13, 54, 31, 64, 65,
66] to CNN models such as the two-stream network [56],
3D spatio-temporal features [60], spatio-temporal ResNet
[17] and the I3D network pre-trained on Kinetics-400 [4].
Such CNNs operate on RGB/optical flow videos thus failing
to capture some domain-specific information which sophisticated low-level representations capture by design. One
prominent example are Improved Dense Trajectory (IDT)
descriptors [66] which are typically encoded with Bag-ofWords (BoW) [57, 12] or Fisher Vectors (FV) [47, 48] and
fused with CNNs [21, 8, 9, 67, 10] at the classifier which
improves results due to several sophisticated steps of IDT:
∗ Both authors contributed equally.

(i) camera motion estimation, (ii) motion descriptor modeling along motion trajectories estimated by the optical flow,
(iii) pruning inconsistent matches, (iv) focusing on human
motions via a human detector, (v) combination of IDT with
powerful and highly complementary to each other video descriptors such as Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG)
[22, 31], Histogram of Optical Flow (HOF) [13] and Motion Boundary Histogram (MBH) [65] e.g., HOF and MBH
contain zero- and first-order motion statistics [66].
However, extracting dense trajectories and corresponding video descriptors is costly due to several off-line/CPUbased steps. Motivated by this shortcoming, we propose
simple trainable CNN streams on top of a CNN network
(in our case I3D [4]) which learn to ‘translate’ the I3D
output into IDT-based BoW and FV global video descriptors. We can even ‘translate’ the I3D RGB output into I3D
Optical Flow Features (OFF). At the testing stage, our socalled BoW, and FV and OFF streams (on top of I3D) are
able to hallucinate such global descriptors which we feed
into the final layer preceding a classifier. We show that
IDT/OFF representations can be synthesized by our network thus removing the need of actually computing them
which simplifies the AR pipeline. With a handful of convolutional/FC layers and basic CNN building blocks, our representation rivals sophisticated AR pipelines that aggregate
features frame-by-frame e.g., HOK [8] and rank-pooling
[21, 9, 67, 10]. Below, we detail our contributions:
I. We are the first to propose that old-fashioned IDT-based
BoW and FV global video descriptors can be learned
via simple dedicated CNN-streams at the training stage
and simply hallucinated for classification with a CNN
action recognition pipeline during testing.
II. We show that even the I3D optical flow stream can be
easily hallucinated from the I3D RGB stream.
III. We study various aspects of our model e.g., the count
sketch [49] of features to avoid overfitting when fusing
several streams and Power Normalization [38, 37, 39]
to prevent so-called burstiness in BoW, FV and CNNs,
and we perform several experiments on four datasets.
Sections 2 and 3 introduce the background, notations and
concepts. Sections 4 and 5 present our method and results.
18698

