Switchable Whitening for Deep Representation Learning
Xingang Pan1 , Xiaohang Zhan1 , Jianping Shi2 , Xiaoou Tang1 , and Ping Luo1,3
1

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Group Limited 3 The University of Hong Kong

{px117, zx017, xtang, pluo}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk,

shijianping@sensetime.com

Abstract
(a)

Normalization methods are essential components in convolutional neural networks (CNNs). They either standardize or whiten data using statistics estimated in predefined
sets of pixels. Unlike existing works that design normalization techniques for specific tasks, we propose Switchable Whitening (SW), which provides a general form unifying different whitening methods as well as standardization
methods. SW learns to switch among these operations in
an end-to-end manner. It has several advantages. First, SW
adaptively selects appropriate whitening or standardization
statistics for different tasks (see Fig.1), making it well suited
for a wide range of tasks without manual design. Second, by
integrating the benefits of different normalizers, SW shows
consistent improvements over its counterparts in various
challenging benchmarks. Third, SW serves as a useful tool
for understanding the characteristics of whitening and standardization techniques.
We show that SW outperforms other alternatives on
image classification (CIFAR-10/100, ImageNet), semantic
segmentation (ADE20K, Cityscapes), domain adaptation
(GTA5, Cityscapes), and image style transfer (COCO). For
example, without bells and whistles, we achieve state-ofthe-art performance with 45.33% mIoU on the ADE20K
dataset.

1. Introduction
Normalization methods have been widely used as a basic module in convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In
various applications, different normalization techniques like
Batch Normalization (BN) [10], Instance Normalization
(IN) [27] and Layer Normalization (LN) [1] are proposed.
These normalization techniques generally perform standardization that centers and scales features. Nevertheless,
the features are not decorrelated, hence their correlation
still exists.
Another type of normalization methods is whitening,

(b)

Figure 1. (a) SW outperforms its counterparts in a variety of
benchmarks. (b) SW learns to select appropriate whitening or standardization methods in different tasks and datasets. The CNNs are
ResNet50 for ImageNet and ADE20K, ResNet44 for CIFAR-10,
and VGG16 for GTA5→Cityscapes. GTA5→Cityscapes indicates
adapting from GTA5 to Cityscapes using domain adaptation.

which not only standardizes but also decorrelates features. For example, Decorrelated Batch Normalization
(DBN) [13], or namely Batch Whitening (BW), whitens a
mini-batch using its covariance matrix, which gives rise to
better optimization efficiency than BN in image classification. Moreover, whitening features of an individual image
is used in image style transfer [15] to filter out information of image appearance. Here we refer to this operation
as instance whitening (IW). Despite their successes, existing works applied these whitening techniques separately to
different tasks, preventing them from benefiting each other.
Besides, whitening and standardization methods are typically employed in different layers of a CNN, which complicates model design.
To address the above issues, we propose Switchable
Whitening (SW). SW provides a general form that integrates
different whitening techniques (e.g. BW, IW), as well as
standardization techniques (e.g. BN, IN and LN). SW controls the ratio of each technique by learning their importance weights. It is able to select appropriate normalizers
with respect to various vision tasks, as shown in Fig.1(b).
For example, semantic segmentation prefers BW and BN,
while IW is mainly chosen to address image diversity in

1863

