Weakly Aligned Cross-Modal Learning for Multispectral Pedestrian Detection
Lu Zhang1,3 , Xiangyu Zhu2,3 , Xiangyu Chen5 , Xu Yang1,3 , Zhen Lei2,3 , Zhiyong Liu1,3,4∗
1
SKL-MCCS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 CEBSIT, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Renmin University of China
{zhanglu2016,xu.yang,zhiyong.liu}@ia.ac.cn, {xiangyu.zhu,zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Multispectral pedestrian detection has shown great advantages under poor illumination conditions, since the thermal modality provides complementary information for the
color image. However, real multispectral data suffers from
the position shift problem, i.e. the color-thermal image pairs
are not strictly aligned, making one object has different
positions in different modalities. In deep learning based
methods, this problem makes it difficult to fuse the feature maps from both modalities and puzzles the CNN training. In this paper, we propose a novel Aligned Region
CNN (AR-CNN) to handle the weakly aligned multispectral data in an end-to-end way. Firstly, we design a Region Feature Alignment (RFA) module to capture the position shift and adaptively align the region features of the
two modalities. Secondly, we present a new multimodal fusion method, which performs feature re-weighting to select
more reliable features and suppress the useless ones. Besides, we propose a novel RoI jitter strategy to improve the
robustness to unexpected shift patterns of different devices
and system settings. Finally, since our method depends on
a new kind of labelling: bounding boxes that match each
modality, we manually relabel the KAIST dataset by locating bounding boxes in both modalities and building their
relationships, providing a new KAIST-Paired Annotation.
Extensive experimental validations on existing datasets are
performed, demonstrating the effectiveness and robustness
of the proposed method. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/luzhang16/AR-CNN .

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is an important research topic in
computer vision field with various applications, such as
video surveillance, autonomous driving, and robotics. Al∗ Corresponding author

though great progress has been made by the deep learning based methods (e.g. [42, 53, 54, 33]), detecting the
pedestrian in adverse illumination conditions, occlusions
and clutter background is still a challenging problem. Recently, many works in robot vision [4, 49], facial expression
recognition [9], material classification [41], and object detection [45, 11, 20, 51] show that adopting a novel modality
can improve the performance and offer competitive advantages over single sensor systems. Among the sensors, thermal camera is widely used in face recognition [3, 44, 27],
human tracking [30, 46] and action recognition [59, 15] for
its biometric robustness. Motivated by this, multispectral
pedestrian detection [24, 52, 17, 39] has attracted massive
attention and provides new opportunities for around-theclock applications, mainly due to its superiority of complementary nature between color and thermal modalities.
Challenges A common assumption of multispectral
pedestrian detection is that the color-thermal image pairs
are geometrically aligned [24, 52, 34, 28, 32, 18, 55]. However, the modalities are just weakly aligned in practice,
which means there is the position shift between modalities, making one object has different positions on different modalities, see Figure 1(a). This position shift problem can be caused by physical properties of different sensors (e.g. parallax, mismatched resolutions and field-ofviews), imperfection of alignment algorithms, external disturbance, and hardware aging. Moreover, the calibration for
color-thermal cameras are tortuous, generally require particular hardware as well as special heated calibration board
[26, 23, 24, 47, 8].
The position shift problem degrades the pedestrian detector in two aspects. First, features from different modalities are mismatched in the corresponding positions, which
puzzles the inference. Second, it is difficult to cover the objects in both modalities with a single bounding box. In existing datasets [24, 17], the bounding box is either labelled
on single modality (color or thermal) or a big bounding box
is labelled to cover the objects on both modalities. This la-

5127

