PRECOG: PREdiction Conditioned On Goals in Visual Multi-Agent Settings
Nicholas Rhinehart1
Rowan McAllister2
Kris Kitani1
Sergey Levine2
2
1
University of California, Berkeley
Carnegie Mellon University
{nrhineha,kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu

{rmcallister,svlevine}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
For autonomous vehicles (AVs) to behave appropriately
on roads populated by human-driven vehicles, they must be
able to reason about the uncertain intentions and decisions
of other drivers from rich perceptual information. Towards
these capabilities, we present a probabilistic forecasting
model of future interactions between a variable number of
agents. We perform both standard forecasting and the novel
task of conditional forecasting, which reasons about how all
agents will likely respond to the goal of a controlled agent
(here, the AV). We train models on real and simulated data
to forecast vehicle trajectories given past positions and LIDAR. Our evaluation shows that our model is substantially
more accurate in multi-agent driving scenarios compared
to existing state-of-the-art. Beyond its general ability to
perform conditional forecasting queries, we show that our
model’s predictions of all agents improve when conditioned
on knowledge of the AV’s goal, further illustrating its capability to model agent interactions.

Left

Right

Figure 1: Forecasting on nuScenes [4]. The input to our model is
a high-dimensional LIDAR observation, which informs a distribution over all agents’ future trajectories.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving requires reasoning about the future behaviors of agents in a variety of situations: at stop
signs, roundabouts, crosswalks, when parking, when merging etc. In multi-agent settings, each agent’s behavior affects the behavior of others. Motivated by people’s ability
to reason in these settings, we present a method to forecast multi-agent interactions from perceptual data, such as
images and LIDAR. Beyond forecasting the behavior of all
agents, we want our model to conditionally forecast how
other agents are likely to respond to different decisions each
agent could make. We want to forecast what other agents
would likely do in response to a robot’s intention to achieve
a goal. This reasoning is essential for agents to make
good decisions in multi-agent environments: they must reason how their future decisions could affect the multi-agent
system around them. Examples of forecasting and conditioning forecasts on robot goals are shown in Fig. 1 and
Fig. 2. Videos of the outputs of our approach are available
at https://sites.google.com/view/precog.

Front

Forecasting

Car 3

Car 2

Car 1

Conditional Forecast: Set Car 1 Goal=Ahead

Car 3

Car 1

Goal=Ahead

Conditional Forecast: Set Car 1 Goal=Stop

Car 3

Car 1 Goal=Stop

Figure 2: Conditioning the model on different Car 1 goals produces different predictions: here it forecasts Car 3 to move if Car
1 yields space, or stay stopped if Car 1 stays stopped.

2821

