Relational Attention Network for Crowd Counting
Anran Zhang1 , Jiayi Shen1 , Zehao Xiao1 , Fan Zhu4 , Xiantong Zhen4 , Xianbin Cao1,2,3∗, Ling Shao4
1
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology of Near Space Information System (Beihang University),
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Beijing, China
4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
zhanganran@buaa.edu.cn, shenjiayi@buaa.edu.cn, zhxiao@buaa.edu.cn,
fan.zhu@inceptioniai.org, zhenxt@gmail.com, xbcao@buaa.edu.cn, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Crowd counting is receiving rapidly growing research
interests due to its potential application value in numerous real-world scenarios. However, due to various challenges such as occlusion, insufficient resolution and dynamic backgrounds, crowd counting remains an unsolved
problem in computer vision. Density estimation is a popular strategy for crowd counting, where conventional density
estimation methods perform pixel-wise regression without
explicitly accounting the interdependence of pixels. As a
result, independent pixel-wise predictions can be noisy and
inconsistent. In order to address such an issue, we propose a Relational Attention Network (RANet) with a selfattention mechanism for capturing interdependence of pixels. The RANet enhances the self-attention mechanism by
accounting both short-range and long-range interdependence of pixels, where we respectively denote these implementations as local self-attention (LSA) and global selfattention (GSA). We further introduce a relation module
to fuse LSA and GSA to achieve more informative aggregated feature representations. We conduct extensive experiments on four public datasets, including ShanghaiTech A,
ShanghaiTech B, UCF-CC-50 and UCF-QNRF. Experimental results on all datasets suggest RANet consistently reduces estimation errors and surpasses the state-of-the-art
approaches by large margins.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting aims at obtaining the number of individuals in a specific scene and has a wide range of applications
such as video surveillance, safety monitoring urban planning and behavior analysis. However, it is a highly chal∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Density estimation results. Top Left: Input image. Top
Right: Ground truth. Bottom Left: ic-CNN [28]. Bottom Right:
Our RANet.

lenging task due to occlusion, low image quality/resolution,
perspective distortion, scale variations of objects [29, 30].
Figure 1 gives an example of a crowd image associated with
density maps by different methods.
Recently, a lot of methods have been proposed to address
the crowd counting problem, which mainly considers crowd
counting as a pixel-wise regression problem. While the output of the unary regression for each pixel is produced independently from the outputs of the regression for other pixels, the labeling produced by the unary all regression alone
is generally noisy and inconsistent. Previous works have
shown that, for many pixel-level classification/regression
problems, e.g., semantic segmentation, contour detection,
and depth estimation, more accurate performance can be
obtained by encoding interdependencies [15, 39, 13, 45].
[15] establishes pairwise potentials on all pairs of pixels
in the image, enabling greatly refined segmentation and la16788

