SO-HandNet: Self-Organizing Network for 3D Hand Pose Estimation with
Semi-supervised Learning
Yujin Chen1 , Zhigang Tu1∗, Liuhao Ge2 , Dejun Zhang4 , Ruizhi Chen1 , Junsong Yuan3
1
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA
4
China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China
{yujin.chen, tuzhigang, ruizhi.chen}@whu.edu.cn ge0001ao@e.ntu.edu.sg
zhangdejun@cug.edu.cn jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract
3D hand pose estimation has made significant progress
recently, where Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
play a critical role. However, most of the existing CNNbased hand pose estimation methods depend much on the
training set, while labeling 3D hand pose on training data is
laborious and time-consuming. Inspired by the point cloud
autoencoder presented in self-organizing network (SO-Net)
[18], our proposed SO-HandNet aims at making use of the
unannotated data to obtain accurate 3D hand pose estimation in a semi-supervised manner. We exploit hand feature
encoder (HFE) to extract multi-level features from hand
point cloud and then fuse them to regress 3D hand pose
by a hand pose estimator (HPE). We design a hand feature decoder (HFD) to recover the input point cloud from
the encoded feature. Since the HFE and the HFD can
be trained without 3D hand pose annotation, the proposed
method is able to make the best of unannotated data during
the training phase. Experiments on four challenging benchmark datasets validate that our proposed SO-HandNet can
achieve superior performance for 3D hand pose estimation
via semi-supervised learning.

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed SO-HandNet for 3D hand
pose estimation. In the training phase, we simultaneously use the
annotated data and unannotated data to train the model. For training data with 3D hand annotation, both 3D hand pose and a new
point cloud are predicted from encoded features. And the network
is optimized by point cloud Chamfer loss and hand pose loss. For
training data without 3D pose annotation, we use the point cloud
Chamfer loss to optimize the HFE and HFD. In the testing phase,
the HFE and the HPE are utilized to estimate 3D hand pose.

1. Introduction
Hands are critical parts of human body in our daily activities. Automatic real-time 3D hand pose estimation has
attracted a lot of attentions due to its wide applications such
as human-computer interaction (HCI), computer graphics
and virtual/augmented reality, etc.
After many years of intensive research, 3D hand pose
estimation has advanced significantly both in accuracy and
∗ Corresponding author: tuzhigang@whu.edu.cn

efficiency [5, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 21, 22, 23, 24, 29, 33, 35, 36,
39, 41]. Most of the proposed state-of-the-art 3D hand pose
estimation methods are based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Since CNNs perform well in processing images, many works modify 2D CNNs to deal with depth images [36] or their 2D projections[11]. However, features extracted by 2D CNNs are not directly suitable for 3D pose estimation due to the lack of 3D spatial information. To better
capture the geometric characteristics of depth data, recent

6961

