Minimum Delay Object Detection From Video
Dong Lao and Ganesh Sundaramoorthi
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
{dong.lao, ganesh.sundaramoorthi}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We consider the problem of detecting objects, as they
come into view, from videos in an online fashion. We provide the first real-time solution that is guaranteed to minimize the delay, i.e., the time between when the object comes
in view and the declared detection time, subject to acceptable levels of detection accuracy. The method leverages
modern CNN-based object detectors that operate on a single frame, to aggregate detection results over frames to provide reliable detection at a rate, specified by the user, in
guaranteed minimal delay. To do this, we formulate the
problem as a Quickest Detection problem, which provides
the aforementioned guarantees. We derive our algorithms
from this theory. We show in experiments, that with an
overhead of just 50 fps, we can increase the number of correct detections and decrease the overall computational cost
compared to running a modern single-frame detector.1

1. Introduction
Real-time closed loop systems continuously acquire
data, process it, make decisions, and act to achieve some
objective. An example includes a self-driving car. In a selfdriving car, data is acquired, processed to make a decision
on steering direction, and this decision is input to a control
system that steers the car to achieve an objective such as
avoiding pedestrians. In these types of closed loop systems,
the data must be processed online, i.e., as it is acquired.
The decisions must be reliable and must be made with an
acceptable level of delay. For instance, in a self-driving car,
a pedestrian must be detected reliably with little delay otherwise the decision to steer away could be too late for the
control system to actuate and avoid a collision. Motivated
by closed-loop system applications that acquire and process
visual data, we are interested in developing computer vision
algorithms that operate online, and perform within limits on
delay and accuracy.
In this paper, we look into a specific instance of this gen1 Code: https://github.com/donglao/mindelay

eral problem in the context of object detection from video.
We are interested in the problem of detection in closed loop
scenarios. As the video is acquired, we want to as soon as
possible 1) determine when an object of interest comes into
view, and 2) we want to localize and determine the identity
of the object at the frame the object comes into view. Further, we seek to operate under constraints on errors of detection, delay and computational cost. While deep learning has
provided a wealth of object detectors [30, 9, 23, 29, 21] that
operate on a single image and localize objects of interest,
which in some cases are real-time, in many cases, they produce false alarms or fail to fire on objects due to phenomena
such as partial occlusion, illumination, and other nuisances.
Thus, although they may satisfy delay requirements, the detection accuracy may be poor. Of course one may leverage
results over frames from a single-frame detector, i.e., several detections near the same location over multiple frames,
ensures reliability. Because of this, there have been many
works [12, 17, 18, 22, 41, 3] that leverage temporal information over video batches to reduce false alarms. However,
this comes at added delay before a detection can be declared
and increased computational cost. Such delay may not be
acceptable. Thus, in one case, one achieves acceptable delay but not detection accuracy, and in the other case one
may achieve acceptable accuracy but not delay. In fact any
algorithm will have to trade-off one for another.
In this paper, we design an algorithm for detection from
videos that, for any given level of a false alarm constraint,
minimizes the delay in detection. To do this, we leverage the Quickest Detection theory [28, 35] from the statistics literature. Quickest Detection addresses the problem
of detecting changes in a stochastic process. It is assumed
that the stochastic process is determined from some known
probability distribution before some unknown change time,
after which the stochastic process is determined from a different known distribution. The theory provides a means
to derive an online algorithm to determine the unknown
change time with minimum delay subject to constraints on
the false alarm rate or the minimum error subject to constraints on the delay. We pose our problem in that framework, leverage existing state-of-the-art single-frame detec-

5097

