Generative Adversarial Minority Oversampling
Sankha Subhra Mullick
Indian Statistical Institute
Kolkata, India

Shounak Datta
Duke University
Durham, NC, USA

Swagatam Das
Indian Statistical Institute
Kolkata, India

sankha r@isical.ac.in

shounak.jaduniv@gmail.com

swagatam.das@isical.ac.in

Abstract
Class imbalance is a long-standing problem relevant to a
number of real-world applications of deep learning. Oversampling techniques, which are effective for handling class
imbalance in classical learning systems, can not be directly
applied to end-to-end deep learning systems. We propose
a three-player adversarial game between a convex generator, a multi-class classifier network, and a real/fake discriminator to perform oversampling in deep learning systems. The convex generator generates new samples from
the minority classes as convex combinations of existing instances, aiming to fool both the discriminator as well as the
classifier into misclassifying the generated samples. Consequently, the artificial samples are generated at critical locations near the peripheries of the classes. This, in turn,
adjusts the classifier induced boundaries in a way which
is more likely to reduce misclassification from the minority classes. Extensive experiments on multiple class imbalanced image datasets establish the efficacy of our proposal.

1. Introduction
The problem of class imbalance occurs when all the
classes present in a dataset do not have equal number of
representative training instances [19, 11]. Most of the existing learning algorithms produce inductive bias favoring the
majority class in presence of class imbalance in the training
set, resulting in poor performance on the minority class(es).
This is a problem which routinely plagues many real-world
applications such as fraud detection, dense object detection [30], medical diagnosis, etc. For example, in a medical diagnosis application, information about unfit patients is
scarce compared to that of fit individuals. Hence, traditional
classifiers may misclassify some unfit patients as being fit,
having catastrophic implications [32].
Over the years, the machine learning community has devised many methods for tackling class imbalance [24, 4].
However, only a few of these techniques have been extended to deep learning even though class imbalance is
fairly persistent is such networks, severely affecting both

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration using a ‘toy’ dataset: (a) Imbalanced classification with an unaided classifier network M results in misclassification of the minority class instances (red dots). (b) Artificial
minority points (green ‘+’) generated using conditional GAN help
to improve the result on the minority class but bleed into the majority class (blue dots), affecting the performance on the latter. (c)
New points are generated by training a convex generator G alternatingly with M . This is a two player adversarial game where G
attempts to generate samples which are hard for M to correctly
classify. This results in ideal performance on the minority class,
but at the cost of misclassifying the majority class as G does not
adhere to the distribution of the minority class. (d) Ideal performance on both classes is achieved by further incorporating an additional discriminator D to induce fidelity to the minority class
distribution and to limit bleeding into majority class territory.

the feature extraction as well as the classification process
[48, 21, 49, 5, 22]. The existing solutions [21, 10, 43,
30, 6] for handling class imbalance in deep neural networks mostly focus on cost tuning to assign suitably higher
costs to minority instances. Another interesting class of
approaches [50, 12] focuses on constructing balanced subsamples of the dataset. Wang et al. [44] proposed a novel
meta-learning scheme for imbalanced classification. It is interesting to note that oversampling techniques like SMOTE
[8] have not received much attention in the context of deep
learning, despite being very effective for classical systems

1695

