Coherent Semantic Attention for Image Inpainting
Hongyu Liu
Bin Jiang∗
Yi Xiao
Chao Yang
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering
Hunan University
{kumapower, jiangbin, yangchaoedu, yixiao− csee}@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The latest deep learning-based approaches have shown
promising results for the challenging task of inpainting
missing regions of an image. However, the existing methods
often generate contents with blurry textures and distorted
structures due to the discontinuity of the local pixels. From
a semantic-level perspective, the local pixel discontinuity
is mainly because these methods ignore the semantic relevance and feature continuity of hole regions. To handle this
problem, we investigate the human behavior in repairing
pictures and propose a fined deep generative model-based
approach with a novel coherent semantic attention (CSA)
layer, which can not only preserve contextual structure but
also make more effective predictions of missing parts by
modeling the semantic relevance between the holes features.
The task is divided into rough, refinement as two steps and
we model each step with a neural network under the U-Net
architecture, where the CSA layer is embedded into the encoder of refinement step. Meanwhile, we further propose
consistency loss and feature patch discriminator to stabilize the network training process and improve the details.
The experiments on CelebA, Places2, and Paris StreetView
datasets have validated the effectiveness of our proposed
methods in image inpainting tasks and can obtain images
with a higher quality as compared with the existing stateof-the-art approaches 1 .

1. Introduction
Image inpainting is the task to synthesize the missing or
damaged parts of a plausible hypothesis, and can be utilized in many applications such as removing unwanted objects, completing occluded regions, restoring damaged or
corrupted parts. The core challenge of image inpainting is
to maintain global semantic structure and generate realistic
texture details for the missing regions.
∗ Corresponding author
1 The codes will be available at https://github.com/
KumapowerLIU/CSA-inpainting.

Traditional works [11, 1, 4, 5, 33] mostly develop texture synthesis techniques to address the problem of hole filling. In [4], Barnes et al. propose the Patch-Match algorithm
which iteratively searches for the best fitting patches from
hole boundaries to synthesize the contents of the missing
parts. Wilczkowiak et al. [33] take further steps and detect desirable search regions to find better match patches.
However, these methods fall short of understanding highlevel semantics and struggle at reconstructing these locally
unique patterns. In contrast, early deep convolution neural networks based approaches [16, 22, 27, 26] learn data
distribution to capture the semantic information of the image. Although these methods can achieve plausible inpainting results, they fail to effectively utilize contextual information to generate the contents of holes, thus leading to the
results containing noise patterns.
Some recent studies effectively utilize the contextual information and obtain better inpainting results. These methods can be divided into two types. The first type [40, 35, 30]
utilizes spatial attention which takes surrounding image features as references to restore missing regions. These methods can ensure the semantic consistency of generated content with contextual information. However, they focus only
on rectangular shaped holes, and the results show pixel discontinuous and have semantic chasm (See in Fig 1(b, c)).
The second type [23, 39] is to make the prediction of the
missing pixels condition on the valid pixels in the original
image. These methods can handle irregular holes properly,
but the generated contents still meet problems of semantic
fault and boundary artifacts (See in Fig 1(g, h)). The reason that the above mentioned methods do not work well is
because they ignore the semantic relevance and feature continuity of generated contents, which is crucial for the local
pixel continuity in image level.
In order to achieve better image inpainting results on
both centering and irregular cases, we investigate the human
behavior in inpainting pictures and find that such process
involves two steps as conception and painting to guarantee
both global structure consistency and local pixel continuity
of a picture. To put it more concrete, a man first observes

4170

