Align2Ground: Weakly Supervised Phrase Grounding Guided by
Image-Caption Alignment
Samyak Datta⋆1,2 Karan Sikka1 Anirban Roy1 Karuna Ahuja1
Devi Parikh2,3
Ajay Divakaran1
1
SRI International, Princeton, NJ, 2 Georgia Institute of Technology, 3 Facebook AI Research
2
1

{samyak, parikh}@gatech.edu

{karan.sikka, anirban.roy, karuna.ahuja, ajay.divakaran}@sri.com

Abstract
We address the problem of grounding free-form textual
phrases by using weak supervision from image-caption pairs.
We propose a novel end-to-end model that uses caption-toimage retrieval as a “downstream” task to guide the process
of phrase localization. Our method, as a first step, infers the
latent correspondences between regions-of-interest (RoIs)
and phrases in the caption and creates a discriminative
image representation using these matched RoIs. In the subsequent step, this learned representation is aligned with the
caption. Our key contribution lies in building this “captionconditioned” image encoding which tightly couples both the
tasks and allows the weak supervision to effectively guide
visual grounding. We provide extensive empirical and qualitative analysis to investigate the different components of
our proposed model and compare it with competitive baselines. For phrase localization, we report improvements of
4.9% and 1.3% (absolute) over prior state-of-the-art on the
VisualGenome and Flickr30k Entities datasets. We also report results that are at par with the state-of-the-art on the
downstream caption-to-image retrieval task on COCO and
Flickr30k datasets.

Figure 1: This figure⋆⋆ shows a high-level overview of the proposed
Align2Ground model which learns to ground phrases by using weak
supervision from image-caption pairs. It first matches the phrases
with local image region, aggregates these matched RoIs to generate
a caption-conditioned image representation. It uses this encoding
to perform image–caption matching.

available (image-caption matching) and the task for which
we do not have explicit labels (region-phrase matching).
This joint reasoning ensures that the supervised loss from
the former is able to effectively guide the learning of the
latter.

We focus on the problem of visual grounding which involves connecting natural language descriptions with image
regions. Supervised learning approaches for this task entail significant manual efforts in collecting annotations for
region-phrase correspondence [29, 39]. Therefore, in this
work, we address the problem of grounding free-form textual
phrases under weak supervision from only image-caption
pairs [20, 37, 40, 45].

Recent works [20, 21] have shown evidence that operating
under such a paradigm helps boost performance for imagecaption matching. Generally, these models consist of two
stages: (1) a local matching module that infers the latent
region-phrase correspondences to generate local matching
information, and (2) a global matching module that uses
this information to perform image-caption matching. This
setup allows phrase grounding to act as an intermediate and a
prerequisite task for image-caption matching. It is important
to note that the primary objective of such works has been on
image-caption matching and not phrase grounding.

A key requirement in such a weakly supervised paradigm
is a tight coupling between the task for which supervision is

An artifact of training under such a paradigm is the amplification of correlations between selective regions and phrases.

1. Introduction

⋆ A major part of this work was done by S. Datta when he was an intern
at SRI International, Princeton, NJ

⋆⋆ “Young girl holding a kitten” by Gennadiy Kolodkin is licensed under
CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.

12601

