Generative Multi-View Human Action Recognition
Lichen Wang1 , Zhengming Ding2 , Zhiqiang Tao1 , Yunyu Liu1 , Yun Fu1
1
Northeastern University, USA
2
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, USA
wanglichenxj@gmail.com, zd2@iu.edu, zqtao@ece.neu.edu,
liu.yuny@husky.neu.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

View1 Subspace

Abstract
Multi-view action recognition targets to integrate complementary information from different views to improve
classification performance. It is a challenging task due
to the distinct gap between heterogeneous feature domains.
Moreover, most existing methods neglect to consider the incomplete multi-view data, which limits their potential compatibility in real-world applications. In this work, we propose a Generative Multi-View Action Recognition (GMVAR) framework to address the challenges above. The adversarial generative network is leveraged to generate one
view conditioning on the other view, which fully explores
the latent connections in both intra-view and cross-view aspects. Our approach enhances the model robustness by employing adversarial training, and naturally handles the incomplete view case by imputing the missing data. Moreover,
an effective View Correlation Discovery Network (VCDN)
is proposed to further fuse the multi-view information in
a higher-level label space. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach by comparing with state-of-the-art algorithms1 .

1. Introduction
Multi-view approaches [58, 30, 29, 62, 40] explore the
complementary information among different views, where
the views refer to various feature representations, modalities
or sensors. Most existing methods focus on analyzing static
multi-view data (e.g., image, description, and attributes),
while recently, multi-view action recognition [10, 4, 18, 22]
has become attractive and urgent as the increasing multimodal sensors are widely deployed in a great number of
real-world applications.
There are two categories in the multi-view action recognition scenario. The ﬁrst category explores action sequences captured by multiple sensors which belonging to
1 Code is available on: https://github.com/wanglichenxj/
Generative-Multi-View-Human-Action-Recognition

View1: RGB

Feature
complement &
augmentation

View1: RGB

View2: Depth

View2 Subspace

View2: Depth

Training set

Testing set

Figure 1. Illustration of our GMVAR approach, which is trained on
both RGB and depth views. However, in the test stage, GMVAR
is capable of dealing with different scenarios including complete
multi-view, partially missing view, or even single-view. It is due
to the generative mechanism in our model which signiﬁcantly extends the potential applications of our approach.

the same visual modality (e.g., surveillance system usually
captures videos with RGB-only cameras). These methods
assume that actions recorded by different viewpoints (e.g.,
front, back, and top) or distances could provide distinctive
aspects for recognition tasks [4, 18, 22]. The second category methods analyze action sequences captured from different types of sensors (e.g., RGB, depth, skeleton, acceleration, trajectory, 3D, and electromyography [26, 32, 34, 50,
52, 53]) and attempt to integrate the complementary information among various modalities. For instance, Kinect sensor [61, 33] provides high-quality RGB, depth, and skeleton sequences simultaneously, where both depth [1, 54] and
skeleton [39, 44, 59] modalities have been demonstrated
to provide effective and unique motion knowledge for action recognition. Electromyography (EMG) signal which
reﬂects the electrical activity produced by skeletal muscles
is utilized for action/motion analysis [3, 50]. Acoustical and
acceleration are also utilized for multi-view event detection
and action recognition tasks [11, 9].
In this study, we focus on the second category. As shown
in Figure 1, both RGB and depth views are available in the
4321
6212

