FW-GAN: Flow-navigated Warping GAN for Video Virtual Try-on
Haoye Dong1,2,∗ , Xiaodan Liang3,∗ , Xiaohui Shen4 , Bowen Wu1 , Bing-Cheng Chen1 , Jian Yin1,2,†
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
3
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
4
ByteDance AI Lab.
{donghy7@mail2,issjyin@mail,wubw6@mail2,chenbch9@mail2}.sysu.edu.cn
xdliang328@gmail.com, shenxiaohui@bytedance.com

Abstract
Beyond current image-based virtual try-on systems that
have attracted increasing attention, we move a step forward to developing a video virtual try-on system that precisely transfers clothes onto the person and generates visually realistic videos conditioned on arbitrary poses. Besides
the challenges in image-based virtual try-on (e.g., clothes
fidelity, image synthesis), video virtual try-on further requires spatiotemporal consistency. Directly adopting existing image-based approaches often fails to generate coherent video with natural and realistic textures. In this work,
we propose Flow-navigated Warping Generative Adversarial Network (FW-GAN), a novel framework that learns to
synthesize the video of virtual try-on based on a person image, the desired clothes image, and a series of target poses.
FW-GAN aims to synthesize the coherent and natural video
while manipulating the pose and clothes. It consists of: (i) a
flow-guided fusion module that warps the past frames to assist synthesis, which is also adopted in the discriminator to
help enhance the coherence and quality of the synthesized
video; (ii) a warping net that is designed to warp clothes
image for the refinement of clothes textures; (iii) a parsing constraint loss that alleviates the problem caused by the
misalignment of segmentation maps from images with different poses and various clothes. Experiments on our newly
collected dataset show that FW-GAN can synthesize highquality video of virtual try-on and significantly outperforms
other methods both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
The emergence of image synthesis technique significantly advances the progress of the virtual try-on sys∗ equal contribution
† Corresponding author is Jian Yin

tems [15, 37], which are of great value to lots of applications, e.g., online shopping, movie making, and video editing. However, most of the try-on methods are based on single images, while the video-based virtual try-on problem
has been largely unexplored. In this work, we make a first
attempt to address this problem. Specifically, given a person
image, the desired clothes, and a series of target poses, we
synthesize a realistic-looking video that preserves the distinct appearance from both the person and clothes image.
Some of the results are illustrated in Figure 1, showing that
the proposed approach can generate high-quality virtual tryon videos with convincing details.
Most existing methods use encoder-decoder-like neural
networks [15, 37] to synthesize virtual try-on images. They
mainly focus on synthesizing the person image by replacing with other clothes, conditioned on a fixed pose, and
thus fail to generate realistic videos due to the lack of ability of manipulating arbitrary poses and different clothes
when virtual try-on is conducted in unconstrained scene.
Besides 2D image synthesis, various 3D modeling techniques [22, 27, 30, 43] have been developed for virtual tryon. However, those methods focus on single images as well,
and have not been extended to video generation. Moreover,
it requires huge labor cost to collect the 3D annotation and
massive computation to build the 3D model, which limits
the performance of virtual try-on in the practical scenario.
Particularly, in a video sequence, person or clothes images often contain various visual appearance, viewpoints,
and arbitrary human layouts due to different poses. It is
impractical for current convolution-based generators to exploit entangled information without the aid of any external
structured knowledge. Besides, different poses for a whole
human body may result in heavy occlusions or dramatic appearance changes for some body parts. Furthermore, spatiotemporal consistency is critical to the visual quality of
the synthesized video, which is not considered in the existing image-based synthesis methods.

1161

