Non-local Intrinsic Decomposition with Near-infrared Priors
Ziang Cheng
Australian National University
Australia

Yinqiang Zheng
National Institute of Informatics
Japan

ziang.cheng@anu.edu.au

yqzheng@nii.ac.jp

Shaodi You
Data61, CSIRO
Australia

Imari Sato
National Institute of Informatics
Japan

shaodi.you@data61.csiro.au

imarik@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
Intrinsic image decomposition is a highly underconstrained problem that has been extensively studied by
computer vision researchers. Previous methods impose additional constraints by exploiting either empirical or datadriven priors. In this paper, we revisit intrinsic image decomposition with the aid of near-infrared (NIR) imagery.
We show that NIR band is considerably less sensitive to
textures and can be exploited to reduce ambiguity caused
by reflectance variation, promoting a simple yet powerful
prior for shading smoothness. With this observation, we
formulate intrinsic decomposition as an energy minimisation problem. Unlike existing methods, our energy formulation decouples reflectance and shading estimation, into
a convex local shading component based on NIR-RGB image pair, and a reflectance component that encourages reflectance homogeneity both locally and globally. We further
show the minimisation process can be approximated by a
series of multi-dimensional convolutions, each within linear
time complexity. To validate the proposed algorithm, a NIRRGB dataset is captured over real-world objects, where our
NIR-assisted approach demonstrates superiority over RGB
methods.

1. Introduction
Recognised as a fundamental problem for scene understanding by computer vision research [4, 18, 24, 27, 44],
intrinsic decomposition is the task of recovering from the
input image two logically independent factors - a shading
image that is solely dependent on illumination, shadows and
shapes, and a reflectance image that is solely dependent on
textures and colours. This independency is nullified once
the input image is observed, permitting decomposition al-

beit under an extremely underdetermined system. In this
paper, we address this ambiguity by a novel NIR-assisted
algorithm that combines both reflectance and shading priors in a unified probabilistic model.
Due to its application background and ill-posed nature, single image intrinsic decomposition has attracted
extensive interest in computer vision research, prompting
a variety of RGB-based approaches via traditional priors
[45, 21, 41, 42, 36, 6] or data-driven regression models (e.g.
deep learning) [34, 3, 23, 43, 17, 32]. However, the information provided by an RGB image alone is limited. A common
problem is weak textures and strong shadows are often misclassified. More recently, further advances have been made
into the hyper-spectral domain where additional subspace
constraints can be sought [10, 22]. Still, these methods ultimately work within the visible spectrum, and a practical
concern of hyper-spectral methods is the difficulty of image acquisition, which requires a dedicated and usually slow
hyper-spectral camera that precludes any scene motion.
We propose an algorithm that solves for intrinsics with
the help of near infrared (NIR) imagery. The NIR band
has a longer wavelength than visible lights and reveals
fairly different scattering patterns. The uniqueness of NIR
band leads to its success in assisting visibility enhancement
[39, 33], surface reconstruction [16, 15] and semantic segmentation [38, 14]. In this paper, we exploit the empirical
observation that texture variation is considerably reduced in
this channel. This property of NIR lessens the ambiguity of
decomposition and offers a powerful prior for shading. On
the other hand, synchronised RGB-NIR cameras are being
popularised by vendors and are available on the market (e.g.
dual-CCD camera, or single sensor camera with RGB-NIR
4-channel Bayer pattern), making our set-up more costfriendly and practical compared to general hyper-spectral
methods.

2521

