CompoNet: Learning to Generate the Unseen by Part Synthesis and Composition
Nadav Schor1 Oren Katzir1
Tel Aviv University1
nadav.schor@cs.tau.ac.il

Hao Zhang2 Daniel Cohen-Or1
Simon Fraser University2

orenkatzir@mail.tau.ac.il

haoz@cs.sfu.ca

dcor@tau.ac.il

“For object recognition, the visual system decomposes
shapes into parts, . . ., parts with their descriptions and spatial relations provide a first index into a memory of shapes.”
— Hoffman & Richards [18]

Abstract
Data-driven generative modeling has made remarkable
progress by leveraging the power of deep neural networks.
A reoccurring challenge is how to enable a model to generate a rich variety of samples from the entire target distribution, rather than only from a distribution confined to the
training data. In other words, we would like the generative
model to go beyond the observed samples and learn to generate “unseen”, yet still plausible, data. In our work, we
present CompoNet, a generative neural network for 2D or
3D shapes that is based on a part-based prior, where the key
idea is for the network to synthesize shapes by varying both
the shape parts and their compositions. Treating a shape
not as an unstructured whole, but as a (re-)composable set
of deformable parts, adds a combinatorial dimension to the
generative process to enrich the diversity of the output, encouraging the generator to venture more into the “unseen”.
We show that our part-based model generates richer variety of plausible shapes compared with baseline generative
models. To this end, we introduce two quantitative metrics
to evaluate the diversity of a generative model and assess
how well the generated data covers both the training data
and unseen data from the same target distribution.

1. Introduction
Learning generative models of shapes and images has
been a long standing research problem in visual computing. Despite the remarkable progress made, an inherent and
reoccurring limitation still remains: a generative model is
often only as good as the given training data, as it is always
trapped or bounded by the empirical distribution of the observed data. More often than not, what can be observed
is not sufficiently expressive of the true target distribution.

(a) Baseline

(b) Part-based generation

Figure 1: CompoNet, our part-based generative model (b)
covers the “unseen” data significantly more than the baseline (a). Generated data (pink dots) by two methods are displayed over training data (purple crosses) and unseen data
(green crosses) from the same target distribution. The data
is displayed via PCA over a classifier feature space, with
the three distributions summarized by ellipses, for illustration only. A few samples of training, unseen, and generated
data are displayed to reveal their similarity/dissimilarity.

Hence, the generative power of a learned model should not
only be judged by the plausibility of the generated data as
confined by the training set, but also its diversity, in particular, by the model’s ability to generate plausible data that
is sufficiently far from the training set. Since the target distribution which encompasses both the observed and unseen
data is unknown, the main challenge is how to effectively
train a network to learn to generate the “unseen”, without
making any compromising assumption about the target distribution. Due to the same reason, even evaluating the generative power of such a network is a non-trivial task.
We believe that the key to generative diversity is to enable more drastic changes, i.e., non-local and/or structural
transformations, to the training data. At the same time, such
changes must be within the confines of the target data distribution. In our work, we focus on generative modeling of
2D or 3D shapes, where the typical modeling constraint is
to produce shapes belonging to the same category as the ex-

8759

