Evolving Space-Time Neural Architectures for Videos
AJ Piergiovanni, Anelia Angelova, Alexander Toshev, Michael S. Ryoo
Google Brain
{ajpiergi,anelia,toshev,mryoo}@google.com

Abstract
We present a new method for finding video CNN architectures that capture rich spatio-temporal information
in videos. Previous work, taking advantage of 3D convolutions, obtained promising results by manually designing
video CNN architectures. We here develop a novel evolutionary search algorithm that automatically explores models with different types and combinations of layers to jointly
learn interactions between spatial and temporal aspects of
video representations. We demonstrate the generality of this
algorithm by applying it to two meta-architectures, obtaining new architectures superior to manually designed architectures: EvaNet. Further, we propose a new component,
the iTGM layer, which more efficiently utilizes its parameters to allow learning of space-time interactions over longer
time horizons. The iTGM layer is often preferred by the evolutionary algorithm and allows building cost-efficient networks. The proposed approach discovers new and diverse
video architectures that were previously unknown. More importantly they are both more accurate and faster than prior
models, and outperform the state-of-the-art results on multiple datasets we test, including HMDB, Kinetics, and Moments in Time. We will open source the code and models, to
encourage future model development 1 .

1. Introduction
Video understanding tasks, such as video object detection and activity recognition, are important for many societal applications of computer vision including robot perception, smart cities, medical analysis, and more. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been popular for video
understanding, with many successful prior approaches, including C3D [30], I3D [1], R(2+1)D [33], S3D [38], and
others [3, 9]. These approaches focus on manually designing CNN architectures specialized for videos, for example by extending known 2D architectures such as Inception [28] and ResNet [5] to 3D [1, 33]. However, designing
new, larger or more advanced architectures is a challenging
1 Code and models: https://sites.google.com/corp/view/evanet-video

problem, especially as the complexity of video tasks necessitates deeper and wider architectures and more complex
sub-modules. Furthermore, the existing networks, which
are mostly inspired by single-image based tasks, might not
sufficiently capture the rich spatio-temporal interactions in
video data.
In this work, we present a video architecture evolution
approach to harness the rich spatio-temporal information
present in videos. Neural architecture search and evolution
have been previously applied for text and image classification [29, 41]. A naive extension of the above approaches to
video is infeasible due to the large search space of possible
architectures operating on 3D inputs.
To address these challenges we propose a novel evolution algorithm for video architecture search. We introduce a hybrid meta-architecture (‘fill-in-the-blanks’) model
for which the high level connectivity between modules is
fixed, but the individual modules can evolve. We apply
this successfully to both Inception and ResNet based metaarchitectures. We design the search space specifically for
video CNN architectures that jointly capture various spatial
and temporal interactions in videos. We encourage exploration of more diverse architectures by applying multiple
nontrivial mutations at the earlier stages of evolution while
constraining the mutations at the later stages. This enables
discovering multiple, very different but similarly good architectures, allowing us to form a better ensemble by combining them.
Furthermore, to enrich the search space for video inputs, we propose a new key element which is specifically
designed to capture space-time features’ interactions. We
introduce an Inflated Temporal Gaussian Mixture (iTGM)
layer as part of the evolution search space. The iTGM is
motivated by the original 1D TGM [21]. For our iTGM,
we learn 2D spatial filters in addition to the temporal Gaussian mixture values, and inflate the 2D filter temporally to
allow learning of joint features in 3D. The 2D filter is inflated non-uniformly, by following the weights according to
the learned 1-D temporal Gaussian mixture pattern. This
allows to explore space-time interactions more effectively
and with much fewer parameters, while at the same time
capture longer temporal information in videos.

1793

