A Dual-Path Model With Adaptive Attention For Vehicle Re-Identification
Pirazh Khorramshahi1 , Amit Kumar1 , Neehar Peri1 , Sai Saketh Rambhatla1 , Jun-Cheng Chen2
and Rama Chellappa1
1
Center for Automation Research, UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park
2
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica
{pirazhkh, akumar14, peri, rssaketh, rama}@umiacs.umd.edu, pullpull@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
In recent years, attention models have been extensively
used for person and vehicle re-identification. Most reidentification methods are designed to focus attention on
key-point locations. However, depending on the orientation, the contribution of each key-point varies. In this paper, we present a novel dual-path adaptive attention model
for vehicle re-identification (AAVER). The global appearance path captures macroscopic vehicle features while the
orientation conditioned part appearance path learns to capture localized discriminative features by focusing attention
on the most informative key-points. Through extensive experimentation, we show that the proposed AAVER method
is able to accurately re-identify vehicles in unconstrained
scenarios, yielding state of the art results on the challenging dataset VeRi-776. As a byproduct, the proposed system is also able to accurately predict vehicle key-points
and shows an improvement of more than 7% over state of
the art. The code for key-point estimation model is available at https://github.com/Pirazh/Vehicle_Key_
Point_Orientation_Estimation

1. Introduction
Vehicle re-identification (re-id) refers to the task of retrieving all images of a particular vehicle identity in a large
gallery set, composed of vehicle images taken from varying
orientations, cameras, time and locations. Accurately reidentifying vehicles from images and videos, is of great interest in surveillance and intelligence applications. In contrast to vehicle recognition which aims to identify the make
and model of the vehicle, vehicle re-id is concerned with
identifying specific vehicle instances. This task is extremely
challenging as vehicles with different identities can be of
the same make, model and color, and thus it is challenging
for a Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) to make
accurate predictions. In this paper, we present a novel algorithm driven by adaptive attention for re-identifying vehi-

(a) Front

(b) Left

(c) Right (d) Rear

Figure 1: Heatmaps grouped as suggested in [22]. Attention to all subgroup of key-points leads to erroneous results.
Although, only the rear of the car is visible, contributions
from frontal key-points are non-zero.

cles from still images without using information from other
sources such as time and location.
The similar task of person re-id aims at re-identifying
humans appearing in different cameras. While visual appearance models work reasonably well for person re-id,
the same techniques fail to differentiate vehicles due to the
lack of highly discriminating features. Person re-id models
are not heavily reliant on facial features as they also learn
discriminating features based on clothing and accessories.
However, vehicle re-id poses a new set of challenges. Different vehicle identities can have similar colors and shapes
especially those coming from the same manufacturer with a
particular model, trim and year. Subtle cues such as different wheel patterns and custom logos might be unavailable
in the global appearance features. Therefore, it is important
that vehicle re-id model learns to focus on different parts
of the vehicles while making a decision. Previous works in
person re-id such as [24] have used attention models with
human key-points as regions of attention and have shown
significant improvement in performance. Similarly, methods such as [22] have used vehicle key-points to learn attention maps for each of the 20 key-points defined by [22]. The
system proposed by Wang et al. [22] grouped key-points
into four groups corresponding to front, rear, left and right.
However, not all key-points provide discriminating information and their respective contributions depend on the
orientation of the vehicle. For instance, in Figure 1a we
observe that the key-points from the front of the car incor16132

