Bottleneck potentials in Markov Random Fields
Ahmed Abbas 1,2
1

Paul Swoboda1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 2 ZEISS

Abstract
We consider general discrete Markov Random
Fields (MRFs) with additional bottleneck potentials which
penalize the maximum (instead of the sum) over local
potential value taken by the MRF-assignment. Bottleneck potentials or analogous constructions have been considered in
(i) combinatorial optimization (e.g. bottleneck shortest path
problem, the minimum bottleneck spanning tree problem,
bottleneck function minimization in greedoids), (ii) inverse
problems with L∞ -norm regularization, and (iii) valued
constraint satisfaction on the (min, max)-pre-semirings.
Bottleneck potentials for general discrete MRFs are a
natural generalization of the above direction of modeling
work to Maximum-A-Posteriori (MAP) inference in MRFs.
To this end, we propose MRFs whose objective consists of
two parts: terms that factorize according to (i) (min, +),
i.e. potentials as in plain MRFs, and (ii) (min, max),
i.e. bottleneck potentials. To solve the ensuing inference
problem, we propose high-quality relaxations and efficient
algorithms for solving them. We empirically show efficacy
of our approach on large scale seismic horizon tracking
problems.

1. Introduction
In the field of computer vision MRFs have found many
applications such as image segmentation, denoising, optical flow, 3D reconstruction and many more, see [16] for a
non-exhaustive overview of problems and algorithms. The
above application scenarios are modelled well as a sum
of unary/pairwise/ternary/. . . potentials on the underlying
graphical structure. More generally, whenever the error of fitting a model to data is captured by local terms, the objective
can factorize into a sum of local error terms. However, such
objectives are not always appropriate. In some computer vision applications, a single error can entail subsequent errors,
rendering the solution useless and local terms are unable
to properly penalize this. Prominent examples are tracking
problems [44, 13, 28, 10], where making a single error and
following a wrong track results in low accuracy nonetheless.
In inverse problems, L∞ -norm regularization penalizes the

maximum deviation from the fitted model and is appropriate
e.g. for some types of group sparsity [27, 23, 24]. In all
of the above scenarios global potentials, which penalize the
maximum value assignment w.r.t. a given set of local costs
are the appropriate choice. We call this maximum value a
bottleneck and the aim is to find a configuration such that
its bottleneck has minimum cost. Formally, optimizing a
bottleneck objective can be written as


(1)
min max{ψi · xi }
x∈X

i

n

where X ⊂ R is the space of feasible elements of the
optimization problem and ψ ∈ Rn is a real valued vector.
Additionally, the bottleneck objective can be written as the
infinity norm kψ ⊙ xk∞ , where ⊙ is the Hadamard product.

2. Related work
Bottleneck-type objectives occur throughout many subfields of mathematical programming. The optimization problems are also often called min-max problems.
Bottleneck potentials in MRFs. The case of pairwise binary MRFs with bottleneck potentials has been addressed
in [32] and has been applied to image segmentation. As
noted by the authors of [32], incorporating a bottleneck term
gives better segment boundaries and resolves ‘small cuts’
(or shrinking bias) of graph cut [6]. In [8] the authors interpret Lp -norm regularization for discrete labeling problems
and for p ∈ [1, ∞) as MAP-inference in MRFs and propose approximating the bottleneck potential corresponding
to L∞ via a high value of p. In [18] a more general class of
MAP-inference with higher order costs were proposed which
include the bottleneck potentials we investigate. In [25] the
authors propose a model that can be specialized to bottleneck
costs with linear distances and give a primal heuristic for
solving it.
Furthermore, labeling problems containing only bottleneck objectives were considered in [37, 33, 11, 29],
where [11, 29] devised algorithms for special cases of the
pure min-max labeling problem, and [37, 33] devised message passing schemes with application in parallel machine
scheduling.
In contrast to previous works [8, 32, 37, 33, 11, 29] we
investigate the mixed problem where ordinary and bottleneck

3175

