6-DOF GraspNet: Variational Grasp Generation for Object Manipulation
Arsalan Mousavian
NVIDIA

Clemens Eppner
NVIDIA

Dieter Fox
NVIDIA

amousavian@nvidia.com

ceppner@nvidia.com

dieterf@nvidia.com

Abstract
Generating grasp poses is a crucial component for any
robot object manipulation task. In this work, we formulate the problem of grasp generation as sampling a set of
grasps using a variational autoencoder and assess and refine the sampled grasps using a grasp evaluator model.
Both Grasp Sampler and Grasp Refinement networks take
3D point clouds observed by a depth camera as input. We
evaluate our approach in simulation and real-world robot
experiments. Our approach achieves 88% success rate on
various commonly used objects with diverse appearances,
scales, and weights. Our model is trained purely in simulation and works in the real world without any extra steps.
The video of our experiments can be found here.

1. Introduction
Grasp selection is one of the most important problems
in robot manipulation. Here, a robot observes an object
and needs to decide where to move its gripper (3D position and 3D orientation) in order to pickup the object (see
Fig. 1). Grasp selection is complex since the stability of
grasps depends on object and gripper geometry, object mass
distribution, and surface frictions. The geometry around an
object poses additional constraints on which grasp points
are reachable without causing the robot manipulator to collide with other objects in a scene (see Fig. 2). Typically,
this problem is approached by geometry-inspired heuristics
to select promising grasp points around an object, possibly followed by a more in-depth geometric analysis of the
stability and reachability of a sampled grasp [31]. Many
of these approaches rely on the availability of complete 3D
models of an object, which is a severe limitation in realistic scenarios where a robot only observes a scene with a
noisy depth camera, for example. To overcome this limitation, one could move the camera to generate a full object
model or perform shape completion, followed by geometrybased grasp analysis. However, moving the camera might
be impossible in constrained spaces, and shape completion
might not be sufficiently accurate for grasp generation and

Figure 1. The Franka Panda manipulator used in our experiments.
Our approach is able to efficiently generate diverse sets of grasps
that lead to successful pickups of unknown objects.

evaluation.
Recently, several groups have introduced deep learning
techniques to evaluate the quality of grasps from raw point
cloud data [21, 19, 31, 15]. While these approaches provide
good grasp assessments, they still use manually designed
heuristics to sample grasps for evaluation or rely on blackbox optimization techniques such as CEM [19, 34]. Additionally, they do not provide efficient means for improving sampled grasps. In this paper, we introduce the first
learning-based framework for efficiently generating diverse
sets of stable grasps for unknown objects. Our approach
introduces two network architectures that sample, evaluate,
and improve grasps. The key contributions of this paper are:
• A variational auto-encoder (VAE) that can be trained
to map the partial point cloud of an observed object
to a diverse set of grasps for the object. Importantly,
our VAE provides high coverage of all possible, functioning grasps while generating only a small number
of failing grasps.
12901

