EMPNet: Neural Localisation and Mapping Using Embedded Memory Points
Gil Avraham

Yan Zuo
Thanuja Dharmasiri
Tom Drummond
ARC Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision, Monash University, Australia
{gil.avraham, yan.zuo, thanuja.dharmasiri, tom.drummond}@monash.edu

Real World

Trajectory

Embedded Memory Points Network
Current Observation
Embedded Memory Points
Point-Embeddings

CNN

Projection

Dense Embedding
Correspondences

Previous
Camera movement

Alignment

Figure 1: EMP-Net maintains an internal representation which corresponds to a real world environment. This internal spatial
memory is continuously updated through a dense matching algorithm, allowing an autonomous agent to localise and model
the world through sequences of observations.

Abstract
1. Introduction
Continuously estimating an agent’s state space and a
representation of its surroundings has proven vital towards
full autonomy. A shared common ground among systems
which successfully achieve this feat is the integration of previously encountered observations into the current state being estimated. This necessitates the use of a memory module
for incorporating previously visited states whilst simultaneously offering an internal representation of the observed
environment. In this work we develop a memory module
which contains rigidly aligned point-embeddings that represent a coherent scene structure acquired from an RGB-D
sequence of observations. The point-embeddings are extracted using modern convolutional neural network architectures, and alignment is performed by computing a dense
correspondence matrix between a new observation and the
current embeddings residing in the memory module. The
whole framework is end-to-end trainable, resulting in a
recurrent joint optimisation of the point-embeddings contained in the memory. This process amplifies the shared information across states, providing increased robustness and
accuracy. We show significant improvement of our method
across a set of experiments performed on the synthetic VIZDoom environment and a real world Active Vision Dataset.

In recent times, there has been a large surge in interest
towards developing agents which are fully autonomous. A
core aspect of full autonomy lies in the spatial awareness of
an agent about its surrounding environment [9]; this understanding would enable the extension towards other useful
applications including navigation [10] as well as humanrobot interaction [7]. Although performance in image understanding challenges such as segmentation [4, 16, 26],
depth estimation [12, 37, 40], video prediction [27, 43], object classification [18,25,36] and detection [13,34] has seen
vast improvement with the aid of deep learning, this level of
success has yet to translate towards the intersection between
spatial awareness and scene understanding. Currently, this
is an active area of research [14, 19, 33], with the vision
community realising its potential towards merging intelligent agents seamlessly and safely into real world environments.
Fundamentally, an autonomous agent is required to
maintain an internal representation of the observed scene
structure that may be accessed for performing tasks such
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council Centre
of Excellence for Robotic Vision (project number CE1401000016)

8120

