STM: SpatioTemporal and Motion Encoding for Action Recognition
Boyuan Jiang ∗
Zhejiang University

MengMeng Wang †
SenseTime Group Limited

Weihao Gan
SenseTime Group Limited

byjiang@zju.edu.cn

wangmengmeng@sensetime.com

ganweihao@sensetime.com

Wei Wu
SenseTime Group Limited

Junjie Yan
SenseTime Group Limited

wuwei@sensetime.com

yanjunjie@sensetime.com

Abstract
Spatiotemporal and motion features are two complementary and crucial information for video action recognition.
Recent state-of-the-art methods adopt a 3D CNN stream to
learn spatiotemporal features and another flow stream to
learn motion features. In this work, we aim to efficiently
encode these two features in a unified 2D framework. To
this end, we first propose an STM block, which contains a
Channel-wise SpatioTemporal Module (CSTM) to present
the spatiotemporal features and a Channel-wise Motion
Module (CMM) to efficiently encode motion features. We
then replace original residual blocks in the ResNet architecture with STM blcoks to form a simple yet effective STM
network by introducing very limited extra computation cost.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed STM
network outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on both
temporal-related datasets (i.e., Something-Something v1 &
v2 and Jester) and scene-related datasets (i.e., Kinetics400, UCF-101, and HMDB-51) with the help of encoding
spatiotemporal and motion features together.

1. Introduction
Following the rapid development of the cloud and edge
computing, we are used to engaged in social platforms and
live under the cameras. In the meanwhile, various industries, such as in security and transportation, collect vast
amount of videos which contain a wealth of information,
ranging from people’s behavior, traffic, and etc. Huge video
information attracts more and more researchers to the video
understanding field. The first step of the video understanding is action recognition which aims to recognize the human actions in videos. The most important features for action recognition are the spatiotemporal and motion features
∗ The work was done during an internship at SenseTime.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Feature visualization of STM block. First row is the input
frames. Second row is the input feature maps of Conv2 1 block.
Third row is the output spatiotemporal feature maps of CSTM.
The fourth row is the output motion feature maps of CMM. The
last row is the optical flow extracted by TV-L1.

where the former encodes the relationship of spatial features
from different timestamps while the latter presents motion
features between neighboring frames.
The existing methods for action recognition can be summarized into two categories. The first type is based on twostream neural networks [10, 33, 36, 9], which consists of an
RGB stream with RGB frames as input and a flow stream
with optical flow as input. The spatial stream models the
appearance features (not spatiotemporal features) without
considering the temporal information. The flow stream is
usually called as a temporal stream, which is designed to

2000

