Learning Compositional Neural Information Fusion for Human Parsing
Wenguan Wang∗ 1,3 , Zhijie Zhang∗ 2,1 , Siyuan Qi 3 , Jianbing Shen 1 , Yanwei Pang 2†, Ling Shao 1
1
2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University

3

University of California, Los Angeles, USA

{wenguanwang.ai, teesoloj}@gmail.com
https://github.com/ZzzjzzZ/CompositionalHumanParsing

Abstract
This work proposes to combine neural networks with the
compositional hierarchy of human bodies for efficient and
complete human parsing. We formulate the approach as a
neural information fusion framework. Our model assembles the information from three inference processes over the
hierarchy: direct inference (directly predicting each part of
a human body using image information), bottom-up inference (assembling knowledge from constituent parts), and
top-down inference (leveraging context from parent nodes).
The bottom-up and top-down inferences explicitly model
the compositional and decompositional relations in human
bodies, respectively. In addition, the fusion of multi-source
information is conditioned on the inputs, i.e., by estimating and considering the confidence of the sources. The
whole model is end-to-end differentiable, explicitly modeling information flows and structures. Our approach is extensively evaluated on four popular datasets, outperforming the state-of-the-arts in all cases, with a fast processing
speed of 23fps. Our code and results have been released to
help ease future research in this direction.

1. Introduction
Human parsing, which aims to decompose humans into
semantic parts (e.g., arms, legs, etc.), is a crucial yet challenging task for detailed human body configuration analysis
in 2D monocular images. It has gained increasing attention
owing to its essential role in many areas of application, such
as surveillance analysis [34], and fashion synthesis [82], to
name a couple.
Recent human parsing approaches have made remarkable progress. Some representative ones [6, 78, 49] are
built upon well-designed deep learning architectures for
semantic segmentation (e.g., fully convolutional networks
(FCNs) [46], DeepLab [4], etc.). Though these achieve
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Yanwei Pang.

Figure 1: We represent the human body (a) as a hierarchy of
multi-level semantic parts, and treat human parsing as a multisource information fusion process. For each part, information
from three sources (direct, bottom-up, and top-down processes)
are fused to better capture the structures in this problem. For clarity, we only show the information fusion of the lower-body node in
the red circle in (d). Compared to directly inferring the human semantics in (b), (c) shows better results after compositional neural
information fusion (d).

promising results, they fail to make full use of the rich structures in this task. Some others use extra human joints to
better constrain body configurations [22, 71, 54], requiring
additional training data of human keypoints and ignoring
the compositional relations within human bodies.
In this paper, we segment body parts at multiple levels
(see Fig. 1), in contrast to most previous human parsers
which only focus on atomic parts (represented as leaf nodes
in the human hierarchy). The insight is that estimating the
whole graph provides us cross-level information that can
assist learning and inference for each body part. This is
also evidenced by human perception studies [33, 62, 53]; a
global shape can either precede or follow the recognition of
its local parts, and both contribute to the final recognition.
We further specify this as a multi-source information fusion procedure, which integrates information from the following three processes (see Fig. 1 (d)). 1) Direct inference
(or unconscious inference) from the input image. For example, sometimes humans directly recognize objects ny re-

5703

