Boundary-Aware Feature Propagation for Scene Segmentation
Henghui Ding1

Xudong Jiang1

Ai Qun Liu1

Nadia Magnenat Thalmann1,2

Gang Wang3

1

2

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
University of Geneva, Switzerland
Alibaba Group, China

{ding0093, exdjiang, eaqliu, nadiathalmann}@ntu.edu.sg, gangwang6@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work, we address the challenging issue of scene
segmentation. To increase the feature similarity of the same
object while keeping the feature discrimination of different
objects, we explore to propagate information throughout
the image under the control of objects’ boundaries. To
this end, we first propose to learn the boundary as an
additional semantic class to enable the network to be aware
of the boundary layout. Then, we propose unidirectional
acyclic graphs (UAGs) to model the function of undirected
cyclic graphs (UCGs), which structurize the image via
building graphic pixel-by-pixel connections, in an efficient
and effective way. Furthermore, we propose a boundaryaware feature propagation (BFP) module to harvest and
propagate the local features within their regions isolated
by the learned boundaries in the UAG-structured image.
The proposed BFP is capable of splitting the feature propagation into a set of semantic groups via building strong
connections among the same segment region but weak connections between different segment regions. Without bells
and whistles, our approach achieves new state-of-the-art
segmentation performance on three challenging semantic
segmentation datasets, i.e., PASCAL-Context, CamVid, and
Cityscapes.

1. Introduction
Scene segmentation is a challenging and fundamental
task that aims to assign semantic categories to every pixels
of scene images. The key of scene segmentation refers
to parsing and segmenting a scene image into a range
of semantic coherent regions. Therefore, it is critical to
improve the feature similarity of the same object while
keeping the feature discrimination of different objects. To
this end, on the one hand, we explore to propagate features
throughout the images to share features and harvest context
information, which is beneficial for improving the feature
similarity. One the other hand, in order to keep the discrim-

Segment 1

Segment 2

Weaker Connection

Stronger Connection

Figure 1. (Best viewed in color) The boundary-aware feature
propagation module builds stronger connections within the same
segment and weaker connections between different segments,
which helps to enhance the similarity of features belonging to the
same segment while keeping discrimination of features belonging
to different segments.

inative power of features belonging to different objects, we
propose to make use of boundary information to control the
information flow during propagation progress. In a word,
we propose a boundary-aware feature propagation module
to build strong connections within the same segment and
weak connections between different segments, as shown in
Figure 1. This module requires two components: boundary
detection and graph construction.
First, boundary detection, which is an implicit task
in scene segmentation, is important for meticulous dense
prediction. However, in existing segmentation methods, boundary detection did not attract due attention since
boundary pixels only account for a small portion of the
entire image and it has little contribution to the performance
improvement. In this work, we try to find a way to simultaneously achieve segmentation and boundary detection, and
further make use of the learned boundary information to
enhance the segmentation performance. With regards to
this, we propose to generate the boundary label of semantic
objects from the existing object class labels given in the
segmentation datasets and define it as an additional class for
learning and classification. By doing so, concise boundaries

6819

