Adversarial Defense by Restricting the Hidden Space
of Deep Neural Networks
Aamir Mustafa1,3
Salman Khan1,2
Munawar Hayat1,3
Roland Goecke3
Jianbing Shen1,4
Ling Shao1
1
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Australian National University,
3
University of Canberra, 4 Beijing Institute of Technology

1. Introduction
Adversarial examples contain small,
humanimperceptible perturbations specifically designed by
an adversary to fool a learned model [37, 10]. These examples pose a serious threat for security critical applications,
e.g. autonomous cars [1], bio-metric identification [34]
and surveillance systems [28]. Furthermore, if a slight
perturbation added to a benign input drastically changes the
deep network’s output with a high-confidence, it reflects
that our current models are not distinctively learning the
fundamental visual concepts. Therefore, the design of
robust deep networks goes a long way towards developing
reliable and trustworthy artificial intelligence systems.
To mitigate adversarial attacks, various defense methods have recently been proposed. These can be broadly
1 Code and models are available at: https://github.com/
aamir-mustafa/pcl-adversarial-defense

Adv

Adv

Clean

Clean

Pred: 7

Pred: 2

Pred: 7

Pred: Ship

Pred: Ship
Clean

Clean
Pred: Auto

Adv

Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which can fool them by adding minuscule perturbations to the input images. The robustness of existing defenses suffers greatly under white-box attack settings, where
an adversary has full knowledge about the network and can
iterate several times to find strong perturbations. We observe that the main reason for the existence of such perturbations is the close proximity of different class samples
in the learned feature space. This allows model decisions
to be totally changed by adding an imperceptible perturbation in the inputs. To counter this, we propose to class-wise
disentangle the intermediate feature representations of deep
networks. Specifically, we force the features for each class
to lie inside a convex polytope that is maximally separated
from the polytopes of other classes. In this manner, the network is forced to learn distinct and distant decision regions
for each class. We observe that this simple constraint on the
features greatly enhances the robustness of learned models,
even against the strongest white-box attacks, without degrading the classification performance on clean images. We
report extensive evaluations in both black-box and whitebox attack scenarios and show significant gains in comparison to state-of-the art defenses1 .

Pred: 7

Adv

Abstract

Softmax Training

Pred: Ship

Our Method

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
airplane
automobile
bird
cat
deer
dog
frog
horse
ship
truck

Figure 1: 2D penultimate layer activations of a clean image
and its adversarial counterpart (PGD attack) for standard softmax
trained model and our method on MNIST (top row) and CIFAR10 (bottom row) datasets. Note that our method correctly maps the
attacked image to its true-class feature space.

classified into two categories: (a) Reactive defenses that
modify the inputs during testing time, using image transformations to counter the effect of adversarial perturbation
[21, 5, 41, 26], and (b) Proactive defenses that alter the underlying architecture or learning procedure e.g. by adding
more layers, ensemble/adversarial training or changing the
loss/activation functions [38, 16, 31, 4, 19, 29, 22, 14].
Proactive defenses are generally more valued, as they provide relatively better robustness against white-box attacks.
Nevertheless, both proactive and reactive defenses are easily circumvented by the iterative white-box adversaries [2].
This paper introduces a new proactive defense based on
a novel training procedure, which maximally separates the
learned feature representations at multiple depth levels of
the deep model. We note that the addition of perturbations
in the input domain leads to a corresponding polytope in the
high-dimensional manifold of the intermediate features and
the output classification space. Based upon this observation,
we propose to maximally separate the polytopes for different class samples, such that there is a minimal overlap between any two classes in the decision and intermediate feature space. This ensures that an adversary can no longer fool
the network within a restricted perturbation budget. In other
words, we build on the intuition that two different class samples, which are visually dissimilar in the input domain, must
be mapped to different regions in the output space. There13385

