Seq-SG2SL: Inferring Semantic Layout from Scene Graph
through Sequence to Sequence Learning

Boren Li∗

Boyu Zhuang

Mingyang Li

Jian Gu

Alibaba AI Labs
{boren.lbr* ,

po-yu.zby, gujian.gj}@alibaba-inc.com
mingyangli009@gmail.com

Abstract
Generating semantic layout from scene graph is a crucial intermediate task connecting text to image. We present
a conceptually simple, flexible and general framework using sequence to sequence (seq-to-seq) learning for this task.
The framework, called Seq-SG2SL, derives sequence proxies for the two modality and a Transformer-based seq-toseq model learns to transduce one into the other. A scene
graph is decomposed into a sequence of semantic fragments
(SF), one for each relationship. A semantic layout is represented as the consequence from a series of brick-action
code segments (BACS), dictating the position and scale of
each object bounding box in the layout. Viewing the two
building blocks, SF and BACS, as corresponding terms in
two different vocabularies, a seq-to-seq model is fittingly
used to translate. A new metric, semantic layout evaluation
understudy (SLEU), is devised to evaluate the task of semantic layout prediction inspired by BLEU. SLEU defines
relationships within a layout as unigrams and looks at the
spatial distribution for n-grams. Unlike the binary precision of BLEU, SLEU allows for some tolerances spatially
through thresholding the Jaccard Index and is consequently
more adapted to the task. Experimental results on the challenging Visual Genome dataset show improvement over a
non-sequential approach based on graph convolution.

1. Introduction
Learning the relation from semantic description to its
visual incarnation leads to important applications, such as
text-to-image synthesis [24] and semantic image retrieval
[11]. It remains a challenging and fundamental problem in
computer vision [10]. Recent researches have gradually formalized the structured representations of the two modality,
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1: The Seq-SG2SL framework for inferring semantic layout from scene graph.
scene graph [11][13] for semantic description and semantic
layout [9][26] for image. Therefore, our goal in this work
solves the underlying task, inferring semantic layout from
scene graph, for connecting text to image.
Most existing works infer semantic layout from text
[7][9][20]. However, leading methods still struggle with
complex text inputs depicting multiple objects owing to the
unstructured nature of text. Hence, Johnson et al. [10] pioneered to infer semantic layout from scene graph as a separate task, isolated from semantic parsing [18]. Scene graph
is adopted because it is a powerful structured representation that efficiently conveys scene contents in text [13]. As
a notable step forward, they observed that semantic layout
is largely constrained by objects within relationships. As
such, they developed a graph convolution network to embed
a scene graph containing only objects within relationships
into respective object feature vectors that further dictate semantic layout through an object layout network. However,
they inferred all object feature embeddings simultaneously
from a scene graph that comprises exponential variability of
object and relationship combinations. It is extremely challenging for a model to express such prohibitive diversity.
We view this task from a novel perspective to avoid combinatorial explosion that largely restricted the model expressiveness in the past. Inferring semantic layout from

7435

