On the Global Optima of Kernelized Adversarial Representation Learning
Bashir Sadeghi
Michigan State University

Runyi Yu
Eastern Mediterranean University

Vishnu Boddeti
Michigan State University

sadeghib@msu.edu

yu@ieee.org

vishnu@msu.edu

Abstract
Adversarial representation learning is a promising
paradigm for obtaining data representations that are invariant to certain sensitive attributes while retaining the information necessary for predicting target attributes. Existing
approaches solve this problem through iterative adversarial minimax optimization and lack theoretical guarantees.
In this paper, we first study the “linear” form of this problem i.e., the setting where all the players are linear functions. We show that the resulting optimization problem is
both non-convex and non-differentiable. We obtain an exact closed-form expression for its global optima through
spectral learning and provide performance guarantees in
terms of analytical bounds on the achievable utility and
invariance. We then extend this solution and analysis to
non-linear functions through kernel representation. Numerical experiments on UCI, Extended Yale B and CIFAR100 datasets indicate that, (a) practically, our solution is
ideal for “imparting” provable invariance to any biased
pre-trained data representation, and (b) the global optima
of the “kernel” form can provide a comparable trade-off
between utility and invariance in comparison to iterative
minimax optimization of existing deep neural network based
approaches, but with provable guarantees.

1. Introduction
Adversarial representation learning (ARL) is a promising framework for training image representation models
that can control the information encapsulated within it.
ARL is practically employed for learning representations
for a variety of applications, including, unsupervised domain adaptation of images [7], censoring sensitive information from images [6], learning fair and unbiased representations [17, 18], learning representations that are controllably invariant to sensitive attributes [26] and mitigating
unintended information leakage [23], amongst others.
At the core of the ARL formulation is the idea of jointly
optimizing three entities: (i) An encoder E that seeks to
distill the information from input data and retains the in-

x

E

T

ŷ

A

ŝ

z

Figure 1: Adversarial Representation Learning consists
of three entities, an encoder E that obtains a compact representation z of input data x, a predictor T that predicts
a desired target attribute y and an adversary that seeks to
extract a sensitive attribute s, both from the embedding z.

formation relevant to a target task while intentionally and
permanently eliminating the information corresponding to a
sensitive attribute, (ii) A predictor T that seeks to extract a
desired target attribute, and (iii) A proxy adversary A, playing the role of an unknown adversary, that seeks to extract a
known sensitive attribute. Figure 1 shows a pictorial illustration of the ARL problem.
Typical instantiations of ARL represent these entities
through non-linear functions in the form of deep neural
networks (DNNs) and formulate parameter learning as a
minimax optimization problem. Practically, optimization is
performed through simultaneous gradient descent, wherein,
small gradient steps are taken simultaneously in the parameter space of the encoder, predictor and proxy adversary.
The solutions thus obtained have been effective in learning
data representations with controlled invariance across applications such as image classification [23], multi-lingual
machine translation [26] and domain adaptation [7].
Despite its practical promise, the aforementioned ARL
setup suffers from a number of drawbacks:
– Representation learning under adversarial settings is challenging in its own right. The minimax formulation of
the problem leads to an optimization problem that is nonconvex in the parameter space, both due to the adversarial loss function as well as due to the non-linear nature of
modern DNNs. As we show in this paper, even for simple
instances of ARL where each entity is characterized by a

7971

