Learning an Effective Equivariant 3D Descriptor Without Supervision
Riccardo Spezialetti, Samuele Salti, Luigi di Stefano
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{riccardo.spezialetti, samuele.salti, luigi.distefano }@unibo.it

Abstract
Establishing correspondences between 3D shapes is a
fundamental task in 3D Computer Vision, typically addressed by matching local descriptors. Recently, a few attempts at applying the deep learning paradigm to the task
have shown promising results. Yet, the only explored way to
learn rotation invariant descriptors has been to feed neural
networks with highly engineered and invariant representations provided by existing hand-crafted descriptors, a path
that goes in the opposite direction of end-to-end learning
from raw data so successfully deployed for 2D images.
In this paper, we explore the benefits of taking a step
back in the direction of end-to-end learning of 3D descriptors by disentangling the creation of a robust and distinctive
rotation equivariant representation, which can be learned
from unoriented input data, and the definition of a good
canonical orientation, required only at test time to obtain
an invariant descriptor. To this end, we leverage two recent innovations: spherical convolutional neural networks
to learn an equivariant descriptor and plane folding decoders to learn without supervision. The effectiveness of
the proposed approach is experimentally validated by outperforming hand-crafted and learned descriptors on a standard benchmark.

1. Introduction
Surface matching is a challenging problem in 3D Computer Vision. It has a large number of applications such
as 3D Object Recognition, 3D Object Retrieval, 3D Registration and Reconstruction. The definition of compact and
effective representations of the local geometry of a surface,
usually referred to as descriptors, plays a key role in surface matching. Indeed, performance of the algorithms proposed to tackle the above mentioned applications is often
largely determined by the effectiveness of the chosen descriptor. This has fostered intensive research in the area of
local 3D descriptors in the last decades [29, 25, 13, 10, 24].
The success of deep neural networks in image recogni-

tion has motivated a recent paradigm shift from handcrafted
algorithms to data-driven approaches also in the design of
local 3D descriptors [36, 14, 3, 4]. However, state-of-the
art proposals do not actually learn new local 3D descriptors from the input data but from existing handcrafted 3D
descriptors, which are already rotation-invariant by design:
e.g., CGF [14] starts from a high-dimensional input parameterization which closely resembles the Unique Shape Context (USC) descriptor [29], while PPF-FoldNet [3] relies
on the well-known Point Pair Features (PPF) [6]. In other
words, due to the difficulty of feeding neural networks with
unorganized input data [14], these approaches create new
descriptors by actually learning how to robustly compress a
specific invariant handcrafted descriptor.
We argue that the drawbacks of relying on invariant
handcrafted descriptors as input data to feed neural networks are twofold. On one hand, there not exist an optimal
handcrafted descriptor across applications and datasets, as
vouched by recent evaluations [9]. Therefore, for instance,
performance of PPF-FoldNet are limited on some scenarios and datasets by the handcrafted design decision of using
PPF as input representation. On the other hand, to achieve
rotation invariance, existing handcrafted descriptors used in
deep learning pipelines rely either on the normal at the point
as a reference axis [3] or on a local reference frame (LRF)
[14] to express point coordinates and angles with respect
to a canonically oriented reference frame. Repeatability of
the axis or the LRF directly affects the invariance and robustness of the input descriptor [20, 19] and, in turn, of the
descriptor learned from such representations. However, parameters used to obtain such canonical orientation (e.g. the
number of neighbours to estimate the normals, how to establish a reference direction on the tangent plane in a LRF,
etc.) are again handcrafted design decisions and are not optimized during training.
Reliance on rotation-invariant handcrafted descriptors as
input representations deviates significantly from the end-toend learning paradigm so successfully applied to images.
Therefore, in this paper we investigate on whether leaving
the model free to learn an optimal descriptor from a non16401

