AGSS-VOS: Attention Guided Single-Shot Video Object Segmentation
Huaijia Lin1 Xiaojuan Qi2 Jiaya Jia1,3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 University of Oxford

3

Tencent YouTu Lab

Most video object segmentation approaches process objects separately. This incurs high computational cost when
multiple objects exist. In this paper, we propose AGSS-VOS
to segment multiple objects in one feed-forward path via
instance-agnostic and instance-specific modules. Information from the two modules is fused via an attention-guided
decoder to simultaneously segment all object instances in
one path. The whole framework is end-to-end trainable
with instance IoU loss. Experimental results on YoutubeVOS and DAVIS-2017 dataset demonstrate that AGSS-VOS
achieves competitive results in terms of both accuracy and
efficiency.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) aims at segmenting
objects in all frames of a video. It finds various applications
in video editing, autonomous driving, robotics, humancomputer interaction, to name a few. In this paper, we study
this problem in the semi-supervised setting, in which annotation of one or multiple objects is given for the first frame
in a video. The task is then to segment all corresponding
objects in the rest of the video.
Successful approaches [26, 29, 2, 7, 15] on video object
segmentation in the semi-supervised setting can be coarsely
cast into three categories. One major stream [26, 29, 25]
is to separately segment objects and does not consider onepass multi-object processing. The efficiency is shown in
Fig. 1 (in the red curve). Another line of research [15, 11]
utilizes region proposals to generate mask proposals. They
adopt re-identification networks to find and associate objects. Albeit improving performance, these systems are still
time-consuming, i.e., taking 37 seconds per frame [15], and
need post-processing to handle false positive object proposals. Recently, embedding-based solutions [2, 7, 17] that
measure pixel distance in the embedding space demonstrate
great efficiency and accuracy trade-off. These methods have
indispensable pixel-wise distance calculation process with
O(N 2 ) time complexity on O(N ) pixels. They are still dif-

Score (%)

Abstract

80

1.6

70

1.4

60

1.2

50

1

40

0.8

30

0.6

20

0.4

10

0.2

0

Speed (t\s)

linhj@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, xiaojuan.qi@eng.ox.ac.uk, leojia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

0
1

2

3

4

RGMP

AGSS-VOS

Object Number
RGMP

AGSS-VOS

Figure 1. Comparison of accuracy (in histogram) and computation
speed (by the curve) regarding different object numbers of RGMP
[26] and our method. Input frame size 832×448 is used in DAVIS2017 test-dev set. On large object numbers, our method efficiency
is less affected.

ficult to handle high-res videos with memory constraint.
To tackle the above challenges, we propose an end-toend attention guided single-shot video object segmentation
(AGSS-VOS) framework to simultaneously segment all objects in one feed-forward pass without utilizing complex object proposals or time consuming pixel-wise distance calculation. The key idea is to adopt an instance-agnostic module to capture knowledge shared by all instances, and an
instance-specific module to generate instance-specific features. Output from the two modules is fused via an attention
mechanism to segment object instances.
Specifically, without discriminating among different object instances, the instance-agnostic module takes all objects and encodes them into one common feature with fully
convolutional neural networks. The instance-specific module then encodes different objects into separate attention
features. The generated two types of features are combined
via multiplication and are further utilized to generate masks
of instances. Finally, they are normalized to produce the object segmentation prediction for the target frame. The whole
framework is end-to-end trainable with instance IoU loss.

3949

