Boosting Few-Shot Visual Learning with Self-Supervision
Spyros Gidaris1 , Andrei Bursuc1 , Nikos Komodakis2 , Patrick Pérez1 , Matthieu Cord1,3
1
2
3
valeo.ai
LIGM, Ecole des Pont ParisTech
Sorbonne Université

Abstract
Few-shot learning and self-supervised learning address
different facets of the same problem: how to train a model
with little or no labeled data. Few-shot learning aims for
optimization methods and models that can learn efficiently
to recognize patterns in the low data regime. Self-supervised
learning focuses instead on unlabeled data and looks into
it for the supervisory signal to feed high capacity deep neural networks. In this work we exploit the complementarity of these two domains and propose an approach for improving few-shot learning through self-supervision. We use
self-supervision as an auxiliary task in a few-shot learning
pipeline, enabling feature extractors to learn richer and more
transferable visual representations while still using few annotated samples. Through self-supervision, our approach can
be naturally extended towards using diverse unlabeled data
from other datasets in the few-shot setting. We report consistent improvements across an array of architectures, datasets
and self-supervision techniques. We provide the implementation code at https://github.com/valeoai/BF3S.

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based methods have achieved impressive
results on various image understanding tasks, such as image classification [22, 29, 52, 54], object detection [47], or
semantic segmentation [4]. However, to learn successfully
these tasks, convolutional neural networks (convnets) need
to access large volumes of manually labeled training data.
If not, the trained convnets might suffer from poor generalization performance to the test data. In contrast, humans are
perfectly capable of learning new visual concepts from only
a few examples, generalizing without difficulty to new data.
Few-shot learning [8, 9, 26, 30, 55] aims to endow artificial
perception systems with a similar ability, especially with the
help of modern deep learning.
Hence, the goal of few-shot visual learning is to devise
recognition models that are capable of efficiently learning to
recognize a set of classes despite that there are available very
few training examples for them (e.g., only 1 or 5 examples
per class). To avoid overfitting due to data scarcity, few-shot

learning algorithms rely on transfer learning techniques and
have two learning stages. During the first stage, the model is
usually trained using a different set of classes, called base
classes, which is associated with a large number of annotated
training examples. The goal of this stage is to let the few-shot
model acquire transferable visual analysis abilities, typically
in the form of learned representations, which are mobilized
in the second stage. In this next step, the model indeed learns
to recognize novel classes, unseen during the first learning
stage, using only a few training examples per class.
Few-shot learning relates to self-supervised representation learning [6, 7, 14, 31, 40, 61]. The latter is a form of
unsupervised learning that trains a model on an annotationfree pretext task defined using only the visual information
present in images. The purpose of this self-supervised task
is to make the model learn image representations that would
be useful when transferred to other image understanding
tasks. For instance, in the seminal work of Doersch et al. [6],
a network, by being trained on the self-supervised task of
predicting the relative location of image patches, manages to
learn image representations that are successfully transferred
to the vision tasks of object recognition, object detection,
and semantic segmentation. Therefore, as in few-shot learning, self-supervised methods also have two learning stages,
the first that learns image representations with a pretext
self-supervised task, and the second that adapts those representations to the actual task of interest. Also, both learning
approaches try to limit the dependence of deep learning
methods on the availability of large amounts of labeled data.
Inspired by the connection between few-shot learning
and self-supervised learning, we propose to combine the two
methods to improve the transfer learning abilities of few-shot
models. More specifically, we add a self-supervised loss to
the training loss that a few-shot model minimizes during its
first learning stage (see Figure 1). Hence, we artificially augment the training task(s) that a few-shot model solves during
this stage. We argue that this task augmentation forces the
model to learn a more diversified set of image features, and
this, in turn, improves its ability to adapt to novel classes
with few training data. Moreover, since self-supervision does
not require data annotations, one can include extra unlabeled
data to the first learning stage. By extending the size and

8059

