Soft Rasterizer: A Differentiable Renderer for Image-based 3D Reasoning

Shichen Liu1,2 , Tianye Li1,2 , Weikai Chen1 , and Hao Li1,2,3
1

USC Institute for Creative Technologies
2
University of Southern California
3
Pinscreen

{lshichen, tli, wechen}@ict.usc.edu

hao@hao-li.com

Abstract
Rendering bridges the gap between 2D vision and 3D
scenes by simulating the physical process of image formation. By inverting such renderer, one can think of a learning
approach to infer 3D information from 2D images. However, standard graphics renderers involve a fundamental
discretization step called rasterization, which prevents the
rendering process to be differentiable, hence able to be
learned. Unlike the state-of-the-art differentiable renderers [30, 20], which only approximate the rendering gradient in the back propagation, we propose a truly differentiable rendering framework that is able to (1) directly render colorized mesh using differentiable functions and (2)
back-propagate efficient supervision signals to mesh vertices and their attributes from various forms of image representations, including silhouette, shading and color images.
The key to our framework is a novel formulation that views
rendering as an aggregation function that fuses the probabilistic contributions of all mesh triangles with respect to
the rendered pixels. Such formulation enables our framework to flow gradients to the occluded and far-range vertices, which cannot be achieved by the previous state-of-thearts. We show that by using the proposed renderer, one can
achieve significant improvement in 3D unsupervised singleview reconstruction both qualitatively and quantitatively.
Experiments also demonstrate that our approach is able
to handle the challenging tasks in image-based shape fitting, which remain nontrivial to existing differentiable renderers. Code is available at https://github.com/
ShichenLiu/SoftRas.

1. Introduction
Understanding and reconstructing 3D scenes and structures from 2D images has been one of the fundamental goals
in computer vision. The key to image-based 3D reasoning
is to find sufficient supervisions flowing from the pixels to
the 3D properties. To obtain image-to-3D correlations, prior
approaches mainly rely on the matching losses based on 2D

3D Mesh
Probability Maps {Dj } w/ Color

Soft Rasterizer R

Aggregate Function A(·)

Soft Rendered Image Is

3D Mesh
Shaded Fragments

Standard Rasterizer R̄

Discrete Sampling

Rendered Image I¯s

Figure 1: We propose Soft Rasterizer R (upper), a truly differentiable renderer, which formulates rendering as a differentiable aggregating process A(·) that fuses per-triangle
contributions {Di } in a “soft” probabilistic manner. Our approach attacks the core problem of differentiating the standard rasterizer, which cannot flow gradients from pixels to
geometry due to the discrete sampling operation (below).
key points/contours [3, 36, 27, 33] or shape/appearance priors [1, 29, 6, 24, 50]. However, the above approaches are
either limited to task-specific domains or can only provide
weak supervision due to the sparsity of the 2D features. In
contrast, as the process of producing 2D images from 3D assets, rendering relates each pixel with the 3D parameters by
simulating the physical mechanism of image formulation.
Hence, by inverting a renderer, one can obtain dense pixellevel supervision for general-purpose 3D reasoning tasks,
which cannot be achieved by conventional approaches.
However, the rendering process is not differentiable
in conventional graphics pipelines. In particular, standard mesh renderer involves a discrete sampling operation, called rasterization, which prevents the gradient to be
flowed into the mesh vertices. Since the forward rendering
function is highly non-linear and complex, to achieve differentiable rendering, recent advances [30, 20] only approx-

7708

