DADA: Depth-Aware Domain Adaptation in Semantic Segmentation
Tuan-Hung Vu1
1

Himalaya Jain1

Maxime Bucher1

valeo.ai, Paris, France

2

Matthieu Cord1,2

Patrick Pérez1

Sorbonne University, Paris, France

Figure 1: We propose a novel depth-aware domain adaptation framework (DADA) to efficiently leverage depth as privileged
information in the unsupervised domain adaptation setting. This example shows how semantic segmentation of a scene from the target
domain benefits from the proposed approach, in comparison to state-of-the-art domain adaptation with no use of depth. In figure’s top, we
use different background colors (blue and red) to represent source and target information that are available during training. Here, annotated
source domain data come from the synthetic SYNTHIA dataset and un-annotated target domain images are real scenes from Cityscapes.
The cyclist highlighted by the yellow box is a good qualitative illustration of the improvement we obtain.

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is important
for applications where large scale annotation of representative data is challenging. For semantic segmentation in
particular, it helps deploy, on real “target domain” data,
models that are trained on annotated images from a different “source domain”, notably a virtual environment.
To this end, most previous works consider semantic segmentation as the only mode of supervision for source domain data, while ignoring other, possibly available, information like depth. In this work, we aim at exploiting at best such a privileged information while training
the UDA model. We propose a unified depth-aware UDA
framework that leverages in several complementary ways
the knowledge of dense depth in the source domain. As
a result, the performance of the trained semantic segmentation model on the target domain is boosted. Our novel
approach indeed achieves state-of-the-art performance on
different challenging synthetic-2-real benchmarks. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/
valeoai/DADA.

1. Introduction
Advances in deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
brought significant leaps forward in many recognition tasks
including semantic segmentation. Still, predicting semantic
labels for all imagery pixels is a challenging problem, especially when models are trained on one domain, named as
source, yet evaluated on another domain, named as target.
The so-called domain gap between source and target distributions often causes drastic drops in target performance.
Instead, autonomous critical systems such as self-driving
cars require robust performance under diverse testing conditions, despite the lack of ubiquitous training data. For such
systems, semantic segmentation models trained on sunny
urban images taken in Roma should yield good results even
on foggy scenes in London.
Techniques addressing the domain gap problem are usually classified as domain adaptation (DA) [7]. In previous works, most DA settings are unsupervised on the target side, i.e., only un-annotated target samples are available
during the supervised training on source domain. This is
referred to as unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). In
recent years, considerable progress has been made in UDA
17364

