Deep Single-Image Portrait Relighting
Hao Zhou1 ∗

1

Sunil Hadap2
Kalyan Sunkavalli3
David W. Jacobs1
1
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
2
Amazon 3 Adobe Research

{hzhou, djacobs}@cs.umd.edu

2

sunilhadap@acm.org

3

sunkaval@adobe.com

Figure 1: Our algorithm takes a portrait image and a target lighting as input and generates a new portrait image.

Abstract
Conventional physically-based methods for relighting
portrait images need to solve an inverse rendering problem, estimating face geometry, reflectance and lighting.
However, the inaccurate estimation of face components can
cause strong artifacts in relighting, leading to unsatisfactory results. In this work, we apply a physically-based portrait relighting method to generate a large scale, high quality, “in the wild” portrait relighting dataset (DPR). A deep
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is then trained using
this dataset to generate a relit portrait image by using a
source image and a target lighting as input. The training
procedure regularizes the generated results, removing the
artifacts caused by physically-based relighting methods. A
GAN loss is further applied to improve the quality of the relit portrait image. Our trained network can relight portrait
images with resolutions as high as 1024 × 1024. We evaluate the proposed method on the proposed DPR datset, Flickr
portrait dataset and Multi-PIE dataset both qualitatively
and quantitatively. Our experiments demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves state-of-the-art results. Please
refer to https://zhhoper.github.io/dpr.html
for dataset and code.

∗ Hao Zhou is currently at Amazon AWS.

1. Introduction
The goal of this work is to design an automatic singleimage portrait relighting algorithm, which takes a portrait
image and a target lighting as input and generates a new
portrait image under the target lighting condition. There
are physically-based relighting methods that explicitly reconstruct the face geometry, reflectance, and lighting and
then re-render this reconstruction using a novel lighting
[3, 31, 7, 26, 29, 22]. However, single image face reconstruction is still an open problem, and even the state-of-theart methods have significant errors, e.g., inaccurate estimation of face geometry and reflectance properties. These errors can propagate into the relighting and lead to poor results. As a result, while these relighting methods are generally good at capturing lighting variations, they may contain artifacts that prevent them from looking realistic. In
this work, we leverage this property: we use a physicallybased relighting method to generate a large-scale training
dataset, and then use it to train a generative network to reproduce them while imposing an adversarial loss based only
on real photographs. The supervised reconstruction loss allows the network to learn how to relight, while the adversarial loss ensures that the results are on the manifold of real
photographs and do not have the errors from the physicallybased relighting method.
We first propose a ratio image-based (RI-based) [23] rendering algorithm to generate a large scale, high resolution,
“in the wild” deep portrait relighting dataset (DPR). In this

7194

