Information Entropy Based Feature Pooling for Convolutional Neural Networks
Weitao Wan, Jiansheng Chen∗, Tianpeng Li, Yiqing Huang, Jingqi Tian, Cheng Yu, Youze Xue
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
wwt16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jschenthu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
{ltp16, huang-yq17, tianjq16, yuc18, xueyz19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

ࣅ૛ ൐ ૙Ǥ ૢૢૢ

h

h

1

w
ෝଵ ൌ ͳǤͳʹ
࢖

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Ă
(GT)

w

c

2

Class

Probability

Conv
Feature Maps

ࣅ૚ ൏ ૙Ǥ ૚

Probability

In convolutional neural networks (CNNs), we propose to
estimate the importance of a feature vector at a spatial location in the feature maps by the network’s uncertainty on
its class prediction, which can be quantified using the information entropy. Based on this idea, we propose the entropybased feature weighting method for semantics-aware feature pooling which can be readily integrated into various
CNN architectures for both training and inference. We
demonstrate that such a location-adaptive feature weighting mechanism helps the network to concentrate on semantically important image regions, leading to improvements
in the large-scale classification and weakly-supervised semantic segmentation tasks. Furthermore, the generated feature weights can be utilized in visual tasks such as weaklysupervised object localization. We conduct extensive experiments on different datasets and CNN architectures, outperforming recently proposed pooling methods and attention
mechanisms in ImageNet classification as well as achieving
state-of-the-arts in weakly-supervised semantic segmentation on PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset.

Entropy Weighting
Coefficients

ෝଶ ൌ ͷ ൈ ͳͲି଺
࢖
Grass Snake
Marmot
Megal ith
Armadi llo

1

Ă

10-6

(GT)

Class

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed location-adaptive feature
weighting mechanism using information entropy. The model is
trained with image classification labels. It’s much more certain on
its localized class predictions regarding the feature vector centered
on the ‘grass snake’ than that on the background rock.

1. Introduction
Visual classification on large-scale image datasets [18,
38] is challenging because of the subtle inter-class differences and large background variations in natural images.
The deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) is by far
the most successful model for solving this problem and various CNN architectures [10, 31, 12, 30] have been proposed
to continually boost the classification performances.
Current CNN models extract deep features from images
by utilizing stacks of convolutional layers intersected with
pooling layers for feature selection. To aggregate global semantics in the input image, in popular CNN architectures
such as ResNet [10] and InceptionV3 [31], a Global Average Pooling (GAP) layer is placed between the last convolu∗ Corresponding author

tional feature maps and the classifier. As such, these CNNs
are capable of extracting global features which are robust to
translation and rotations at very low computational costs.
In the GAP layer, the final image representation is computed as the average of all the feature vectors from the last
convolutional feature maps. In other words, local features
focused on different spatial locations in the input image are
treated equally. Nevertheless, this may not be the best feature selection strategy. From the data distribution perspective, objects in natural images often appear on various complex backgrounds and there are frequent co-occurrences of
different objects in the same image. At the same time, for
feature vectors at different locations in the feature maps, the
corresponding centers of the effective receptive field are different, indicating that semantics embedded in these feature
13405

