Contextual Attention for Hand Detection in the Wild
Supreeth Narasimhaswamy†,1 , Zhengwei Wei†,1 , Yang Wang1 , Justin Zhang2 , Minh Hoai1,3
†
Joint First Authors, 1 Stony Brook University, 2 Caltech, 3 VinAI Research

Abstract
We present Hand-CNN, a novel convolutional network
architecture for detecting hand masks and predicting hand
orientations in unconstrained images. Hand-CNN extends
MaskRCNN with a novel attention mechanism to incorporate contextual cues in the detection process. This attention mechanism can be implemented as an efficient network
module that captures non-local dependencies between features. This network module can be inserted at different
stages of an object detection network, and the entire detector can be trained end-to-end.
We also introduce large-scale annotated hand datasets
containing hands in unconstrained images for training and
evaluation. We show that Hand-CNN outperforms existing methods on the newly collected datasets and the publicly available PASCAL VOC human layout dataset. Data
and code: https://www3.cs.stonybrook.edu/
˜cvl/projects/hand_det_attention/.

1. Introduction
People use hands to interact with each other and the environment, and most human actions and gestures can be determined by the location and motion of their hands. As such,
being able to detect hands reliably in images and videos
will facilitate many visual analysis tasks, including gesture
and action recognition. Unfortunately, it is difficult to detect hands in unconstrained conditions due to tremendous
variation of hands in images. Hands are highly articulated,
appearing in various orientations, shapes, and sizes. Occlusion and motion blur further increase variations in the
appearance of hands.
Hands can be considered as a generic object class, and
an appearance-based object detection framework such as
DPM [9] and MaskRCNN [12] can be used to train a hand
detector. However, an appearance-based detector would
have difficulties in detecting hands with occlusion and motion blur. Another approach for detecting hands is to consider them as a part of a human body and determine the
locations of the hands based on the detected human pose.
Pose detection, however, does not provide a reliable solution by itself, especially when several human body parts are
not visible in the image (e.g., in TV shows, the lower body

Figure 1: Hand detection in the wild. We propose HandCNN, a novel network for detecting hand masks and estimating hand orientations in unconstrained conditions.
is frequently not contained in the image frame).
In this paper, we propose Hand-CNN, a novel CNN architecture to detect hand masks and predict hand orientations. Hand-CNN is founded on MaskRCNN [12], with a
novel attention module to incorporate contextual cues during the detection process. The proposed attention module
is designed for two types of non-local contextual pooling:
one based on feature similarity and the other based on spatial relationship between semantically related entities. Intuitively, a region is more likely to be a hand if there are
other regions with similar skin tones, and the location of a
hand can be inferred by the presence of other semantically
related body parts such as wrist and elbow. The contextual
attention module encapsulates these two types of non-local
contextual pooling operations. These operations can be performed efficiently with a few matrix multiplications and additions, and the parameters of the attention module can be
learned together with other parameters of the detector endto-end. The attention module as a whole can be inserted
in already existing detection networks. This illustrates the
generality and flexibility of the proposed attention module.
Finally, we address the lack of training data by collecting and annotating two large-scale hand datasets. Since annotating many images is a laborious process, we develop
a method to semi-automatically annotate most of the data
and we only manually annotate a portion of the data. Al-

9567

