Bilinear Attention Networks for Person Retrieval
Pengfei Fang1,2 , Jieming Zhou1 , Soumava Kumar Roy1,2 , Lars Petersson1,2 , Mehrtash Harandi2,3
1
The Australian National University, 2 DATA61-CSIRO, Australia, 3 Monash University
{Pengfei.Fang, u5761794, Soumava.KumarRoy}@anu.edu.au
Lars.Petersson@data61.csiro.au, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates a novel Bilinear attention (Biattention) block, which discovers and uses second order
statistical information in an input feature map, for the purpose of person retrieval. The Bi-attention block uses bilinear pooling to model the local pairwise feature interactions
along each channel, while preserving the spatial structural
information. We propose an Attention in Attention (AiA)
mechanism to build inter-dependency among the second order local and global features with the intent to make better use of, or pay more attention to, such higher order
statistical relationships. The proposed network, equipped
with the proposed Bi-attention is referred to as Bilinear
ATtention network (BAT-net). Our approach outperforms
current state-of-the-art by a considerable margin across
the standard benchmark datasets (e.g., CUHK03, Market1501, DukeMTMC-reID and MSMT17).

1. Introduction
Person retrieval1 , also known as person re-identification
(re-ID), has attracted an increasing amount of attention in
the Computer Vision (CV) community due to its significant industrial potential as well as academic importance in
terms of creating highly discriminative feature representations, with one of the earliest works being [6]. In short, the
task of a person retrieval machine can be characterised as
follows: given an image of a specific person, the machine
should retrieve all images, from a gallery, that contain a person with the same identity (ID).
This is a challenging task, and one of the main issues
causing an unreliable person retrieval system is that of
misalignment. That is, the location of the person’s body,
and its parts, with respect to a reference frame, can easily
change due to body shape, pose, clothing etc. This, in turn,
causes feature mismatches during training and testing, lead1 In the remainder of this paper, we will use the terms “person retrieval”,
“person re-identification” and “person re-ID” interchangeably.

ing to inaccurate re-identification. Much effort has gone
into studying and addressing these issues [20, 36, 38, 32,
23, 41, 17, 22, 35]; however, it still remains a dominant
problem and calls for further study.
Some attempts [34, 29] developed over the years to
address this problem rely on human pose estimation.
These estimator networks supplement the baseline-network
with additional cues to learn a superior embedding space,
thereby resulting in increased accuracy over the baselinenetwork. Other solutions benefit from person attributes
[16, 35], which are invariant across pose, illumination, misalignment etc. However, person attribute learning also requires training a network on an additional person attribute
dataset or labelling attributes within existing person re-ID
datasets.
Recently, several solutions have been inspired by the human visual sensing process using visual attention mechanisms [20, 43, 33, 22], to focus on the discriminative regions
within a person bounding box. The inherent attention module is designed to automatically select the meaningful parts
of an image, and is trained in a weakly-supervised manner
(i.e., no explicit labelling information is given to identify
the areas to attend). However, current attention models tend
to only utilize first order information, such as the pattern
itself in the feature map, ignoring higher order statistical
information that may be hidden in the feature map.
Bilinear mappings and models have been widely adopted
as a generalization of their linear counterparts. Some prime
examples are bilinear classifiers [25], bilinear pooling [5]
and bilinear CNNs [21] with applications in visual question
answering, fine-grained image recognition, texture classification to name but a few. To the best of our knowledge,
attention mechanisms equipped with bi-linear models have
not been developed or studied before despite their intriguing
properties.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized as
follows: (a) We formulate a novel Bilinear attention (Biattention) block with an Attention in Attention (AiA) mechanism. The AiA mechanism can be understood as having
an attention module inside another, with the inner one de-

8030

