Video Classification with Channel-Separated Convolutional Networks
Du Tran

Heng Wang

Lorenzo Torresani
Facebook AI

Matt Feiszli

{trandu,hengwang,torresani,mdf}@fb.com

Abstract
Group convolution has been shown to offer great computational savings in various 2D convolutional architectures
for image classification. It is natural to ask: 1) if group convolution can help to alleviate the high computational cost
of video classification networks; 2) what factors matter the
most in 3D group convolutional networks; and 3) what are
good computation/accuracy trade-offs with 3D group convolutional networks.
This paper studies the effects of different design choices
in 3D group convolutional networks for video classification. We empirically demonstrate that the amount of channel interactions plays an important role in the accuracy of
3D group convolutional networks. Our experiments suggest
two main findings. First, it is a good practice to factorize 3D convolutions by separating channel interactions and
spatiotemporal interactions as this leads to improved accuracy and lower computational cost. Second, 3D channelseparated convolutions provide a form of regularization,
yielding lower training accuracy but higher test accuracy
compared to 3D convolutions. These two empirical findings
lead us to design an architecture – Channel-Separated Convolutional Network (CSN) – which is simple, efficient, yet
accurate. On Sports1M and Kinetics, our CSNs are comparable with or better than the state-of-the-art while being
2-3 times more efficient.

1. Introduction
Video classification has witnessed much good progress
in recent years. Most of the accuracy gains have come
from the introduction of new powerful architectures [3, 30,
23, 37, 35]. However, many of these architectures are
built on expensive 3D spatiotemporal convolutions. Furthermore, these convolutions are typically computed across
all the channels in each layer. 3D CNNs have complexity
O(CT HW ) as opposed to the cost of O(CHW ) of 2D
CNNs, where T denotes the number of frames, H, W the
spatial dimensions and C the number of channels. For both
foundational and practical reasons, it is natural to ask which

parameters in these large 4D kernels matter the most.
Kernel factorizations have been applied in several settings to reduce compute and improve accuracy. For example, several recent video architectures factor 3D convolution in space and time: examples include P3D [23],
R(2+1)D [30], and S3D [37]. In these architectures, a 3D
convolution is replaced with a 2D convolution (in space)
followed by a 1D convolution (in time). This factorization can be leveraged to increase accuracy and/or to reduce
computation. In the still-image domain, separable convolution [7] is used to factorize the convolution of 2D k × k filters into a pointwise 1 × 1 convolution followed by a depthwise k × k convolution. When the number of channels is
large compared to k 2 , which is usually the case, this reduces
FLOPs by ∼ k 2 for images. For the case of 3D video kernels, the FLOP reduction is even more dramatic: ∼ k 3 .
Inspired by the accuracy gains and good computational
savings demonstrated by 2D separable convolutions in image classification [7, 17, 39], this paper proposes a set of architectures for video classification – 3D Channel-Separated
Networks (CSN) – in which all convolutional operations
are separated into either pointwise 1×1×1 or depthwise
3×3×3 convolutions. Our experiments reveal the importance of channel interaction in the design of CSNs. In particular, we show that excellent accuracy/computational cost
balances can be obtained with CSNs by leveraging channel separation to reduce FLOPs and parameters as long as
high values of channel interaction are retained. We propose
two factorizations, which we call interaction-reduced and
interaction-preserved. Compared to 3D CNNs, both our
interaction-reduced and interaction-preserved CSNs provide higher accuracy and FLOP savings of about 2.5-3×
when there is enough channel interaction. We experimentally show that the channel factorization in CSNs acts as a
regularizer, leading to a higher training error but better generalization. Finally, we show that our proposed CSNs outperform or are comparable with the current state-of-the art
methods on Sports1M and Kinetics while being 2–3 times
faster.
15552

