Ground-to-Aerial Image Geo-Localization With a Hard Exemplar Reweighting
Triplet Loss
Sudong Cai1 Yulan Guo2,1 Salman Khan3 Jiwei Hu4 Gongjian Wen1,2
1
National University of Defense Technology 2 Sun Yat-Sen University
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence 4 Wuhan University of Technology
781594648@whut.edu.cn yulan.guo@nudt.edu.cn salman.khan@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
The task of ground-to-aerial image geo-localization can
be achieved by matching a ground view query image to a
reference database of aerial/satellite images. It is highly
challenging due to the dramatic viewpoint changes and unknown orientations. In this paper, we propose a novel
in-batch reweighting triplet loss to emphasize the positive
effect of hard exemplars during end-to-end training. We
also integrate an attention mechanism into our model using
feature-level contextual information. To analyze the difficulty level of each triplet, we first enforce a modified logistic
regression to triplets with a distance rectifying factor. Then,
the reference negative distances for corresponding anchors
are set, and the relative weights of triplets are computed by
comparing their difficulty to the corresponding references.
To reduce the influence of extreme hard data and less useful simple exemplars, the final weights are pruned using
upper and lower bound constraints. Experiments on two
benchmark datasets show that the proposed approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Image-based geo-localization has attracted significant attention for its numerous applications in autonomous driving
[21], augmented reality [22], and mobile robotics [30, 21].
Traditional methods mainly focus on ground-to-ground image matching, where both query and reference images are
acquired from ground views [2, 14, 13, 27, 25, 21, 40,
6]. Although matching images that are all from groundlevel is relatively easy, it is difficult to comprehensively
cover a large area using only ground-view images obtained from vehicle-mounted cameras or crowd-sourcing
websites [32, 11, 34]. Therefore, ground-to-ground image geo-localization tends to fail in places without available reference images. In contrast, images captured from a
bird’s eye view by satellites and aerial vehicles can densely

Reference Database: Aerial Image

Without
Weight Sharing

Siamese Network

Query: Ground-view Image

Figure 1. A demonstration of matching ground-view query to reference database consisting of aerial image. Here, “green” and
“red” colors denote positive and negative matches, respectively.

and uniformly cover the Earth. Consequently, matching
ground-level images to aerial images has gradually become
an attractive approach for coarse-level geo-localization and
place recognition [32], as shown in Figure 1. However,
cross-view image matching is extremely challenging due to
large viewpoint differences, lighting variations, and orientation (i.e., azimuth) uncertainty between ground and aerial
images [11, 32, 17, 38, 34]. Despite numerous attempts, this
problem is largely unsolved and needs new breakthroughs.
Due to the low cross-view matching accuracy of handcrafted features, existing methods generally compute similarities between features from CNN models trained independently for ground and aerial images. Inspired by face
recognition [28, 31], Lin et al. [17] proposed ‘Where-CNN’
using a Siamese architecture. However, it has been demonstrated that weight sharing in a Siamese architecture leads

8391

