Occupancy Flow: 4D Reconstruction by Learning Particle Dynamics
Michael Niemeyer1 Lars Mescheder1 Michael Oechsle1,2 Andreas Geiger1
1
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems and University of Tübingen
2
ETAS GmbH, Bosch Group, Stuttgart
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Deep learning based 3D reconstruction techniques have
recently achieved impressive results. However, while stateof-the-art methods are able to output complex 3D geometry,
it is not clear how to extend these results to time-varying
topologies. Approaches treating each time step individually
lack continuity and exhibit slow inference, while traditional
4D reconstruction methods often utilize a template model
or discretize the 4D space at fixed resolution. In this work,
we present Occupancy Flow, a novel spatio-temporal representation of time-varying 3D geometry with implicit correspondences. Towards this goal, we learn a temporally
and spatially continuous vector field which assigns a motion vector to every point in space and time. In order to perform dense 4D reconstruction from images or sparse point
clouds, we combine our method with a continuous 3D representation. Implicitly, our model yields correspondences
over time, thus enabling fast inference while providing a
sound physical description of the temporal dynamics. We
show that our method can be used for interpolation and
reconstruction tasks, and demonstrate the accuracy of the
learned correspondences. We believe that Occupancy Flow
is a promising new 4D representation which will be useful
for a variety of spatio-temporal reconstruction tasks.

1. Introduction
We live in a 4D world full of 3D objects in motion. An
accurate and efficient representation of time-varying 3D geometry is therefore essential for us as well as for robots
which navigate the very same environments. However, current 4D reconstruction approaches often require complicated multi-view setups [33,41,42,44,45,58], utilize a template model of fixed topology [2, 5, 15, 27, 30, 63, 75], or
require spatio-temporally smooth inputs [48, 70], limiting
the scope of possible applications to very specific tasks.
Recently, learning-based approaches for recovering the
3D geometry from various forms of input have shown
promising results [13,14,20,25,34,38,46,54,71]. In contrast

Figure 1: Occupancy Flow. We represent time-varying 3D
geometry by a temporally and spatially continuous vector
field which assigns a motion vector to every point in space
and time, thus implicitly capturing correspondences. We
demonstrate that our representation can be used for 4D reconstruction from point cloud and image sequences as well
as interpolation, shape matching, and generative tasks.
to traditional methods, they leverage prior knowledge obtained during the training process to resolve ambiguities. In
particular, recent continuous representations [13, 22, 28, 38,
39, 46, 56, 72] achieve impressive results at limited memory
costs. However, it remains unclear how to extend these approaches to the task of 4D reconstruction, i.e., reconstructing 3D shapes over time. Naı̈vely discretizing the temporal
domain would lead to high memory cost and slow inference.
Furthermore, it would neither provide implicit correspondences nor a physical description of the temporal evolution.
While not only being unsatisfactory from a scientific viewpoint, these problems also limit the use of existing 4D reconstruction techniques in applications where fast inference
and reliable correspondences are desirable.
Contribution: In this paper, we propose a novel continuous 4D representation (Fig. 1) which implicitly models correspondences. More specifically, we parameterize a vector
15379

