Mixed High-Order Attention Network for Person Re-Identification
Binghui Chen, Weihong Deng∗, Jiani Hu
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
chenbinghui@bupt.edu.cn, whdeng@bupt.edu.cn, jnhu@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Attention has become more attractive in person reidentification (ReID) as it is capable of biasing the allocation of available resources towards the most informative
parts of an input signal. However, state-of-the-art works
concentrate only on coarse or first-order attention design,
e.g. spatial and channels attention, while rarely exploring higher-order attention mechanism. We take a step towards addressing this problem. In this paper, we first propose the High-Order Attention (HOA) module to model and
utilize the complex and high-order statistics information in
attention mechanism, so as to capture the subtle differences
among pedestrians and to produce the discriminative attention proposals. Then, rethinking person ReID as a zero-shot
learning problem, we propose the Mixed High-Order Attention Network (MHN) to further enhance the discrimination
and richness of attention knowledge in an explicit manner.
Extensive experiments have been conducted to validate the
superiority of our MHN for person ReID over a wide variety
of state-of-the-art methods on three large-scale datasets, including Market-1501, DukeMTMC-ReID and CUHK03-NP.
Code is available at http://www.bhchen.cn/.

1. Introduction
Since the quest for algorithms that enable cognitive abilities is an important part of machine learning, person reidentification (ReID) has become more attractive, where the
model is requested to be capable of correctly matching images of pedestrians across videos captured from different
cameras. This task has drawn increasing attention in many
computer vision applications, such as surveillance [49], activity analysis [31, 32] and people tracking [55, 44]. It is
also challenging because the images of pedestrians are captured from disjoint views, the lighting-conditions/personposes differ across cameras, and occlusions are frequent in
real-world scenarios.
Affected by the aforementioned factors, the discrimina∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Attention comparison. (1) Spatial attention uses
softmax-like gated functions to produce a spatial mask. (2) Channel attention [19] uses global average pooling and fully connected
layers to produce a scale vector. (3) Our high-order attention uses
high-order polynomial predictor to produce scale maps that contain high-order statistics of convolutional activations.

tion of feature representations of pedestrian images actually is not good enough. In order to obtain discriminative
feature representations, many research works [30, 27, 25,
52, 21, 58, 45] resort to attention mechanism so as to highlight the informative parts (e.g. spatial locations) of convolutional responses and suppress the noisy patterns (e.g.
background). Specifically, spatial attention [25, 27, 52] is a
form of visual attention that involves directing attention to
a location in space, it allows CNN to selectively process visual information of an area within the visual field. While, in
spatial attention, the processing strategy of spatial masking
is coarse and has no intrinsic effect on modulating the finegrained channel-knowledge. Recently, channel attention
[10, 19, 27] is proposed to adaptively recalibrates channelwise convolutional responses by explicitly modelling interdependencies among channels. And the combination of
spatial and channel attention has also been successfully applied in person ReID [27]. However, we emphasize that
these commonly used attention methods (i.e. spatial and
channel attention) are either coarse or first-order, being confined to mining only simple and coarse information, in person ReID cases, they are insufficiently rich to capture the
1371

