Learning Implicit Generative Models by Matching Perceptual Features
Cicero Nogueira dos Santos∗, Youssef Mroueh∗, Inkit Padhi∗, Pierre Dognin∗
IBM Research, T.J. Watson Research Center, NY
{cicerons,mroueh,pdognin}@us.ibm.com, inkit.padhi@ibm.com

Abstract
Perceptual features (PFs) have been used with great success in tasks such as transfer learning, style transfer, and
super-resolution. However, the efficacy of PFs as key source
of information for learning generative models is not well
studied. We investigate here the use of PFs in the context of learning implicit generative models through moment
matching (MM). More specifically, we propose a new effective MM approach that learns implicit generative models by
performing mean and covariance matching of features extracted from pretrained ConvNets. Our proposed approach
improves upon existing MM methods by: (1) breaking away
from the problematic min/max game of adversarial learning; (2) avoiding online learning of kernel functions; and
(3) being efficient with respect to both number of used moments and required minibatch size. Our experimental results demonstrate that, due to the expressiveness of PFs
from pretrained deep ConvNets, our method achieves stateof-the-art results for challenging benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The use of features from deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) pretrained on ImageNet [37] has led to
important advances in computer vision. DCNN features,
usually called perceptual features (PFs), have been used in
tasks such as transfer learning [42, 17], style transfer [9]
and super-resolution [18]. While there have been previous
works on the use of PFs in the context of image generation and transformation [7, 18], exploration of PFs as key
source of information for learning generative models is not
well studied. Particularly, the efficacy of PFs for implicit
generative models trained through moment matching is an
open question.
Moment matching approaches for generative modeling
are based on the assumption that one can learn the data distribution by matching the moments of the model distribution
to the empirical data distribution. Two representative meth∗ Equal contribution.

ods of this family are based on maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD) [11, 12, 24] and the method of moments (MoM)
[35]. While MoM based methods embed a probability distribution into a finite-dimensional vector (i.e., matching of a
finite number of moments), MMD based methods embed a
distribution into an infinite-dimensional vector [35]. A challenge for MMD methods is to define a kernel function that is
statistically efficient and can be used with small minibatch
sizes [22]. A solution comes by using adversarial learning
for the online training of kernel functions [22, 3]. However,
this solution inherits the problematic min/max game of adversarial learning. The main challenges of using MoM for
training deep generative networks consist in defining millions of sufficiently distinct moments and specifying an objective function to learn the desirable moments. Ravuri et
al. [35] addressed these two issues by defining the moments
as features and derivatives from a moment network that is
trained online (together with the generator) by using a specially designed objective function.
In this work we demonstrate that, by using PFs to perform moment matching, one can overcome some of the
difficulties found in current moment matching approaches.
More specifically, we propose a simple but effective moment matching method that: (1) breaks away from the problematic min/max game completely; (2) does not use online learning of kernel functions; and (3) is very efficient
with regard to both number of used moments and required
minibatch size. Our proposed approach, named Generative
Feature Matching Networks (GFMN), learns implicit generative models by performing mean and covariance matching of features extracted from all convolutional layers of
pretrained deep ConvNets. Some interesting properties of
GFMNs include: (a) the loss function is directly correlated
to the generated image quality; (b) mode collapsing is not
an issue; and (c) the same pretrained feature extractor can
be used across different datasets.
We perform an extensive number of experiments with
different challenging datasets: CIFAR10, STL10, CelebA
and LSUN. We demonstrate that our approach can achieve
state-of-the-art results for challenging benchmarks such as
CIFAR10 and STL10. Moreover, we show that the same

4461

