Event-Based Motion Segmentation by Motion Compensation
Timo Stoffregen1,2 , Guillermo Gallego3 , Tom Drummond1,2 , Lindsay Kleeman1 , Davide Scaramuzza3
1

Dept. Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University, Australia.
2
Australian Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision, Australia.
3
Dept. Informatics (Univ. Zurich) and Dept. Neuroinformatics (Univ. Zurich & ETH Zurich), Switzerland.

Figure 1: Our method segments a set of events produced by an event-based camera (Left, with color image of the scene for
illustration) into the different moving objects causing them (Right: pedestrian, cyclist and camera’s ego-motion, in color).
We propose an iterative clustering algorithm (Middle block) that jointly estimates the motion parameters θ and event-cluster
membership probabilities P to best explain the scene, yielding motion-compensated event images on all clusters (Right).

Abstract
In contrast to traditional cameras, whose pixels have
a common exposure time, event-based cameras are novel
bio-inspired sensors whose pixels work independently and
asynchronously output intensity changes (called “events”),
with microsecond resolution. Since events are caused by
the apparent motion of objects, event-based cameras sample visual information based on the scene dynamics and are,
therefore, a more natural fit than traditional cameras to acquire motion, especially at high speeds, where traditional
cameras suffer from motion blur. However, distinguishing
between events caused by different moving objects and by
the camera’s ego-motion is a challenging task. We present
the first per-event segmentation method for splitting a scene
into independently moving objects. Our method jointly estimates the event-object associations (i.e., segmentation) and
the motion parameters of the objects (or the background) by
maximization of an objective function, which builds upon
recent results on event-based motion-compensation. We
provide a thorough evaluation of our method on a public dataset, outperforming the state-of-the-art by as much
as 10 %. We also show the first quantitative evaluation of a
segmentation algorithm for event cameras, yielding around
90 % accuracy at 4 pixels relative displacement.

Supplementary Material
Accompanying video: https://youtu.be/0q6ap OSBAk.
We encourage the reader to view the added experiments and
theory in the supplement.

1. Introduction
Event-based cameras, such as the Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) [1, 2], are novel, bio-inspired visual sensors. In
contrast to conventional cameras that produce images at a
fixed rate, the pixels in an event-based camera operate independently and asynchronously, responding to intensity
changes by producing events. Events are represented by
the x, y pixel location and timestamp t (in microseconds) of
an intensity change as well as its polarity (i.e., whether the
pixel became darker or brighter). Since event-based cameras essentially sample the scene at the same rate as the
scene dynamics, they offer several advantages over conventional cameras: very high temporal resolution, low latency,
very high dynamic range (HDR, 140 dB) and low power
and bandwidth requirements - traits which make them well
suited to capturing motion. Hence, event-based cameras
open the door to tackle challenging scenarios that are inaccessible to traditional cameras, such as high-speed and/or
HDR tracking [3–6], control [7–9] and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [10–13]. Due to their principle of operation and unconventional output, these cameras

7244

