Bayesian Adaptive Superpixel Segmentation
Roy Uziel

Meitar Ronen
Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University

Oren Freifeld

uzielr@post.bgu.ac.il

meitarr@post.bgu.ac.il

orenfr@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Superpixels provide a useful intermediate image representation. Existing superpixel methods, however, suffer from
at least some of the following drawbacks: 1) topology is
handled heuristically; 2) the number of superpixels is either predefined or estimated at a prohibitive cost; 3) lack of
adaptiveness. As a remedy, we propose a novel probabilistic
model, self-coined Bayesian Adaptive Superpixel Segmentation (BASS), together with an efficient inference. BASS is
a Bayesian nonparametric mixture model that also respects
topology and favors spatial coherence. The optimizationbased and topology-aware inference is parallelizable and
implemented in GPU. Quantitatively, BASS achieves results
that are either better than the state-of-the-art or close to it,
depending on the performance index and/or dataset. Qualitatively, we argue it achieves the best results; we demonstrate this by not only subjective visual inspection but also
objective quantitative performance evaluation of the downstream application of face detection. Our code is available
at https://github.com/uzielroy/BASS.

1. Introduction
Superpixels [37], relatively-small image segments, form
a compact intermediate image representation that is a key
preprocessing step in many computer-vision tasks, e.g., [6,
14, 18, 22, 24, 25, 27, 30, 33, 34, 35, 46, 54]. Existing
superpixel methods, however, suffer from at least some of
the following shortcomings: 1) Topological constraints are
handled only via post-processing heuristics, and thus the
resulting superpixels are no longer directly related to their
objective; 2) the number of superpixels, K, is either defined
manually or estimated at a usually-prohibitive computational
cost (at least for methods of superixels with flexible shapes,
as opposed to those that support only limited geometric
primitives); 3) Limited adaptiveness to the global and local
levels of image details, causing important details to be lost
while wasting many superpixels in uninformative regions.
This work was partially supported by the Lynn and William Frankel
Center for Computer Science at BGU.

Figure 1: BASS adapts the size, shapes, and number of the
superpixels to the image content, thereby providing an unsupervised and compact detail-preserving intermediate image
representation. From left to right: original images; superpixels colored by their mean colors, superpixel boundaries. The
same hyperparameters were used for both the images.

Here we propose a novel adaptive model of superpixels
(Fig. 1) together with an efficient inference. This model, selfcoined Bayesian Adaptive Superpixel Segmentation (BASS),
is based on the Dirichlet-Process Gaussian Mixture Model
(DPGMM). The latter is an important example of Bayesian
Non-Parametric (BNP) mixture models. Such models provide a flexible and principled approach to the unsupervisedlearning task of clustering and were first introduced to the
computer-vision community over a decade ago; see, e.g. [45].
A key benefit of the BNP approach is that the inference procedure finds not only the clusters but also their number, thus
letting these models adapt their complexity to the complexity
of the data. Particularly, BASS automatically adapts K to
the complexity of the image both globally and locally. BASS

8470

