Learning Feature-to-Feature Translator
by Alternating Back-Propagation for Generative Zero-Shot Learning

1

Yizhe Zhu1∗, Jianwen Xie2 , Bingchen Liu1 , Ahmed Elgammal1
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University 2 Hikvision Research Institute

yizhe.zhu@rutgers.edu, jianwen@ucla.edu, bingchen.liu@rutgers.edu, elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
We investigate learning feature-to-feature translator
networks by alternating back-propagation as a generalpurpose solution to zero-shot learning (ZSL) problems.
It is a generative model-based ZSL framework. In contrast to models based on generative adversarial networks
(GAN) or variational autoencoders (VAE) that require auxiliary networks to assist the training, our model consists
of a single conditional generator that maps class-level semantic features and Gaussian white noise vector accounting for instance-level latent factors to visual features, and
is trained by maximum likelihood estimation. The training process is a simple yet effective alternating backpropagation process that iterates the following two steps:
(i) the inferential back-propagation to infer the latent factors of each observed example, and (ii) the learning backpropagation to update the model parameters. We show that,
with slight modifications, our model is capable of learning
from incomplete visual features for ZSL. We conduct extensive comparisons with existing generative ZSL methods
on five benchmarks, demonstrating the superiority of our
method in not only ZSL performance but also convergence
speed and computational cost. Specifically, our model outperforms the existing state-of-the-art methods by a remarkable margin up to 3.1% and 4.0% in ZSL and generalized
ZSL settings, respectively.

1. Introduction
Deep learning techniques have successfully tackled various computer vision problems such as object detection [16,
34, 10, 26, 9, 63], image, video and 3d shape generation [18, 13, 57, 58, 33, 60, 59, 64, 45], pose estimation [32, 44, 65, 42, 43], object recognition [20, 41, 17], etc.
Especially, these advanced deep learning methods equip the
machine with the comparable ability of object recognition
to human beings when abundant labeled training samples
∗ Work was done while Yizhe Zhu was an intern at Hikvision.

Figure 1: Demonstration of the feature-to-feature translator for generative zero-shot learning. Training (blue flow):
given the class-level semantic features C and the observed
visual features X, (i) the latent factors Z are inferred by
MCMC and (ii) the weights θ of the translator are updated
by the gradient ascent for maximum likelihood. Translation (black flow): once the translator is learned, arbitrary
number of synthetic visual features can be generated for
unseen classes by translating the unseen class semantic features along with Z randomly sampled from Gaussian distribution. The generated samples for unseen classes are useful
for zero-shot learning.
are provided. However, this ability will decrease dramatically for classes that are insufficiently represented or even
not present in the training data, thus increasing the difficulty
of real-world applications due to the costly data collection
and annotation effort. This limitation attracts the intense
interest of researchers in zero-shot learning (ZSL).
ZSL aims to recognize novel classes where no training
data is available for these classes. The key to make ZSL
work is to use the semantic description of classes as the
bridge to connect the seen classes and unseen classes. Recently, generative ZSL approaches [4, 67, 55, 11, 50, 46]
have emerged as a new trend of ZSL strategy by exploiting the successful generative models, e.g., variational autoencoders (VAE) [18, 35], generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [13, 28], etc, to learn mappings from class-level semantic features (e.g., attributes or description embeddings)
to visual features. The synthetic visual features for unseen
classes through well-trained generative models establish the
visual description of unseen classes and make the conven19844

