Controllable Video Captioning with POS Sequence Guidance
Based on Gated Fusion Network
Bairui Wang1∗
Lin Ma2†
Wei Zhang1†
Wenhao Jiang2
Jingwen Wang2
Wei Liu2
1
2
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University
Tencent AI Lab
{bairuiwong, forest.linma, cswhjiang, jaywongjaywong}@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Video captioning [18, 56, 46] aims at automatically describing rich content in videos with natural language, which
is a meaningful but challenging task for bridging vision and
language. This task can be applied for high-level video understanding in a variety of practical applications, such as
visual retrieval [26, 37, 48, 24], visual question answer∗ This work was done while Bairui Wang was a Research Intern with
Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding authors.

Gated Fusion
Network

In this paper, we propose to guide the video caption generation with Part-of-Speech (POS) information, based on
a gated fusion of multiple representations of input videos.
We construct a novel gated fusion network, with one particularly designed cross-gating (CG) block, to effectively encode and fuse different types of representations, e.g., the
motion and content features of an input video. One POS
sequence generator relies on this fused representation to
predict the global syntactic structure, which is thereafter
leveraged to guide the video captioning generation and control the syntax of the generated sentence. Specifically, a
gating strategy is proposed to dynamically and adaptively
incorporate the global syntactic POS information into the
decoder for generating each word. Experimental results
on two benchmark datasets, namely MSR-VTT and MSVD,
demonstrate that the proposed model can well exploit complementary information from multiple representations, resulting in improved performances. Moreover, the generated
global POS information can well capture the global syntactic structure of the sentence, and thus be exploited to control
the syntactic structure of the description. Such POS information not only boosts the video captioning performance
but also improves the diversity of the generated captions.
Our code is at: https://github.com/vsislab/
Controllable_XGating.

Description
Decoder

Abstract

…

is

tapping

basketball

<EOS>

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

CG Fusion
Feature#1
Encoding

Feature#2
Encoding

Feature#3
Encoding

…

POS Sequence
Generator

wl2223@columbia.edu

[ … VERB NOUN <EOS> ]

davidzhang@sdu.edu.cn

Figure 1. The proposed model for video captioning consists of a
gated fusion network, a POS sequence generator, and a description generator. The gated fusion network extracts diverse features
from videos, encodes, and fuses them together to generate a more
representative video feature. Relying on the global syntactic POS
information generated from the POS sequence generator and the
fused video feature, the description generator produces one sentence describing the video content.

ing [25, 9], and so on.Video captioning is related to image
captioning which describes an image with a sentence, as a
video can be regarded as a sequence of images. However,
what makes video captioning more challenging than image
captioning [12, 44, 7, 17] is not only that the input of video
captioning are multiple images, but also that video contains
richer semantics, such as spatial/temporal information, content/motion information, and even speech information. Obviously, the existing approahces with one single kind feature [11, 43, 45, 46] are hard to comprehensively exploit
the semantic meaning of a video.
Recently, researches on describing videos from diverse representations, such as Inception ResNet V2 [38],
C3D [40], and I3D [2], have proved that multiple features
can improve the video captioning models [42, 53, 27, 28]. It
is reasonable as different features can capture video semantic information from different perspectives. However, to the
best of our knowledge, the existing methods simply concatenate different representations together, while neglect the
relationships among them, which play an important role in
fully characterizing the video semantic meaning.
Prior video captioning methods also neglect the syntactic

2641

