Self-Supervised Difference Detection
for Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Wataru Shimoda and Keiji Yanai
Artificial Intelligence eXploration Research Center, The University of Electro Communications, Tokyo
1-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofu, Tokyo 182-8585 JAPAN
{shimoda-k,yanai}@mm.inf.uec.ac.jp

Abstract
To minimize the annotation costs associated with the
training of semantic segmentation models, researchers
have extensively investigated weakly-supervised segmentation approaches. In the current weakly-supervised segmentation methods, the most widely adopted approach is based
on visualization. However, the visualization results are not
generally equal to semantic segmentation. Therefore, to
perform accurate semantic segmentation under the weakly
supervised condition, it is necessary to consider the mapping functions that convert the visualization results into semantic segmentation. For such mapping functions, the conditional random field and iterative re-training using the outputs of a segmentation model are usually used. However,
these methods do not always guarantee improvements in
accuracy; therefore, if we apply these mapping functions
iteratively multiple times, eventually the accuracy will not
improve or will decrease.
In this paper, to make the most of such mapping functions, we assume that the results of the mapping function
include noise, and we improve the accuracy by removing
noise. To achieve our aim, we propose the self-supervised
difference detection module, which estimates noise from the
results of the mapping functions by predicting the difference
between the segmentation masks before and after the mapping. We verified the effectiveness of the proposed method
by performing experiments on the PASCAL Visual Object
Classes 2012 dataset, and we achieved 64.9% in the val set
and 65.5% in the test set. Both of the results become new
state-of-the-art under the same setting of weakly supervised
semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a promising image recognition
technology that enables the detailed analysis of images for
various practical applications. However, semantic segmentation methods require training data with pixel-level annotation, which is costly to create. On the other hand, imagelevel annotation is much easier to obtain than pixel-level
annotation. In recent years, various weakly-supervised se-

mantic segmentation (hereinafter WSS) methods that required only image-level annotation have been proposed
to resolve the annotation problems. However, there is
still a large performance gap between fully-supervised and
weakly-supervised methods.
In
weakly-supervised
segmentation
methods,
visualization-based approaches [39, 33, 41] have been
widely adopted. The visualization results highlight the
regions that contributed to the classification, and we can
roughly estimate the regions of the target objects by visualization. Class Activation Map (CAM) [41] is a standard
method to visualize the classification results. However,
the visualization results do not always match actual
segmentation results; therefore, it is usually necessary to
consider the mapping from the visualization results to the
semantic segmentation in weakly-supervised segmentation.
Conditional Random Field (CRF) [17] is widely used as
a mapping function. CRF is a method for optimizing the
probability distribution to be fitted to the edge of regions
by using color and position information as features. The
iterative approach for the learning segmentation models
proposed by Wei et al. [37] is a versatile approach for
improving weakly supervised segmentation results. In
this method, we generate pseudo pixel-level labels under
weakly supervised conditions, and we train a segmentation
model with the pseudo labels. Subsequently, we generate
pseudo pixel-level labels from the outputs of the trained
segmentation model, and we re-train a new segmentation
model using the generated pseudo labels. Wei et al. [37]
showed that repeating this process absorbed outliers and
gradually improved the accuracy. These methods can be
regarded as mapping functions that bring inputs closer
to the segmentation. However, the mapping functions of
these methods [17, 37] do not guarantee any improvement
in the accuracy of the semantic segmentation; therefore,
the mapping results contain noise. In this paper, the
mapping functions that make the above inputs close to the
segmentation are treated as supervision containing noise,
and we propose a robust learning method for such noise.
In this paper, we denote the information used as the inputs of the mapping functions as knowledge, and we consider the supervision containing the noise as advice. The
supervision for fully supervised learning that allows one-to15208

