Task-Driven Modular Networks for Zero-Shot Compositional Learning
Senthil Purushwalkam1∗
Maximilian Nickel2
1
Carnegie Mellon University

Abhinav Gupta1,2
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato2
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
One of the hallmarks of human intelligence is the ability
to compose learned knowledge into novel concepts which
can be recognized without a single training example. In
contrast, current state-of-the-art methods require hundreds
of training examples for each possible category to build reliable and accurate classifiers. To alleviate this striking
difference in efficiency, we propose a task-driven modular
architecture for compositional reasoning and sample efficient learning. Our architecture consists of a set of neural network modules, which are small fully connected layers operating in semantic concept space. These modules
are configured through a gating function conditioned on the
task to produce features representing the compatibility between the input image and the concept under consideration.
This enables us to express tasks as a combination of subtasks and to generalize to unseen categories by reweighting
a set of small modules. Furthermore, the network can be
trained efficiently as it is fully differentiable and its modules operate on small sub-spaces. We focus our study on the
problem of compositional zero-shot classification of objectattribute categories. We show in our experiments that current evaluation metrics are flawed as they only consider unseen object-attribute pairs. When extending the evaluation
to the generalized setting which accounts also for pairs seen
during training, we discover that naı̈ve baseline methods
perform similarly or better than current approaches. However, our modular network is able to outperform all existing
approaches on two widely-used benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
How can machines reliably recognize the vast number of
possible visual concepts? Even simple concepts like “envelope” could, for instance, be divided into a seemingly infinite number of sub-categories, e.g., by size (large, small),
color (white, yellow), type (plain, windowed), or condition
(new, wrinkled, stamped). Moreover, it has frequently been
∗ Work done as an intern at Facebook AI Research.
Proposed
dataset splits and code available here: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/
˜spurushw/projects/compositional.html

Modular
Cute Cat
Classifier

Modular
Wet Cat
Classifier

Feature

Feature

Feature

Modular
Cute Dog
Classifier

Figure 1. We investigate how to build a classifier on-the-fly, for
a new concept (“wet dog”) given knowledge of related concepts
(“cute dog”, “cute cat”, and “wet cat”). Our approach consists
of a modular network operating in a semantic feature space. By
rewiring its primitive modules, the network can recognize new
structured concepts.

observed that visual concepts follow a long-tailed distribution [28, 34, 31]. Hence, most classes are rare, and yet humans are able to recognize them without having observed
even a single instance. Although a surprising event, most
humans wouldn’t have trouble to recognize a “tiny striped
purple elephant sitting on a tree branch”. For machines,
however, this would constitute a daunting challenge. It
would be impractical, if not impossible, to gather sufficient
training examples for the long tail of all possible categories,
even more so as current learning algorithms are data-hungry
and rely on large amounts of labeled examples. How can we
build algorithms to cope with this challenge?
One possibility is to exploit the compositional nature of
the prediction task. While a machine may not have observed
any images of “wrinkled envelope”, it may have observed
many more images of “white envelope”, as well as “white
paper” and “wrinkled paper”. If the machine is capable of
compositional reasoning, it may be able to transfer the concept of being “wrinkled” from “paper” to “envelope”, and
generalize without requiring additional examples of actual
“wrinkled envelope”.
One key challenge in compositional reasoning is contextuality. The meaning of an attribute, and even the meaning of an object, may be dependent on each other. For
instance, how “wrinkled” modifies the appearance of “en-

3593

