SlowFast Networks for Video Recognition
Christoph Feichtenhofer

Haoqi Fan

Jitendra Malik

Kaiming He

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract

1. Introduction
It is customary in the recognition of images I(x, y) to
treat the two spatial dimensions x and y symmetrically. This
is justified by the statistics of natural images, which are to
a first approximation isotropic—all orientations are equally
likely—and shift-invariant [41, 26]. But what about video
signals I(x, y, t)? Motion is the spatiotemporal counterpart
of orientation [2], but all spatiotemporal orientations are
not equally likely. Slow motions are more likely than fast
motions (indeed most of the world we see is at rest at a given
moment) and this has been exploited in Bayesian accounts of
how humans perceive motion stimuli [58]. For example, if
we see a moving edge in isolation, we perceive it as moving
perpendicular to itself, even though in principle it could
also have an arbitrary component of movement tangential to
itself (the aperture problem in optical flow). This percept is
rational if the prior favors slow movements.
If all spatiotemporal orientations are not equally likely,
then there is no reason for us to treat space and time symmetrically, as is implicit in approaches to video recognition
based on spatiotemporal convolutions [49, 5]. We might
instead “factor” the architecture to treat spatial structures
and temporal events separately. For concreteness, let us
study this in the context of recognition. The categorical
spatial semantics of the visual content often evolve slowly.

Low frame rate

H,W

T

C

T

C

T

C

prediction

We present SlowFast networks for video recognition. Our
model involves (i) a Slow pathway, operating at low frame
rate, to capture spatial semantics, and (ii) a Fast pathway, operating at high frame rate, to capture motion at
fine temporal resolution. The Fast pathway can be made
very lightweight by reducing its channel capacity, yet can
learn useful temporal information for video recognition.
Our models achieve strong performance for both action
classification and detection in video, and large improvements are pin-pointed as contributions by our SlowFast concept. We report state-of-the-art accuracy on major video
recognition benchmarks, Kinetics, Charades and AVA. Code
has been made available at: https://github.com/
facebookresearch/SlowFast.

T
C

αT

High frame rate

αT

βC

αT
βC

βC

Figure 1. A SlowFast network has a low frame rate, low temporal
resolution Slow pathway and a high frame rate, α× higher temporal
resolution Fast pathway. The Fast pathway is lightweight by using
a fraction (β, e.g., 1/8) of channels. Lateral connections fuse them.

For example, waving hands do not change their identity as
“hands” over the span of the waving action, and a person
is always in the “person” category even though he/she can
transit from walking to running. So the recognition of the categorical semantics (as well as their colors, textures, lighting
etc.) can be refreshed relatively slowly. On the other hand,
the motion being performed can evolve much faster than
their subject identities, such as clapping, waving, shaking,
walking, or jumping. It can be desired to use fast refreshing
frames (high temporal resolution) to effectively model the
potentially fast changing motion.
Based on this intuition, we present a two-pathway
SlowFast model for video recognition (Fig. 1). One pathway is designed to capture semantic information that can be
given by images or a few sparse frames, and it operates at
low frame rates and slow refreshing speed. In contrast, the
other pathway is responsible for capturing rapidly changing
motion, by operating at fast refreshing speed and high temporal resolution. Despite its high temporal rate, this pathway
is made very lightweight, e.g., ∼20% of total computation.
This is because this pathway is designed to have fewer channels and weaker ability to process spatial information, while
such information can be provided by the first pathway in a
less redundant manner. We call the first a Slow pathway and
the second a Fast pathway, driven by their different temporal
speeds. The two pathways are fused by lateral connections.

6202

