Photo-Realistic Facial Details Synthesis From Single Image
Anpei Chen∗1
Zhang Chen∗1
Guli Zhang1
Kenny Mitchell2
Jingyi Yu1
2
1
ShanghaiTech University
Edinburgh Napier University
{chenap,chenzhang,zhanggl,yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

K.Mitchell2@napier.ac.uk

Figure 1. From left to right: input face image; proxy 3D face, texture and displacement map produced by our framework; detailed face
geometry with estimated displacement map applied on the proxy 3D face; and re-rendered facial image.

Abstract
We present a single-image 3D face synthesis technique
that can handle challenging facial expressions while recovering fine geometric details. Our technique employs expression analysis for proxy face geometry generation and combines supervised and unsupervised learning for facial detail
synthesis. On proxy generation, we conduct emotion prediction to determine a new expression-informed proxy. On detail synthesis, we present a Deep Facial Detail Net (DFDN)
based on Conditional Generative Adversarial Net (CGAN)
that employs both geometry and appearance loss functions.
For geometry, we capture 366 high-quality 3D scans from
122 different subjects under 3 facial expressions. For appearance, we use additional 163K in-the-wild face images
and apply image-based rendering to accommodate lighting
variations. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that
our framework can produce high-quality 3D faces with realistic details under challenging facial expressions.

1. Introduction
Producing high quality human faces with fine geometric
details has been a core research area in computer vision and

graphics. Geometric structure details such as wrinkles are
important indicators of age and facial expression, and are
essential for producing realistic virtual human [2]. Successful solutions by far rely on complex and often expensive
capture systems such as stereo-based camera domes [20]
or photometric-based LightStage [32, 13]. Although such
solutions have become increasingly popular and affordable
with the availability of low-cost cameras and lights, they are
still bulky and hence do not support portable scanning. In
addition, they are vulnerable to low texture regions such as
bare skins.
We aim to produce high-quality 3D faces with fine geometric details from a single image, with quality comparable
to those produced from the dome systems and LightStage.
Existing single-image solutions first construct a 3D proxy
face from templates and then refine the proxy by deforming
geometry and adding details. Such proxies can be derived
from 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [11, 10, 42, 51, 17]
by blending base face geometry. More complex techniques
employ sparse coding on 3D face dictionaries to further improve robustness and quality [41, 11, 10, 42, 51, 17, 23, 43,
8]. However, artifacts arise from these approaches such as
over-smoothing and incorrect expression, where a relatively
small number of parameters are used to approximate the

9429

