Targeted Mismatch Adversarial Attack:
Query with a Flower to Retrieve the Tower
Giorgos Tolias
Filip Radenovic
Ondřej Chum
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract

1. Introduction
Information about users is a valuable article. Websites,
service providers, and even operating systems collect and
store user data. The collected data have various forms,
e.g. visited websites, interactions between users in social
networks, hardware fingerprints, keyboard typing or mouse
movement patterns, etc. Internet search engines record what
the users search for, as well as the responses, i.e. clicks, to
the returned results.
Recent development in computer vision allowed efficient
and precise large scale image search engines to be launched,
such as Google Image Search. Nevertheless, similarly to
text search engines, queries – the images – are stored and
further analyzed by the provider1 . In this work, we protect
the user image (target) by constructing a novel image. The
constructed image is visually dissimilar to the target, however, when used as a query, identical results are retrieved as
with the target image. Large-scale search methods require
short-code image representation, both for storage minimization and for search efficiency, which are usually extracted
1 Google Search Help: “The pictures you upload in your search may be stored by
Google for 7 days. They won’t be a part of your search history, and we’ll only use
them during that time to make our products and services better.”

Original

→

→

→
Attack

Access to online visual search engines implies sharing of
private user content – the query images. We introduce the
concept of targeted mismatch attack for deep learning based
retrieval systems to generate an adversarial image to conceal the query image. The generated image looks nothing
like the user intended query, but leads to identical or very
similar retrieval results. Transferring attacks to fully unseen networks is challenging. We show successful attacks to
partially unknown systems, by designing various loss functions for the adversarial image construction. These include
loss functions, for example, for unknown global pooling operation or unknown input resolution by the retrieval system.
We evaluate the attacks on standard retrieval benchmarks
and compare the results retrieved with the original and adversarial image.

→
Query

Retrieval results

Figure 1. Top two rows show retrieval results to the user query
image (target). Bottom two rows show the results of our attack
where a carrier image (flower, Notre Dame) is perturbed to have
identical descriptor to that of the target in the first row. Identical
results are obtained without disclosing the target.

with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). We formulate
the problem as an adversarial attack on CNNs.
Adversarial attacks, as introduced by Szegedy et al. [35],
study imperceptible non-random image perturbations to
mislead a neural network. The first attacks were introduced and tested on image classification. In that context,
adversarial attacks are divided into two categories, namely
non-targeted and targeted. The goal of non-targeted attacks
is to change the prediction of a test image to an arbitrary
class [25, 24], while targeted attacks attempt to make a specific change of the network prediction, i.e. to misclassify the
test image to a predefined target class [35, 7, 10].
Similarly to image classification, adversarial attacks
have been proposed in the domain of image retrieval too.
An non-targeted attack attempts to generate an image that
for a human observer carries the same visual information,
while for the neural network it appears dissimilar to other
images of the same object [19, 20, 37]. This way, a user
protects personal images and does not allow them to be in15037

