FCOS: Fully Convolutional One-Stage Object Detection
Zhi Tian

Chunhua Shen∗
Hao Chen
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Tong He

Abstract
We propose a fully convolutional one-stage object detector (FCOS) to solve object detection in a per-pixel prediction fashion, analogue to semantic segmentation. Almost
all state-of-the-art object detectors such as RetinaNet, SSD,
YOLOv3, and Faster R-CNN rely on pre-defined anchor
boxes. In contrast, our proposed detector FCOS is anchor
box free, as well as proposal free. By eliminating the predefined set of anchor boxes, FCOS completely avoids the
complicated computation related to anchor boxes such as
calculating overlapping during training. More importantly,
we also avoid all hyper-parameters related to anchor boxes,
which are often very sensitive to the final detection performance. With the only post-processing non-maximum suppression (NMS), FCOS with ResNeXt-64x4d-101 achieves
44.7% in AP with single-model and single-scale testing,
surpassing previous one-stage detectors with the advantage
of being much simpler. For the first time, we demonstrate
a much simpler and flexible detection framework achieving
improved detection accuracy. We hope that the proposed
FCOS framework can serve as a simple and strong alternative for many other instance-level tasks. Code is available
at: tinyurl.com/FCOSv1

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental yet challenging task in
computer vision, which requires the algorithm to predict a
bounding box with a category label for each instance of interest in an image. All current mainstream detectors such
as Faster R-CNN [24], SSD [18] and YOLOv2, v3 [23] rely
on a set of pre-defined anchor boxes and it has long been
believed that the use of anchor boxes is the key to detectors’
success. Despite their great success, it is important to note
that anchor-based detectors suffer some drawbacks: 1) As
shown in [15, 24], detection performance is sensitive to the
sizes, aspect ratios and number of anchor boxes. For example, in RetinaNet [15], varying these hyper-parameters affects the performance up to 4% in AP on the COCO benchmark [16]. As a result, these hyper-parameters need to be
∗ Corresponding author, email:

chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

t
l

r

b

Figure 1 – As shown in the left image, FCOS works by predicting a
4D vector (l, t, r, b) encoding the location of a bounding box at each
foreground pixel (supervised by ground-truth bounding box information
during training). The right plot shows that when a location residing in
multiple bounding boxes, it can be ambiguous in terms of which bounding box this location should regress.

carefully tuned in anchor-based detectors. 2) Even with
careful design, because the scales and aspect ratios of anchor boxes are kept fixed, detectors encounter difficulties to
deal with object candidates with large shape variations, particularly for small objects. The pre-defined anchor boxes
also hamper the generalization ability of detectors, as they
need to be re-designed on new detection tasks with different object sizes or aspect ratios. 3) In order to achieve
a high recall rate, an anchor-based detector is required to
densely place anchor boxes on the input image (e.g., more
than 180K anchor boxes in feature pyramid networks (FPN)
[14] for an image with its shorter side being 800). Most
of these anchor boxes are labelled as negative samples during training. The excessive number of negative samples aggravates the imbalance between positive and negative samples in training. 4) Anchor boxes also involve complicated
computation such as calculating the intersection-over-union
(IoU) scores with ground-truth bounding boxes.
Recently, fully convolutional networks (FCNs) [20] have
achieved tremendous success in dense prediction tasks such
as semantic segmentation [20, 28, 9, 19], depth estimation
[17, 31], keypoint detection [3] and counting [2]. As one
of high-level vision tasks, object detection might be the
only one deviating from the neat fully convolutional per-

9627

