Looking to Relations for Future Trajectory Forecast
Chiho Choi
Honda Research Institute USA

Behzad Dariush
Honda Research Institute USA

cchoi@honda-ri.com

bdariush@honda-ri.com

Abstract
Inferring relational behavior between road users as well
as road users and their surrounding physical space is an
important step toward effective modeling and prediction
of navigation strategies adopted by participants in road
scenes. To this end, we propose a relation-aware framework
for future trajectory forecast. Our system aims to infer relational information from the interactions of road users with
each other and with the environment. The first module involves visual encoding of spatio-temporal features, which
captures human-human and human-space interactions over
time. The following module explicitly constructs pair-wise
relations from spatio-temporal interactions and identifies
more descriptive relations that highly influence future motion of the target road user by considering its past trajectory. The resulting relational features are used to forecast
future locations of the target, in the form of heatmaps with
an additional guidance of spatial dependencies and consideration of the uncertainty. Extensive evaluations on the
public benchmark datasets demonstrate the robustness and
efficacy of the proposed framework as observed by performances higher than the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Forecasting future trajectories of moving participants in
indoor and outdoor environments has profound implications
for execution of safe and naturalistic navigation strategies
in partially and fully automated vehicles [3, 42, 41, 10] and
robotic systems [49, 19, 18, 4]. While autonomous navigation of robotic systems in dynamic indoor environments is
an increasingly important application that can benefit from
such research, the potential societal impact may be more
consequential in the transportation domain. This is particularly apparent considering the current race to deployment
of automated driving and advanced driving assistance systems on public roads. Such technologies require advanced
decision making and motion planning systems that rely on
estimates of the future position of road users in order to realize safe and effective mitigation and navigation strategies.

Figure 1: Spatio-temporal features are visually encoded
from discretized grid to locally discover (i) human-human
( : woman↔man) and (ii) human-space interactions ( :
man↔ground, : cyclist↔cone) over time. Then, their
pair-wise relations (i.e., ↔ , ↔ , ↔ , ↔ , ↔ ,
...) with respect to the past motion of the target (→) are investigated from a global perspective for trajectory forecast.
Related research [46, 1, 36, 23, 37, 12, 13, 43, 45, 32, 33,
47] has attempted to predict future trajectories by focusing
on social conventions, environmental factors, or pose and
motion constraints. They have shown to be more effective
when the prediction model learns to extract these features
by considering human-human (i.e., between road agents) or
human-space (i.e., between a road agent and environment)
interactions. Recent approaches [20, 44] have incorporated
both interactions to understand behavior of agents toward
environments. However, they restrict human interactions to
nearby surroundings and overlook the influence of distant
obstacles in navigation, which is not feasible in real-world
scenarios. In this view, we present a framework where such
interactions are not limited to nearby road users nor surrounding medium. The proposed relation-aware approach
fully discovers human-human and human-space interactions
from local scales and learns to infer relations from these interactions from global scales for future trajectory forecast.
Inferring relations of interactive entities has been researched for many years, but the focus is on the implications
of relations between the object pair as in [35, 22]. Recently,

921

