Expert Sample Consensus Applied to Camera Re-Localization
Eric Brachmann and Carsten Rother
Visual Learning Lab
Heidelberg University (HCI/IWR)
http://vislearn.de

1. Introduction
In computer vision, we often have a model that explains
an observation with a small set of parameters. For example, our model is the 6D pose (translation and rotation) of
a camera, and our observations are images of a known 3D
environment. The task of camera re-localization is then to
robustly and accurately predict the 6D camera pose given
the camera image. However, inferring model parameters
from an observation is difficult because many effects are
not explained by our model. People might move through
the environment, and its appearance varies largely due to
lighting effects such as day versus night. We usually map
our observation to a representation from which we can infer model parameters more easily. For example, in camera

Office 1

Office 2
Query Image:

Gating Prediction:

...

Experts:
Expert Predictions:

Office 2

Fitting model parameters to a set of noisy data points is a
common problem in computer vision. In this work, we fit the
6D camera pose to a set of noisy correspondences between
the 2D input image and a known 3D environment. We estimate these correspondences from the image using a neural
network. Since the correspondences often contain outliers,
we utilize a robust estimator such as Random Sample Consensus (RANSAC) or Differentiable RANSAC (DSAC) to
fit the pose parameters. When the problem domain, e.g. the
space of all 2D-3D correspondences, is large or ambiguous,
a single network does not cover the domain well. Mixture of
Experts (MoE) is a popular strategy to divide a problem domain among an ensemble of specialized networks, so called
experts, where a gating network decides which expert is responsible for a given input. In this work, we introduce Expert Sample Consensus (ESAC), which integrates DSAC in a
MoE. Our main technical contribution is an efficient method
to train ESAC jointly and end-to-end. We demonstrate experimentally that ESAC handles two real-world problems
better than competing methods, i.e. scalability and ambiguity. We apply ESAC to fitting simple geometric models to
synthetic images, and to camera re-localization for difficult,
real datasets.

Environment:

Office 1

Abstract

Low Sample Consensus

High Sample Consensus

Figure 1. Camera Re-Localization Using ESAC. Given an environment consisting of several ambiguous rooms (top) and a query
image (middle), we estimate the 6D camera pose (bottom). A gating network (black) predicts a probability for each room. We distribute a budget of pose hypotheses to expert networks specialized
to each room. We choose the pose hypothesis with maximum sample consensus (green), i.e. the maximum geometric consistency.
We train all networks jointly and end-to-end.

re-localization we can train a neural network to predict correspondences between the 2D input image and the 3D environment. Inferring the camera pose from these correspondences is much easier, and various geometric solvers for
this problem exist [21, 16, 26]. Because some predictions
of the network might be erroneous, i.e. we have outlier correspondences, we utilize a robust estimator such as Random
Sample Consensus (RANSAC) [14], resp. its differentiable
counterpart Differentiable Sample Consensus (DSAC) [6],
or other differentiable estimators [53, 35] for training.

7525

