A Decoupled 3D Facial Shape Model by Adversarial Training
Victoria Fernández Abrevaya1 , Adnane Boukhayma2 , Stefanie Wuhrer1 , Edmond Boyer1
1
Inria - Univ. Grenoble Alpes - CNRS - LJK, France
{victoria.fernandez-abrevaya, stefanie.wuhrer, edmond.boyer}@inria.fr
2

University of Oxford, UK

adnane.boukhayma@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Data-driven generative 3D face models are used to compactly encode facial shape data into meaningful parametric representations. A desirable property of these models is
their ability to effectively decouple natural sources of variation, in particular identity and expression. While factorized
representations have been proposed for that purpose, they
are still limited in the variability they can capture and may
present modeling artifacts when applied to tasks such as
expression transfer. In this work, we explore a new direction with Generative Adversarial Networks and show that
they contribute to better face modeling performances, especially in decoupling natural factors, while also achieving more diverse samples. To train the model we introduce
a novel architecture that combines a 3D generator with a
2D discriminator that leverages conventional CNNs, where
the two components are bridged by a geometry mapping
layer. We further present a training scheme, based on auxiliary classifiers, to explicitly disentangle identity and expression attributes. Through quantitative and qualitative results
on standard face datasets, we illustrate the benefits of our
model and demonstrate that it outperforms competing state
of the art methods in terms of decoupling and diversity.

1. Introduction
Generative models of 3D shapes are widely used for their
ability to provide compact representations that allow to synthesize realistic shapes and their variations according to natural factors. This is particularly true with faces whose 3D
shape spans a low dimensional space, and for which generative models often serve as strong priors to solve underconstrained problems such as reconstruction from partial
data. Given that the facial shape presents natural factors
of variation (e.g. identity and expression), modeling these
in a decoupled manner is an important aspect, as it allows
to incorporate semantic control when performing inference
or synthesis tasks. Having interpretable representations in

terms of pre-defined factors of variation opens the door to
several applications, such as 3D face animation [41, 21],
accurate expression transfer [22, 38], recognition [1] and
artifical data synthesis [33].
Since the seminal work of Blanz and Vetter [4], numerous approaches have been proposed to build data-driven
generative models of the 3D face. Most commonly, variations among different identities are modeled by linear shape
statistics such as PCA [4, 5]. When expressions need to be
considered the identity and expression subpaces are typically modeled as two independent linear factors which are
additively combined [1]. In practice this can produce artifacts when transferring expressions among very different
facial shapes, an issue that has to be explicitly accounted
for, e.g. [38]. Multilinear models [40, 8, 13] present relative improvements by considering a tensor decomposition
combining the two spaces, but training requires a complete
labeled data tensor which is very hard to get in practice,
and transferring expressions by simply switching the latent
coefficients can still present artifacts [17].
With the aim to relax the linear assumption in modeling
3D faces, deep generative models with autoencoder architectures have recently been proposed. They demonstrate
benefits in modeling geometric details [3], non-linear deformations present in facial expressions [29], and increasing robustness to different types of capture noise [13]. Yet,
none of these approaches decouple the factors of variation
with the exception of [13], where an initialization with fully
labeled data is required whose size increases exponentially
in the number of considered factors.
In this work we investigate the use of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [16] for 3D face modeling and provide insights on their ability to learn decoupled representations. In particular, our comparisons with recent approaches
based on autoencoder architectures [13, 29] demonstrate
that our proposed approach can better decouple identity and
expression, and exhibit more variability in the generated
data.
While current deep learning techniques have shown im-

9419

