GEOBIT: A Geodesic-Based Binary Descriptor Invariant to
Non-Rigid Deformations for RGB-D Images
Erickson R. Nascimento1 , Guilherme Potje1 , Renato Martins1,2 , Felipe Cadar1 ,
Mario F. M. Campos1 , and Ruzena Bajcsy3
1
2
3
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG)
INRIA
University of California Berkeley
{erickson,guipotje,renato.martins,cadar,mario}@dcc.ufmg.br, bajcsy@eecs.berkeley.edu
Binary Descriptor

Abstract

010 ... 0

At the core of most three-dimensional alignment and
tracking tasks resides the critical problem of point correspondence. In this context, the design of descriptors that
efficiently and uniquely identifies keypoints, to be matched,
is of central importance. Numerous descriptors have been
developed for dealing with affine/perspective warps, but few
can also handle non-rigid deformations. In this paper, we
introduce a novel binary RGB-D descriptor invariant to isometric deformations. Our method uses geodesic isocurves
on smooth textured manifolds. It combines appearance and
geometric information from RGB-D images to tackle nonrigid transformations. We used our descriptor to track multiple textured depth maps and demonstrate that it produces
reliable feature descriptors even in the presence of strong
non-rigid deformations and depth noise. The experiments
show that our descriptor outperforms different state-of-theart descriptors in both precision-recall and recognition rate
metrics. We also provide to the community a new dataset
composed of annotated RGB-D images of different objects
(shirts, cloths, paintings, bags), subjected to strong nonrigid deformations, to evaluate point correspondence algorithms.

1. Introduction
The ability to make sense of real-world objects from images, considering all possible variations of their characteristics such as texture, shape and deformation, is central for an
adequate interpretation of scenes and objects in the world
around us. The appearance of these objects on images is
susceptible to a large number of conditions and transformations. For instance, while visually recognizing or tracking
objects, we need to deal with partial view occlusions, rotations, and illumination changes, but also with the challenging condition of non-rigid surface deformations. Therefore,
finding properties that characterize an object and remain in-

Intensity
Tests

Geodesic
Isocurves

Input
Image
Figure 1. Overview of our method. We exploit geodesic isocurves
of a textured 2D manifold subjected to isometric deformations.

variant under such conditions, play a key role in the development of image recognition, tracking, and multiple view
reconstruction. A common approach, to overcome the influence of these conditions, is to represent objects as a sampling of interest points, which are encoded with feature vectors called descriptors that contain distinguished features to
characterize each object ubiquitously.
In this paper, we introduce a new binary descriptor
that combines appearance and geometric information from
RGB-D images to handle isometric non-rigid deformations.
Our method is invariant to image scale and uses geodesic
isocurves on smooth textured manifolds. We used our descriptor to track multiple textured depth maps and demonstrate that it is robust and provides reliable results even in
the presence of strong non-rigid deformations and depth
noise. Figure 1 illustrates our descriptor.
Over the past few decades, numerous methodologies to
extract features have been proposed (e.g., [20, 6, 14, 13, 30,
22, 2, 21, 28]). These approaches can be roughly grouped
110004

