Dual Adversarial Inference for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Qicheng Lao1 2

Mohammad Havaei1
Ahmad Pesaranghader1 3
Francis Dutil1
Lisa Di Jorio1
Thomas Fevens2
1
2
3
Imagia Inc.
Concordia University
Dalhousie University

{qi lao, fevens}@encs.concodia.ca, {mohammad, ahmad.pgh, francis.dutil, lisa}@imagia.com

Abstract
Synthesizing images from a given text description involves engaging two types of information: the content,
which includes information explicitly described in the text
(e.g., color, composition, etc.), and the style, which is usually not well described in the text (e.g., location, quantity,
size, etc.). However, in previous works, it is typically treated
as a process of generating images only from the content, i.e.,
without considering learning meaningful style representations. In this paper, we aim to learn two variables that are
disentangled in the latent space, representing content and
style respectively. We achieve this by augmenting current
text-to-image synthesis frameworks with a dual adversarial inference mechanism. Through extensive experiments,
we show that our model learns, in an unsupervised manner,
style representations corresponding to certain meaningful
information present in the image that are not well described
in the text. The new framework also improves the quality
of synthesized images when evaluated on Oxford-102, CUB
and COCO datasets.

1. Introduction
The problem of text-to-image synthesis is to generate diverse yet plausible images given a text description of the
image and a general data distribution of images and matching descriptions. In recent years, generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9] have asserted themselves as perhaps the
most effective architecture for image generation, along with
their variant Conditional GANs [22], wherein the generator
is conditioned on a vector encompassing some desired property of the generated image.
A common approach for text-to-image synthesis is to use
a pre-trained text encoder to produce a text embedding from
the description. This vector is used as the conditioning factor in a conditional GAN-based model. The very first GAN
model for the text-to-image synthesis task [26] uses a noise
vector sampled from a normal distribution to capture image
style features left out of the text representation, enabling

(a)

Location

Content sources
from
text descriptions

Style sources
Size

Quantity

inferred z ̂

This ﬂower has petals that are
pink and has yellow stamen.
This ﬂower has white petals as
well as a pedicel.
This ﬂower has petals that are
yellow and has dark lines.

(b)

Multiple
flowers

Yellow/Orange

White

Red/Pink
Blue/Purple
ĉ)

inferred content (

Top
located
z ̂)

inferred style (

Figure 1: (a) Controlling the style (in columns) of generated images given a text description as the content (in rows). Columns
1-4 show locations (e.g., left, right and top) of the content in the
image; Columns 5-7 and columns 8-10 represent size and quantity
of the content respectively. (b) The learned content and style features through our dual adversarial inference, visualized by t-SNE.
The inferred content is clustered solely on color (one dominant
factor that is described in the text), while the inferred style shows
a more diffused cluster pattern, with local clusters such as multiple
flowers and top-located flowers.

the model to generate a variety of images given a certain
textual description. StackGan [32] introduces conditioning augmentation as a way to augment the text embeddings,
where a text embedding can be sampled from a learned distribution representing the text embedding space. As a result,
current state-of-the-art methods for text-to-image synthesis
generally have two sources of randomness: one for the text
embedding variability, and the other (noise z given a normal
distribution) capturing image variability.

7567

