Adaptive Wing Loss for Robust Face Alignment via Heatmap Regression
Xinyao Wang1,2
Liefeng Bo2
Li Fuxin1
1
2
Oregon State University
JD Digits
{wangxiny, lif}@oregonstate.edu, {xinyao.wang3, liefeng.bo}@jd.com

Abstract
Foregound

Heatmap regression with a deep network has become
one of the mainstream approaches to localize facial landmarks. However, the loss function for heatmap regression is
rarely studied. In this paper, we analyze the ideal loss function properties for heatmap regression in face alignment
problems. Then we propose a novel loss function, named
Adaptive Wing loss, that is able to adapt its shape to different types of ground truth heatmap pixels. This adaptability penalizes loss more on foreground pixels while less on
background pixels. To address the imbalance between foreground and background pixels, we also propose Weighted
Loss Map, which assigns high weights on foreground and
difficult background pixels to help training process focus
more on pixels that are crucial to landmark localization.
To further improve face alignment accuracy, we introduce
boundary prediction and CoordConv with boundary coordinates. Extensive experiments on different benchmarks,
including COFW, 300W and WFLW, show our approach
outperforms the state-of-the-art by a significant margin on
various evaluation metrics. Besides, the Adaptive Wing
loss also helps other heatmap regression tasks. Code will
be made publicly available at https://github.com/
protossw512/AdaptiveWingLoss.

1. Introduction
Face alignment, also known as facial landmark localization, seeks to localize pre-defined landmarks on human
faces. Face alignment plays an essential role in many face
related applications such as face recognition [48, 38, 35,
63, 10], face frontalization [22, 53, 28] and 3D face reconstruction [14, 45, 33, 19]. In recent years, Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) based heatmap regression has become one of the mainstream approaches for face alignment
problems and achieved considerable performance on frontal
faces. However, landmarks on faces with large pose, occlusion and significant blur are still challenging to localize.
Heatmap regression, which regresses a heatmap generated from landmark coordinates, is widely used for face

Mode
Heatmap

Difficult
Background
Background

Figure 1: Pixel type definitions. (Best viewed in color).

(a) Blurry
Large Pose

(b) GT
Heatmap

(c) MSE
NME: 6.27%

(d) AWing
NME: 4.23%

Figure 2: Predicted heatmap quality comparison. The
model trained with MSE failed to accurately predict the
heatmap around left cheek, lower right cheek and eye
brows. With the proposed Adaptive Wing loss (Fig. 2d),
the heatmap becomes much sharper on landmarks.
alignment [4, 29, 61, 47]. In heatmap regression, the ground
truth heatmap is generated by plotting a Gaussian distribution centered at each landmark on each channel. The model
regresses against the ground truth heatmap at pixel level
and then use the predicted heatmaps to infer landmark locations. Prediction accuracy on foreground pixels (pixels with
positive values), especially the ones near the mode of each
Gaussian distribution (Fig. 1), is essential to accurately localize landmarks, even small prediction errors on these pixels can cause the prediction to shift from the correct modes.
On the contrary, accurately predicting the values of background pixels (pixels with zero values) is less important,
since small errors on these pixels will not affect landmark
prediction in most cases. However, prediction accuracy on
difficult background pixels (Fig. 1 background pixels near
foreground pixels) are also important since they are often
incorrectly regressed as foreground pixels and could cause
inaccurate predictions.
From this discussion, we locate two issues of the widely
used Mean Square Error (MSE) loss in heatmap regression:
i) MSE is not sensitive to small errors, which hurts the capability to correctly locate the mode of the Gaussian dis-

6971

