A Novel Unsupervised Camera-aware Domain Adaptation Framework for
Person Re-identification
∗

Lei Qi1 , Lei Wang2 , Jing Huo1 , Luping Zhou3 , Yinghuan Shi1 , and Yang Gao1

∗

1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong
3
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney

2

Abstract
Unsupervised cross-domain person re-identification (ReID) faces two key issues. One is the data distribution discrepancy between source and target domains, and the other
is the lack of label information in target domain. They are
addressed in this paper from the perspective of representation learning. For the first issue, we highlight the presence
of camera-level sub-domains as a unique characteristic of
person Re-ID, and develop “camera-aware” domain adaptation to reduce the discrepancy not only between source
and target domains but also across these sub-domains. For
the second issue, we exploit the temporal continuity in each
camera of target domain to create discriminative information. This is implemented by dynamically generating online triplets within each batch, in order to maximally take
advantage of the steadily improved feature representation
in training process. Together, the above two methods give
rise to a novel unsupervised deep domain adaptation framework for person Re-ID. Experiments and ablation studies
on benchmark datasets demonstrate its superiority and interesting properties.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) matches images of
the same identity captured by different cameras of nonoverlapping views [4]. In unsupervised cross-domain person Re-ID, labeled data is only available in source domain,
while all data in target domain is unlabeled [20]. It aims to
learn an effective model to conduct Re-ID in target domain.
Unsupervised cross-domain person Re-ID faces two key
∗ Corresponding authors: Yang Gao; Lei Wang. The work of J. Huo
was supported by NSFC (61806092) and Jiangsu Natural Science Foundation (BK20180326). The work of Y. Shi was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (020214380056), NSFC
(61673203), CCF-Tencent Open Research Fund (RAGR20180114). The
work of Y. Gao was supported by NSFC (61432008).

issues. One is the data distribution discrepancy of source
and target domains, caused by the variations such as body
pose, view angle, illumination, image resolution, occlusion
and background. The other is the lack of label information
in target domain, due to time-consuming or even infeasible
manual annotation in real applications. Tangible progress
has been made to address them [24, 20, 25, 6, 31, 2], as
reviewed in next section. However, unsupervised crossdomain person Re-ID is still far from satisfactory, especially
when compared with the supervised counterpart [1, 29, 11].
This paper aims to better address the above two issues
from the perspective of representation learning. We try to
learn a deep feature representation (or equally, a shared subspace) in which the discrepancy of source and target domains is more effectively reduced and the discriminative information in target domain is more effectively reflected.
First, in most practical applications, the camera ID of a
frame can be readily obtained1 . The frames from the same
camera exhibit a common visual style (e.g., in terms of
background, image resolution, viewing angle, and so on).
This camera-specific style has recently started attracting attention in person Re-ID (e.g., image-image translation)[31].
The presence of camera-level sub-domains is a unique characteristic of cross-domain person Re-ID. Nevertheless, it
has not been well exploited from the perspective of representation learning. To utilize this characteristic, we propose a novel camera-aware domain adaptation. It emphasizes that with the learned representation, the distribution
discrepancy across camera-level sub-domains shall also be
sufficiently reduced, dealing with the discrepancy of source
and target domains at a finer level. This idea is realized
by adversarial learning with a novel criterion called crossdomain camera equiprobability.
Second, temporal information is usually available for the
1 For example, camera ID is provided for each frame in benchmark
datasets of person Re-ID, as will be shown in the experiment.

18080

