Transductive Learning for Zero-Shot Object Detection
Shafin Rahman⋆† , Salman Khan‡⋆ and Nick Barnes⋆†
⋆
Australian National University, † Data61-CSIRO, ‡ Inception Institute of AI
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Zero-shot object detection (ZSD) is a relatively unexplored research problem as compared to the conventional
zero-shot recognition task. ZSD aims to detect previously
unseen objects during inference. Existing ZSD works suffer from two critical issues: (a) large domain-shift between
the source (seen) and target (unseen) domains since the two
distributions are highly mismatched. (b) the learned model
is biased against unseen classes, therefore in generalized
ZSD settings, where both seen and unseen objects co-occur
during inference, the learned model tends to misclassify unseen to seen categories. This brings up an important question: How effectively can a transductive setting1 address the
aforementioned problems? To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to propose a transductive zero-shot object detection approach that convincingly reduces the domain-shift
and model-bias against unseen classes. Our approach is
based on a self-learning mechanism that uses a novel hybrid
pseudo-labeling technique. It progressively updates learned
model parameters by associating unlabeled data samples to
their corresponding classes. During this process, our technique makes sure that knowledge that was previously acquired on the source domain is not forgotten. We report
significant ‘relative’ improvements of 34.9% and 77.1% in
terms of mAP and recall rates over the previous best inductive models on MSCOCO dataset.

1. Introduction
The availability of large-scale annotated datasets and
high capacity deep networks have paved the way for rapid
progress in supervised learning tasks. As a result, deep
CNNs are now performing as well as humans on specialized tasks of visual recognition and fine-grained categorization [17, 33]. However, in several domains, acquiring largescale annotations is not viable due to the requirement of
expert knowledge or simply due to scarcity of visual samples in the real world (e.g., rare species). Zero-shot learn1 In a transductive ZSD setting, unlabeled test examples are available
during model training.

Unlabeled Data (Target Domain)

4

1

Inductive Model

3

Transudative Model

6
2

Fixed Pseudo-label

5

Dynamic Pseudo-label

Figure 1: We propose a self-learning approach based on pseudolabeling for transductive ZSD. (1) Unlabeled data is fed to the inductive model to (2) generate fixed pseudo-labels. (3) The Transductive model is initialized with an inductive model. (4) Unlabeled data is fed to the transductive model to generate (5) dynamic
labels. (6) Fixed and dynamic labels are then fed to the transductive model to interactively update it (4-5-6). The initial decision
boundary of an inductive model (solid black line) is updated to a
modified decision boundary (blue dashed line) after transductive
learning.

ing (ZSL) addresses such scenarios where we do not have
any visual examples for the unseen classes during training
[23, 30]. Traditional ZSL approaches have been limited to
recognition (classification) setting.
Zero-shot object detection (ZSD) is a recentlyintroduced problem that aims to simultaneously locate and
categorize unseen object classes. Compared to the recognition task, ZSD is far more challenging due to the ill-posed
nature and inherent complexity of localizing totally unseen
categories. The problem is compounded when we consider
a generalized ZSD setting, which assumes both seen and
unseen objects can co-occur during inference. Existing efforts [1, 3, 24, 38, 22] to address the ZSD problem explore

6082

