Anomaly Detection in Video Sequence with Appearance-Motion Correspondence
Trong-Nguyen Nguyen, Jean Meunier
DIRO, University of Montreal
{nguyetn, meunier}@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract
Anomaly detection in surveillance videos is currently a
challenge because of the diversity of possible events. We
propose a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) that
addresses this problem by learning a correspondence between common object appearances (e.g. pedestrian, background, tree, etc.) and their associated motions. Our model
is designed as a combination of a reconstruction network
and an image translation model that share the same encoder. The former sub-network determines the most significant structures that appear in video frames and the latter
one attempts to associate motion templates to such structures. The training stage is performed using only videos
of normal events and the model is then capable to estimate
frame-level scores for an unknown input. The experiments
on 6 benchmark datasets demonstrate the competitive performance of the proposed approach with respect to state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection in video sequences is a necessary
functionality for surveillance systems. Because abnormal
events rarely occur in real-world videos, this task is significantly time-consuming and may require a large amount of
resource (e.g. people) to perform manual checking. A method than can automatically determine potential frames of
anomalous events is thus crucial.
Our model is a combination of a convolutional autoencoder (Conv-AE) and a U-Net with skip connections [39]
that share the same encoder sub-network. Other related
works employed either an AE or a U-Net to perform the
anomaly detection in different ways. Hasan et al. [11] estimate regularity score for frames in video sequences according to reconstruction models. Their two AEs (with and
without convolutional layers) work on two different inputs:
hand-crafted features (HOG and HOF with trajectory-based
properties [49]) and concatenation of 10 consecutive frames
along the temporal axis. The reconstruction error is used to
indicate their regularity score. Unlike that work, the input

of our Conv-AE is a single frame and the temporal factor is
considered in the other stream via U-Net. The purpose of
our Conv-AE is to learn only regular appearance structures.
On the contrary, Ravanbakhsh et al. [37] employ the UNet structure proposed in [17] to translate an input from
video frame to a corresponding optical flow and vice versa.
We argue that the use of two CNNs with the same structure
may be redundant and an appropriate modification and/or
combination would improve the model ability. Compared
with [37], our network keeps the stream translating a video
frame to an optical flow (but using our proposed structure
instead of [17]) while replaces the other U-Net by a ConvAE that shares the encoding flow.
Inspired by the good performance of the video prediction
model in [32], Liu et al. [25] present a model that uses a
U-Net structure to predict a frame from a number of recent
ones and then estimates the corresponding optical flow. The
model is optimized according to the difference between the
outputted and original versions of video frame as well as
the optical flow together with an adversarial loss. Our work
also predicts an optical flow but directly from a single frame
in order to determine the association between a scene appearance and its typical motion. Since a fixed procedure of
optical flow estimation (FlowNet [8]) is embedded inside
the network in [25], the selection of such method is thus limited because the estimator has to be fully differentiable to
perform an end-to-end training. Our model, however, has a
stream that directly estimates a mapping from input frame to
optical flow. We only use a pretrained estimator for ground
truth calculation and the model signal does not propagate
through it during the training as well as inference stages.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We design a CNN that combines a Conv-AE and a UNet, in which each stream has its own contribution for
the task of detecting anomalous frames. The model
can be trained end-to-end.
• We integrate an Inception module modified from [48]
right after the input layer to reduce the effect of network’s depth since this depth is considered as a hyperparameter that requires a careful selection.

1273

