Neighborhood Preserving Hashing for Scalable Video Retrieval
Shuyan Li1,4 , Zhixiang Chen1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗, Xiu Li1,4 , Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, China
li-sy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zxchen@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn;
lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn; xiu.li@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn; jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Neighborhood Preserving
Hashing (NPH) method for scalable video retrieval in an
unsupervised manner. Unlike most existing deep video
hashing methods which indiscriminately compress an entire video into a binary code, we embed the spatial-temporal
neighborhood information into the encoding network such
that the neighborhood-relevant visual content of a video can
be preferentially encoded into a binary code under the guidance of the neighborhood information. Specifically, we propose a neighborhood attention mechanism which focuses
on partial useful content of each input frame conditioned
on the neighborhood information. We then integrate the
neighborhood attention mechanism into an RNN-based reconstruction scheme to encourage the binary codes to capture the spatial-temporal structure in a video which is consistent with that in the neighborhood. As a consequence, the
learned hashing functions can map similar videos to similar
binary codes. Extensive experiments on three widely-used
benchmark datasets validate the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Scalable video retrieval seeks similar videos from a large
database given a query video. Usually, videos are represented by sampled frames and each frame is characterized
by a representative feature. The set of frame features are
utilized to identify relevant videos or nearest neighbors.
In the face of high dimensional features and large scale
datasets, hashing methods have attracted a lot of attention
in scalable visual retrieval [1–10]. Video hashing methods encode frame features of each video into a compact
binary code while enabling the similarity between videos
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1: The basic idea of neighborhood preserving hashing. The spatial-temporal neighborhood information is embedded into the encoding network to guide the encoder to
preferentially compress relevant visual content of the video
into a binary code.

to be preserved in the Hamming space [11–22]. Among
them, learning-based video hashing methods which learn
data-dependent and task-specific hashing functions have
achieved good search accuracy [23–25].
Over the past decade, hashing functions have been integrated into various deep learning architectures to obtain promising performance. Typically, deep video hashing methods compress an entire video into a binary code
via deep neural networks and apply similarity preserving
criteria on top of the hash layer to learn hashing functions [13, 18–20]. However, since videos contain complex, redundant and sometimes ambiguous content for nearest neighbor search, indiscriminately extracting entire content from a video will inevitably lead to suboptimal hashing functions [26]. On the other hand, manual labels are
time and labor consuming especially for large-scale video
dataset, which makes supervised hashing methods less feasible for scalable video retrieval.
4321
8212

