Human Attention in Image Captioning: Dataset and Analysis
Sen He1 , Hamed R. Tavakoli2,3 , Ali Borji4 , and Nicolas Pugeault1
1

University of Exeter, 2 Nokia Technologies, 3 Aalto University, 4 MarkableAI

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel dataset consisting of eye
movements and verbal descriptions recorded synchronously
over images. Using this data, we study the differences in
human attention during free-viewing and image captioning
tasks. We look into the relationship between human attention and language constructs during perception and sentence articulation. We also analyse attention deployment
mechanisms in the top-down soft attention approach that is
argued to mimic human attention in captioning tasks, and
investigate whether visual saliency can help image captioning. Our study reveals that (1) human attention behaviour
differs in free-viewing and image description tasks. Humans tend to fixate on a greater variety of regions under
the latter task, (2) there is a strong relationship between described objects and attended objects (97% of the described
objects are being attended), (3) a convolutional neural network as feature encoder accounts for human-attended regions during image captioning to a great extent (around
78%), (4) soft-attention mechanism differs from human attention, both spatially and temporally, and there is low
correlation between caption scores and attention consistency scores. These indicate a large gap between humans
and machines in regards to top-down attention, and (5) by
integrating the soft attention model with image saliency,
we can significantly improve the model’s performance
on Flickr30k and MSCOCO benchmarks. The dataset
can be found at: https://github.com/SenHe/
Human-Attention-in-Image-Captioning.

1. Introduction
“Two elderly ladies and a young man sitting at a
table with food on it.”
This sentence is an example of how someone would describe the image in Fig. 1. Describing images in a few
words and extracting the gist of the scene while ignoring
unnecessary details is an easy task for humans, that can

Image

Recorded Audio description

Text transcription:
Two elderly ladies
and a young man
sitting at a table
with food on it

Eye-fixation sequence, from left to right, top to bottom

Figure 1: An example of the data collected in our dataset,
including the image shown to the subject, the subject’s audio description for this image, the textual transcription of
this description, and the sequence of eye-fixations while the
subject watched and described the image.
in some cases be achieved from only a very brief glance.
In a stark contrast, providing a formal algorithm for the
same task is an intricate challenge that has been beyond
the reach of computer vision for decades. Recently, with
the availability of powerful deep neural network architectures and large scale datasets, new data-driven approaches
have been proposed for automatic captioning of images and
have demonstrated intriguing performance [5, 21, 33, 35].
Although there is no proof that such models can fully capture the complexity of visual scenes, they appear to be able
to produce credible captions for a variety of images. This
raises the question of whether such artificial systems are using similar strategies employed by the human visual system
to generate captions.
One clue onto how humans perform the captioning task
is through the study of visual attention via eye-tracking.
Attention mechanisms have been studied from different
perspectives under the umbrella terms of visual attention (bottom-up and top-down mechanisms of attention),
saliency prediction (predicting fixations), as well as eye
movement analysis. A large number of studies in computer
vision and robotics have tried to replicate these capabilities
for different applications such as object detection, image
thumbnailing, and human-robot interaction [1, 2, 3]. There

8529

