Budget-Aware Adapters for Multi-Domain Learning
Rodrigo Berriel1∗ Stéphane Lathuilière2 Moin Nabi3 Tassilo Klein3
Thiago Oliveira-Santos1 Nicu Sebe2 Elisa Ricci2,4
2
1
LCAD, UFES
DISI, University of Trento 3 SAP ML Research 4 Fondazione Bruno Kessler
berriel@lcad.inf.ufes.br

Abstract
50% Budget

Multi-Domain Learning (MDL) refers to the problem of
learning a set of models derived from a common deep architecture, each one specialized to perform a task in a certain domain (e.g., photos, sketches, paintings). This paper
tackles MDL with a particular interest in obtaining domainspecific models with an adjustable budget in terms of the
number of network parameters and computational complexity. Our intuition is that, as in real applications the number
of domains and tasks can be very large, an effective MDL
approach should not only focus on accuracy but also on
having as few parameters as possible. To implement this
idea we derive specialized deep models for each domain
by adapting a pre-trained architecture but, differently from
other methods, we propose a novel strategy to automatically
adjust the computational complexity of the network. To this
aim, we introduce Budget-Aware Adapters that select the
most relevant feature channels to better handle data from
a novel domain. Some constraints on the number of active
switches are imposed in order to obtain a network respecting the desired complexity budget. Experimentally, we show
that our approach leads to recognition accuracy competitive with state-of-the-art approaches but with much lighter
networks both in terms of storage and computation.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have brought revolutionary advances in computer vision, setting the state of the art in
many tasks such as object recognition [9, 14], detection [7],
semantic segmentation [4], depth estimation [37], and many
more. Despite these progresses, a major drawback with
deep architectures is that when a novel task is addressed
typically a new model is required. However, in many situations it may be reasonable to learn models which perform well on data from different domains. This problem,
referred as Multi-Domain Learning (MDL) and originally
proposed in [25], has received considerable attention lately
∗ Work done when with MHUG (DISI, University of Trento).

Pre-trained
Model

Adaptation
to New
Domains

Flowers

Budget-Aware Adapters (BA2)

Standard Adapters [18,20,26]

Figure 1: In Multi-Domain Learning, a pre-trained model is
usually adapted to solve new tasks in new domains. When
using standard approaches, the complexity C of the domainspecific models is dependent on the pre-trained model complexity. In this work we propose a novel approach to learn
specialized models while imposing budget constraints in
terms of the number of parameters for each new domain.
[18, 20, 26]. An example of MDL is the problem of image
classification when the data belong to several domains (e.g.,
natural images, paintings, sketches, etc.) and the categories
in the different domains do not overlap.
Previous MDL approaches [18, 20, 25, 26] utilize a common backbone architecture (i.e., a pre-trained model) and
learn a limited set of domain-specific parameters. This
strategy is advantageous with respect to building several
independent classifiers, as it guarantees a significant saving in terms of memory. Furthermore, it naturally deals
with the catastrophic forgetting issue, as when a new domain is considered the knowledge on the previously learned
ones is retained. Existing approaches mostly differ from
the way domain-specific parameters are designed and integrated within the backbone architecture. For instance,
binary masks are employed in [18, 20] in order to select
the parameters of the main network that are useful for a
given task. Differently, in [25, 26] domain-specific residual blocks are embedded in the original deep architecture.
While the different approaches are typically compared in
terms of classification accuracy , their computational and
memory requirements are not taken into account.

382

