Restoration of Non-rigidly Distorted Underwater Images using a Combination of
Compressive Sensing and Local Polynomial Image Representations
Jerin Geo James
IIT Bombay

Pranay Agrawal
IIT Bombay

Ajit Rajwade
IIT Bombay

jeringeo@cse.iitb.ac.in

pranay.agr09@gmail.com

ajitvr@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
Images of static scenes submerged beneath a wavy water surface exhibit severe non-rigid distortions. The physics
of water flow suggests that water surfaces possess spatiotemporal smoothness and temporal periodicity. Hence they
possess a sparse representation in the 3D discrete Fourier
(DFT) basis. Motivated by this, we pose the task of restoration of such video sequences as a compressed sensing (CS)
problem. We begin by tracking a few salient feature points
across the frames of a video sequence of the submerged
scene. Using these point trajectories, we show that the
motion fields at all other (non-tracked) points can be effectively estimated using a typical CS solver. This by itself
is a novel contribution in the field of non-rigid motion estimation. We show that this method outperforms state of
the art algorithms for underwater image restoration. We
further consider a simple optical flow algorithm based on
local polynomial expansion of the image frames (PEOF).
Surprisingly, we demonstrate that PEOF is more efficient
and often outperforms all the state of the art methods in
terms of numerical measures. Finally, we demonstrate that
a two-stage approach consisting of the CS step followed by
PEOF much more accurately preserves the image structure
and improves the (visual as well as numerical) video quality
as compared to just the PEOF stage.
The source code, datasets and supplemental material can
be accessed at [1], [3].

1. Introduction
Underwater image analysis is a challenging and relatively less explored area of computer vision. In particular, if a scene submerged in water is imaged by a camera in air, the scene exhibits severe spatial distortions due
to dynamic refraction at the wavy/dynamic water surface.
Such distortions can interfere with higher level tasks such
as object recognition, tracking, motion analysis or segmentation, which are required in applications such as coral reef

monitoring, surveillance of shallow riverbeds to observe
vegetation [32], or studying of visual perception in waterbirds (see references in [5]). Applying the principle of
reversibility of light, there also exist applications in submarines where a camera in water is observing scenes in the
air [5].
Related Work: There exists a medium-sized body of literature on this topic. The earliest work, to our knowledge,
is from [19] where frame-to-frame optical flow is estimated
using a correlation-based method, and the underlying image
is estimated from the centroid of the flow trajectory at each
point. Such a method is expensive and error-prone due to
ambiguities in optical flow (especially in case of large motion), and reflective or blur artifacts. The work in [29] infers
a set of ‘water bases’ from synthetic underwater scenes generated from the wave equation, and then expresses deformation fields within small patches as linear combinations of
the water bases. The work in [20] performs non-rigid registration of blurred versions of all frames in the sequence
with an evolving template (initialized to be the mean image) followed by a robust PCA step [7]. Both these methods are expensive and prone to local minima in case of large
motion, leaving behind some residual motion or geometric
distortion. Along similar lines, [15] proposes a method to
register all frames of a video sequence with a ‘reference
frame’, chosen to be a frame with the least blur. The socalled ‘lucky region approach’ has been developed in [12],
[9], [36] and [35]. In this, distortion-free patches which correspond to patches of the image formed due to a locally flat
portion of the water surface, are identified and then stitched
together using graph embedding. In [25], the restoration is
performed based on the assumption that the water surface is
a single unidirectional cyclic wave (UCW). The restoration
process is framed as a blind deconvolution problem, the input to which is the average of the video frames (equivalent
to a motion-blurred image due to long camera exposure).
The UCW assumption will not hold in some scenarios, for
example if the water waves are formed from a superposition of different constituent waves due to multiple independent disturbances. Recently, [18] presented a deep learning
17839

