Unsupervised Video Interpolation Using Cycle Consistency
Fitsum A. Reda Deqing Sun∗ Aysegul Dundar Mohammad Shoeybi
Kevin J. Shih Andrew Tao Jan Kautz Bryan Catanzaro
NVIDIA

Abstract
Learning to synthesize high frame rate videos via interpolation requires large quantities of high frame rate training videos, which, however, are scarce, especially at high
resolutions. Here, we propose unsupervised techniques to
synthesize high frame rate videos directly from low frame
rate videos using cycle consistency. For a triplet of consecutive frames, we optimize models to minimize the discrepancy
between the center frame and its cycle reconstruction, obtained by interpolating back from interpolated intermediate
frames. This simple unsupervised constraint alone achieves
results comparable with supervision using the ground truth
intermediate frames. We further introduce a pseudo supervised loss term that enforces the interpolated frames to be
consistent with predictions of a pre-trained interpolation
model. The pseudo supervised loss term, used together with
cycle consistency, can effectively adapt a pre-trained model
to a new target domain. With no additional data and in
a completely unsupervised fashion, our techniques significantly improve pre-trained models on new target domains,
increasing PSNR values from 32.84dB to 33.05dB on the
Slowflow and from 31.82dB to 32.53dB on the Sintel evaluation datasets.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of modern technology, consumergrade smartphones and digital cameras can now record
videos at high frame rates (e.g. 240 frames-per-second).
However, achieving this comes at the cost of high power
consumption, larger storage requirements, and reduced
video resolution. Given these limitations, regular events
are not typically recorded at high frame rates. Yet, important life events happen unexpectedly and hence tend to be
recorded at standard frame rates. It is thus greatly desirable
to have the ability to produce arbitrarily high FPS videos
from low FPS videos.
Video frame interpolation addresses this need by gener∗ Currently affiliated with Google.

Ground Truth
Intermediate

Baseline Supervised
(Super SloMo)

Guilin Liu

Proposed Unsupervised
Fine-tuning (Super SloMo)

Figure 1. Visual results of a sample from Slowflow dataset. Baseline supervised model is trained with Adobe and YouTube datasets
and proposed unsupervised model is fine-tuned with Slowflow.

ating one or more intermediate frames from two consecutive frames. Increasing the number of frames in videos essentially allows one to visualize events in slow motion and
appreciate content better. Often, video interpolation techniques are employed to increase the frame rate of already
recorded videos, or in streaming applications to provide a
high refresh rate or a smooth viewing experience.
Video interpolation is a classical vision and graphics
problem [3, 21, 27] and has recently received renewed research attention [10, 16, 11, 14]. Particularly, supervised
learning with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has
been widely employed to learn video interpolation from
paired input and ground truth frames, often collected from
raw video data. For instance, recent CNN-based approaches
such as [6] and [16], trained with large quantities of public
high FPS videos, obtain high quality interpolation results
when the test videos are similar to the training ones.
However, these methods may fail if the training data differ from the target domain. For instance, the target domain
might be to slow down videos of fish taken underwater, but

892

