S2 GAN: Share Aging Factors Across Ages and
Share Aging Trends Among Individuals
Zhenliang He1,2 , Meina Kan1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
zhenliang.he@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {kanmeina,sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Generally, we human follow the roughly common aging
trends, e.g., the wrinkles only tend to be more, longer or
deeper. However, the aging process of each individual is
more dominated by his/her personalized factors, including
the invariant factors such as identity and mole, as well as
the personalized aging patterns, e.g., one may age by graying hair while another may age by receding hairline. Following this biological principle, in this work, we propose
an effective and efficient method to simulate natural aging.
Specifically, a personalized aging basis is established for
each individual to depict his/her own aging factors. Then
different ages share this basis, being derived through agespecific transforms. The age-specific transforms represent
the aging trends which are shared among all individuals.
The proposed method can achieve continuous face aging
with favorable aging accuracy, identity preservation, and
fidelity. Furthermore, befitted from the effective design, a
unique model is capable of all ages and the prediction time
is significantly saved.

1. Introduction
Face aging/rejuvenation aims to predict the future/past
faces of a given face image as shown in Fig. 1(a), which is
not only interesting for entertainment but also valuable for
applications such as cross-age face recognition, finding lost
children or wanted fugitives. Although face aging has been
studied for decades and witnessed various breakthroughs,
it is still a challenging task even for human itself because
the natural human aging is affected by many factors such
as genes, physical damage, disease and living environment,
which are indeterministic and quite complicated to be modeled. Besides, it is difficult or even impossible to collect
age data for each individual over a long period, and most
available datasets are limited to short age span for the same
person. Therefore, discontinuous data distribution makes
the modeling of long period aging even more challenging.

Generally, traditional face aging approaches can be
grouped into two main categories, i.e., the physical model
approaches and the prototype approaches. The physical
model approaches [38, 28] simulate the aging process by
exploiting prior knowledge about the biological structure
and aging mechanism. These physical model approaches
only consider the overall aging characteristics, but do not
specially investigate the personality in the aging process.
The prototype approaches [37, 15] divide continuous ages
into discrete age groups, and define the average face or lowrank face as the prototype of each age group, then the transition pattern between a pair of age groups is represented by
the difference between their corresponding prototypes. Because of averaging, however, the personalized information
is eliminated in the prototypes, and therefore the transition
pattern is also an average pattern without personality. Shu
et al. [32] try to introduce personality by establishing aging
coupled dictionaries for each age group, and the personality
is represented by the sparse coding coefficients. However,
this method produces severe ghost artifacts.
Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9]
and its variants are adopted for face aging with promising
results [17, 40, 42]. These methods, powered by deep neural networks and adversarial training, usually train a transformation network to convert an input image to a target
age group. Besides, an identity preservation network is
often adopted in GAN based methods to keep the identity
unchanged during the aging process. Although the identity is kept, as for age, these methods only consider the
population-to-population transition between age groups, instead of explicitly considering the personalized transition
pattern for each individual between different ages. As a solution, Liu et al. [18] propose a transition pattern discriminator to drive the aging network to capture the personalized
transition pattern for each individual.
Without proper consideration of personality may result
in missing details. Therefore, in this work, in considera-

9440

