Situational Fusion of Visual Representation for Visual Navigation
William B. Shen1

Danfei Xu1 Yuke Zhu1 Leonidas J. Guibas1,2 Li Fei-Fei1
1
Stanford University, 2 Facebook AI Research

Silvio Savarese1

{willshen,danfei,yukez,guibas,feifeili,ssilvio}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Assistive robots that can efficiently navigate an everyday
home require an extensive repertoire of visual perception
abilities. To “find the nearest cup”, the robot needs a situational combination of different perception abilities. It needs
to recognize a cup using object detection, and if no cup is
present, identify and navigate to a room that may contain
cups using a combination of scene semantic knowledge and
geometric cues such as vanishing point and depth. Performing such a complex task in any home that may have completely different spatial layouts and appearances demands
not only the generalizability of the individual visual perception modules but also the situational combination thereof.
Recently, deep reinforcement learning has made promising progress in goal-directed visual navigation with end-toend learning [21, 41]. The guiding principle of imposing
minimal structure to the learning algorithm and the practi-

...

A complex visual navigation task puts an agent in different situations which call for a diverse range of visual perception abilities. For example, to “go to the nearest chair”,
the agent might need to identify a chair in a living room
using semantics, follow along a hallway using vanishing
point cues, and avoid obstacles using depth. Therefore, utilizing the appropriate visual perception abilities based on
a situational understanding of the visual environment can
empower these navigation models in unseen visual environments. We propose to train an agent to fuse a large set of
visual representations that correspond to diverse visual perception abilities. To fully utilize each representation, we develop an action-level representation fusion scheme, which
predicts an action candidate from each representation and
adaptively consolidate these action candidates into the final
action. Furthermore, we employ a data-driven inter-task
affinity regularization to reduce redundancies and improve
generalization. Our approach leads to a significantly improved performance in novel environments over ImageNetpretrained baseline and other fusion methods.

Diverse
Environments

Find Table

Situational
Fusion

Semantic
Segment.

Depth
Perception

Object
Class.

Room
Layout

Scene
Class.

Action

Figure 1: (Top) The visual navigation task requires an agent to
handle large diversity in real-world environments. (Bottom) Instead of using a black-box model, we propose to adaptively fuse
visual representations from a diverse set of vision tasks to better
generalize to new environments.

cally unlimited synthetic training data have warranted the
wide applicability of these methods. However, obviating
structures and prior knowledge about visual perception can
often lead to solutions that overfit to an environment. In
fact, such success often reckons on training and evaluating
in identical or similar environments [21, 41]. Being able
to perform complex navigation tasks and generalize to environments with drastically varying appearances as aforementioned is still beyond reach.
Meanwhile, visual representations extracted from a wide
range of vision tasks [6, 19] have been greatly effective
in generalizing towards new tasks and new domains. It
has been a common practice to reuse visual representations
trained for standard vision tasks, such as image classification [20], in new datasets and new problems [8, 33]. In
this work, we endow visual navigation models with structures and priors based on a diverse set of visual representations. This leads to stronger generalization without losing
the wide applicability of end-to-end learning. Our idea is

2881

