Context-Aware Emotion Recognition Networks
Jiyoung Lee1 , Seungryong Kim2 , Sunok Kim1 , Jungin Park1 , Kwanghoon Sohn1,∗
1
Yonsei University, 2 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
{easy00,kso428,newrun,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr, seungryong.kim@epfl.ch

Abstract
Traditional techniques for emotion recognition have focused on the facial expression analysis only, thus providing limited ability to encode context that comprehensively
represents the emotional responses. We present deep networks for context-aware emotion recognition, called CAERNet, that exploit not only human facial expression but also
context information in a joint and boosting manner. The
key idea is to hide human faces in a visual scene and seek
other contexts based on an attention mechanism. Our networks consist of two sub-networks, including two-stream
encoding networks to separately extract the features of
face and context regions, and adaptive fusion networks to
fuse such features in an adaptive fashion. We also introduce a novel benchmark for context-aware emotion recognition, called CAER, that is more appropriate than existing benchmarks both qualitatively and quantitatively. On
several benchmarks, CAER-Net proves the effect of context for emotion recognition. Our dataset is available at
http://caer-dataset.github.io.

1. Introduction
Recognizing human emotions from visual contents has
attracted significant attention in numerous computer vision
applications such as health care and human-computer interaction systems [1, 2, 3].
Previous researches for emotion recognition based on
handcrafted features [4, 5] or deep networks [6, 7, 8] have
mainly focused on the perception of the facial expression,
based on the assumption that facial images are one of the
most discriminative features of emotional responses. In
this regard, the most widely used datasets, such as the
AFEW [9] and FER2013 [10], only provide the cropped
and aligned facial images. However, those conventional
This research was supported by Next-Generation Information Computing Development Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (NRF2017M3C4A7069370).
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Intuition of CAER-Net: for untrimmed videos as in (a),
conventional methods that leverage the facial regions only as in (b)
often fail to recognize emotion. Unlike these methods, CAER-Net
focuses on both face and attentive context regions as in (c).

methods with the facial image dataset frequently fail to provide satisfactory performance when the emotional signals in
the faces are indistinguishable and ambiguous. Meanwhile,
people recognize the emotion of others from not only their
faces but also surrounding contexts, such as action, interaction with others, and place [11, 12]. Given untrimmed
videos as in Fig. 1(a), could we catch how a woman feels
solely from her facial expression as in Fig. 1(b)? It is ambiguous to estimate the emotion only with cropped facial
videos. However, we could easily guess the emotion as
“surprise” with her facial expression and contexts that an
another woman comes close to her as shown in Fig. 1(c).
Nevertheless, such contexts have been rarely considered
in most existing emotion recognition methods and benchmarks.
Some methods [13, 14] have shown that emotion recognition performance can be significantly boosted by considering context information such as gesture and place [13, 14].
In addition, in visual sentimental analysis [15, 16] that
recognizes the sentiment of an image, similar to emotion
recognition but not tailored to humans, the holistic visual
appearance was used to encode such contexts. However,
these approaches are not practical for extracting the salient
context information from visual contents. Moreover, large-

10143

