Scalable Place Recognition Under Appearance Change for Autonomous Driving
Anh-Dzung Doan1 , Yasir Latif1 , Tat-Jun Chin1 , Yu Liu1 , Thanh-Toan Do2 , and Ian Reid1
1
2

School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool

Abstract
A major challenge in place recognition for autonomous
driving is to be robust against appearance changes due
to short-term (e.g., weather, lighting) and long-term (seasons, vegetation growth, etc.) environmental variations. A
promising solution is to continuously accumulate images
to maintain an adequate sample of the conditions and incorporate new changes into the place recognition decision.
However, this demands a place recognition technique that
is scalable on an ever growing dataset. To this end, we propose a novel place recognition technique that can be efficiently retrained and compressed, such that the recognition
of new queries can exploit all available data (including recent changes) without suffering from visible growth in computational cost. Underpinning our method is a novel temporal image matching technique based on Hidden Markov
Models. Our experiments show that, compared to state-ofthe-art techniques, our method has much greater potential
for large-scale place recognition for autonomous driving.

1. Introduction
Place recognition (PR) is the broad problem of recognizing “places” based on visual inputs [26, 6]. Recently, it
has been pursued actively in autonomous driving research,
where PR forms a core component in localization (i.e., estimating the vehicle pose) [34, 21, 4, 9, 35, 5, 7] and loop closure detection [10, 13]. Many existing methods for PR require to train on a large dataset of sample images, often with
ground truth positioning labels, and state-of-the-art results
are reported by methods that employ learning [21, 20, 7, 9].
To perform convincingly, a practical PR algorithm must
be robust against appearance changes in the operating environment. These can occur due to higher frequency environmental variability such as weather, time of day, and pedestrian density, as well as longer term changes such as seasons
and vegetation growth. A realistic PR system must also contend with “less cyclical” changes, such as construction and
roadworks, updating of signage, façades and billboards, as

well as abrupt changes to traffic rules that affect traffic flow
(this can have a huge impact on PR if the database contains
images seen from only one particular flow [10, 13]). Such
appearance changes invariably occur in real life.
To meet the challenges posed by appearance variations,
one paradigm is to develop PR algorithms that are inherently robust against the changes. Methods under this
paradigm attempt to extract the “visual essence” of a place
that is independent of appearance changes [1]. However,
such methods have mostly been demonstrated on more “natural” variations such as time of day and seasons.
Another paradigm is to equip the PR algorithm with a
large image dataset that was acquired under different environmental conditions [8]. To accommodate long-term evolution in appearance, however, it is vital to continuously
accumulate data and update the PR algorithm. To achieve
continuous data collection cost-effectively over a large region, one could opportunistically acquire data using a fleet
of service vehicles (e.g., taxis, delivery vehicles) and amateur mappers. Indeed, there are street imagery datasets that
grow continuously through crowdsourced videos [30, 14].
Under this approach, it is reasonable to assume that a decent sampling of the appearance variations, including the
recent changes, is captured in the ever growing dataset.
Under continuous dataset growth, the key to consistently
accurate PR is to “assimilate” new data quickly. This demands a PR algorithm that is scalable. Specifically, the
computational cost of testing (i.e., performing PR on a
query input) should not increase visibly with the increase
in dataset size. Equally crucially, updating or retraining the
PR algorithm on new data must also be highly efficient.
Arguably, PR algorithms based on deep learning [7, 9]
can accommodate new data by simply appending it to the
dataset and fine-tuning the network parameters. However,
as we will show later, this fine-tuning process is still too
costly to be practical, and the lack of accurate labels in the
testing sequence can be a major obstacle.
Contributions We propose a novel framework for PR on
large-scale datasets that continuously grow due to the incor-

9319

