EvalNorm: Estimating Batch Normalization Statistics for Evaluation
Saurabh Singh
Google Research

Abhinav Shrivastava∗
University of Maryland, College Park

saurabhsingh@google.com

abhinav@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Batch normalization (BN) has been very effective for deep
learning and is widely used. However, when training with
small minibatches, models using BN exhibit a significant
degradation in performance. In this paper we study this
peculiar behavior of BN to gain a better understanding of
the problem, and identify a cause. We propose ‘EvalNorm’
to address the issue by estimating corrected normalization
statistics to use for BN during evaluation. EvalNorm supports online estimation of the corrected statistics while the
model is being trained, and does not affect the training
scheme of the model. As a result, EvalNorm can also be used
with existing pre-trained models allowing them to benefit
from our method. EvalNorm yields large gains for models
trained with smaller batches. Our experiments show that
EvalNorm performs 6.18% (absolute) better than vanilla BN
for a batchsize of 2 on ImageNet validation set and from 1.5
to 7.0 points (absolute) gain on the COCO object detection
benchmark across a variety of setups.

1. Introduction
Batch Normalization (BN) [11] has significantly contributed to the wide application and success of deep learning. It has enabled training of larger and deeper models [7, 8, 22, 23] leading to significant advances in computer
vision. However, a well-acknowledged drawback of BN is
that it requires sufficiently large minibatches [7, 10, 23], and
results in drastically reduced model performance for smaller
mini-batches. In this paper we study this peculiar behavior
of BN to gain a better understanding of the source of the
problem. We identify a cause and propose EvalNorm to address the issue. EvalNorm estimates corrected normalization
statistics to use for BN during evaluation only. EvalNorm
supports online estimation of the corrected statistics while
the model is being trained and does not affect the training
scheme of the model. As a result, EvalNorm can also be used
with existing pre-trained models allowing them to benefit
∗ Work done while at Google.

from our method without retraining. For pre-trained models
EvalNorm suggests: 1) a rule of thumb that is trivial to implement and, 2) an offline estimation method that requires
a pass through data (but doesn’t update the model). The
ability to estimate corrected statistics online for new models
helps avoid an otherwise two step process. The model is
still trained as it would be without our method. Note that
proposing a new normalization technique is not a goal of
this paper. Instead, the goal is to gain a better understanding of the behavior of BN for small minibatches. We limit
ourselves to explorations that only affect the evaluation of
a model trained with BN and refer to our method as ‘Eval
Normalization’ (EvalNorm or EN).
Reliance of BN on large minibatches is prohibitive in
several settings due to the hardware memory limitations. For
example, applications requiring high-resolution inputs (object detection, segmentation, medical image analysis, etc.) or
high-capacity (deeper and wider) networks are constrained
to using smaller minibatches and thus take a performance
hit. As a result, several normalization techniques, such as
Group Normalization [25] and Batch Re-normalization [10],
have been proposed to address the problem due to smaller
minibatches. However, these approaches don’t shed any
light on the source of the problem with BN. Instead, they
propose alternatives that make changes to the model and
require retraining. As a result, many already trained and deployed models that use BN, where retraining is not possible,
can not benefit from these alternatives. Our experimental
evaluation of EN shows that it addresses the shortcomings
of BN for small batches and provides a feasible alternative
when retraining isn’t an option.
Training and evaluation discrepancy in BN: During training, BN normalizes each channel for an example using the
mean and variance of that channel aggregated across the full
minibatch. This aggregation across the minibatch introduces
a dependency on other minibatch samples. However, during
evaluation each example is evaluated by itself and thus an
approximation of the minibatch statistics is required. Typically, an exponential moving average (EMA) of minibatch
moment statistics is maintained during training and used as
a substitute during evaluation. Normalization using EMA

3633

