DeCaFA: Deep Convolutional Cascade for Face Alignment In The Wild
Arnaud Dapogny1,2 , Kevin Bailly2, 3 , and Matthieu Cord1
1

LIP6, Sorbonne Université, CNRS, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris
2
Datakalab, 114 boulevard Malesherbes, 75017 Paris
3
ISIR, Sorbonne Université, CNRS, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris

Abstract
Face Alignment is an active computer vision domain, that
consists in localizing a number of facial landmarks that vary
across datasets. State-of-the-art face alignment methods
either consist in end-to-end regression, or in refining the
shape in a cascaded manner, starting from an initial guess.
In this paper, we introduce DeCaFA, an end-to-end deep convolutional cascade architecture for face alignment. DeCaFA
uses fully-convolutional stages to keep full spatial resolution throughout the cascade. Between each cascade stage,
DeCaFA uses multiple chained transfer layers with spatial
softmax to produce landmark-wise attention maps for each
of several landmark alignment tasks. Weighted intermediate
supervision, as well as efficient feature fusion between the
stages allow to learn to progressively refine the attention
maps in an end-to-end manner. We show experimentally that
DeCaFA significantly outperforms existing approaches on
300W, CelebA and WFLW databases. In addition, we show
that DeCaFA can learn fine alignment with reasonable accuracy from very few images using coarsely annotated data.

1. Introduction
Face alignment consists in localizing landmarks (e.g. lips
and eyes corners, pupils, nose tip). It is an important computer vision field, as it is essential for expression analysis
[28], face recognition [19], tracking [2], and synthesis [20].
Recent face alignment approaches either belongs to cascaded regression or deep end-to-end regression methods. On
the one’s hand, cascaded regression consists in learning a
sequence of updates, starting from an initial guess, to refine
the landmark localization in a coarse-to-fine manner. This
allows to robustly learn rigid transformations, such as translation and rotation, in the first cascade stages, then learning
non-rigid deformation (e.g. due to facial expression).

Figure 1. DeCaFA estimates landmark-wise attention maps at several stages of its architecture (horizontally: stages 1 to 4). By
chaining transfer layers, it can integrate heterogeneous data (Vertically: attention maps and predictions for 98, 68 and 5-landmarks.

On the other hand, many deep approaches aim at aligning
the landmarks from the image directly. However, because annotating landmarks is tedious, data is scarce and the nature of
the annotations vary a lot. Thus, end-to-end approaches usually rely on learning intermediate representation (e.g. edges)
to drive the alignment process. However, these representations are ad hoc and sub-optimal for localizing landmarks.
In this paper, we introduce a Deep convolutional Cascade
for Face Alignment (DeCaFA). It contains several stages
producing attention maps, relatively to heterogeneous landmark annotation markups. Figure 1 shows attention maps
extracted by the subsequent stages (horizontally) and for
three markups (vertically). These attention maps are refined
through the successive stages for each of these markups. The
contributions of this paper are thus three-fold:
• We introduce a fully-convolutional Deep Cascade for
Face Alignment (DeCaFA) that unifies cascaded regression and end-to-end deep approaches, by using
landmark-wise attention maps fused to extract local
information around a current landmark estimate.
16893

