Occlusion-shared and Feature-separated Network
for Occlusion Relationship Reasoning
Rui Lu1 Feng Xue1 Menghan Zhou1,3 Anlong Ming1 Yu Zhou2,∗
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
3
Lenovo Research, Beijing, China
{lurui,xuefeng,mal}@bupt.edu.cn zhoumh3@lenovo.com yuzhou@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Occlusion relationship reasoning demands closed contour to express the object, and orientation of each contour pixel to describe the order relationship between objects. Current CNN-based methods neglect two critical issues of the task: (1) simultaneous existence of the relevance and distinction for the two elements, i.e, occlusion
edge and occlusion orientation; and (2) inadequate exploration to the orientation features. For the reasons above, we
propose the Occlusion-shared and Feature-separated Network (OFNet). On one hand, considering the relevance between edge and orientation, two sub-networks are designed
to share the occlusion cue. On the other hand, the whole
network is split into two paths to learn the high-level semantic features separately. Moreover, a contextual feature
for orientation prediction is extracted, which represents the
bilateral cue of the foreground and background areas. The
bilateral cue is then fused with the occlusion cue to precisely locate the object regions. Finally, a stripe convolution
is designed to further aggregate features from surrounding
scenes of the occlusion edge. The proposed OFNet remarkably advances the state-of-the-art approaches on PIOD and
BSDS ownership dataset. The source code is available at
https://github.com/buptlr/OFNet.

1. Introduction
Reasoning the occlusion relationship of objects from
monocular image is fundamental in computer vision and
mobile robot applications, such as [11, 2, 24, 17, 29]. Furthermore, it can be regarded as crucial elements for scene
understanding and visual perception[40, 42, 43, 39, 18],
such as object detection, image segmentation and 3D reconstruction [6, 1, 37, 7, 26, 34]. From the perspective of
∗ Corresponding Author

(a)

(b)

(c)
θ

Bg

Fg

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. (a) visualization result of DOC-HED, (b) visualization
result of DOOBNet, (c) visualization result of ours, (d) the occlusion cue, (e) the bilateral feature, (f) visualization result of ground
truth. Occlusion relationship (the red arrows) is represented by
orientation θ ∈ (−π, π] (tangent direction of the edge), using
the ”left” rule where the left side of the arrow means foreground
area. Notably, ”red” pixels with arrows: correctly labeled occlusion boundaries; ”cyan”: correctly labeled boundaries but mislabeled occlusion; ”green”: false negative boundaries; ”orange”:
false positive boundaries (Best viewed in color).

the observer, occlusion relationship reflects relative depth
difference between objects in the scene.
Previously, a number of influential studies infer the occlusion relationship by designing hand-crafted features, e.g.
[5, 22, 25, 16, 38, 41]. Recently, driven by Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN), several deep learning based approaches outperform traditional methods at a large margin.
DOC [21] specifies a new representation for occlusion relationship, which decomposes the task into the occlusion
edge classification and the occlusion orientation regression.
And it utilizes two networks for these two sub-tasks, respectively. DOOBNet [31] employs an encoder-decoder structure to obtain multi-scale and multi-level features. It shares
backbone features with two sub-networks and simultaneously acquires the predictions.

10343

