Geometric Disentanglement for Generative Latent Shape Models
Tristan Aumentado-Armstrong,* Stavros Tsogkas, Allan Jepson, Sven Dickinson
University of Toronto Vector Institute for AI Samsung AI Center, Toronto
taumen@cs.utoronto.ca, {stavros.t,allan.jepson,s.dickinson}@samsung.com

Abstract
Representing 3D shape is a fundamental problem in artificial intelligence, which has numerous applications within
computer vision and graphics. One avenue that has recently
begun to be explored is the use of latent representations of
generative models. However, it remains an open problem
to learn a generative model of shape that is interpretable
and easily manipulated, particularly in the absence of supervised labels. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised
approach to partitioning the latent space of a variational
autoencoder for 3D point clouds in a natural way, using
only geometric information. Our method makes use of tools
from spectral differential geometry to separate intrinsic and
extrinsic shape information, and then considers several hierarchical disentanglement penalties for dividing the latent
space in this manner, including a novel one that penalizes
the Jacobian of the latent representation of the decoded output with respect to the latent encoding. We show that the
resulting representation exhibits intuitive and interpretable
behavior, enabling tasks such as pose transfer and poseaware shape retrieval that cannot easily be performed by
models with an entangled representation.

1. Introduction
Fitting and manipulating 3D shape (e.g., for inferring 3D
structure from images or efficiently computing animations)
are core problems in computer vision and graphics. Unfortunately, designing an appropriate representation of 3D
object shape is a non-trivial, and, often, task-dependent issue.
One way to approach this problem is to use deep generative models, such as generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [18] or variational autoencoders (VAEs) [48, 30].
These methods are not only capable of generating novel examples of data points, but also produce a latent space that
* The work in this article was done while Tristan A.A. was a student at the University of Toronto. Sven Dickinson, Allan Jepson, and Stavros Tsogkas contributed
in their capacity as Professors and Postdoc at the University of Toronto, respectively.
The views expressed (or the conclusions reached) are their own and do not necessarily
represent the views of Samsung Research America, Inc.

Figure 1. Factoring pose and intrinsic shape within a disentangled
latent space offers fine-grained control when generating shapes using a generative model. Top: decoded shapes with constant latent
extrinsic group and randomly sampled latent intrinsics. Bottom:
decoded shapes with fixed latent intrinsic group and random extrinsics. Colors denote depth (i.e., distance from the camera).

provides a compressed, continuous vector representation of
the data, allowing efficient manipulation. Rather than performing explicit physical calculations, for example, one can
imagine performing approximate “intuitive” physics by predicting movements in the latent space instead.
However, a natural representation for 3D objects is likely
to be highly structured, with different variables controlling
separate aspects of an object. In general, this notion of disentanglement [6] is a major tenet of representation learning,
that closely aligns with human reasoning, and is supported
by neuroscientific findings [4, 25, 23]. Given the utility of
disentangled representations, a natural question is whether
we can structure the latent space in a purely unsupervised
manner. In the context of 3D shapes, this is equivalent
to asking how one can factor the representation into interpretable components using geometric information alone.
We take two main steps in this direction. First, we lever-

8181

