RGB-Infrared Cross-Modality Person Re-Identification
via Joint Pixel and Feature Alignment
Guan’an Wang1,2 Tianzhu Zhang4 Jian Cheng1,2,3 Si Liu5 Yang Yang1 †Zengguang Hou1,2,3
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
4
University of Science and Technology of China, Beijing, China 5 Beihang University, Beijing, China
{wangguanan2015, zengguang.hou}@ia.ac.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn, {jcheng, yang.yang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, liusi@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
RGB-Infrared (IR) person re-identification is an important and challenging task due to large cross-modality variations between RGB and IR images. Most conventional approaches aim to bridge the cross-modality gap with feature alignment by feature representation learning. Different from existing methods, in this paper, we propose
a novel and end-to-end Alignment Generative Adversarial
Network (AlignGAN) for the RGB-IR RE-ID task. The proposed model enjoys several merits. First, it can exploit
pixel alignment and feature alignment jointly. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first work to model the two
alignment strategies jointly for the RGB-IR RE-ID problem. Second, the proposed model consists of a pixel generator, a feature generator and a joint discriminator. By
playing a min-max game among the three components, our
model is able to not only alleviate the cross-modality and
intra-modality variations, but also learn identity-consistent
features. Extensive experimental results on two standard
benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed model performs
favorably against state-of-the-art methods. Especially, on
SYSU-MM01 dataset, our model can achieve an absolute
gain of 15.4% and 12.9% in terms of Rank-1 and mAP.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is an important task in
video surveillance, which aims to match pedestrian images
of a person across disjoint camera views [7]. Its key challenges lie in large intra-class and small inter-class variations
caused by different poses, illuminations, views, and occlusions. To handle these issues, a large number of models for
Re-ID problem have been proposed including hand-crafted
† Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Most existing methods solve the RGB-IR Re-ID task
via feature alignment by feature representation learning. Different from existing methods, our goal is to generate fake IR images
based on real RGB images via a pixel alignment module, and then
match the generated fake IR images and real IR images via a feature alignment module. For more details, please refer to the text.
(Please view in color.)

descriptors [22, 36, 19], metric learning models [43, 16, 20]
and deep learning algorithms [42, 11, 28]. Most of existing
methods are focusing on visible cameras and formulate the
Re-ID task as a single-modality matching problem (RGBRGB), i.e., given a query image/video and match it against
a set of gallery images/videos.
However, the visible cameras may not be able to capture
valid appearance information under poor illumination environments (e.g., at night), which limits the applicability in
practical surveillance applications [32]. In such case, imaging devices without relying on visible light should be applied. In many applications, the surveillance cameras could
be heterogeneous, such as near-infrared (IR), thermal and
depth cameras. Especially, most surveillance cameras can
automatically switch from RGB to IR mode, which facil4321
3623

