Lifelong GAN: Continual Learning for Conditional Image Generation
Mengyao Zhai1,2∗ , Lei Chen1,2∗ , Fred Tung1,2 , Jiawei He1,2 , Megha Nawhal1,2 , Greg Mori1,2
1
Simon Fraser University 2 Borealis AI
{mzhai, chenleic, ftung, jha203, mnawhal}@sfu.ca

Catastrophic Forgetting

mori@cs.sfu.ca

Catastrophic Forgetting

Lifelong GAN

Lifelong GAN

Figure 1: Lifelong learning of conditional image generation. Traditional training methods suffer from catastrophic forgetting: when we add new tasks, the network forgets how to perform previous tasks. Our Lifelong GAN is a generic framework
for conditional image generation that applies to various types of conditional inputs (e.g. labels and images).

Abstract
Lifelong learning is challenging for deep neural networks due to their susceptibility to catastrophic forgetting.
Catastrophic forgetting occurs when a trained network is
not able to maintain its ability to accomplish previously
learned tasks when it is trained to perform new tasks. We
study the problem of lifelong learning for generative models, extending a trained network to new conditional generation tasks without forgetting previous tasks, while assuming
access to the training data for the current task only. In contrast to state-of-the-art memory replay based approaches
which are limited to label-conditioned image generation
tasks, a more generic framework for continual learning of
generative models under different conditional image generation settings is proposed in this paper. Lifelong GAN employs knowledge distillation to transfer learned knowledge
from previous networks to the new network. This makes it
possible to perform image-conditioned generation tasks in a
lifelong learning setting. We validate Lifelong GAN for both
image-conditioned and label-conditioned generation tasks,
and provide qualitative and quantitative results to show the
generality and effectiveness of our method.

∗ Equal Contribution

1. Introduction
Learning is a lifelong process for humans. We acquire
knowledge throughout our lives so that we become more efficient and versatile facing new tasks. The accumulation of
knowledge in turn accelerates our acquisition of new skills.
In contrast to human learning, lifelong learning remains an
open challenge for modern deep learning systems. It is
well known that deep neural networks are susceptible to a
phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting [23]. Catastrophic forgetting occurs when a trained neural network is
not able to maintain its ability to accomplish previously
learned tasks when it is adapted to perform new tasks.
Consider the example in Figure 1. A generative model
is first trained on the task edges → shoes. Given a new
task segmentations → facades, a new model is initialized
from the previous one and fine-tuned for the new task. After training, the model forgets about the previous task and
cannot generate shoe images given edge images as inputs.
One way to address this would be to combine the training
data for the current task with the training data for all previous tasks and then train the model using the joint data.
Unfortunately, this approach is not scalable in general: as
new tasks are added, the storage requirements and training time of the joint data grow without bound. In addition,
the models for previous tasks may be trained using private
or privileged data which is not accessible during the training of the current task. The challenge in lifelong learning

2759

