View-LSTM: Novel-View Video Synthesis Through View Decomposition
Mohamed ILyes Lakhal1 , Oswald Lanz2 , Andrea Cavallaro1
1
CIS, Queen Mary University of London, 2 TeV, Fondazione Bruno Kessler
{m.i.lakhal,a.cavallaro}@qmul.ac.uk, lanz@fbk.eu

Abstract
We tackle the problem of synthesizing a video of multiple moving people as seen from a novel view, given only an
input video and depth information or human poses of the
novel view as prior. This problem requires a model that
learns to transform input features into target features while
maintaining temporal consistency. To this end, we learn an
invariant feature from the input video that is shared across
all viewpoints of the same scene and a view-dependent feature obtained using the target priors. The proposed approach, View-LSTM, is a recurrent neural network structure that accounts for the temporal consistency and target
feature approximation constraints. We validate View-LSTM
by designing an end-to-end generator for novel-view video
synthesis. Experiments on a large multi-view action recognition dataset validate the proposed model.

1. Introduction
Generating a video from cues such as a textual description, information on a specific object or scene type, or a
single frame is an interesting challenge with applications in
data augmentation and action imitation. Generating a realistic video without specific priors is a challenging task. Deepgenerative models can synthesize (predict) a video using an
approximation of the density distribution of the data (probabilistic methods [16, 30, 19]) or an input representation
(context-based methods [42, 41, 51]). Temporal Generative
Adversarial Nets (TGAN) [30] produces a fix length vector
that corresponds to a latent representation of frames that is
used in the decoder of the GAN [7] structure to synthesize
a video.
Recent works [55, 23] include priors to help the generation but produce more intractable results. For example,
style-content based models [11, 39, 38] separate the generation as content generation (e.g. background scene) from the
generation of the motion or dynamics. Pose Guided [54, 2]
models rely on the 2D body pose information as guidance in
the generation process. Other methods predict Optical flow
and use it along with a conditioned image to synthesize the

next frame [5] or a sequence of frames [24].
Multi-view data can be decomposed into a generic, viewinvariant component, and a view-dependent component.
This concept was used for 3D object generation via the socalled intact space and noise as prior [52]. Feature aggregation between view-invariant and view-dependent information is performed using summation. However, joining two
different feature points as summation for real world data
such as image or video stream might not be appropriate
with deep learning models. Features are coming from nonlinear mapping and using a linear operator (summation) as
a way to combine them can damage important feature information. In fact concatenation is preferred in recent architectures [21, 45, 41]. Similarly, features can be projected into
appearance space that is common for the same 3D object
and pose space that contains the object 3D orientation [25].
We propose View-LSTM, a novel convolutional Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) structure that takes advantage of the temporal learning capability of Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) to approximate the target view sequence
in the feature space. It does so by learning to aggregate a
view-invariant representation of the input view with viewdependent information from the target prior. Moreover, we
extend the perceptual loss [14] to account for relevant temporal information as needed in our video prediction task.
For this we use the features obtained from the intermediate
layers of a 3D CNN as spatiotemporal representations and
verify empirically that Conv-LSTM implicitly learns invariant feature representation.

2. Related Work
Recurrent structures can predict frames from a sequence
of previous frames. Spatiotemporal LSTM (ST-LSTM) [48]
keeps track of a memory cell between subsequent time
steps to prevent the vanishing gradient problem. PredRNN++ [46] extends ST-LSTM to allow deeper stacking
of layers through an additional gating mechanism. Eidetic
3D LSTM [47] extends ST-LSTM to 3D convolution inside
the RNN gating computation thus enabling local temporal
memory. The problem of spatiotemporal prediction using
stationary and non-stationary components can be addressed

7577

