USIP: Unsupervised Stable Interest Point Detection from 3D Point Clouds
Jiaxin Li∗
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore

Abstract
In this paper, we propose the USIP detector: an Unsupervised Stable Interest Point detector that can detect
highly repeatable and accurately localized keypoints from
3D point clouds under arbitrary transformations without
the need for any ground truth training data. Our USIP
detector consists of a feature proposal network that learns
stable keypoints from input 3D point clouds and their respective transformed pairs from randomly generated transformations. We provide degeneracy analysis and suggest
solutions to prevent it. We encourage high repeatability
and accurate localization of the keypoints with a probabilistic chamfer loss that minimizes the distances between
the detected keypoints from the training point cloud pairs.
Extensive experimental results of repeatability tests on several simulated and real-world 3D point cloud datasets from
Lidar, RGB-D and CAD models show that our USIP detector significantly outperforms existing hand-crafted and
deep learning-based 3D keypoint detectors. Our code is
available at the project website.1

1. Introduction
3D interest point or keypoint detection refers to the problem of finding stable points with well-defined positions that
are highly repeatable on 3D point clouds under arbitrary
SE(3) transformations. These detected keypoints play important roles in many computer vision and robotics tasks,
where 3D point clouds are widely adopted as the data structure to represent objects and scenes in the 3D space. Examples include geometric registration for 3D object modeling
[1] or point cloud-based SLAM [20], and 3D object [12, 16]
or place recognition [30]. In these tasks, the detected keypoints are respectively used as correspondences to compute
rigid transformations, and locations to extract representative
signatures for efficient retrievals.
Despite the high number of successful hand-crafted detectors proposed for 2D images [22, 17, 11], significantly
lesser hand-crafted detectors [28] with limited success are
∗ Jiaxin Li now works at nuTonomy, an APTIV company.
1 https://github.com/lijx10/USIP

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Examples of keypoints detected by our USIP detector
on four datasets: (a) ModelNet40 [31], object model. (b) Oxford
RobotCar [18], outdoor SICK LiDAR. (c) KITTI [9] (Trained on
Oxford), outdoor Velodyne LiDAR.

proposed for hand-crafted detectors on 3D point clouds.
This difference can be largely attributed to the difficulty
in hand-crafting powerful algorithms to extract meaningful
information solely from the Euclidean coordinates of the
point cloud in comparison to images that contain richer information from the additional RGB channels. The problem
is further aggravated by the fact that it is difficult to handcraft 3D detectors to handle 3D point clouds in arbitrary
transformations, i.e., different reference coordinate frames.
Very few deep learning-based 3D keypoint detectors exist (only one deep learning-based approach [32] exists to
date) in contrast to its increasing success on learning 3D
keypoint descriptors [6, 5, 34, 13]. This is due to the lack
of ground truth training datasets to supervise deep learningbased detectors on 3D point clouds. Unlike 3D descriptors
that are supervised by easily available ground truth registered overlapping 3D point clouds [6, 5, 13, 34, 32, 10], it
is impossible for anyone to identify and label the “ground
truth” keypoints on 3D point clouds.
We propose the USIP detector: an Unsupervised Stable
Interest Point deep learning-based detector that can detect
highly repeatable, and accurately localized keypoints from
3D point clouds under arbitrary transformations without the
need for any ground truth training data. To this end, we design a Feature Proposal Network (FPN) that outputs a set of
keypoints and their respective saliency uncertainties from
an input 3D point cloud. Our FPN improves keypoint localization by estimating their positions on contrary to existing
3D detectors [26, 32, 35] that select existing points in the
point cloud as keypoints, which causes quantization errors.
During training, we apply randomly generated SE(3) trans1361

