Enforcing geometric constraints of virtual normal for depth prediction
Youliang Yan2
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies

Wei Yin1
Yifan Liu1
Chunhua Shen1∗
1
The University of Adelaide, Australia
{wei.yin, yifan04, chunhua.shen}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Monocular depth prediction plays a crucial role in understanding 3D scene geometry. Although recent methods
have achieved impressive progress in evaluation metrics
such as the pixel-wise relative error, most methods neglect
the geometric constraints in the 3D space. In this work, we
show the importance of the high-order 3D geometric constraints for depth prediction. By designing a loss term that
enforces one simple type of geometric constraints, namely,
virtual normal directions determined by randomly sampled
three points in the reconstructed 3D space, we can considerably improve the depth prediction accuracy. Significantly,
the byproduct of this predicted depth being sufficiently accurate is that we are now able to recover good 3D structures
of the scene such as the point cloud and surface normal directly from the depth, eliminating the necessity of training
new sub-models as was previously done. Experiments on
two benchmarks: NYU Depth-V2 and KITTI demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method and state-of-the-art performance. Code is available at: https://tinyurl.com/
virtualnormal

1. Introduction
Monocular depth prediction aims to predict distances between scene objects and the camera from a single monocular image. It is a critical task for understanding the 3D
scene, such as recognizing a 3D object and parsing a 3D
scene.
Although the monocular depth prediction is an ill-posed
problem because many 3D scenes can be projected to the
same 2D image, many deep convolutional neural networks
(DCNN) based methods [8, 9, 13, 15, 27, 30, 39, 17] have
achieved impressive results by using a large amount of labelled data, thus taking advantage of prior knowledge in labelled data to solve the ambiguity.
These methods typically formulate the optimization
problem as either point-wise regression or classification.
∗ Corresponding author

Depth

Point Cloud

Surface Normal

Figure 1 – Example results of ground truth (the first row), our method
(the second row) and Hu et al. [21] (the third row). By enforcing the geometric constraints of virtual normals, our reconstructed 3D point cloud
can represent better shape of sofa (see the left part) and the recovered
surface normal has much less errors (see green parts) even though the
absolute relative error (rel) of our predicted depth is only slightly better
than Hu et al. (0.108 vs. 0.115).

That is, with the i.i.d. assumption, the overall loss is summing over all pixels. To improve the performance, some
endeavours have been made to employ other constraints besides the pixel-wise term. For example, a continuous conditional random field (CRF) [31] is used for depth prediction, which takes pair-wise information into account. Other
high-order geometric relations [10, 35] are also exploited,
such as designing a gravity constraint for local regions [10]
or incorporating the depth-to-surface-normal mutual transformation inside the optimization pipeline [35]. Note that,
for the above methods, almost all the geometric constraints
are ‘local’ in the sense that they are extracted from a small
neighborhood in either 2D or 3D. Surface normal is ‘local’
by nature as it is defined by the local tangent plane. As
the ground truth depth maps of most datasets are captured
by consumer-level sensors, such as the Kinect, depth values
can fluctuate considerably. Such noisy measurement would
adversely affect the precision and subsequently the effectiveness of those local constraints inevitably. Moreover, local constraints calculated over a small neighborhood have

5684

