Talking With Hands 16.2M: A Large-Scale Dataset of Synchronized Body-Finger
Motion and Audio for Conversational Motion Analysis and Synthesis
Gilwoo Lee†

Zhiwei Deng∗
Shugao Ma‡
Takaaki Shiratori‡
†
Siddhartha S. Srinivasa
Yaser Sheikh‡
†
∗
‡
University of Washington
Simon Fraser University
Facebook Reality Labs
{gilwoo, siddh}@cs.uw.edu

zhiweid@sfu.ca

{tshiratori,shugao,yasers}@fb.com

Figure 1: With our capture setup (left), we collected a large-scale, conversational motion and audio dataset of 50 people (right).
Participants often make pointy gestures with high pitch emphasis when referring to a place or asking a question.

Abstract
We present a 16.2-million-frame (50-hour) multimodal
dataset of two-person face-to-face spontaneous conversations. Our dataset features synchronized body and finger
motion as well as audio data. To the best of our knowledge,
it represents the largest motion capture and audio dataset
of natural conversations to date. The statistical analysis
verifies strong intraperson and interperson covariance of
arm, hand, and speech features, potentially enabling new
directions on data-driven social behavior analysis, prediction, and synthesis. As an illustration, we propose a novel
real-time finger motion synthesis method: a temporal neural network innovatively trained with an inverse kinematics
(IK) loss, which adds skeletal structural information to the
generative model. Our qualitative user study shows that
the finger motion generated by our method is perceived as
natural and conversation enhancing, while the quantitative
ablation study demonstrates the effectiveness of IK loss.

1. Introduction
Real-time motion synthesis in conversational settings is
becoming more important with the increased demand for

telepresence through virtual/augmented reality and applications in 3D animation and social games. Motion synthesis is commonly done via physics-based trajectory optimization [17], data-driven generative models [20, 16], or a
combination of the two [24]. In the latter two approaches,
the availability of high-quality data is crucial for the quality of synthesized motion. Recent advancement in deep
learning provides many advanced temporal generative models [11, 5, 23]. In leveraging such powerful models, the
scale of the training dataset is important. However, when it
comes to conversational settings, high-quality, large-scale
motion capture dataset is not available due to the challenges
involved in capturing face-to-face conversations in a holistic
manner: the dataset must capture the complex multimodal
interaction including spontaneous verbal and nonverbal gestures and voice, and must be captured across many subjects
for diversity.
We introduce a large-scale, multimodal (body, finger, and
audio) dataset of two-person conversations. Our dataset
consists of 50-hour motion capture of two-person conversational data, which amounts to 16.2 million frames. To the
best of our knowledge, our dataset is the largest dataset of
conversational motion and voice, and has unique content:
1) nonverbal gestures associated with casual conversations
1763

