Efficient Segmentation:
Learning Downsampling Near Semantic Boundaries
Dmitrii Marin∗
Zijian He†
Peter Vajda†
Priyam Chatterjee†
†
‡
Sam Tsai
Fei Yang
Yuri Boykov∗
∗
∗
†
‡
University of Waterloo,
Vector Research Institute,
Facebook Inc,
TAL Education,
Canada
Canada
USA
China
{d2marin,yboykov}@uwaterloo.ca

{zijian,vajdap,priyamc,sstsai}@fb.com

yang.fei@100tal.com

Abstract
Many automated processes such as auto-piloting rely on
a good semantic segmentation as a critical component. To
speed up performance, it is common to downsample the input frame. However, this comes at the cost of missed small
objects and reduced accuracy at semantic boundaries. To
address this problem, we propose a new content-adaptive
downsampling technique that learns to favor sampling locations near semantic boundaries of target classes. Costperformance analysis shows that our method consistently
outperforms the uniform sampling improving balance between accuracy and computational efficiency. Our adaptive
sampling gives segmentation with better quality of boundaries and more reliable support for smaller-size objects.

(a) original 2710×2710 image

(b) ground truth labels

(c) target semantic boundaries
and adaptive sampling locations

(d) interpolation of sparse
classifications (target is white)

1. Introduction
Recent progress in hardware technology has made running efficient deep learning models on mobile devices possible. This has enabled many on-device experiences relying
on deep learning-based computer vision systems. However,
many tasks including semantic segmentation still require
downsampling of the input image trading off accuracy in
finer details for better inference speed [25, 56]. We show
that uniform downsampling is sub-optimal and propose an
alternative content-aware adaptive downsampling technique
driven by semantic boundaries. We hypothesize that for
better segmentation quality more pixels should be picked
near semantic boundaries. With this intuition, we formulate
a neural network model for learning content-adaptive sampling from ground truth semantic boundaries, see Fig. 1.
The advantages of our non-uniform downsampling over
the uniform one are two-fold. First, the common uniform
downsampling complicates accurate localization of boundaries in the original image. Indeed, assuming N uniformly
sampled points over an image of diameter D, the distance

Figure 1: Illustration of our content-adaptive downsampling
method on a high-resolution image (a). Given ground truth
(b), we compute a non-uniform grid of sampling locations
(red in (c)) pulled towards semantic boundaries of target
classes (white in (c)). We use these points for training our
auxiliary network to automatically produce such sparsely
sampled locations. Their classification (colored dots in (d))
can be produced by a separately trained efficient low-res
segmentation CNN. Concentration of sparse classifications
near boundaries of target classes improves accuracy of interpolation (d) compared to uniform sampling, see Fig. 6.
between neighboring points gives a bound for the segmentation boundary localization errors O( √DN ). In contrast, our
analysis (see [37, Appendix A]) shows that the error bound

2131

