CDTB: A Color and Depth Visual Object Tracking Dataset and Benchmark
Alan Lukežič1 , Ugur Kart2 , Jani Käpylä2 , Ahmed Durmush2 , Joni-Kristian Kämäräinen2 ,
Jiřı́ Matas3 and Matej Kristan1
1

Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
2

3

Computing Sciences, Tampere University, Finland

Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
alan.lukezic@fri.uni-lj.si

Abstract
We propose a new color-and-depth general visual object
tracking benchmark (CDTB). CDTB is recorded by several
passive and active RGB-D setups and contains indoor as
well as outdoor sequences acquired in direct sunlight. The
CDTB dataset is the largest and most diverse dataset for
RGB-D tracking, with an order of magnitude larger number
of frames than related datasets. The sequences have been
carefully recorded to contain significant object pose change,
clutter, occlusion, and periods of long-term target absence
to enable tracker evaluation under realistic conditions. Sequences are per-frame annotated with 13 visual attributes
for detailed analysis. Experiments with RGB and RGB-D
trackers show that CDTB is more challenging than previous datasets. State-of-the-art RGB trackers outperform the
recent RGB-D trackers, indicating a large gap between the
two fields, which has not been detected by the prior benchmarks. Based on the results of the analysis we point out
opportunities for future research in RGB-D tracker design.

a)

b)

c)

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking has been enjoying a significant interest of the research community for over several decades
due to scientific challenges it presents and its large practical potential. In its most general formulation, it addresses
localization of an arbitrary object in all frames of a video,
given a single annotation specified in one frame. This is a
challenging task of self-supervised learning, since a tracker
has to localize and carefully adapt to significant target appearance changes, cope with ambient changes, clutter, and
detect occlusion and target disappearance. As such, general
object trackers cater a range of applications and research
challenges like surveillance systems, video editing, sports
analytics and autonomous robotics.
Fuelled by emergence of tracking benchmarks [40, 44,
27, 25, 37, 36] that facilitate objective comparison of different approaches, the field has substantially advanced in the
last decade. Due to a wide adoption of RGB cameras, the
benchmarks have primarily focused on color (RGB) track-

d)

Figure 1. RGB and depth sequences from CDTB. Depth offers a
complementary information to color: two identical objects are easier to distinguish in depth (a), low illumination scenes (b) are less
challenging for trackers if depth information is available, tracking
a deformable object in depth simplifies the problem (c) and a sudden significant change in depth is a strong clue for occlusion (d).
Sequences (a,b) are captured by a ToF-RGB pair of cameras, (c)
by s tereo-camera sensor and (d) by a Kinect sensor.

ers and trackers that combine color and thermal (infrared)
modalities [28, 26, 23, 24].
Only recently various depth sensors like RGB-D, time-

10013

