Attention Augmented Convolutional Networks
Irwan Bello

Barret Zoph

Ashish Vaswani
Quoc V. Le
Google Brain

Jonathon Shlens

{ibello,barretzoph,avaswani,shlens,qvl}@google.com

Abstract
Convolutional networks have been the paradigm of
choice in many computer vision applications. The convolution operation however has a significant weakness in that it
only operates on a local neighborhood, thus missing global
information. Self-attention, on the other hand, has emerged
as a recent advance to capture long range interactions, but
has mostly been applied to sequence modeling and generative modeling tasks. In this paper, we consider the use of
self-attention for discriminative visual tasks as an alternative to convolutions. We introduce a novel two-dimensional
relative self-attention mechanism that proves competitive
in replacing convolutions as a stand-alone computational
primitive for image classification. We find in control experiments that the best results are obtained when combining
both convolutions and self-attention. We therefore propose
to augment convolutional operators with this self-attention
mechanism by concatenating convolutional feature maps
with a set of feature maps produced via self-attention. Extensive experiments show that Attention Augmentation leads
to consistent improvements in image classification on ImageNet and object detection on COCO across many different models and scales, including ResNets and a stateof-the art mobile constrained network, while keeping the
number of parameters similar. In particular, our method
achieves a 1.3% top-1 accuracy improvement on ImageNet
classification over a ResNet50 baseline and outperforms
other attention mechanisms for images such as Squeezeand-Excitation [17]. It also achieves an improvement of
1.4 mAP in COCO Object Detection on top of a RetinaNet
baseline.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks have enjoyed tremendous success in many computer vision applications, especially in image classification [24, 23]. The design of the
convolutional layer imposes 1) locality via a limited receptive field and 2) translation equivariance via weight sharing.

Figure 1. Attention Augmentation systematically improves image classification across a large variety of networks of different
scales. ImageNet classification accuracy [9] versus the number of
parameters for baseline models (ResNet) [14], models augmented
with channel-wise attention (SE-ResNet) [17] and our proposed
architecture (AA-ResNet).

Both these properties prove to be crucial inductive biases
when designing models that operate over images. However,
the local nature of the convolutional kernel prevents it from
capturing global contexts in an image, often necessary for
better recognition of objects in images [33].
Self-attention [43], on the other hand, has emerged as a
recent advance to capture long range interactions, but has
mostly been applied to sequence modeling and generative
modeling tasks. The key idea behind self-attention is to
produce a weighted average of values computed from hidden units. Unlike the pooling or the convolutional operator,
the weights used in the weighted average operation are produced dynamically via a similarity function between hidden units. As a result, the interaction between input signals
depends on the signals themselves rather than being predetermined by their relative location like in convolutions. In
particular, this allows self-attention to capture long range

3286

