Dynamic Points Agglomeration for Hierarchical Point Sets Learning
Jinxian Liu1,2 Bingbing Ni1,2∗ Caiyuan Li1,2 Jiancheng Yang1,2 Qi Tian3
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{liujinxian, nibingbing, 1161313414, jekyll4168}@sjtu.edu.cn
tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D vision analysis has attracted a lot of attention because
3D data contains richer spatial information compared with
2D image/video. 3D point cloud is the simplest 3D data format and consists of irregular and unordered points. With the
renaissance of convolution neural network (CNN) in 2D image/video processing, there are many works that have tried
to make an adaptation of deep learning framework for point
cloud analyses [41, 24, 7, 16].
Recently, some works [26, 28, 22, 10, 32] focus on di∗ Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni

Agglomerated points
(From similar parts)

Fixed Grouping

Dynamic Points Agglomeration
Agglomerated points
(From various parts)

Many previous works on point sets learning achieve excellent performance with hierarchical architecture. Their
strategies towards points agglomeration, however, only perform points sampling and grouping in original Euclidean
space in a fixed way. These heuristic and task-irrelevant
strategies severely limit their ability to adapt to more varied scenarios. To this end, we develop a novel hierarchical
point sets learning architecture, with dynamic points agglomeration. By exploiting the relation of points in semantic
space, a module based on graph convolution network is designed to learn a soft points cluster agglomeration. We construct a hierarchical architecture that gradually agglomerates points by stacking this learnable and lightweight module. In contrast to fixed points agglomeration strategy, our
method can handle more diverse situations robustly and efficiently. Moreover, we propose a parameter sharing scheme
for reducing memory usage and computational burden induced by the agglomeration module. Extensive experimental results on several point cloud analytic tasks, including
classification and segmentation, well demonstrate the superior performance of our dynamic hierarchical learning
framework over current state-of-the-art methods.

Fixed Sampling

Figure 1. The motivation of our proposed framework. Given a
plane, we would like to agglomerate these points into two representative points. If the initial sampling point is from the wing,
existing methods are likely to sample two points from two wings
of the plane with FPS algorithm and group surrounding points with
KNN algorithm. Thereby, information of the fuselage is lost. Our
proposed dynamic agglomeration strategy samples, groups and
pools points in semantic space, hence points from various local
semantic filed will be agglomerated.

rectly consuming point cloud rather than transforming it
into multi-view images or voxel. A well-known pioneering work in this domain is PointNet [26], where point-wise
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) are used to extract pointwise feature and a max-pooling layer is used to aggregate
features of all points. However, every point is treated individually and local dependency structure is not considered.
To overcome this problem, PointNet++ [28] proposes a hierarchical architecture for multi-level feature aggregation.

7546

