Controlling Neural Networks via Energy Dissipation
Michael Moeller
University of Siegen

Thomas Möllenhoff
TU Munich

Daniel Cremers
TU Munich

michael.moeller@uni-siegen.de

thomas.moellenhoff@tum.de

cremers@tum.de

Abstract
The last decade has shown a tremendous success in
solving various computer vision problems with the help of
deep learning techniques. Lately, many works have demonstrated that learning-based approaches with suitable network architectures even exhibit superior performance for
the solution of (ill-posed) image reconstruction problems
such as deblurring, super-resolution, or medical image reconstruction. The drawback of purely learning-based methods, however, is that they cannot provide provable guarantees for the trained network to follow a given data formation
process during inference. In this work we propose energy
dissipating networks that iteratively compute a descent direction with respect to a given cost function or energy at the
currently estimated reconstruction. Therefore, an adaptive
step size rule such as a line-search, along with a suitable
number of iterations can guarantee the reconstruction to
follow a given data formation model encoded in the energy
to arbitrary precision, and hence control the model’s behavior even during test time. We prove that under standard
assumptions, descent using the direction predicted by the
network converges (linearly) to the global minimum of the
energy. We illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in experiments on single image super resolution and
computed tomography (CT) reconstruction, and further illustrate extensions to convex feasibility problems.

1. Introduction
In the overwhelming number of imaging applications,
the quantity of interest cannot be observed directly, but
rather has to be inferred from measurements that contain
implicit information about it. For instance, color images
have to be restored from the raw data captured through a
color filter array (demosaicking), suboptimal foci or camera movements cause blurs that ought to be removed to obtain visually pleasing images (deblurring), and non-invasive
medical imaging techniques such as magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) can faithfully be modeled as sampling the image’s Fourier transform

and computing its Radon transform, respectively. Mathematically, the above problems can be phrased as linear inverse problems in which one tries to recover the desired
quantity û from measurements f that arise from applying
an application-dependent linear operator A to the unknown
and contain additive noise ξ:
f = Aû + ξ.

(1)

Unfortunately, most practically relevant inverse problems
are ill-posed, meaning that equation (1) either does not determine û uniquely even if ξ = 0, or tiny amounts of noise
ξ can alter the naive prediction of û significantly. These
phenomena have been well-investigated from a mathematical perspective with regularization methods being the tool
to still obtain provably stable reconstructions.
At the heart of all regularization methods is the idea not
to determine a naive estimate like u = A† f for the pseudoinverse A† . Instead, one determines an estimate u for which
kAu − f k ≤ δ,

(2)

holds for a suitable norm k · k and some δ ∈ R proportional
to kξk. The actual u is found by some iterative procedure
that is stopped as soon as (2) is met, or by explicitly enforcing a desired regularity via a penalty term or constraint in
an energy minimization method.
Motivated by the success of deep learning in classification and semantic segmentation tasks [30, 36], researchers
have proposed to tackle a wide variety of different linear
inverse problems with deep learning techniques, e.g., deblurring [52, 50], super-resolution [16], demosaicking [19],
MRI- [53], or CT-reconstruction [26]. All the aforementioned results are based on acquiring or simulating exemplary pairs (ûi , fi ) of ground-truth images ûi and data fi
and training a network G which, for suitable parameters θ,
accomplishes a mapping G(fi ; θ) ≈ ûi . While such methods show truly remarkable reconstruction quality in practical applications, there is no mechanism to provably guarantee that the solutions G(f ; θ) predicted by the network
actually explain the measured data in accordance with the
(known) data formation process (1), i.e., no a-priori proximity bound in the form of (2) can be guaranteed. The latter
13256

