ACFNet: Attentional Class Feature Network for Semantic Segmentation
Fan Zhang1,2,3∗ Yanqin Chen3 Zhihang Li2
Jingtuo Liu3 Feifei Ma1,2† Junyu Han3

Zhibin Hong3†
Errui Ding3

1

Laboratory of Parallel Software and Computational Science,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Baidu Inc.
{zhangf, maff}@ios.ac.cn

zhihang.li@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

{chenyanqin, hongzhibin, liujingtuo, hanjunyu, dingerrui}@baidu.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims to assign per-pixel
class label for a given image, is one of the fundamental tasks
in computer vision. It has been widely used in various challenging fields like autonomous driving, scene understanding, human parsing, etc. Recent state-of-the-art semantic
segmentation approaches are typically based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), especially the Fully Convolution Network (FCN) frameworks [26].
One of the most effective approaches to improve the performance is exploiting richer context [46, 8, 12]. For ex∗ This work is done when Fan Zhang is an intern at Baidu Inc.
† Corresponding Author

UPSAMPLE

Recent works have made great progress in semantic segmentation by exploiting richer context, most of which are
designed from a spatial perspective. In contrast to previous works, we present the concept of class center which
extracts the global context from a categorical perspective.
This class-level context describes the overall representation
of each class in an image. We further propose a novel module, named Attentional Class Feature (ACF) module, to calculate and adaptively combine different class centers according to each pixel. Based on the ACF module, we introduce a coarse-to-fine segmentation network, called Attentional Class Feature Network (ACFNet), which can be composed of an ACF module and any off-the-shell segmentation
network (base network). In this paper, we use two types of
base networks to evaluate the effectiveness of ACFNet. We
achieve new state-of-the-art performance of 81.85% mIoU
on Cityscapes dataset with only finely annotated data used
for training.

POOL

feature map

(a) Pyramid Pooling Module

1x1 conv

3x3 conv
rate 6

feature map

feature map

3x3 conv
rate 12

3x3 conv
rate 18

(b) Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP)

segmentation map

(c) Class Center

Figure 1. Different approaches to exploit context. The Pyramid
Pooling Module (a) and the Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (b)
exploit context by employing different spatial sampling strategies.
But the Class Center (c) captures the context via a categorical strategy, which uses all pixels of the same category to calculate a classlevel feature.

ample, Chen et al. [8] proposed the atrous spatial pyramid
pooling (ASPP) to aggregate spatial regularly sampled pixels at different dilated rates around a pixel as its context.
In PSPNet [46], the pyramid pooling module divides the
feature map into multiple regions with different sizes. The
pooled representation of each region is then considered as
the context within the same region. Moreover, the global
average pooling (GAP) [23] is also widely used to obtain
a global context [42, 46, 43, 8, 24]. Generally, these kinds
of methods [9, 46, 12, 42, 43] focus on exploiting different spatial strategies to capture richer contextual informa-

6798

