Learning the Model Update for Siamese Trackers
Lichao Zhang1 , Abel Gonzalez-Garcia1 , Joost van de Weijer1 , Martin Danelljan2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan3,4
1
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Spain
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
4
Computer Vision Laboratory, Linköping University, Sweden
{lichao,agonzalez,joost}@cvc.uab.es, martin.danelljan@vision.ee.ethz.ch, fahad.khan@liu.se

Abstract
Siamese approaches address the visual tracking problem by extracting an appearance template from the current
frame, which is used to localize the target in the next frame.
In general, this template is linearly combined with the accumulated template from the previous frame, resulting in
an exponential decay of information over time. While such
an approach to updating has led to improved results, its
simplicity limits the potential gain likely to be obtained by
learning to update. Therefore, we propose to replace the
handcrafted update function with a method which learns
to update. We use a convolutional neural network, called
UpdateNet, which given the initial template, the accumulated template and the template of the current frame aims
to estimate the optimal template for the next frame. The
UpdateNet is compact and can easily be integrated into
existing Siamese trackers. We demonstrate the generality
of the proposed approach by applying it to two Siamese
trackers, SiamFC and DaSiamRPN. Extensive experiments
on VOT2016, VOT2018, LaSOT, and TrackingNet datasets
demonstrate that our UpdateNet effectively predicts the new
target template, outperforming the standard linear update.
On the large-scale TrackingNet dataset, our UpdateNet improves the results of DaSiamRPN with an absolute gain
of 3.9% in terms of success score. Code and models are
available at https://github.com/zhanglichao/
updatenet.

1. Introduction
Generic visual object tracking is the task of predicting
the location of a target object in every frame of a video,
given its initial location. Tracking is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision, spanning a wide range
of applications including video understanding [34], surveillance [12], and robotics [29]. It is a highly challenging task

#063

#290

#291

#008

#015

#016

#022

#199

#226

UpdateNet-SiamFC

SiamFC

GT

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison between model updates. We
learn to update the model template using UpdateNet. When combined with Siamese trackers such as SiamFC [1], our learned
updating strategy can be effectively adapted to current circumstances, unlike the simple linear update commonly used.

due to frequent appearance changes, various types of occlusions, the presence of distractor objects, and environmental
aspects such as motion blur or illumination changes.
Currently, there are two prevalent tracking paradigms:
Siamese tracking methods [1, 27, 41, 50] and tracking-bydetection methods [3, 7, 11, 19, 32, 47, 48]. In this work,
we consider Siamese trackers, since they provide competitive accuracy while achieving impressive computational efficiency. The basic principle of these trackers is to match
an object appearance template with a corresponding feature
representation of the search region in the test frame. The
features for the object template and the search region are
acquired through a deep neural network trained offline on a
large dataset. Such a training strategy has shown to provide
excellent visual descriptors for the tracking task [1, 50].
In the original Siamese tracker [1], the object template
is initialized in the first frame and then kept fixed during
the remainder of the video. However, appearance changes
are often large and failing to update the template could
lead to early failure of the tracker. In such scenarios, it is

4010

