Learning Two-View Correspondences and Geometry
Using Order-Aware Network
Jiahui Zhang13∗†

Dawei Sun2∗†
Zixin Luo3‡
Anbang Yao 2§
Lei Zhou3‡
Tianwei Shen4
2
3
1§
Yurong Chen
Long Quan
Hongen Liao
1
2
3
Tsinghua University
Intel Labs China
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Everest Innovation Technology (Altizure)
{jiahui-z15@mails.,liao@}tsinghua.edu.cn
{dawei.sun,anbang.yao,yurong.chen}@intel.com
{zluoag,lzhouai,quan}@cse.ust.hk
tianwei@altizure.com
Abstract

Establishing correspondences between two images requires both local and global spatial context. Given putative correspondences of feature points in two views, in this
paper, we propose Order-Aware Network, which infers the
probabilities of correspondences being inliers and regresses
the relative pose encoded by the essential matrix. Specifically, this proposed network is built hierarchically and comprises three novel operations. First, to capture the local
context of sparse correspondences, the network clusters unordered input correspondences by learning a soft assignment matrix. These clusters are in a canonical order and
invariant to input permutations. Next, the clusters are spatially correlated to form the global context of correspondences. After that, the context-encoded clusters are recovered back to the original size through a proposed upsampling operator. We intensively experiment on both outdoor
and indoor datasets. The accuracy of the two-view geometry and correspondences are significantly improved over the
state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Two-view geometry estimation is a fundamental problem in computer vision, which plays an important role in
Structure from Motion (SfM) [37, 33] and visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [21]. Current state-of-the-art SfM [37, 33] and SLAM [21] pipelines
commonly start from local feature extraction and matching.
Outlier rejection algorithm is then applied which is necessary for accurate relative pose estimation. After that, the
∗ indicates equal contributions.
† interns at Intel Labs China.
‡ interns at Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology (Altizure).
§ indicates corresponding authors.

relative pose can be recovered from inliers.
Until recently, great efforts have been spent on applying
deep learning techniques to geometric matching pipeline,
and most of them focus on learning local feature detectors and descriptors [40, 4]. More interestingly, learningbased outlier rejection has also been revisited [20, 29] and
achieves appealing results. Our work also applies learningbased outlier rejection as the core component for two-view
geometry estimation. We exploit a neural network to infer the probability of each correspondence as an inlier, then
recover the relative pose by regressing the essential matrix
through a closed-form and differentiable computation. The
overview of the workflow is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Previous works [20, 29] exploited PointNet-like architecture [26] and Context Normalization [20, 35] to classify
putative correspondences, which we refer to as PointCN.
It has following drawbacks: (1) PointNet-like architecture
applies Multi Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) on each point individually. Hence it cannot capture the local context [27],
e.g., similar motion shared by neighboring pixels [1], which
has been shown to be beneficial for outlier rejection [1, 44].
(2) PointCN relies on Context Normalization to encode the
global context. Such a simple operation normalizes the feature maps by their mean and variance, which overlooks the
underlying complex relations among different points and
may hinder the overall performance.
One of the challenges in mitigating the above limitations is exploiting neighbors to encoding local context. Unlike 3D point clouds, sparse matches have no well-defined
neighbors, where this issue is previously tackled in bilateral
domain [14] (2D spatial domain and 2D motion domain) or
by a graphical model [44]. Besides, another challenge is
modeling the relation between correspondences since they
are unordered and have no stable relations to be captured.
To address the above two problems, we draw inspiration from hierarchical representations of Graph Neural Net-

5845

