HEMlets Pose: Learning Part-Centric Heatmap Triplets
for Accurate 3D Human Pose Estimation

1

Kun Zhou1 , Xiaoguang Han2 , Nianjuan Jiang1 , Kui Jia3 , and Jiangbo Lu1∗
Shenzhen Cloudream Technology Co., Ltd. 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
3
South China University of Technology ∗ Corresponding email: jiangbo.lu@gmail.com

Abstract

E
p

Estimating 3D human pose from a single image is a challenging task. This work attempts to address the uncertainty
of lifting the detected 2D joints to the 3D space by introducing an intermediate state - Part-Centric Heatmap Triplets
(HEMlets), which shortens the gap between the 2D observation and the 3D interpretation. The HEMlets utilize three
joint-heatmaps to represent the relative depth information
of the end-joints for each skeletal body part. In our approach, a Convolutional Network (ConvNet) is first trained
to predict HEMlets from the input image, followed by a volumetric joint-heatmap regression. We leverage on the integral operation to extract the joint locations from the volumetric heatmaps, guaranteeing end-to-end learning. Despite the simplicity of the network design, the quantitative
comparisons show a significant performance improvement
over the best-of-grade method (about 20% on Human3.6M).
The proposed method naturally supports training with “inthe-wild” images, where only weakly-annotated relative
depth information of skeletal joints is available. This further improves the generalization ability of our model, as
validated by qualitative comparisons on outdoor images.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation from a single image is an important problem in computer vision, because of its wide applications, e.g., video surveillance and human-computer interaction. Given an image containing a single person, 3D
human pose inference aims to predict 3D coordinates of the
human body joints. Recovering 3D information of human
poses from a single image faces several challenges. The
challenges are at least three folds: 1) reasoning 3D human
poses from a single image is by itself very challenging due
to the inherent ambiguities; 2) being a regression problem,
existing approaches have not achieved a good balance between representation efficiency and learning effectiveness;
3) for “in-the-wild” images, both 3D capturing and manual
labeling require a lot of efforts to obtain high-quality 3D

c

+(0OHWVOHDUQLQJ
F z
x


z

7k

D

7

p
c"
y

p

c"

c"

y

x

k

7k 

G

c

Figure 1. Overview of the HEMlets-based 3D pose estimation.
(a) Input RGB image. Our algorithm encodes (b) the 2D locations
for the joints p and c, but also (c) their relative depth relationship
for each skeletal part ~
pc into HEMlets. (d) Output 3D human pose.

annotations, making the training data extremely scarce.
For 2D human pose estimation, almost all best performing methods are detection based [16, 11, 34]. Detectionbased approaches essentially divide the joint localization
task into local image classification tasks. The latter is easier
to train, because it effectively reduces the feature and target
dimensions for the learning system [28]. Existing 3D pose
estimation methods often use detection as an intermediate
supervision mechanism as well. A straightforward strategy
is to use volumetric heatmaps to represent the likelihood
map of each 3D joint location [20]. Sun et al. [28] further
proposed a differentiable soft-argmax operator that unifies
the joint detection task and the regression task into an endto-end training framework. This significantly improves the
state-of-the-art 3D pose estimation accuracy.
In this work, we propose a novel effective intermediate representation for 3D pose estimation - Part-Centric
Heatmap Triplets (HEMlets) (as shown in Fig. 1). The key
idea is to polarize the 3D volumetric space around each distinct skeletal part, which has the two end-joints kinematically connected. Different from [19], our relative depth
information is represented as three polarized heatmaps, corresponding to the different state of the local depth ordering
of the part-centric joint pairs. Intuitively, HEMlets encodes

2344

