Unsupervised Robust Disentangling of
Latent Characteristics for Image Synthesis
Patrick Esser, Johannes Haux, Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
firstname.lastname@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Deep generative models come with the promise to learn
an explainable representation for visual objects that allows
image sampling, synthesis, and selective modification. The
main challenge is to learn to properly model the independent latent characteristics of an object, especially its appearance and pose. We present a novel approach that learns
disentangled representations of these characteristics and
explains them individually. Training requires only pairs
of images depicting the same object appearance, but no
pose annotations. We propose an additional classifier that
estimates the minimal amount of regularization required
to enforce disentanglement. Thus both representations together can completely explain an image while being independent of each other. Previous methods based on adversarial approaches fail to enforce this independence, while
methods based on variational approaches lead to uninformative representations. In experiments on diverse object
categories, the approach successfully recombines pose and
appearance to reconstruct and retarget novel synthesized
images. We achieve significant improvements over stateof-the-art methods which utilize the same level of supervision, and reach performances comparable to those of posesupervised approaches. However, we can handle the vast
body of articulated object classes for which no pose models/annotations are available.

1. Introduction
Supervised end-to-end training on large volumes of
tediously labelled data has tremendously propelled deep
learning [28]. The discriminative learning paradigm has enabled to train deep network architectures with millions of
parameters to address important computer vision tasks such
as image categorization [48], object detection [44], and segmentation [46]. The network architectures underlying these
discriminative models have become increasingly complex

[49] and have tremendously increased in depth [17] to yield
great improvements in performance. However, the ability to
explain these models and their decisions suffers due to this
discriminative end-to-end training setup [57, 52, 42].

Figure 1. Without annotations about pose, we disentangle images
into two independent factors: pose and appearance. Starting from
a query image (top left), we can extract and visualize its pose representation (top row), and retrieve images based on their pose similarity. The visualizations (Sec. 4.2) in the first row show that pose
is learned accurately and contains no information about appearance. Similarly, appearance is visualized in the first column. Because our representations are both independent and informative,
we can recombine arbitrary combinations to synthesize what an
appearance would look like in a specific pose. More results can be
found at https://compvis.github.io/robust-disentangling.

Consequently, there has recently been a rapidly increasing interest in deep generative models [26, 45, 14, 55].
These aim for a complete description of data in terms of
a joint distribution and can, in a natural way, synthesize images from a learned representation. Thus, besides explain-

2699

