Robust Variational Bayesian Point Set Registration

Jie Zhou 1,2,† Xinke Ma 1,2,† Li Liang 1,2 Yang Yang 1,2,∗ Shijin Xu 1,2 Yuhe Liu 1,2 Sim Heng Ong 3
1
School of Information Science and Technology, Yunnan Normal University
2
Laboratory of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence, Yunnan Normal University
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
†
Jie Zhou and Xinke Ma contributed equally to this work.
∗
Yang Yang is corresponding author.
∗
Email: yyang ynu@163.com

Abstract
In this work, we propose a hierarchical Bayesian network based point set registration method to solve missing
correspondences and various massive outliers. We construct this network first using the finite Student’s t latent mixture model (TLMM), in which distributions of latent
variables are estimated by a tree-structured variational inference (VI) so that to obtain a tighter lower bound under
the Bayesian framework. We then divide the TLMM into two different mixtures with isotropic and anisotropic covariances for correspondences recovering and outliers identification, respectively. Finally, the parameters of mixing proportion and covariances are both taken as latent variables,
which benefits explaining of missing correspondences and
heteroscedastic outliers. In addition, a cooling schedule is
adopted to anneal prior on covariances and scale variables
within designed two phases of transformation, it anneal priors on global and local variables to perform a coarse-tofine registration. In experiments, our method outperforms
five state-of-the-art methods in synthetic point set and realistic imaging registrations.

1. Introduction
Point set registration is the process of finding one-to-one
correspondence of two point sets (the model and scene) in
ways of which supposed spatial transformations are exerted
on the model point set. It is actually to recover the deformation while taking the noise, outlier and missing into account.
Point set registration plays an indispensable role in numerous applications such as remote sensing image registration
[12, 33, 37], medical image analysis [22], deformable motion tracking [9, 26], intermediate frames interpolation, etc.

We summarize the existing problems of traditional point set
registration algorithms in dealing with outliers, missing correspondences and objective function optimization.
There are three approaches to deal with outliers: (i) The
first approach is to construct extra modeling for outliers.
Robust Point Matching (RPM) [4] utilizes a correspondence
matrix where extra entries are added to address outliers, and
the number of outliers is reasonable restrained by conducting a linear assignment to the correspondence matrix. Mixture point matching (MPM) [3] and Coherent Point Drift
(CPD) [20] employ an extra component of uniform distribution embedded into Gaussian mixture model to handle
outliers, but the correspondences are badly biased because
the extra fixed component can not capture distributions of
positional Gaussian outliers. Han-Bing Qu et al. [27] proposes extra Gaussian mixtures to fit outliers, it alleviates the
estimation bias arising from positional dense outliers even
though it may lack robustness to the outliers presenting as
non-Gaussianity. (ii) The second approach is to employ
a more robust parameter estimator (e.g., L2 E [8, 14]) to
minimize the difference between the two point sets which
are taken as the means of two Gaussian mixture models (GMM). Tsin et al. in the kernel correlation (KC) [32]
maximize the correlation of the kernel densities constructed by the two sets. Jian and Vemuri [8], Ma et al. [14]
apply the L2 estimator to maximize the correlation of two
Gaussian densities. Their methods [8, 14, 32] are different
from the Maximum Likelihood estimates (MLE) which will
bring about a bias estimation if there is a fraction of outliers, because the penalty intensity of L2 E is more smooth
than that of quadratic MLE in the truncation of their penalty curves [8, 14]. So even the remote point (containing the
outliers that cause the biased estimates) can also be assigned
with a low probability. Therefore, the distribution of outliers can be captured by the tails of all Gaussian components.
19905

