Hierarchical Self-Attention Network for Action Localization in Videos
Rizard Renanda Adhi Pramono, Yie-Tarng Chen, and Wen-Hsien Fang
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Email:

{d10702801, ytchen, whf}@mail.ntust.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper presents a novel Hierarchical SelfAttention Network (HISAN) to generate spatialtemporal tubes for action localization in videos. The
essence of HISAN is to combine the two-stream convolutional neural network (CNN) with hierarchical bidirectional self-attention mechanism, which comprises of two
levels of bidirectional self-attention to efficaciously capture both of the long-term temporal dependency information and spatial context information to render more
precise action localization. Also, a sequence rescoring
(SR) algorithm is employed to resolve the dilemma of
inconsistent detection scores incurred by occlusion or
background clutter. Moreover, a new fusion scheme is
invoked, which integrates not only the appearance and
motion information from the two-stream network, but
also the motion saliency to mitigate the effect of camera motion. Simulations reveal that the new approach
achieves competitive performance as the state-of-the-art
works in terms of action localization and recognition
accuracy on the widespread UCF101-24 and J-HMDB
datasets.

Figure 1: Examples of the impact of self-attention on
the group action scenario: (a) initial localization before
employing spatio-temporal attention; (b) the attention
weight scores are at the top of the bounding boxes; (c)
the final localization supervised by the attention, where
the localization and the ground truth are in green and
red, respectively.
aggregate multi-stream features. Alwando et al. [6]
considered an efficient dynamic programming (DP) approach to search for multiple action paths and used an
iterative refinement algorithm to obtain more precise
bounding boxes. Singh et al. [8] incorporated a single shot multi-box detector (SSD) with an incremental
DP scheme to generate action tubes with low complexity. The aforementioned methods [4–8], however, consider each frame separately without using the temporal
relationship information across the frames, and thus is
usually unable to detect actions that contain a sequence
of sub-actions such as cricket bowling and basketball.
To address this issue, Yang et al. [9] proposed a cascaded proposal generation scheme with a location anticipation network to leverage the sequential information
across the adjacent frames. Hou et al. [10] trained a 3D

1. Introduction
Owing to its vast potential applications in video content analysis such as video surveillance [1] and video
captioning [2], action localization, which performs action classification and generates sequences of bounding
boxes related to the locations of the actors, has received
much research attention over the past few years. Action localization, however, encounters not only common
issues in action recognition such as background clutter,
occlusion, intraclass variation, and adverse camera motion, but also the challenging issues that the videos may
be untrimmed and have multiple action instances.
A variety of algorithms has been proposed for action recognition and localization [4–7]. For instance,
Zolfaghari et al. [5] utilized a markov chain model to

61

