Few-Shot Learning with Embedded Class Models and Shot-Free Meta Training
Avinash Ravichandran
Amazon Web Services

Rahul Bhotika
Amazon Web Services

Stefano Soatto
Amazon Web Services and UCLA

ravinash@amazon.com

bhotikar@amazon.com

soattos@amazon.com

Abstract
We propose a method for learning embeddings for fewshot learning that is suitable for use with any number of
shots (shot-free). Rather than fixing the class prototypes to
be the Euclidean average of sample embeddings, we allow
them to live in a higher-dimensional space (embedded class
models) and learn the prototypes along with the model parameters. The class representation function is defined implicitly, which allows us to deal with a variable number of
shots per class with a simple constant-size architecture. The
class embedding encompasses metric learning, that facilitates adding new classes without crowding the class representation space. Despite being general and not tuned to the
benchmark, our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on the standard few-shot benchmark datasets.

Figure 1. One image of a mushroom (Muscaria) may be enough
to recognize it in the wild (left); in other cases, there may be more
subtle differences between an edible (Russula, shown in the center) and a deadly one (Phalloides, shown on the right), but still few
samples are enough for humans.

1. Introduction
Consider Figure 1: Given one or few images of an
Amanita Muscaria (left), one can easily recognize it in the
wild. Identifying a Russula (center) may require more samples, enough to distinguish it from the deadly Amanita Phalloides (right), but likely not millions of them. We refer to
this as few-shot learning. This ability comes from having
seen and touched millions of other objects, in different environments, under different lighting conditions, partial oc-

clusions and other nuisances. We refer to this as metalearning. We wish to exploit the availability of large annotated datasets to meta-train models so they can learn new
concepts from few samples, or “shots.” We refer to this as
meta-training for few-shot learning.
In this paper we develop a framework for both metatraining (learning a potentially large number of classes from
a large annotated dataset) and few-shot learning (using the
learned model to train new concepts from few samples), designed to have the following characteristics.
Open set: Accommodate an unknown, growing, and possibly unbounded number of new classes in an “open set”
or “open universe” setting. Some of the simpler methods
available in the literature, for instance based on nearestneighbors of fixed embeddings [15], do so in theory. In
these methods, however, there is no actual few-shot learning per se, as all learnable parameters are set at metatraining.
Continual: Enable leveraging few-shot data to improve the
model parameters, even those inferred during meta-training.
While each class may only have few samples, as the number
of classes grows, the few-shot training set may grow large.
We want a model flexible enough to enable “lifelong” or
“continual” learning.
Shot Free: Accommodate a variable number of shots for
each new category. Some classes may have a few samples,
others a few hundred; we do not want to meta-train different models for different number of shots, nor to restrict ourselves to all new classes having the same number of shots,
as many recent works do. This may be a side-effect of the
benchmarks available that only test a few combinations of
shots and “ways” (classes).
Embedded Class Models: Learn a representation of the
classes that is not constrained to live in the same space as the
representation of the data. All known methods for few-shot
learning choose an explicit function to compute class representatives (a.k.a. “prototypes” [15], “proxies,” “means,”
“modes,” or “templates”) as some form of averaging in the
embedding (feature) space of the data. By decoupling the
data (feature space) from the classes (class embedding), we
free the latter to live in a richer space, where they can bet1331

