SSAP: Single-Shot Instance Segmentation With Affinity Pyramid
Naiyu Gao1,2 , Yanhu Shan3 , Yupei Wang1,2 , Xin Zhao1,2∗, Yinan Yu3 , Ming Yang3 , Kaiqi Huang1,2,4
1
CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Horizon Robotics, Inc
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{gaonaiyu2017,wangyupei2014}@ia.ac.cn,{xzhao,kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{yanhu.shan,yinan.yu}@horizon.ai, m-yang4@u.northwestern.edu

Abstract

Instance Seg.

…

∗ Corresponding author

Image

…

The rapid development of Convolutional networks [30,
29] has revolutionized various vision tasks, enabling us
to move towards more fine-grained understanding of images. Instead of classic bounding-box level object detection [19, 18, 46, 39, 44, 15] or class-level semantic segmen-

Cascaded
Graph
Partiton

…

1. Introduction

Semantic Seg.
ConvNet
…

Recently, proposal-free instance segmentation has received increasing attention due to its concise and efficient pipeline. Generally, proposal-free methods generate instance-agnostic semantic segmentation labels and
instance-aware features to group pixels into different object
instances. However, previous methods mostly employ separate modules for these two sub-tasks and require multiple
passes for inference. We argue that treating these two subtasks separately is suboptimal. In fact, employing multiple
separate modules significantly reduces the potential for application. The mutual benefits between the two complementary sub-tasks are also unexplored. To this end, this work
proposes a single-shot proposal-free instance segmentation
method that requires only one single pass for prediction.
Our method is based on a pixel-pair affinity pyramid, which
computes the probability that two pixels belong to the same
instance in a hierarchical manner. The affinity pyramid can
also be jointly learned with the semantic class labeling and
achieve mutual benefits. Moreover, incorporating with the
learned affinity pyramid, a novel cascaded graph partition
module is presented to sequentially generate instances from
coarse to fine. Unlike previous time-consuming graph partition methods, this module achieves 5× speedup and 9%
relative improvement on Average-Precision (AP). Our approach achieves new state of the art on the challenging
Cityscapes dataset.

Affinity Pyramid

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method. The per-pixel semantic class and pixel-pair affinities are generated with a single pass
of a fully-convolutional network. The final instance segmentation
result is then derived from these predictions by the proposed cascaded graph partition module.

tation [41, 6, 49], instance segmentation provides in-depth
understanding by segmenting all objects and distinguishing
different object instances. Researchers are thus showing increasing interests in instance segmentation recently.
Current state-of-the-art solutions to this challenging
problem can be classified into the proposal-based and
proposal-free approaches [34, 28, 40]. The proposal-based
approaches regard it as an extension to the classic object
detection task [46, 39, 44, 15]. After localizing each object with a bounding box, a foreground mask is predicted
within each bounding box proposal. However, the performances of these proposal-based methods are highly limited
by the quality of the bounding box predictions and the twostage pipeline also limits the speed of the systems. By contrast, the proposal-free approach has the advantage of its
simple and efficient design. This work also focuses on the
proposal-free paradigm.
The proposal-free methods mostly start by producing
instance-agnostic pixel-level semantic class labels [41, 6,
8, 49], followed by clustering them into different object
instances with particularly designed instance-aware features. However, previous methods mainly treat the two subprocesses as two separate stages and employ multiple mod-

642

