Grounded Human-Object Interaction Hotspots From Video
Tushar Nagarajan∗
UT Austin

Christoph Feichtenhofer
Facebook AI Research

Kristen Grauman
UT Austin and Facebook AI Research

tushar@cs.utexas.edu

feichtenhofer@fb.com

grauman@fb.com

Abstract
Learning how to interact with objects is an important
step towards embodied visual intelligence, but existing techniques suffer from heavy supervision or sensing requirements. We propose an approach to learn human-object
interaction “hotspots” directly from video. Rather than
treat affordances as a manually supervised semantic segmentation task, our approach learns about interactions by
watching videos of real human behavior and anticipating afforded actions. Given a novel image or video, our
model infers a spatial hotspot map indicating where an
object would be manipulated in a potential interaction—
even if the object is currently at rest. Through results with
both first and third person video, we show the value of
grounding affordances in real human-object interactions.
Not only are our weakly supervised hotspots competitive
with strongly supervised affordance methods, but they can
also anticipate object interaction for novel object categories. Project page: http://vision.cs.utexas.
edu/projects/interaction-hotspots/

1. Introduction
Today’s visual recognition systems know how objects
look, but not how they work. Understanding how objects
function is fundamental to moving beyond passive perceptual systems (e.g., those trained for image recognition) to
active, embodied agents that are capable of both perceiving
and interacting with their environment—whether to clear
debris in a search and rescue operation, cook a meal in the
kitchen, or even engage in a social event with people. Gibson’s theory of affordances [17] provides a way to reason
about object function. It suggests that objects have “action
possibilities” (e.g., a chair affords sitting, a broom affords
cleaning), and has been studied extensively in computer vision and robotics in the context of action, scene, and object
understanding [22].
However, the abstract notion of “what actions are possi∗ Work done during internship at Facebook AI Research.

"Interaction hotspots"
Watch natural interactions

Figure 1: Envisioned concept. We propose to learn object affordances directly from videos of people naturally interacting with
objects. The resulting representation of “interaction hotspots” is
grounded in real human behavior from video, rather than manual
image annotations. See Sec. 4 for examples on video datasets.

ble?” addressed by current affordance learning methods is
only half the story. For example, for an agent tasked with
sweeping the floor with a broom, knowing that the broom
handle affords holding and the broom affords sweeping is
not enough. The agent also needs to know the best way to
grasp the object, the specific points on the object that need
to be manipulated for a successful interaction, how the object is used to achieve a goal, and even what it suggests
about how to interact with other objects.
Learning how to interact with objects is challenging.
Traditional methods face two key limitations. First, methods that consider affordances as properties of an object’s
shape or appearance [36, 18, 24] fall short of modeling actual object use and manipulation. In particular, learning
to segment specified object parts [37, 48, 36, 38] can capture annotators’ expectations of what is important, but is
detached from real interactions, which are dynamic, multimodal, and may only partially overlap with part regions (see
Figure 1). Secondly, existing methods are limited by their
heavy supervision and/or sensor requirements. They assume access to training images with manually drawn masks
or keypoints [45, 10, 12] and some leverage additional sensors like depth [31, 65, 66] or force gloves [3], all of which
restrict scalability. Such bottlenecks also deter generaliza-

8688

