Gaze360: Physically Unconstrained Gaze Estimation in the Wild
Petr Kellnhofer∗1 , Adrià Recasens∗1 , Simon Stent2 , Wojciech Matusik1 , and Antonio Torralba1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02139, USA
2
Toyota Research Institute, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA

{pkellnho,recasens,wojciech,torralba}@csail.mit.edu simon.stent@tri.global
∗ indicates equal contribution

Abstract
Understanding where people are looking is an informative social cue. In this work, we present Gaze360, a
large-scale gaze-tracking dataset and method for robust 3D
gaze estimation in unconstrained images. Our dataset consists of 238 subjects in indoor and outdoor environments
with labelled 3D gaze across a wide range of head poses
and distances. It is the largest publicly available dataset
of its kind by both subject and variety, made possible by
a simple and efficient collection method. Our proposed
3D gaze model extends existing models to include temporal information and to directly output an estimate of gaze
uncertainty. We demonstrate the benefits of our model
via an ablation study, and show its generalization performance via a cross-dataset evaluation against other recent
gaze benchmark datasets. We furthermore propose a simple self-supervised approach to improve cross-dataset domain adaptation. Finally, we demonstrate an application
of our model for estimating customer attention in a supermarket setting. Our dataset and models are available at
http://gaze360.csail.mit.edu.

1. Introduction
In order to better understand humans – their desires, intents and states of mind – one must be able to observe
and perceive certain behavioral cues. Eye gaze direction
is one such cue: it is a strong form of non-verbal communication, signalling engagement, interest and attention during social interactions [1]. Detecting and following where
another person is looking is a skill developed early on in
a child’s life – four-month-old infants are known to use
eye gaze cuing to help visually process objects, for example [21]. Just as a parent’s gaze can help to guide a child’s
attention, human gaze fixations have also been found to be
useful in helping machines to learn or interact in various
contexts [18, 22].

Figure 1. Overview: we introduce a novel dataset and method for
estimating 3D gaze in-the-wild. This figure illustrates our model’s
output on unseen video gathered from YouTube, demonstrating its
robustness to diverse, physically unconstrained scenes.

In recent years, while methods for related human modeling problems such as 2D body pose and face tracking have
achieved impressive success by leveraging the representational power of deep convolutional neural networks along
with very large annotated datasets [2, 6, 9, 14, 26], methods for gaze estimation have not yet reached such levels
of performance. This is primarily due to the lack of sufficiently large and diverse annotated training data for the task.
Collecting precise and highly varied gaze data with ground
truth, particularly outside of the lab, is a challenging task.
In this work, we introduce an approach to help tackle this
task and narrow the perceived performance gap:
• we first describe a methodology to efficiently collect
annotated 3D gaze data in arbitrary environments;
• we use our method to acquire the largest 3D gaze
16912

