View N-gram Network for 3D Object Retrieval
Xinwei He1∗
Tengteng Huang1∗
Song Bai2
Xiang Bai1†
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
University of Oxford
{eriche.hust, songbai.site}@gmail.com

Abstract
How to aggregate multi-view representations of a 3D object into an informative and discriminative one remains a
key challenge for multi-view 3D object retrieval. Existing
methods either use view-wise pooling strategies which neglect the spatial information across different views or employ recurrent neural networks which may face the efficiency problem. To address these issues, we propose an
effective and efficient framework called View N-gram Network (VNN). Inspired by n-gram models in natural language processing, VNN divides the view sequence into a
set of visual n-grams, which involve overlapping consecutive view sub-sequences. By doing so, spatial information
across multiple views is captured, which helps to learn a
discriminative global embedding for each 3D object. Experiments on 3D shape retrieval benchmarks, including
ModelNet10, ModelNet40 and ShapeNetCore55 datasets,
demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
3D object retrieval is an important topic in computer
vision and has received a surge of research attention owing to its close relationship with various geometry related applications, e.g., VR/AR [20, 26, 48], medical imaging [25, 6, 56] and 3D printing [49]. With the development
of 3D model acquisition technology, large amounts of 3D
models are available for free, e.g., the large-scale repository ShapeNet [8]. Thanks to the advances of data-driven
based deep learning techniques, dramatic progresses have
been achieved in this ﬁeld. Nowadays, research trend has
shifted from designing hand-crafted features [5, 10, 16, 24]
to learn 3D shape representations directly via deep architectures [46, 37, 34, 23, 3].
In general, learning deep 3D shape representation can be
coarsely divided into two mainstreams, i.e., model-based
∗ indicates equal contributions.
† corresponding author.

{huangtengtng, xbai}@hust.edu.cn

and view-based methods. Model-based methods [37, 39,
53, 34, 54] learn 3D shape representations directly from the
raw representation (e.g., point cloud, voxel) of 3D shapes.
View-based methods [46, 2, 51, 44, 55] usually ﬁrst represent a 3D object with a set of 2D view images, then extract
features of each view image, and ﬁnally aggregate them into
a compact 3D shape descriptor. Comparing with modelbased methods, view-based methods are more ﬂexible and
can beneﬁt from recent developments in 2D image analysis,
for instance, well-established architectures. Besides, in the
real-world scenario, view images for 3D objects are easier
to obtain, hence more efﬁcient.
However, for multi-view based methods, one challenge
is how to effectively aggregate the multiple view cues. To
this end, existing works can be mainly categorized into
two representative branches, i.e., view-wise pooling strategies [46, 51] (see Fig. 1(a)) and recurrent neural networks
(RNN) based strategies [12, 17] (see Fig. 1(b)). Although
great progresses have been achieved, these methods have
certain limitations and cannot fully leverage the latent view
embeddings. For instance, view-wise pooling strategies
lose the spatial information across different views, while recurrent neural networks suffer from inefﬁciency due to the
sequential working mechanism which requires much more
computational resources [50, 32].
Considering these limitations, we propose an effective and efﬁcient framework called View N-gram Network
(VNN) based on the concept of n-gram (see Fig. 1(c)) in
natural language processing. In a typical n-gram model, a
sentence is ﬁrst decomposed into a sequence of n-grams,
each of which has n consecutive words. Due to its capability
of capturing word order in short context and its simplicity,
n-gram has been widely used for various NLP tasks like language modeling [40], text classiﬁcation [27], and machine
translation [33]. Though its success has been demonstrated
on learning text features, its effectiveness on learning 3D
shape representations is unexplored.
However, n-gram also has intrinsic advantages for learning multi-view 3D shape representation. Speciﬁcally, for a
3D shape, we regard each view image as a “word” and di-

7515

