Semantic Part Detection via Matching:
Learning to Generalize to Novel Viewpoints from Limited Training Data

1

Yutong Bai1∗, Qing Liu1∗ , Lingxi Xie1,2, , Weichao Qiu1 , Yan Zheng3 , Alan Yuille1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 University of Texas at Austin

{ytongbai, 198808xc, yan.zheng.mat, qiuwch, alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Abstract
Detecting semantic parts of an object is a challenging
task, particularly because it is hard to annotate semantic parts and construct large datasets. In this paper, we
present an approach which can learn from a small annotated dataset containing a limited range of viewpoints
and generalize to detect semantic parts for a much larger
range of viewpoints. The approach is based on our matching algorithm, which is used for finding accurate spatial
correspondence between two images and transplanting semantic parts annotated on one image to the other. Images in the training set are matched to synthetic images
rendered from a 3D CAD model, following which a clustering algorithm is used to automatically annotate semantic parts of the CAD model. During the testing period,
this CAD model can synthesize annotated images under
every viewpoint. These synthesized images are matched
to images in the testing set to detect semantic parts in
novel viewpoints. Our algorithm is simple, intuitive, and
contains very few parameters. Experiments show our
method outperforms standard deep learning approaches
and, in particular, performs much better on novel viewpoints. For facilitating the future research, code is available: https://github.com/ytongbai/SemanticPartDetection

1. Introduction
Detecting and parsing an object has been a long-lasting
challenge in computer vision and has attracted a lot of
research attention [8, 9]. Recently, with the development
of deep networks, this research area has been dominated
by an approach which starts by extracting several regional
proposals and then determines if each of them belongs to
a specific set of object classes [11, 42, 3, 31, 41]. The
success of these approaches [8, 28] motivates researchers
to address the more challenging task of understanding the
objects at a finer level and, in particular, to parse it into
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

qingliu@jhu.edu

Real
Image
Domain
Training

Virtual
Image
Domain

3D Model
with
Aggregated
Annotations

Testing
Real
Image
Domain

Figure 1. The flowchart of our approach (best viewed in color).
The key module is the matching algorithm which finds spatial
correspondence between real and synthesized images in similar
viewpoints. This enables us to match the training data to a 3D
CAD model and thereby annotate it. The CAD model can then be
used to detect the semantic parts on images in the testing set, by
reusing the matching algorithm.

semantic parts, which was defined to be those components
of an object with semantic meaning and can be verbally
described [58]. A particular challenge lies in that annotating
semantic parts is much more difficult and time-consuming
than annotating objects, which makes it harder to directly
apply deep networks to this task.
In this paper, we address the problem of semantic part
detection in the scenario that only a small amount of training data are available and the object is seen from a limited
range of viewpoints. The overall framework is illustrated
in Figure 1. Our strategy is to design a matching algorithm
which finds correspondences between images of the same
object seen from roughly the same viewpoint. This can
be used to match the training real images to the rendered
images of a 3D CAD model, enabling us to annotate the
semantic parts of the 3D model automatically. The same
matching algorithm can then be used in the testing time,
which transplants the annotated semantic parts on the CAD
model to the testing images, even though their viewpoints
may not have appeared in the training set.
In this pipeline, the key component is the matching algo-

7535

