Learning Meshes for Dense Visual SLAM
Michael Bloesch1 , Tristan Laidlow1 , Ronald Clark1 , Stefan Leutenegger2 , Andrew J. Davison1
1
2
Dyson Robotics Laboratory at Imperial College
Smart Robotics Lab
Imperial College London, UK

Abstract
Estimating motion and surrounding geometry of a moving camera remains a challenging inference problem. From
an information theoretic point of view, estimates should get
better as more information is included, such as is done in
dense SLAM, but this is strongly dependent on the validity
of the underlying models. In the present paper, we use triangular meshes as both compact and dense geometry representation. To allow for simple and fast usage, we propose
a view-based formulation for which we predict the in-plane
vertex coordinates directly from images and then employ the
remaining vertex depth components as free variables. Flexible and continuous integration of information is achieved
through the use of a residual based inference technique.
This so-called factor graph encodes all information as mapping from free variables to residuals, the squared sum of
which is minimised during inference. We propose the use
of different types of learnable residuals, which are trained
end-to-end to increase their suitability as information bearing models and to enable accurate and reliable estimation.
Detailed evaluation of all components is provided on both
synthetic and real data which confirms the practicability of
the presented approach.

1. Introduction
While a large amount of the interest in dense visual simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM) algorithms
may be due to their ability to create fully dense 3D reconstructions of the environment (an important requirement for
many tasks such as manipulator grasp planning, augmented
reality, and safe robotic navigation), one of the original motivations behind dense SLAM was to attain higher levels of
accuracy and robustness in localisation [23]. It was argued
that since the quality of an estimate can only improve with
additional measurements, dense approaches, which make
use of all of the pixels in the image, should be capable of
better performance than sparse systems.
This information theoretic claim, however, is only true
under the assumption that the correct probabilistic model is

Figure 1: Input images, summed feature activations, and
predicted triangular meshes for three example frames.
While the in-plane vertex coordinates are directly predicted
from the image, the remaining vertex depth coordinate is
optimisable and will be inferred based on learned residuals.

used for all of the additional data. This has usually not been
the case in practical dense SLAM systems. One key reason is that the direct photometric measurements that fully
dense systems use, which depend on lighting and reflection,
have residuals which are not well modelled in many parts of
a scene by the same computationally simple Gaussian/Mestimator models which are suitable for sparse feature reprojection error. Further, just the large amount of measurement data from all-pixels measurements has meant that
fully probabilistic inference which takes account of all cross
correlations between estimates has been approximated by
alternating pose/map optimisation. There is good discussion of these issues in [9, 24]. The outcome is that sparse
feature-based SLAM with dense reconstruction as a layer
on top has become the standard practical approach, rather
than the appealing promise from [23] of using the dense
model itself as the master map.
One of the key factors determining both the computational cost and model accuracy of a dense inference algorithm is the choice of geometry representation. As in

5855

