3D-LaneNet: End-to-End 3D Multiple Lane Detection
Noa Garnett

Rafi Cohen

Tomer Pe’er
Roee Lahav
General Motors Israel
HaMada St. 7, Herzlya, Israel

Dan Levi

{noa.garnett,rafi.cohen,tomer.peer,roee.lahav,dan.levi}@gm.com

Abstract
We introduce a network that directly predicts the 3D layout of lanes in a road scene from a single image. This
work marks a first attempt to address this task with onboard sensing without assuming a known constant lane
width or relying on pre-mapped environments. Our network
architecture, 3D-LaneNet, applies two new concepts: intranetwork inverse-perspective mapping (IPM) and anchorbased lane representation. The intra-network IPM projection facilitates a dual-representation information flow
in both regular image-view and top-view. An anchor-percolumn output representation enables our end-to-end approach which replaces common heuristics such as clustering and outlier rejection, casting lane estimation as an object detection problem. In addition, our approach explicitly
handles complex situations such as lane merges and splits.
Results are shown on two new 3D lane datasets, a synthetic
and a real one. For comparison with existing methods, we
test our approach on the image-only tuSimple lane detection
benchmark, achieving performance competitive with stateof-the-art.

1. Introduction
3D lane detection, comprising of an accurate estimation
of the 3D position of the drivable lanes relative to the host
vehicle, is a crucial enabler for autonomous driving. Two
complementary technological solutions exist: loading premapped lanes generated off-line [33] and perception-based
real-time lane detection [4]. The off-line solution is geometrically accurate given precise host localization (in map
coordinates) but complex to deploy and maintain. The most
common perception-based solution uses a monocular camera as the primary sensor for solving the task. Existing
camera-based methods detect lanes in the image domain
and then project them to the 3D world by assuming a flat
ground [4], leading to inaccuracy not only in the elevation
but also in the lane curvature when the assumption is violated. Inspired by recent success of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) in monocular depth estimation [20], we

propose instead to directly detect lanes in 3D. More formally, given a single image taken from a front-facing camera, the task is to output a set of 3D curves in camera coordinates, each describing either a lane delimiter or a lane
centerline.

3D-LaneNet
Input image

Figure 1. End-to-end approach illustrated. Left: Output represented in top view. Top-right: result visualized in 3D. Bottomright: result projected to original input image

3D-LaneNet, our proposed solution, is a deep CNN that
performs 3D lane detection. The network, trained end-toend, outputs in each longitudinal road slice, the confidence
that a lane passes through the slice and its 3D curve in
camera coordinates. Our approach is schematically illustrated in Figure 1. Our direct, single-shot approach avoids
post-processing used in existing methods such as clustering and outlier rejection. The network’s backbone is based
on a novel dual pathway architecture that uses several innetwork projections of feature maps to virtual bird-eyeview. This dual representation gives the network an enhanced ability to infer 3D in a road scene, and may possibly be used for other tasks requiring this ability (e.g. 3D
car detection). The output is represented by a new column-

2921

