Stacked Cross Refinement Network for Edge-Aware Salient Object Detection
Zhe Wu1,2 , Li Su∗1,2,3 , and Qingming Huang1,2,3,4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS),
Beijing, China
2
Key Lab of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, UCAS, Beijing, China
3
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, ShenZhen, China
wuzhe14@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {suli, qmhuang}@usas.ac.cn

Abstract
Salient object detection is a fundamental computer vision task. The majority of existing algorithms focus on aggregating multi-level features of pre-trained convolutional
neural networks. Moreover, some researchers attempt to utilize edge information for auxiliary training. However, existing edge-aware models design unidirectional frameworks
which only use edge features to improve the segmentation
features. Motivated by the logical interrelations between
binary segmentation and edge maps, we propose a novel Stacked Cross Refinement Network (SCRN) for salient object detection in this paper. Our framework aims to
simultaneously refine multi-level features of salient object detection and edge detection by stacking Cross Refinement Unit (CRU). According to the logical interrelations,
the CRU designs two direction-specific integration operations, and bidirectionally passes messages between the two tasks. Incorporating the refined edge-preserving features with the typical U-Net, our model detects salient objects accurately. Extensive experiments conducted on six
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art algorithms in both accuracy
and efficiency. Besides, the attribute-based performance on
the SOC dataset show that the proposed model ranks first
in the majority of challenging scenes. Code can be found at
https://github.com/wuzhe71/SCAN .

1. Introduction
Salient object detection [1, 5, 10, 11, 17] aims to detect
and segment the most attractive objects in images or videos.
∗ Li Su (suli@ucas.ac.cn) is the corresponding author.

In the past decades, hundreds of traditional methods have
been developed to address the task of salient object detection and widely applied as a pre-processing procedure in
other computer vision tasks [2, 3].
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) greatly
promote the research of computer vision. Early deep salient
object detection models [14, 18, 19, 27, 38] utilize classiﬁcation network to determine each region of an image is
salient or not. These models generate better results than
the traditional models along with expensive computation
overhead. Then fully convolutional networks (FCNs) [23]
based approaches [4, 15, 22, 24, 29, 30, 31, 35, 36, 37]
further boost the development of salient object detection.
These works have achieved state-of-the-art performance via designing reasonable decoders to extract discriminative
multi-level features and aggregate them together. Besides,
researchers also attempt to leverage the complementary information between the two tasks of salient object detection and edge detection. Some strategies use edge labels to
improve the training procedure of segmentation networks:
adding auxiliary boundary loss at the end of the segmentation network [24], designing unidirectional frameworks [12, 39] which only use edge information to improve the
representation ability of segmentation feature. Though the
previous works have demonstrated that fusing edge features
is propitious to generate more accurate segmentation maps,
they may confront the problem of inaccurate edge features.
And the edge information has not been fully exploited in
existing edge-aware frameworks.
In this paper, we investigate the interrelations between
binary segmentation and edge maps, and ﬁgure out that
boundary region in the edge map is the proper subset of
object region in the corresponding segmentation map. Inspired by this observation, we propose a novel edge-aware

7264

