Context-Aware Feature and Label Fusion for Facial Action Unit Intensity
Estimation With Partially Labeled Data

1

Yong Zhang1∗, Haiyong Jiang2* , Baoyuan Wu1†, Yanbo Fan1 , Qiang Ji3
Tencent AI Lab, 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 3 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

{zhangyong201303,haiyong.jiang1990,wubaoyuan1987,fanyanbo0124}@gmail.com, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Facial action unit (AU) intensity estimation is a fundamental task for facial behaviour analysis. Most previous
methods use a whole face image as input for intensity prediction. Considering that AUs are defined according to their
corresponding local appearance, a few patch-based methods utilize image features of local patches. However, fusion
of local features is always performed via straightforward
feature concatenation or summation. Besides, these methods require fully annotated databases for model learning,
which is expensive to acquire. In this paper, we propose a
novel weakly supervised patch-based deep model on basis
of two types of attention mechanisms for joint intensity estimation of multiple AUs. The model consists of a feature
fusion module and a label fusion module. And we augment
attention mechanisms of these two modules with a learnable task-related context, as one patch may play different
roles in analyzing different AUs and each AU has its own
temporal evolution rule. The context-aware feature fusion
module is used to capture spatial relationships among local patches while the context-aware label fusion module is
used to capture the temporal dynamics of AUs. The latter
enables the model to be trained on a partially annotated
database. Experimental evaluations on two benchmark expression databases demonstrate the superior performance
of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [5] defines a set
of AUs to depict the movements of facial muscles. Each
AU is associated with one or a set of muscles. AUs can
be treated as basic elements to encode nearly all anatomically possible human expressions [22]. AU intensity is used
to describe the extent of muscle movement, which presents
detailed information of facial behaviours. It is quantified
∗ Authors contributed equally
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. The training and inference phases of the proposed
method. During training, we use a sequence as input and use
the sequence level labels (intensity annotations of peak and valley
frames) to provide supervision. Feature fusion and label fusion involve the enhanced attention mechanisms. During inference, we
use a single frame as input as well as the learned task-related context to perform context-aware AU intensity estimation.

into six-point ordinal scales in FACS. Automatic AU intensity estimation is valuable for facial behaviour analysis, but
it is more challenging than AU detection since distinguishing subtle changes between neighbor intensities are more
difficult than recognizing the existence of AU.
Most previous methods in AU detection [56, 54, 57, 19,
53] and AU intensity estimation [47, 50] focus on extracting features from a whole face image. A few region or
patch-based methods [61, 12] extract features from local
regions, since AUs are defined according to the facial appearance of local regions which contain informative patterns. Most deep learning methods such as [43, 48] directly
feed a whole image into deep models, while only several
methods [62, 20, 17, 25] consider extracting deep features
from local patches. And these methods simply fuse features
via concatenation, summation, or a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) [17] (see Fig. 2). Note that these patch-based methods treat each patch equally during feature fusion without
considering connections among patches or the relevance of
a patch to the given AU. However, when annotating the intensity of an AU, we focus on the AU-related regions and
ignore unrelated regions. Hence, patches should be treated

733

