Online Hyper-parameter Learning for Auto-Augmentation Strategy
Chen Lin1∗, Minghao Guo1∗ , Chuming Li1 , Xin Yuan1 , Wei Wu1 , Junjie Yan1 , Dahua Lin2 , Wanli
Ouyang3
1

SenseTime Group Limited
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
2

{linchen,guominghao,lichuming,yuanxin,wuwei,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com; dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk;
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Data augmentation is critical to the success of modern deep learning techniques. In this paper, we propose
Online Hyper-parameter Learning for Auto-Augmentation
(OHL-Auto-Aug), an economical solution that learns the
augmentation policy distribution along with network training. Unlike previous methods on auto-augmentation that
search augmentation strategies in an offline manner, our
method formulates the augmentation policy as a parameterized probability distribution, thus allowing its parameters to be optimized jointly with network parameters. Our
proposed OHL-Auto-Aug eliminates the need of re-training
and dramatically reduces the cost of the overall search process, while establishes significantly accuracy improvements
over baseline models. On both CIFAR-10 and ImageNet,
our method achieves remarkable on search accuracy, i.e.
60× faster on CIFAR-10 and 24× faster on ImageNet, while
maintaining competitive accuracies.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen remarkable success of deep
neural networks in various computer vision applications.
Driven by large amounts of labeled data, the performances
of networks have reached an amazing level. A common issue in learning deep networks is that the training process
is prone to overfitting, with the sharp contrast between the
huge model capacity and the limited dataset. Data augmentation, which applies randomized modifications to the training samples, have been shown to be an effective way to mitigate this problem. Simple image transforms, including random crop, horizontal flipping, rotation and translation, are
∗ equal contribution

Figure 1. The search cost of Auto-Augment [6] and our OHLAuto-Aug. ‘#Iterations’ denotes the total training iterations
with conversion under a same batch size 1024 (more details in
Section 4.2). Our proposed OHL-Auto-Aug achieves a remarkable auto-augmentation search efficiency, which is 60× faster on
CIFAR-10 and 24× faster on ImageNet than Auto-Augment [6].

utilized to create label-preserved new training data to promote the network generalization and accuracy performance.
Recent efforts such as [8, 34] further develop the transform
strategy and boost the model to state-of-the-art accuracy on
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets.
However, it is nontrivial to find a good augmentation policy for a given task, as it varies significantly across datasets
and tasks. It often requires extensive experience combined
with tremendous efforts to devise a reasonable policy. Instinctively, automatically finding the process of data augmentation strategy for a target dataset turns into an alternative. Cubuk et al. [6] described a procedure to automatically search augmentation strategy from data. The search
process involves sampling hundreds and thousands of poli-

6579

