LADN: Local Adversarial Disentangling Network for
Facial Makeup and De-Makeup
Qiao Gu∗
CMU, HKUST

Guanzhi Wang∗
Stanford University, HKUST

Mang Tik Chiu
UIUC

qiaog@andrew.cmu.edu

guanzhi@stanford.edu

mtchiu2@illinois.edu

Yu-Wing Tai
Tencent

Chi-Keung Tang
HKUST

yuwingtai@tencent.com

cktang@cs.ust.hk

Abstract
We propose a local adversarial disentangling network
(LADN) for facial makeup and de-makeup. Central to our
method are multiple and overlapping local adversarial discriminators in a content-style disentangling network for
achieving local detail transfer between facial images, with
the use of asymmetric loss functions for dramatic makeup
styles with high-frequency details. Existing techniques do
not demonstrate or fail to transfer high-frequency details
in a global adversarial setting, or train a single local discriminator only to ensure image structure consistency and
thus work only for relatively simple styles. Unlike others,
our proposed local adversarial discriminators can distinguish whether the generated local image details are consistent with the corresponding regions in the given reference image in cross-image style transfer in an unsupervised setting. Incorporating these technical contributions,
we achieve not only state-of-the-art results on conventional
styles but also novel results involving complex and dramatic styles with high-frequency details covering large areas across multiple facial features. A carefully designed
dataset of unpaired before and after makeup images is
released at https://georgegu1997.github.io/LADN-projectpage.

1. Introduction
We propose to incorporate local adversarial discriminators into an image domain translation network for details
transfer between two images, and apply these local adversarial discriminators on overlapping image regions to
achieve image-based facial makeup and removal. By en-

(a) Source

(b) Reference

(c) Transfer result

(d) Demakeup result

(e) Zoom-in view

Figure 1: Facial makeup and de-makeup with dramatic makeup
style. See supplemental material for high-quality images of all our
results.

couraging cross-cycle consistency between input and output, we can disentangle the makeup latent variable from
other factors on a single facial image. Through increasing
the number and overlapping local discriminators, complex
makeup styles with high-frequency details can be seamlessly transferred or removed while facial identity and structure are both preserved. See Figure 1.
The contributions of our paper are:
• By utilizing local adversarial discriminators rather
than cropping the image into different local paths, our
network can seamlessly transfer and remove dramatic
makeup styles;
• Through incorporating asymmetric loss functions on
makeup transfer and removal branches, the network

∗ Equal contribution.

Authorship order was determined by rolling
dice.
This research is supported in part by Tencent and the Research Grant
Council of the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 1620818.

10481

