Face De-occlusion using 3D Morphable Model and Generative Adversarial
Network
Xiaowei Yuan and In Kyu Park
{xiaoweichn@qq.com

pik@inha.ac.kr}

Dept. of Information and Communication Engineering, Inha University, Incheon 22212, Korea

Abstract
In recent decades, 3D morphable model (3DMM) has
been commonly used in image-based photorealistic 3D face
reconstruction. However, face images are often corrupted
by serious occlusion by non-face objects including eyeglasses, masks, and hands. Such objects block the correct
capture of landmarks and shading information. Therefore,
the reconstructed 3D face model is hardly reusable. In this
paper, a novel method is proposed to restore de-occluded
face images based on inverse use of 3DMM and generative
adversarial network. We utilize the 3DMM prior to the proposed adversarial network and combine a global and local
adversarial convolutional neural network to learn face deocclusion model. The 3DMM serves not only as geometric
prior but also proposes the face region for the local discriminator. Experiment results confirm the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed algorithm in removing challenging
types of occlusions with various head poses and illumination. Furthermore, the proposed method reconstructs the
correct 3D face model with de-occluded textures.

1. Introduction
3D face reconstruction from a single image is a key
technology in many computer vision and graphic applications, such as face recognition and face animation. Since
Blanz and Vetter [1] proposed the 3D morphable face
model (3DMM), the methodology based on 3DMM has
been most popular for coarse face geometric reconstruction.
Further development involves using the shape from shading (SfS) technique to enhance details (e.g. wrinkles) on
the face geometry [14, 22, 13]. These techniques assume
that the input image is free from occlusion, or at most, selfoccluded by head pose variation. However, in actual situations in the wild, we encounter new challenges in which
existing algorithms become inapplicable due to serious occlusion by eyeglasses, masks, hands, and others.
To solve this problem in face recognition, a few methods propose solutions for automatic face de-occlusion to

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Face de-occlusion results by applying the proposed method. (a)(b) Real images. (c)(d) Synthetic images. (Upper) Input images with occlusions. (Lower) Deocclusion results.

improve recognition performance [4, 21, 27, 31, 18]. However, almost all existing methods work under highly constrained conditions, e.g. low-resolution grayscale images
with predefined head pose. Therefore, these methods cannot perform photorealistic 3D face reconstruction in terms
of image resolution and image diversity.
The recent work by Tran [26] addresses the challenge of
detailed face reconstruction from occluded images. However, rather than performing de-occlusion, this method focuses on geometrical reconstruction by searching the reference dataset to reconstruct the bump map on the occluded
region. By contrast, our proposed method directly removes
the occlusion on the face image, thereby allowing texture
mapping on the reconstructed 3D model.
In this paper, we address the problem of face deocclusion from seriously occluded actual images while
focusing on the application of 3D face reconstruction.
The proposed method aims to directly remove occlusions,
thereby enabling it to synthesize the texture for the 3D face
model. An example of face de-occlusion is shown in Figure 1. Various occlusions and head poses are observed from
actual face images. Thus, automatically removing face occlusions through a purely data-driven manner is a challeng110062

