Few-shot Object Detection via Feature Reweighting
Bingyi Kang1 *, Zhuang Liu2∗ , Xin Wang2 , Fisher Yu2 , Jiashi Feng1 , Trevor Darrell2
1
National University of Singapore 2 University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Conventional training of a deep CNN based object detector demands a large number of bounding box annotations, which may be unavailable for rare categories. In this
work we develop a few-shot object detector that can learn
to detect novel objects from only a few annotated examples.
Our proposed model leverages fully labeled base classes
and quickly adapts to novel classes, using a meta feature
learner and a reweighting module within a one-stage detection architecture. The feature learner extracts meta features
that are generalizable to detect novel object classes, using training data from base classes with sufficient samples.
The reweighting module transforms a few support examples
from the novel classes to a global vector that indicates the
importance or relevance of meta features for detecting the
corresponding objects. These two modules, together with a
detection prediction module, are trained end-to-end based
on an episodic few-shot learning scheme and a carefully
designed loss function. Through extensive experiments we
demonstrate that our model outperforms well-established
baselines by a large margin for few-shot object detection,
on multiple datasets and settings. We also present analysis
on various aspects of our proposed model, aiming to provide some inspiration for future few-shot detection works.

1. Introduction
The recent success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in object detection [32, 15, 30, 31] relies
heavily on a huge amount of training data with accurate
bounding box annotations. When the labeled data are
scarce, CNNs can severely overfit and fail to generalize. In
contrast, humans exhibit strong performance in such tasks:
children can learn to detect a novel object quickly from very
few given examples. Such ability of learning to detect from
few examples is also desired for computer vision systems,
since some object categories naturally have scarce examples or their annotations are hard to obtain, e.g., California
firetrucks, endangered animals or certain medical data [33].
* Equal contribution.

Novel classes

Dog

Bike

 

Few-shot
Detector

 

Base classes

Figure 1: We aim to obtain a few-shot detection model by training
on the base classes with sufficient examples, such that the model
can learn from a few annotated examples to detect novel objects
on testing images.

In this work, we target at the challenging few-shot object
detection problem, as shown in Fig. 1. Specifically, given
some base classes with sufficient examples and some novel
classes with only a few samples, we aim to obtain a model
that can detect both base and novel objects at test time. Obtaining such a few-shot detection model would be useful
for many applications. Yet, effective methods are still absent. Recently, meta learning [39, 35, 12] offers promising
solutions to a similar problem, i.e., few-shot classification.
However, object detection is by nature much more difficult
as it involves not only class predictions but also localization of the objects, thus off-the-shelf few-shot classification
methods cannot be directly applied on the few-shot detection problem. Taking Matching Networks [39] and Prototypical Networks [35] as examples, it is unclear how to
build object prototypes for matching and localization, because there may be distracting objects of irrelevant classes
within the image or no targeted objects at all.
We propose a novel detection model that offers few-shot
learning ability through fully exploiting detection training
data from some base classes and quickly adapting the detection prediction network to predict novel classes according to a few support examples. The proposed model first
learns meta features from base classes that are generalizable
to the detection of different object classes. Then it effectively utilizes a few support examples to identify the meta
18420

