Learning with Average Precision: Training
Image Retrieval with a Listwise Loss
Jérôme Revaud

Jon Almazán

Rafael S. Rezende

César Roberto de Souza

NAVER LABS Europe

Abstract
Image retrieval can be formulated as a ranking problem where the goal is to order database images by decreasing similarity to the query. Recent deep models for image
retrieval have outperformed traditional methods by leveraging ranking-tailored loss functions, but important theoretical and practical problems remain. First, rather than
directly optimizing the global ranking, they minimize an
upper-bound on the essential loss, which does not necessarily result in an optimal mean average precision (mAP). Second, these methods require significant engineering efforts
to work well, e.g., special pre-training and hard-negative
mining. In this paper we propose instead to directly optimize the global mAP by leveraging recent advances in listwise loss formulations. Using a histogram binning approximation, the AP can be differentiated and thus employed
to end-to-end learning. Compared to existing losses, the
proposed method considers thousands of images simultaneously at each iteration and eliminates the need for ad hoc
tricks. It also establishes a new state of the art on many
standard retrieval benchmarks. Models and evaluation
scripts have been made available at: https://europe.
naverlabs.com/Deep-Image-Retrieval/.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval consists in finding, given a query, all images containing relevant content within a large database.
Relevance here is defined at the instance level and retrieval
typically consists in ranking in top positions database images with the same object instance as the one in the query.
This important technology serves as a building block for
popular applications such as image-based item identification (e.g., fashion items [13, 35, 60] or products [53]) and
automatic organization of personal photos [20].
Most instance retrieval approaches rely on computing
image signatures that are robust to viewpoint variations and
other types of noise. Interestingly, signatures extracted by
deep learned models have recently outperformed keypointbased traditional methods [17, 18, 45]. This good perfor-

mance was enabled by the ability of deep models to leverage a family of loss functions well-suited to the ranking
problem. Compared to classification losses previously used
for retrieval with less success [3, 4, 47], ranking-based loss
functions directly optimize for the end task, enforcing intraclass discrimination and more fine-grained instance-level
image representations [18]. Ranking losses used to date
consider either image pairs [44], triplets [18], quadruplets
[11], or n-tuples [52]. Their common principle is to subsample a small set of images, verify that they locally comply
with the ranking objective, perform a small model update if
they do not, and repeat these steps until convergence.
Despite their effectiveness, important theoretical and
practical problems remain. In particular, it has been shown
that these ranking losses are upper bounds on a quantity
known as the essential loss [34], which in turn is an upper bound on standard retrieval metrics such as mean average precision (mAP) [34]. Thus, optimizing these ranking
losses is not guaranteed to give results that also optimize
mAP. Hence there is no theoretical guarantee that these approaches yield good performance in a practical system. Perhaps for this reason, many tricks are required to obtain good
results, such as pre-training for classification [1, 18], combining multiple losses [10, 12], and using complex hardnegative mining strategies [15, 21, 37, 38]. These engineering heuristics involve additional hyper-parameters and are
notoriously complicated to implement and tune [25, 58].
In this paper, we investigate a new type of ranking loss
that remedy these issues altogether by directly optimizing
mAP (see Fig. 1). Instead of considering a couple of images
at a time, it optimizes the global ranking of thousands of images simultaneously. This practically renders the aforementioned tricks unnecessary while improving the performance
at the same time. Specifically, we leverage recent advances
in listwise loss functions that allow to reformulate AP using
histogram binning [24, 25, 58]. AP is normally non-smooth
and not differentiable, and cannot be directly optimized in
gradient-based frameworks. Nevertheless, histogram binning (or soft-binning) is differentiable and can be used to
replace the non-differentiable sorting operation in the AP,
15107

