Temporal Attentive Alignment for Large-Scale Video Domain Adaptation
Min-Hung Chen1∗ Zsolt Kira1 Ghassan AlRegib1 Jaekwon Yoo2 Ruxin Chen2 Jian Zheng3∗
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Sony Interactive Entertainment LLC 3 Binghamton University

Abstract
Although various image-based domain adaptation (DA)
techniques have been proposed in recent years, domain
shift in videos is still not well-explored. Most previous
works only evaluate performance on small-scale datasets
which are saturated. Therefore, we first propose two largescale video DA datasets with much larger domain discrepancy: UCF-HMDBf ull and Kinetics-Gameplay. Second,
we investigate different DA integration methods for videos,
and show that simultaneously aligning and learning temporal dynamics achieves effective alignment even without
sophisticated DA methods. Finally, we propose Temporal
Attentive Adversarial Adaptation Network (TA3 N), which
explicitly attends to the temporal dynamics using domain
discrepancy for more effective domain alignment, achieving state-of-the-art performance on four video DA datasets
(e.g. 7.9% accuracy gain over “Source only” from 73.9%
to 81.8% on “HMDB → UCF”, and 10.3% gain on “Kinetics → Gameplay”). The code and data are released at
http://github.com/cmhungsteve/TA3N .

1. Introduction
Domain adaptation (DA) [29] has been studied extensively in recent years [4] to address the domain shift problem [32, 30], which means the models trained on source
labeled dataset do not generalize well to target datasets and
tasks. DA is categorized in terms of the availability of annotations in the target domain. In this paper, we focus on the
harder unsupervised DA problem, which requires training
models that can generalize to target samples without access to any target labels. While many unsupervised DA
approaches are able to diminish the distribution gap between source and target domains while learning discriminative deep features [22, 24, 9, 10, 21, 20, 34], most methods
have been developed only for images and not videos.
Furthermore, unlike image-based DA work, there do not
exist well-organized datasets to evaluate and benchmark the
performance of DA algorithms for videos. The most common datasets are UCF-Olympic and UCF-HMDBsmall [39,
∗ Work partially done as a SIE intern

Source

Target
Temporal

Temporal

Temporal
Alignment

Spatial

Spatial
Spatial
Alignment

Domain Shift
Figure 1: An overview of proposed TA3 N for video DA.
In addition to spatial discrepancy between frame images,
videos also suffer from temporal discrepancy between sets
of time-ordered frames that contain multiple local temporal dynamics with different contributions to the overall domain shift, as indicated by the thickness of green dashed
arrows. Therefore, we propose to focus on aligning the temporal dynamics which have higher domain discrepancy using a learned attention mechanism to effectively align the
temporal-embedded feature space for videos. Here we use
the action basketball as the example.

46, 15], which have only a few overlapping categories between source and target domains. This introduces limited domain discrepancy so that a deep CNN architecture
can achieve nearly perfect performance even without any
DA method (details in Section 5.2 and Table 2). Therefore, we propose two larger-scale datasets to investigate
video DA: 1) UCF-HMDBf ull : We collect 12 overlapping categories between UCF101 [38] and HMDB51 [18],
which is around three times larger than both UCF-Olympic
and UCF-HMDBsmall , and contains larger domain discrepancy (details in Section 5.2 and Tables 3 and 4).
2) Kinetics-Gameplay: We collect from several currently

6321

