Graph Convolutional Networks for Temporal Action Localization
Runhao Zeng1∗ Wenbing Huang2,5∗ Mingkui Tan1,4† Yu Rong2
Peilin Zhao2 Junzhou Huang2 Chuang Gan3
1
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
Tencent AI Lab 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
5
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, State Key Lab. of Intelligent
Technology and Systems, Tsinghua National Lab. for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
{runhaozeng.cs, ganchuang1990}@gmail.com, hwenbing@126.com, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Action Instance

Abstract
Most state-of-the-art action localization systems process
each action proposal individually, without explicitly exploiting their relations during learning. However, the relations
between proposals actually play an important role in action
localization, since a meaningful action always consists of
multiple proposals in a video. In this paper, we propose to
exploit the proposal-proposal relations using Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs). First, we construct an action
proposal graph, where each proposal is represented as a
node and their relations between two proposals as an edge.
Here, we use two types of relations, one for capturing the
context information for each proposal and the other one
for characterizing the correlations between distinct actions.
Then we apply the GCNs over the graph to model the relations among different proposals and learn powerful representations for the action classification and localization. Experimental results show that our approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art on THUMOS14 (49.1% versus
42.8%). Moreover, augmentation experiments on ActivityNet also verify the efficacy of modeling action proposal
relationships.

1. Introduction
Understanding human actions in videos has been becoming a prominent research topic in computer vision, owing to
its various applications in security surveillance, human behavior analysis and many other areas [10, 35, 38, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 42]. Despite the fruitful progress in this vein, there
are still some challenging tasks demanding further explo∗ indicates equal contributions. This work was done when Runhao Zeng
was served as a research intern in Tencent AI Lab under the supervision of
Wenbing Huang.
† Corresponding author

𝒑𝟒

𝒑𝟐 𝒑𝟏 𝒑𝟑

𝑝

𝑝

𝑝

Graph
Convolutions

𝑝
𝑝

𝑝

Classification

𝑝

Regression
𝑝

Figure 1. Schematic depiction of our approach. We apply graph
convolutional networks to model the proposal-proposal interactions and boost the temporal action localization performance.

ration — temporal action localization is such an example.
To deal with real videos that are untrimmed and usually contain the background of irrelevant activities, temporal action
localization requires the machine to not only classify the actions of interest but also localize the start and end time of
every action instance. Consider a sport video as illustrated
in Figure 1, the detector should find out the frames where
the action event is happening and identify the category of
the event.
Temporal Action localization has attracted increasing attention in the last several years [6, 18, 26, 33, 34]. Inspired
by the success of object detection, most current action detection methods resort to the two-stage pipeline: they first
generate a set of 1D temporal proposals and then perform
classification and temporal boundary regression on each
proposal individually. However, processing each proposal
separately in the prediction stage will inevitably neglect the
semantic relations between proposals.
We contend that exploiting the proposal-proposal relations in the video domain provides more cues to facilitate
the recognition of each proposal instance. To illustrate this,

7094

