Joint Prediction for Kinematic Trajectories in Vehicle-Pedestrian-Mixed Scenes
Huikun Bi1,2 Zhong Fang1 Tianlu Mao1 Zhaoqi Wang1 Zhigang Deng2∗
1 Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2 University of Houston
{bihuikun,fangzhong,ltm,zqwang}@ict.ac.cn, zdeng4@uh.edu

Abstract
Trajectory prediction for objects is challenging and critical for various applications (e.g., autonomous driving, and
anomaly detection). Most of the existing methods focus
on homogeneous pedestrian trajectories prediction, where
pedestrians are treated as particles without size. However, they fall short of handling crowded vehicle-pedestrianmixed scenes directly since vehicles, limited with kinematics in reality, should be treated as rigid, non-particle objects ideally. In this paper, we tackle this problem using
separate LSTMs for heterogeneous vehicles and pedestrians. Specifically, we use an oriented bounding box to represent each vehicle, calculated based on its position and
orientation, to denote its kinematic trajectories. We then
propose a framework called VP-LSTM to predict the kinematic trajectories of both vehicles and pedestrians simultaneously. In order to evaluate our model, a large dataset
containing the trajectories of both vehicles and pedestrians in vehicle-pedestrian-mixed scenes is specially built.
Through comparisons between our method with state-ofthe-art approaches, we show the effectiveness and advantages of our method on kinematic trajectories prediction in
vehicle-pedestrian-mixed scenes.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction is a challenging and essential task
due to its broad applications in the computer vision field,
including the navigation of autonomous driving, anomaly
detection, and behavior understanding. Trajectory prediction for pedestrians has been extensively studied in recent
years [34, 28, 5, 2, 9, 32, 29]. By encoding human-human
interactions in a complex environment, these methods can
predict future trajectories based on historical and surrounding human behaviors. Many methods have also been proposed to predict vehicle trajectories based on the states of
∗ Corresponding Author

a

b
c

d

Figure 1. Illustration of various interactions in a vehiclepedestrian-mixed scene. The vehicle-vehicle, human-human, and
vehicle-human interactions are separately represented with solid
blue lines, solid red lines, and orange dash lines. The vehicle a
and pedestrian b in gray dash box have similar interactions with
surrounding pedestrians. b walks freely to avoid collisions with
d. However, the vehicle a, limited with kinematics, stops to avoid
collisions with c.

surrounding vehicles [18, 14, 6].
All the above methods predict the trajectories of homogeneous traffic agents, namely, the whole scene with
only pedestrians or only vehicles. Furthermore, in these
methods, each agent is treated as a particle, with the same
motion pattern. However, such naive simplifications are
not suitable in common vehicle-pedestrian-mixed scenes,
where vehicles and pedestrians have different sizes and
motion patterns. As shown in Fig. 1, the interactions
among different traffic agents in a vehicle-pedestrian-mixed
scene include human-human, human-vehicle, and vehiclevehicle interactions. The pedestrians with free movement
are treated as particles, while the vehicles should be treated
as rigid, non-particle objects ideally due to their sizes. Besides, only trajectories represented with positions are predicted in existing methods for traffic agents, which is insufficient to describe the accurate trajectories of heterogeneous vehicles in vehicle-pedestrian-mixed scenes. Different orientations along which vehicles drive forward in
Fig. 1, will result in different interactions with surrounding
agents. Besides, the kinematic motion of vehicles has been
seldom considered yet in existing trajectory prediction literature. Therefore, predicting the accurate kinematic trajectories of heterogeneous vehicles, treated as rigid non-particle

10383

