Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting with Unlabeled Data in the Wild
Kibok Lee∗

Kimin Lee† Jinwoo Shin† Honglak Lee∗
∗
University of Michigan † KAIST

∗

{kibok, honglak}@umich.edu

†

{kiminlee, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in many machine learning applications, e.g., classification [10], generation [29], object detection [9], and reinforcement learning [39]. However, in the real world where
the number of tasks continues to grow, the entire tasks cannot be given at once; rather, it may be given as a sequence of
tasks. The goal of class-incremental learning [33] is to enrich the ability of a model dealing with such a case, by aiming to perform both previous and new tasks well.1 In particular, it has gained much attention recently as DNNs tend to
forget previous tasks easily when learning new tasks, which
is a phenomenon called catastrophic forgetting [7, 28].
The primary reason of catastrophic forgetting is the limited resources for scalability: all training data of previous
tasks cannot be stored in a limited size of memory as the
number of tasks increases. Prior works in class-incremental
learning focused on learning in a closed environment, i.e., a

Hen

Eagle?
Dog?

Hen

Confidence-based
sampling

Fox
Fox

???
???

Dog
Goose
Cat
Eagle
Fox
Hen

Dog
Goose
Cat
Eagle

Previous model
Fox
Hen

Stream of unlabeled data

Lifelong learning with deep neural networks is wellknown to suffer from catastrophic forgetting: the performance on previous tasks drastically degrades when learning a new task. To alleviate this effect, we propose to
leverage a large stream of unlabeled data easily obtainable in the wild. In particular, we design a novel classincremental learning scheme with (a) a new distillation
loss, termed global distillation, (b) a learning strategy
to avoid overfitting to the most recent task, and (c) a
confidence-based sampling method to effectively leverage
unlabeled external data. Our experimental results on various datasets, including CIFAR and ImageNet, demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed methods over prior methods, particularly when a stream of unlabeled data is accessible: our method shows up to 15.8% higher accuracy
and 46.5% less forgetting compared to the state-of-the-art
method. The code is available at https://github.
com/kibok90/iccv2019-inc.

New model
Teacher for the current task

Figure 1. We propose to leverage a large stream of unlabeled
data in the wild for class-incremental learning. At each stage, a
confidence-based sampling strategy is applied to build an external
dataset. Specifically, some of unlabeled data are sampled based
on the prediction of the model learned in the previous stage P
for alleviating catastrophic forgetting, and some of them are randomly sampled for confidence calibration. Under the combination
of the labeled training dataset and the unlabeled external dataset,
a teacher model C first learns the current task, and then the new
model M learns both the previous and current tasks by distilling
the knowledge of P, C, and their ensemble Q.

model can only see the given labeled training dataset during
training [3, 12, 23, 24, 33]. However, in the real world, we
live with a continuous and large stream of unlabeled data
easily obtainable on the fly or transiently, e.g., by data mining on social media [26] and web data [17]. Motivated by
this, we propose to leverage such a large stream of unlabeled external data for overcoming catastrophic forgetting.
We remark that our setup on unlabeled data is similar to
self-taught learning [31] rather than semi-supervised learning, because we do not assume any correlation between unlabeled data and the labeled training dataset.
Contribution. Under the new class-incremental setup, our
contribution is three-fold (see Figure 1 for an overview):
A. We propose a new learning objective, termed global
distillation, which utilizes data to distill the knowledge
of reference models effectively.

1 In class-incremental learning, a set of classes is given in each task. In

evaluation, it aims to classify data in any class learned so far without task
boundaries.

312

