A Dataset of Multi-Illumination Images in the Wild
Lukas Murmann1

Michaël Gharbi1, 2

Miika Aittala1

MIT CSAIL1

Adobe Research2

Frédo Durand1

1. Introduction

input

ours

GT

Figure 1. Using our multi-illumination image dataset of over 1000
scenes, we can train neural networks to solve challenging vision
tasks. For instance, one of our models can relight an input image
to a novel light direction. Specular highlights pose a significant
challenge for many relighting algorithms, but are handled gracefully by our network. Further analysis is presented in Section 4.2.

Abstract
Collections of images under a single, uncontrolled illumination [42] have enabled the rapid advancement of core
computer vision tasks like classification, detection, and segmentation [26, 43, 18]. But even with modern learning
techniques, many inverse problems involving lighting and
material understanding remain too severely ill-posed to be
solved with single-illumination datasets. The data simply
does not contain the necessary supervisory signals. Multiillumination datasets are notoriously hard to capture, so the
data is typically collected at small scale, in controlled environments, either using multiple light sources [10, 53], or
robotic gantries [8, 20]. This leads to image collections
that are not representative of the variety and complexity of
real-world scenes. We introduce a new multi-illumination
dataset of more than 1000 real scenes, each captured in
high dynamic range and high resolution, under 25 lighting conditions. We demonstrate the richness of this dataset
by training state-of-the-art models for three challenging applications: single-image illumination estimation, image relighting, and mixed-illuminant white balance.

The complex interplay of materials and light is central
to the appearance of objects and to many areas of computer
vision, such as inverse problems and relighting. We argue
that research in this area is limited by the scarcity of datasets
— the current data is often limited to individual samples
captured in a lab setting, e.g. [8, 20], or to 2D photographs
that do not encode the variation of appearance with respect
to light [42]. While setups such as light stages, e.g. [10], can
capture objects under varying illumination, they are hard to
move and require the acquired object to be fully enclosed
within the stage. This makes it difficult to capture everyday
objects in their real environment.
In this paper, we introduce a new dataset of photographs
of indoor surfaces under varying illumination. Our goal
was to capture small scenes at scale (at least 1,000 scenes).
We wanted to be able to bring the capture equipment to
any house, apartment or office and record a scene in minutes. For this, we needed a compact setup. This appears to
be at odds with the requirement that scenes be illuminated
from different directions, since designs such as the light
stage [10] have required a large number of individual lights
placed around the scene. We resolved this dilemma by using indirect illumination and an electronic flash mounted on
servos so that we can control its direction. As the flash gets
rotated, it points to a wall or ceiling near the scene, which
forms an indirect “bounce” light source. The reflected light
becomes the primary illumination for the scene. We also
place a chrome and a gray sphere in the scene as ground
truth measurements of the incoming illumination.
Our capture process takes about five minutes per scene
and is fully automatic. We have captured over a thousand
scenes, each under 25 different illuminations for a total of
25,000 HDR images. Each picture comes segmented and
labeled according to material. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first dataset of its kind: offering both everyday
objects in context and lighting variations.
In Section 4, we demonstrate the generality and usefulness of our dataset with three learning-based applications:
predicting the environment illumination, relighting single
images, and correcting inconsistent white balance in pho14080

