Predicting 3D Human Dynamics from Video
Jason Y. Zhang, Panna Felsen, Angjoo Kanazawa, Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley
{zhang.j, panna, kanazawa, malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

…

PHD
Alternate
Viewpoint

…

PHD
Alternate
Viewpoint

Figure 1: Autoregressive prediction of human 3D motion from video. We present Predicting Human Dynamics (PHD), a neural autoregressive framework that takes past video frames as input to predict the motion of a 3D human body model. As shown, PHD takes in a
video sequence of a person and predicts the future 3D human motion. We show the predictions from two different viewpoints.

Abstract
Given a video of a person in action, we can easily guess
the 3D future motion of the person. In this work, we present
perhaps the first approach for predicting a future 3D mesh
model sequence of a person from past video input. We do
this for periodic motions such as walking and also actions
like bowling and squatting seen in sports or workout videos.
While there has been a surge of future prediction problems
in computer vision, most approaches predict 3D future from
3D past or 2D future from 2D past inputs. In this work, we
focus on the problem of predicting 3D future motion from
past image sequences, which has a plethora of practical applications in autonomous systems that must operate safely
around people from visual inputs. Inspired by the success of
autoregressive models in language modeling tasks, we learn
an intermediate latent space on which we predict the future.
This effectively facilitates autoregressive predictions when
the input differs from the output domain. Our approach can
be trained on video sequences obtained in-the-wild without
3D ground truth labels. The project website with videos can
be found at https://jasonyzhang.com/phd.

1. Introduction
Consider the video sequences in Figure 1. Given the past
frames of action, we can easily imagine the future motion

of the athletes, whether hitting a tennis serve or pitching a
baseball. In this paper, we consider this problem of predicting the motion of the person as a 3D mesh given some
past image sequences. We propose a learning-based framework that given past frames can successively predict the future 3D mesh of the person in an autoregressive manner.
Our model is trained on videos obtained in-the-wild without ground truth 3D annotations.
Learning generative models of sequences has a long tradition, particularly in language [5, 20] and speech generation [38]. Our approach is the first counterpart to these
approaches for 3D mesh motion generation from video.
While there has been much interest in future prediction
from video, most approaches focus on predicting 2D components from video such as 2D keypoints [54, 59], flow
[51], or pixels [13, 16]. On the other hand, the several works
that predict 3D human motion all take past 3D skeleton sequences as input obtained from motion capture data. To
our knowledge, no previous approach explores the problem
of 3D human motion prediction from video. 3D is a natural
space of motion prediction with many practical applications
such as human-robot interaction, where autonomous systems such as self-driving cars or drones must operate safely
around people from visual inputs in-the-wild. Our approach
is trainable on videos without 3D annotations, providing a
more abundant and natural source of information than 3D
17114

