ACMM: Aligned Cross-Modal Memory for Few-Shot Image and
Sentence Matching
Yan Huang1,4
Liang Wang1,2,3,4
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC)
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
Chinese Academy of Sciences Artificial Intelligence Research (CAS-AIR)
1

{yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Image and sentence matching has drawn much attention
recently, but due to the lack of sufficient pairwise data for
training, most previous methods still cannot well associate
those challenging pairs of images and sentences containing
rarely appeared regions and words, i.e., few-shot content.
In this work, we study this challenging scenario as few-shot
image and sentence matching, and accordingly propose an
Aligned Cross-Modal Memory (ACMM) model to memorize
the rarely appeared content. Given a pair of image and sentence, the model first includes an aligned memory controller
network to produce two sets of semantically-comparable interface vectors through cross-modal alignment. Then the
interface vectors are used by modality-specific read and update operations to alternatively interact with shared memory items. The memory items persistently memorize crossmodal shared semantic representations, which can be addressed out to better enhance the representation of few-shot
content. We apply the proposed model to both conventional and few-shot image and sentence matching tasks, and
demonstrate its effectiveness by achieving the state-of-theart performance on two benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of multimodal data, image and
sentence matching has drawn much attention recently. This
technique has been widely applied to the task of crossmodal retrieval, i.e., given an image query to retrieve certain
sentences with similar content, and vice-versa given a sentence query. The challenge of image and sentence matching
lies in how to accurately measure the cross-modal similarity
between images and sentences. As shown in Figure 1, the

a squatting couple outdoors
engaged with a kneeling
street performer or vendor
reading from a book of
manga

0

1

10

100

1000

Figure 1. Averaged recall rate vs. minimum appearing frequency
(best viewed in colors).

global similarity of a given pair of image and sentence usually depends on multiple local similarities between regions
(marked by rectangle) and words (marked by bold). Most
existing models [13, 21, 25, 5] measure these local similarities by training on limited pairs of image and sentence, so
they statistically tend to better associate partial regions and
words with higher appearing frequencies (marked by blue)
during training. While for the rarely appeared region and
word (marked by red), i.e., few-shot content, these models
cannot well recognize or associate them.
In Figure 1, we also illustrate the performance of crossmodal retrieval by three state-of-the-art models: VSE++
[5], SCO [13] and SCAN [21] on selected test sets containing k-shot content. For each test set, we select ceratin pairs
of image and sentence that have at least one word1 whose
appearing frequency is less than k. We can observe that all
the models can achieve well performance when there is no
few-shot (k≥100) content. But when k ≤ 10, their perfor1 Only considering nouns, verbs and adjectives.

5774

