Bidirectional One-Shot Unsupervised Domain Mapping
Tomer Cohen
Tel Aviv University

Lior Wolf
Facebook AI Research and Tel Aviv University

tomer104@gmail.com

wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We study the problem of mapping between a domain A,
in which there is a single training sample and a domain
B, for which we have a richer training set. The method
we present is able to perform this mapping in both directions. For example, we can transfer all MNIST images to
the visual domain captured by a single SVHN image and
transform the SVHN image to the domain of the MNIST
images. Our method is based on employing one encoder
and one decoder for each domain, without utilizing weight
sharing. The autoencoder of the single sample domain is
trained to match both this sample and the latent space of
domain B. Our results demonstrate convincing mapping
between domains, where either the source or the target
domain are defined by a single sample, far surpassing existing solutions. Our code is made publicly available at
https://github.com/tomercohen11/BiOST.

1. Introduction
There are multiple well-known gaps between many of
the current learning techniques and the requirements of ecological cognition, i.e., the ability to operate freely in the
real world. These include: (i) ecological learning systems
are required to rely mostly on very weakly supervised or
unsupervised training data; (ii) the amount of data available
during training is small; and (iii) ecological systems should
be able to learn continuously, improving over time.
In this work, we address unsupervised learning in the
one-shot scenario, in a way that links the one-sample x
to a second, larger training set S. The training set S can
represent, for example, an existing body of accumulated
knowledge. The unsupervised task that we study is cross
domain mapping between two visual domains A and B,
i.e., the ability to translate an image in one visual domain
to another visual domain. We present a solution that can
perform this mapping in both directions: we can map the
single image x ∈ A to the domain B defined by S, and we
can also translate any image in domain B to the domain A.
In this scenario, our knowledge of domain A is limited

to the single example x. This has a few implications, especially when mapping into this domain. At the principled
level, we are heavily influenced by this one sample, and our
view of domain A is myopic. At the technical level, we are
challenged by the inability to train a GAN for domain A.
Our method trains an autoencoder for each domain. The
autoencoeder of domain B is first pretrained and then jointly
trained with an autoencoder for domain A. Despite the
limited number of samples in the low-shot domain, weight
sharing is not used. Instead, we rely on a feature cycle loss
that ensures alignment between the domains, while allowing
more freedom to the autoencoders. In addition, we do not
employ GANs, not even for domain B.
In the literature, one-shot translation was only demonstrated successfully for the mapping from A to B (see Sec. 2).
Our success in mapping from B to A provides new insights
on unsupervised cross-domain translation. It demonstrates
that the variability in the target visual domain does not need
to be estimated and it strengthens the link between crossdomain visual translation and style transfer, since style transfer is often applied based on a single image.
Note, however, that style transfer solutions: (i) typically
employ pretrained networks to obtain a perceptual similarity score; (ii) do not benefit from having more than one
image from the domain of the content image; and (iii) employ a large style image, while our method can work with
low-res visual domains, as well as with high-res ones. The
success of our method also demonstrates the emergence of
disentanglement between style and content, since the content is translated, while the style is taken from the image
x. However, unlike the existing methods in the literature, a
single encoding pathway is used, i.e., we do not have a style
encoder that is separate from the content one.
The new method greatly outperforms the existing algorithms in the one-shot case, in both directions. In comparison
to both domain transfer methods and style transfer methods,
our method is able to better maintain content. In addition,
when mapping to the one-shot domain, the style is faithfully extracted from this one sample, while creating less
distortions than previous work.
11784

