Learning to Caption Images Through a Lifetime by Asking Questions
Tingke Shen1,2
1
Vector Institute

Amlan Kar1,2
2
University of Toronto

Sanja Fidler1,2,3
3
NVIDIA

{shenkev, amlan, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

In order to bring artificial agents into our lives, we will
need to go beyond supervised learning on closed datasets
to having the ability to continuously expand knowledge. Inspired by a student learning in a classroom, we present an
agent that can continuously learn by posing natural language questions to humans. Our agent is composed of three
interacting modules, one that performs captioning, another
that generates questions and a decision maker that learns
when to ask questions by implicitly reasoning about the uncertainty of the agent and expertise of the teacher. As compared to current active learning methods which query images for full captions, our agent is able to ask pointed questions to improve the generated captions. The agent trains on
the improved captions, expanding its knowledge. We show
that our approach achieves better performance using less
human supervision than the baselines on the challenging
MSCOCO [14] dataset.

1. Introduction
Imagine a child that sees a crocodile for the first time.
She may likely ask what the animal is called, or where it can
be encountered outside the zoo, but probably does not need
to be told that it is green or has four legs, and that its sharp
teeth can pose danger. Children (and even adults) learn from
teachers in an active way: asking questions about concepts
that they are unfamiliar or uncertain about. In doing so, they
make learning more efficient – the child who acquires exactly the information they are missing – and the teacher who
answers the question instead of needing to explain many aspects of a concept in full detail. As A.I. becomes more and
more integrated in our everyday lives, be it in the form of
personal assistants or household robots [28, 17, 23], they
too should actively seek out missing information from humans – by asking questions in the form of natural language
which non-experts can understand and answer.
Most existing work on scene understanding tasks such as
VQA [5, 25, 29, 6] and captioning [14, 21, 3] have focused
on a closed world setting, i.e. consuming the knowledge
provided by a labeled dataset. On the other hand, the goal
of active learning is to be able to continuously update the
model by seeking for the relevant data to be additionally la-

Decision Maker
0

0.1

0

Question Generator
0.2

0

0

0.6

0.1

CNN

Abstract

Where

is

the

dog

sitting?

RNN + Softmax across time

Captioner
A

Dog

is

sitting

in
CNN

a

window

<eos>

Question Answerer (Teacher)

car

car
Figure 1. Learning to describe images by asking questions. Our model
learns in a lifetime learning setting, by actively seeking for missing information. We jointly learn when and what to ask, and learn from the teacher’s
answers. Our model poses questions in natural language.

beled by a human [22]. Most active learning approaches,
however, ask the human to provide a full labeling of an example, and the main challenge is in identifying the examples to be labeled, to ensure annotation efficiency. In our
work, we go beyond this, by endowing the model with the
ability to ask for a particular aspect of a label, and do so
in natural language in order to unambiguously identify the
missing information.
We focus on the task of image captioning as a proxy task
for scene understanding. In order to describe an image, a
model needs to generate words describing the objects, their
attributes, actions, and possibly relationships and interactions between objects. This is inherently a multi-task problem. In this paper, our goal is to allow a captioning agent
to actively ask questions about the aspects of the image it
is uncertain about, in a lifetime learning setting in which
examples arrive sequentially and continually. Thus, instead
of having humans provide captions for each new image, our
agent aims to ask a minimal set of questions for the human
to answer, and learn to caption from these answers.
Our model consists of three modules: a captioning module, a decision making module that learns whether to ask
and what to ask about, and a question generation module.
At training time when the captioner produces each word,
the decision module decides for which concept, if any, to
ask about. If the agent decides to ask, the question module
produces a question, which the teacher answers. All three
modules are implemented as neural networks. They are updated continuously with the data arriving in batches: the
captioning module is updated using the captions improved
110393

