Attribute Attention for Semantic Disambiguation in Zero-Shot Learning
Yang Liu, Jishun Guo† , Deng Cai∗, Xiaofei He
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
†
GAC R&D Center, Guangzhou, China
lyng 95@zju.edu.cn, guojishun@gacrnd.com, dengcai@cad.zju.edu.cn, xiaofeihe@fabu.ai

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to accurately recognize
unseen objects by learning mapping matrices that bridge
the gap between visual information and semantic attributes.
Previous works implicitly treat attributes equally in compatibility score while ignoring that they have different importance for discrimination, which leads to severe semantic
ambiguity. Considering both low-level visual information
and global class-level features that relate to this ambiguity, we propose a practical Latent Feature Guided Attribute
Attention (LFGAA) framework to perform object-based attribute attention for semantic disambiguation. By distracting semantic activation in dimensions that cause ambiguity, our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on AwA2, CUB and SUN datasets in both inductive
and transductive settings. The source code is released at
https://github.com/ZJULearning/AttentionZSL.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL), whose goal is to construct a
classification model for classes that have no labeled samples before, is an active research topic recently [1, 18, 46,
33, 27, 39, 24, 43, 4]. Unlike supervised classification that
directly assigns an unlabeled object to one of training accessible (seen) categories, ZSL aims to recognize objects
that are unseen in training. To achieve this goal, auxiliary
semantic attributes are provided for both seen and unseen
classes [46, 44, 30]. ZSL then learns to predict in semantic
space for the unseen object and infer its label by searching
the class that attains the most similar semantic attribute.
Existing ZSL methods can be divided into inductive ZSL
and transductive ZSL depending on whether images from
unseen classes are available during training. Neither visual
information nor side-information of unseen classes is avail∗ Corresponding author

Pig

Semantic Space
Spotty Pig

Dalmatian

Latent Category Space

Spotty Pigs
Classical Pigs
Dalmatian’s Prototypes
Pig’s Prototypes
Decision Boundary w/o Attribute Attention
Decision Boundary w/ Attribute Attention

Figure 1: An illustrative diagram of semantic ambiguity
where spotty pig is likely to be misclassified as dalmatian in
semantic space. Based on objects’ visual features and latent
category features, we propose an attention based model to
distract high activation in objects’ sambiguous dimensions.

able for inductive ZSL [49, 35, 17, 24, 16] while transductive ZSL [20, 13, 42, 47, 10, 39] has access to part of the
unlabeled images. During the test phase, both conventional
setting and generalized setting are considered in most recent works [42, 16, 39]. The search space for classifying
new images is restricted to unseen classes in the conventional setting. While in generalized ZSL setting, we assume
the test images come from both seen and unseen classes.
Compatibility score based measurement, which exploit
linear or nonlinear function F (x, y; W ) = θ(x)T W φ(y)
to associate visual representation θ(x) and provided auxiliary side-information φ(y), have dominated the ZSL literature in the past few years [9, 1, 2, 35, 45]. Compatibility score could be adopted not only in user-defined semantic space (φ(y) = ay ) but also in latent feature space
(φ(y) = σy ) that recently introduced in several state-ofthe-art ZSL methods [17, 24, 48, 31].
While previous works mostly focus on introducing various regularization targets [9, 2, 35, 1] to learn better mapping matrices W , semantic attribute itself is less concerned
in the literature. Attributes are implicitly treated equally in

6698

