Action recognition with spatial-temporal discriminative filter banks
Brais Martinez, Davide Modolo, Yuanjun Xiong, Joseph Tighe
Amazon
braisa,dmodolo,yuanjx,tighej@amazon.com

Abstract
Action recognition has seen a dramatic performance improvement in the last few years. Most of the current stateof-the-art literature either aims at improving performance
through changes to the backbone CNN network, or they explore different trade-offs between computational efficiency
and performance, again through altering the backbone network. However, almost all of these works maintain the
same last layers of the network, which simply consist of a
global average pooling followed by a fully connected layer.
In this work we focus on how to improve the representation capacity of the network, but rather than altering the
backbone, we focus on improving the last layers of the network, where changes have low impact in terms of computational cost. In particular, we show that current architectures
have poor sensitivity to finer details and we exploit recent
advances in the fine-grained recognition literature to improve our model in this aspect. With the proposed approach,
we obtain state-of-the-art performance on Kinetics-400 and
Something-Something-V1, the two major large-scale action
recognition benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Action recognition has seen significant advances in
terms of overall accuracy in recent years. Most existing
methods [2, 11, 26, 27, 31] treat this problem as a generic
classification problem, of which the only difference from
ImageNet [6] classification is that the input is now a video
frame sequence. Thus, numerous efforts have been devoted
to leveraging the temporal information. However, unlike
objects in ImageNet, which are usually centered and occupy the majority of pixels, human activities are complex
concepts. They involve many factors such as body movement, temporal structure, and human-object interaction.
An example of this complexity can be found in action
classes like “eating a burger” and “eating a hot-dog”. They
both depict eating something, and have a similar body motion pattern. To correctly distinguish them, one has to focus
on the object the person is interacting with. A even more

Baking Cookies

Peeling Potatos

Baking Cookies

Peeling Potatos

Dribbling Basketball

Shooting Basketball

Dribbling Basketball

Shooting Basketball

Smoking

Eating Burger

Smoking

Eating Burger

Figure 1. Action recognition is a fine-grained recognition problem. Left: we illustrate samples from class pairs that are easily
confused by a state-of-the-art method [2]. This confusion is due
to these actions being visually extremely similar and they can only
be distinguished by fine-grained information. In (b) we show the
classification output of the proposed approach on these classes,
as well the highly activated regions with fine-grained information,
such as objects (red), motion pattern (blue), object texture (green).

difficult situation happens when we try to distinguish “picking up a phone” versus “picking up a hot-dog”, where even
the shape of the objects are similar. Another example is for
“dribbling basketball” and “shooting basketball”, where the
objects and scenes are the same. The major cue for distinguishing them is the difference in the body motion pattern.
This complex nature of human activities dictates that
rough modeling of the visual or temporal features will lead
to confusion between many classes that share similar factors. A common example of rough modeling is the widely
used classifier head of one global average pooling and one
linear classifier in action recognition models [2, 26], a setup
typical of image object recognition models [10] on ImageNet [6]. However, as illustrated in fig. 1, even a stateof-the-art CNN architecture, when learned with this setup,
fails to distinguish two classes when they share similar factors. In this case both classes can only be distinguished by
capturing fine-grained patterns.
In this work, we propose to tackle the complexity of human action classification by promoting the importance of
15482

