PU-GAN: a Point Cloud Upsampling Adversarial Network
Ruihui Li1 Xianzhi Li1,3 Chi-Wing Fu1,3 Daniel Cohen-Or2 Pheng-Ann Heng1,3
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Tel Aviv University
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{lirh,xzli,cwfu,pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

dcor@mail.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Point clouds acquired from range scans are often sparse,
noisy, and non-uniform. This paper presents a new point
cloud upsampling network called PU-GAN 1 , which is formulated based on a generative adversarial network (GAN),
to learn a rich variety of point distributions from the latent space and upsample points over patches on object surfaces. To realize a working GAN network, we construct an
up-down-up expansion unit in the generator for upsampling
point features with error feedback and self-correction, and
formulate a self-attention unit to enhance the feature integration. Further, we design a compound loss with adversarial, uniform and reconstruction terms, to encourage the
discriminator to learn more latent patterns and enhance the
output point distribution uniformity. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate the quality of our results
over the state-of-the-arts in terms of distribution uniformity,
proximity-to-surface, and 3D reconstruction quality.

1. Introduction
Point clouds are the standard outputs from 3D scanning.
In recent years, they are gaining more and more popularity
as a compact representation for 3D data, and as an effective
means for processing 3D geometry. However, raw point
clouds produced from depth cameras and LiDAR sensors
are often sparse, noisy, and non-uniform. This is evidenced
in various public benchmark datasets, such as KITTI [8],
SUN RGB-D [28], and ScanNet [6]. Clearly, the raw data
is required to be amended, before it can be effectively used
for rendering, analysis, or general processing.
Given a sparse, noisy, and non-uniform point cloud, our
goal is to upsample it and generate a point cloud that is
dense, complete, and uniform, as a faithful representation
of the underlying surface. These goals are very challenging
to achieve, given such an imperfect input, since, apart from
1 https://liruihui.github.io/publication/PU-GAN/

Figure 1. Upsampling (b) a point set cropped from (a) the realscanned KITTI dataset [8] by using (c) PU-Net [40] (CVPR 2018),
(d) MPU [38] (CVPR 2019), and (e) our PU-GAN. Note the distribution non-uniformity and sparsity in the input.

upsampling the data, we need to fill small holes and gaps in
data, while improving the point distribution uniformity.
Early methods [3, 21, 14, 15, 33] for the problem are
optimization-based, where various shape priors are used to
constrain the point cloud generation. Recently, deep neural
networks brought the promise of data-driven approaches to
the problem. Network architectures, including PU-Net [40],
EC-Net [39], and very recently, MPU [38], have demonstrated the advantage of upsampling point clouds through
learning. However, these networks may not produce plausible results from low-quality inputs that are particularly
sparse and non-uniform; in Figure 1 (c)-(e), we show a typical example that demonstrates the advantage of our method,

7203

