Detecting 11K Classes: Large Scale Object Detection without Fine-Grained
Bounding Boxes
Hao Yang
Hao Wu
Hao Chen
Amazon Web Services
{haoyng, goodwu, hxen}@amazon.com
Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning greatly boost the performance of object detection. State-of-the-art methods such
as Faster-RCNN, FPN and R-FCN have achieved high accuracy in challenging benchmark datasets. However, these
methods require fully annotated object bounding boxes for
training, which are incredibly hard to scale up due to
the high annotation cost. Weakly-supervised methods, on
the other hand, only require image-level labels for training, but the performance is far below their fully-supervised
counterparts. In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised
large scale fine-grained detection method, which only needs
bounding box annotations of a smaller number of coarsegrained classes and image-level labels of large scale finegrained classes, and can detect all classes at nearly fullysupervised accuracy. We achieve this by utilizing the correlations between coarse-grained and fine-grained classes
with shared backbone, soft-attention based proposal reranking, and a dual-level memory module. Experiment results show that our methods can achieve close accuracy on
object detection to state-of-the-art fully-supervised methods
on two large scale datasets, ImageNet and OpenImages,
with only a small fraction of fully annotated classes.

1. Introduction
Object detection has been in the center stage of computer vision research, and the recent development of deep
learning has vastly improved its performance. State-of-theart algorithms, such as R-FCN [5], FPN [16] and MaskRCNN [12] have achieved high accuracy on challenging
benchmark datasets. However, these methods rely on accurate and complete annotations of object bounding boxes,
which are expensive and time consuming to collect.
Exhaustively annotating bounding boxes for a large scale
dataset with fine-grained level labels is extremely laborious (here “large scale” not only means large numbers of instances N , but also large numbers of categories C. Due to
the multi-label nature of the detection problem, the annotation cost is O(N C)). Even with state-of-the-art annotating

methods [21, 22], it is still much more costly than annotating image level labels. Existing object detection datasets are
either fully annotated but in small scale, such as PASCAL
VOC [8] and MS COCO [17], or large scale but with only
parts of categories having bounding box annotations, such
as ImageNet [7] and OpenImages [14]. ImageNet has 11K
categories that are considered to be trainable (i.e., more than
500 training images), with in total 12M training images.
However, only 3K categories and less than 1M training images have bounding boxes annotations [27] ( if we count all
the ILSVRC-Detection annotations, the number is close to
1.5M). Similarly, OpenImages has more than 8K trainable
categories but only 601 categories have bounding box annotations [14]. Even for those categories with bounding box
annotations, missing annotations are common [37].
Recent studies propose large scale algorithms to facilitate the detection task on the scale of ImageNet and
OpenImages detection set, such as R-FCN 3000 [27] and
SNIPER with soft sampling [37, 28]. However, these methods still require full bounding boxes annotations. Fullysupervised detectors not only fail to utilize the full capacity of the training data (by ignoring data without bounding
box annotations), but also limit the detector’s capability to
recognize more fine-grained categories. We believe a better
way to train large scale detector is through semi-supervised
learning by utilizing both coarse-grained detection data and
fine-grained classification data. There are several benefits
in such a method: first, comparing to fully-supervised detectors, the semi-supervised detector only needs a relatively
small number of coarse-grained classes to be fully annotated with bounding boxes. Intuitively, if we have fully
annotated “dogs” with bounding boxes, we do not need
bounding boxes for all the species of dogs. This can greatly
reduce the annotation costs and make better use of existing data. Second, comparing to weakly-supervised detectors, we still exploit the coarse-grained detection data and
train a stronger detector. State-of-the-art weakly-supervised
methods are still 30 points below fully-supervised methods [10, 40, 33] in mAP. Our semi-supervised method
demonstrates that we can achieve comparable performance
19805

