Deep Comprehensive Correlation Mining for Image Clustering
Jianlong Wu123∗ Keyu Long2∗ Fei Wang2 Chen Qian2 Cheng Li2 Zhouchen Lin3( ) Hongbin Zha3
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University
2
SenseTime Research
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
jlwu1992@sdu.edu.cn, corylky114@gmail.com, {wangfei, qianchen, chengli}@sensetime.com, zlin@pku.edu.cn, zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

(a)

among different samples
local robustness

sample
B

feature correspondence
inter-correlations

Recent developed deep unsupervised methods allow us
to jointly learn representation and cluster unlabelled data.
These deep clustering methods mainly focus on the correlation among samples, e.g., selecting high precision pairs
to gradually tune the feature representation, which neglects
other useful correlations. In this paper, we propose a novel
clustering framework, named deep comprehensive correlation mining (DCCM), for exploring and taking full advantage of various kinds of correlations behind the unlabeled
data from three aspects: 1) Instead of only using pairwise information, pseudo-label supervision is proposed to
investigate category information and learn discriminative
features. 2) The features’ robustness to image transformation of input space is fully explored, which benefits the network learning and significantly improves the performance.
3) The triplet mutual information among features is presented for clustering problem to lift the recently discovered
instance-level deep mutual information to a triplet-level
formation, which further helps to learn more discriminative features. Extensive experiments on several challenging
datasets show that our method achieves good performance,
e.g., attaining 62.3% clustering accuracy on CIFAR-10,
which is 10.1% higher than the state-of-the-art results1 .

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the fundamental tasks in computer
vision and machine learning. Especially with the development of the Internet, we can easily collect thousands of images and videos every day, most of which are unlabeled. It is
very expensive and time-consuming to manually label these
data. In order to make use of these unlabeled data and investigate their correlations, unsupervised clustering draws
much attention recently, which aims to categorize similar
data into one cluster based on some similarity measures.
∗ Equal contribution and the work was done during interns at SenseTime Research
1 Project address: https://github.com/Cory-M/DCCM

feature vector
of other samples

sample
A

low-level
feature map

high-level
feature vector

transformed
feature vector

transformed
A’

Deep Comprehensive Correlation Mining

(b)

(c)

DCCM
DAC

Figure 1. Comprehensive correlations mining. (a) Various correlations; (b) Connect pair-wise items in higher semantic level progressively; (c) Better results of DCCM than the state-of-the-art
DAC [8] on CIFAR-10 [27]. Best viewed in color!

Image clustering is a challenging task due to the image variance of shape and appearance in the wild. Traditional clustering methods [55, 19, 6], such as K-means,
spectral clustering [35, 48], and subspace clustering [31, 16]
may fail for two main issues: first, hand-crafted features
have limited capacity and cannot dynamically adjust to capture the prior distribution, especially when dealing with
large-scale real-world images; second, the separation of
feature extraction and clustering will make the solution
sub-optimal. Recently, with the booming of deep learning [28, 21, 46, 30, 51], many researchers shift their attention to deep unsupervised feature learning and clustering [42, 23, 8], which can well solve the aforementioned
limitations. Typically, to learn a better representation,
[3, 50, 52] adopt the auto-encoder and [22] maximizes the
mutual information between features. DAC [8] constructs

8150

