Pose-aware Multi-level Feature Network for Human Object
Interaction Detection
Bo Wan∗ Desen Zhou∗ Yongfei Liu Rongjie Li Xuming He
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
{wanbo, zhouds, liuyf3, lirj2, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Reasoning human object interactions is a core problem
in human-centric scene understanding and detecting such
relations poses a unique challenge to vision systems due
to large variations in human-object configurations, multiple co-occurring relation instances and subtle visual difference between relation categories. To address those challenges, we propose a multi-level relation detection strategy that utilizes human pose cues to capture global spatial configurations of relations and as an attention mechanism to dynamically zoom into relevant regions at human
part level. Specifically, we develop a multi-branch deep
network to learn a pose-augmented relation representation
at three semantic levels, incorporating interaction context,
object features and detailed semantic part cues. As a result, our approach is capable of generating robust predictions on fine-grained human object interactions with interpretable outputs. Extensive experimental evaluations on
public benchmarks show that our model outperforms prior
methods by a considerable margin, demonstrating its efficacy in handling complex scenes. Code is available at
https://github.com/bobwan1995/PMFNet.

1. Introduction
Visual relations play an essential role in a deeper understanding of visual scenes, which usually requires reasoning beyond merely recognizing individual scene entities [22, 15, 30]. Among different types of visual relations,
human object interactions are ubiquitous in our visual environment and hence its inference is critical for many vision
tasks, such as activity analysis [1], video understanding [29]
and visual question answering [10].
The task of human object interaction (HOI) detection
aims to localize and classify triplets of human, object and
relation from an input image. While deep neural networks
have led to significant progresses in object and action recognition [13, 21, 6], it remains challenging to detect HOIs due
∗ Authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order.

Zoom-In
Right shoulder

Right wrist

Object

Left wrist

Figure 1. Our framework utilizes three levels of representation, including i): interaction (blue box), ii): visual object (green box and
yellow box), iii): human parts (red boxes) to recognize interaction.
The highlight of our framework is human parts level representation, which can provide discriminative feature. Here several informative human parts, like ‘right shoulder’, ‘right wrist’ and ‘left
wrist’, are focused to help recognize action ‘hold’.

to large variations of human-object appearance and spatial
configurations, multiple co-existing relations and subtle differences between similar relations [11, 2].
Most of existing works on HOI detection tackle the problem by reasoning interactions at the visual object level [9,
7, 20]. The dominant approaches typically start from a set
of human-object proposals, and extract visual features of
human and object instances which are combined with their
spatial cues (e.g., masks of proposals) to predict relation
classes of those human-object pairs [7, 25, 16]. Despite
their encouraging results, such coarse-level reasoning suffers from several drawbacks when handling relatively complex relations. First, it is difficult to determine the relatedness of a human-object pair instance with an object-level
representation due to lack of context cues, which can lead
to erroneous association. In addition, many relation types
are defined in terms of fine-grained actions, which are unlikely to be differentiated based on similar object-level features. For instance, it may require a set of detailed local
features to tell the difference between ‘hold’ and ‘catch’ in
sport scenes. Furthermore, as these methods largely rely
on holistic features, the reasoning process of relations is a
blackbox and hard to interpret.
In this work, we propose a new multi-level relation rea-

9469

