Batch Weight for Domain Adaptation With Mass Shift
Mikołaj Bińkowski∗1, 2 , R Devon Hjelm1, 3 , and Aaron Courville1, 4
1

Mila, Université de Montréal
2
Imperial College London
3
Microsoft Research
4
CIFAR Fellow

Abstract
Unsupervised domain transfer is the task of transferring
or translating samples from a source distribution to a different target distribution. Current solutions unsupervised
domain transfer often operate on data on which the modes
of the distribution are well-matched, for instance have the
same frequencies of classes between source and target distributions. However, these models do not perform well
when the modes are not well-matched, as would be the case
when samples are drawn independently from two different,
but related, domains. This mode imbalance is problematic
as generative adversarial networks (GANs), a successful
approach in this setting, are sensitive to mode frequency,
which results in a mismatch of semantics between source
samples and generated samples of the target distribution.
We propose a principled method of re-weighting training
samples to correct for such mass shift between the transferred distributions, which we call batch weight. We also
provide rigorous probabilistic setting for domain transfer
and new simplified objective for training transfer networks,
an alternative to complex, multi-component loss functions
used in the current state-of-the art image-to-image translation models. The new objective stems from the discrimination of joint distributions and enforces cycle-consistency
in an abstract, high-level, rather than pixel-wise, sense.
Lastly, we experimentally show the effectiveness of the proposed methods in several image-to-image translation tasks.

1. Motivation
Recent developments originating from Generative Adversarial Networks [GANs, 9] allow generation of high
quality images, often hardly distinguishable from the real
∗ Corresponding author (mikbinkowski at gmail dot com).

images [18, 4]. Adversarial methods have also been successfully applied in conditional image generation, where
generated samples are obtained as functions of some prior
data. When the latter is also composed of images, the problem is also called image-to-image (domain) transfer or style
transfer. In this scope, adversarial objectives are often combined with other loss functions to ensure desirable properties of the transfer networks. These include variants of cycle
consistency loss, originally proposed in CycleGAN [38] and
developed further by [16, 1, 23], leading to current state-ofthe-art results in several image-to-image transfer problems.
Notwithstanding these notable results, not much attention has been paid towards understanding of unsupervised
domain transfer from probabilistic point of view. Although
original CycleGAN assumes deterministic transfer, later
works identified the necessity of learning non-deterministic
many-to-many mappings to account for features that might
be present only in one of the considered domains. A
common assumption made in such setting, sometimes directly [e.g., 16], but often implicitly, is the existence of
latent variable that covers the shared semantics between the
domains of interest. Learning the transfer function can then
be decomposed to learning deterministic encoders to and
stochastic decoders from such latent space.
This view, however, does not take into account the distributional differences that may exist between the domains
being matched. Since probability mass is preserved trough
encoders and decoders, every mode in source domain covers the same share of the distribution as its representations in
latent space and the target domain do in their respective distributions. However, we do not necessarily want to match
modes that consist the same shares of data.
For example, consider the task of transferring between
handwritten digits [MNIST, 22], and Street View House
Numbers [SVHN, 28]. These datasets are independently
sampled but share semantics expressed in the digit classes,
styless (e.g., seven with or without a cross), etc which we

1844

