Deep Learning for Light Field Saliency Detection
Tiantian Wang, Yongri Piao, Xiao Li, Lihe Zhang∗, Huchuan Lu
Dalian University of Technology, China
tiantianwang.ice@gmail.com, yrpiao@dlut.edu.cn, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent research in 4D saliency detection is limited by
the deficiency of a large-scale 4D light field dataset. To
address this, we introduce a new dataset to assist the subsequent research in 4D light field saliency detection. To
the best of our knowledge, this is to date the largest light
field dataset in which the dataset provides 1465 all-focus
images with human-labeled ground truth masks and the corresponding focal stacks for every light field image. To verify the effectiveness of the light field data, we first introduce a fusion framework which includes two CNN streams
where the focal stacks and all-focus images serve as the
input. The focal stack stream utilizes a recurrent attention mechanism to adaptively learn to integrate every slice
in the focal stack, which benefits from the extracted features of the good slices. Then it is incorporated with the
output map generated by the all-focus stream to make the
saliency prediction. In addition, we introduce adversarial examples by adding noise intentionally into images to
help train the deep network, which can improve the robustness of the proposed network. The noise is designed
by users, which is imperceptible but can fool the CNNs to
make the wrong prediction. Extensive experiments show
the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed model on
the popular evaluation metrics. The proposed method performs favorably compared with the existing 2D, 3D and 4D
saliency detection methods on the proposed dataset and existing LFSD light field dataset. The code and results can
be found at https://github.com/OIPLab-DUT/
MoreICCV2019_Deeplightfield_Saliency.
over, to facilitate research in this field, all images we collected are shared in a ready-to-use manner.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection refers to locate and segment objects that grab human attention most, which has been a fundamental task in computer vision area for a long time.
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. All-focus images (a) and focal stacks (b-d) generated by
the Lytro Illum camera. Usually a focal stack is a collection of images (slices) and each slice indicates the different focus distance.
In every slice, there are some scene points in clear focus and the
other points are in blurred defocus.

The existing methods measure saliency based on the
2D [7, 18, 21, 22, 27, 32, 42, 43, 62, 63, 66, 72, 78], 3D [10,
13, 25, 33, 47, 55, 77] or 4D [38, 39, 67, 69] images. A
large proportion of works lie in the first category, while
only a few belong to the last two. Recently, the performance of saliency detection on 2D images has been dramatically improved, which derives from the rapid progress
of deep learning techniques. Usually RGB images serve
as the input to the deep networks and hierarchical features
are extracted to compute saliency from the local and global
perspectives. With the availability of commercial 3D sensors such as Microsoft Kinect [74], depth maps are incorporated into the deep networks on saliency detection. Dependent of RGB features, the additional depth information
can describe 3D geometric information and help human in
the understanding of contextual information of salient objects. Recently, the light field are becoming popular for the
light field cameras can record multiple viewpoints in one
single exposure. The handheld light field camera Lytro Illum [46] features a microlens array, which is composed
of thousands of tiny lenses and designed to measure light
from multiple directions. These information can synthesize
different kinds of 2D images, including focal stacks, depth
maps and all-focus images through rendering [34] and postshot refocusing techniques [46]. See Figure 1 for example,
every slice in the focal stack shows the varying focus depth
levels. Focal stacks are a rich source of 3D shape information and have been used extensively for shape-from-focus

8838

