Jointly Aligning Millions of Images with
Deep Penalised Reconstruction Congealing
Roberto Annunziata
Onfido, UK

Christos Sagonas
Onfido, UK

Jacques Cali∗
Blue Prism

roberto.annunziata@onfido.com

christos.sagonas@onfido.com

jqscali@gmail.com

Abstract
Extrapolating fine-grained pixel-level correspondences
in a fully unsupervised manner from a large set of misaligned images can benefit several computer vision and
graphics problems, e.g. co-segmentation, super-resolution,
image edit propagation, structure-from-motion, and 3D reconstruction. Several joint image alignment and congealing
techniques have been proposed to tackle this problem, but
robustness to initialisation, ability to scale to large datasets,
and alignment accuracy seem to hamper their wide applicability. To overcome these limitations, we propose an unsupervised joint alignment method leveraging a densely fused
spatial transformer network to estimate the warping parameters for each image and a low-capacity auto-encoder
whose reconstruction error is used as an auxiliary measure
of joint alignment. Experimental results on digits from multiple versions of MNIST (i.e., original, perturbed, affNIST
and infiMNIST) and faces from LFW, show that our approach is capable of aligning millions of images with high
accuracy and robustness to different levels and types of perturbation. Moreover, qualitative and quantitative results
suggest that the proposed method outperforms state-of-theart approaches both in terms of alignment quality and robustness to initialisation.

1. Introduction
Establishing pixel-level correspondences between pair
of images including instances of the same object category
can benefit several important applications, such as motion
estimation [33], medical imaging [1, 19], object recognition [13] and 3D reconstruction [20]. As a result, this has
become a fundamental problem in computer vision [12, 14].
Typically, pixel-level correspondences between two images
are computed by extracting sparse local feature descriptors
(e.g., SIFT [29], HOG [11], SURF [5], SCIRD [2, 4]),
∗ Contribution to this research project was entirely made while this coauthor was at Onfido.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Unsupervised joint alignment (a.k.a. congealing) results
obtained by the proposed method on digit ‘2’ from affNIST [43]
and Jennifer Capriati from LFW [18]. (a) input images
before alignment (initialisation in red), (b) output images aligned
with the proposed method.

then matching the extracted descriptors, and finally pruning mismatches based on geometric constraints. Although
this approach has been applied successfully in different domains, its performance can degrade significantly due to factors such as intra-class variations, non-rigid deformations,
partial occlusions, illumination, image blur, and visual clutter. Recently, the representational power of Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) has been leveraged to improve
the overall process. In particular, several CNN-based methods for learning powerful feature descriptors have been introduced [40, 47, 31]. More recently, end-to-end trainable
CNNs for learning image descriptors as well as estimating
the geometric transformation between the two images have
been introduced in [36, 21]. The majority of previously pro-

81

