Fully Convolutional Geometric Features
Christopher Choy∗
Stanford University

Jaesik Park∗
POSTECH

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract
Extracting geometric features from 3D scans or point
clouds is the first step in applications such as registration, reconstruction, and tracking. State-of-the-art methods require computing low-level features as input or extracting patch-based features with limited receptive field.
In this work, we present fully-convolutional geometric features, computed in a single pass by a 3D fully-convolutional
network. We also present new metric learning losses that
dramatically improve performance. Fully-convolutional geometric features are compact, capture broad spatial context, and scale to large scenes. We experimentally validate
our approach on both indoor and outdoor datasets. Fullyconvolutional geometric features achieve state-of-the-art
accuracy without requiring prepossessing, are compact (32
dimensions), and are 290 times faster than the most accurate prior method.

1. Introduction
Finding geometric correspondences is a key step in
many 3D registration, tracking, and scene flow estimation
pipelines. A substantial body of work has thus focused on
designing 3D features that can capture discriminative local
geometry for correspondence establishment [16, 29, 26, 24,
23, 36, 17, 7, 6].
Learning-based 3D features have recently gained popularity due to their robustness and superior performance. Existing learning-based features rely on low-level geometric
characteristics as input: e.g., angular deviation [7, 6, 26, 29,
23], point distributions [17, 16, 21], or volumetric distance
functions [36, 11]. Then, a 3D patch is extracted at each
point of interest and mapped to a low-dimensional feature
space through a multi-layer perceptron or 3D convolutions.
This process is computationally expensive and features are
extracted only at downsampled interest points, thus lowering the spatial resolution for subsequent registration steps.
Such patch-based processing is inefficient because intermediate network activations are not reused across adjacent patches. If we use a 2D analogy, extracting 3D
∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1: Feature-match recall [6, 7] and speed in log scale
on the 3DMatch benchmark [36]. Our approach is the most
accurate and the fastest. The gray region shows the Pareto
frontier of the prior methods.

patches for feature learning is akin to extracting small 2D
patches around each pixel for semantic segmentation. Furthermore, current pipelines limit spatial context by focusing
on patches with restricted spatial extent.
Instead, we could apply 3D convolutions on the entire input without cropping out sections by simply transforming convolutions to fully-convolutional counterparts.
Similarly, we could convert all fully-connected layers in a
multi-layer perceptron into a series of convolutional layers with kernel size 1 × 1 × 1. This is known as fullyconvolutional processing and has been widely used in image analysis [20, 35, 5, 3]. Fully-convolutional networks
can capture broad context, and are faster and more memoryefficient than non-fully-convolutional counterparts since intermediate activations are reused across overlapping regions.
Despite these advantages, fully-convolutional networks
have not been widely used for 3D geometric feature extraction due to the characteristics of 3D data. A standard input
representation for convolutional networks on 3D data is a
dense 4D tensor: three spatial dimensions and one feature
dimension. This representation has a massive memory foot18958

