Domain Intersection and Domain Difference
Sagie Benaim1 , Michael Khaitov1 , Tomer Galanti1 , and Lior Wolf1,2
1

School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We present a method for recovering the shared content
between two visual domains as well as the content that is
unique to each domain. This allows us to map from one
domain to the other, in a way in which the content that is
specific for the first domain is removed and the content that
is specific for the second is imported from any image in the
second domain. In addition, our method enables generation of images from the intersection of the two domains as
well as their union, despite having no such samples during
training. The method is shown analytically to contain all the
sufficient and necessary constraints. It also outperforms the
literature methods in an extensive set of experiments.

1. Introduction
In unsupervised mapping between visual domains, the
algorithm receives two unmatched sets of samples: one
from domain A and one from domain B. It then learns a
mapping function that generates, for each sample a in domain A, a matching sample in B.
Without a supervision in the form of pairs of matched
samples, the problem, like other unsupervised tasks, can be
ambiguous [5]. However, it is natural to expect that a pair of
samples (a, b), one from each domain, would be considered
matching, if there is a significant amount of shared content
between a and b. The more content is shared, the stronger
the link between the two samples.
Therefore, one can consider the intersection of two visual domains A and B as a domain that contains all of
the information that is common to the two domains. This
shared domain needs not be visual, and it can contain information that is encoded (latent information).
Turning our attention to the information that complements the shared information, each domain also has a separate, unshared part, which is domain-specific in the context
of the two domains.
When mapping a sample a from domain A to B, we can,
therefore, consider three types of information. The part of
a that is in the shared domain needs to remain fixed under

the transformation. The part of a that is specific to domain
A is discarded. Lastly, the part of the generated sample in
B that is specific to this domain is arbitrary.
While many unsupervised domain mapping methods do
not specify the component that is specific to the second domain, some of the recent methods rely on a sample in B
to donate this information. Such methods are called guided
image to image translation methods. The literature has two
types of such methods: those that borrow the style from the
image in B, assuming that the domain specific information
is a type of visual style [10, 14], and a recent method [18]
which assumes that domain A is a subset of domain B,
which does not contain any information that is not present
in B. In both cases, these assumptions seem too strong.
Our method is able to deal with the two separate domains
in a symmetric way, without assuming that domain B can
contribute only a different style and without assuming that
A is a degenerate subset of B. The method employs a set
of loss terms that lead, as our analysis shows, to a disentanglement between the three types of information that exist in
the two domains.
As a result, our method enables a level of control that is
unprecedented in mapping image across domains. It allows
us to take the specific part that belongs to domain A from
one image, the specific part of domain B from another image, and the shared part from either image or from a third
image. In addition, each of the three parts can be interpolated between different samples, and the domain specific
parts can be eliminated altogether.

1.1. Previous Work
In image to image translation, the algorithm is provided
with two independent datasets from two different domains.
The goal is to learn a transformation of samples from the
first domain to samples from the second domain. These
transformations are often implemented by a deep neural network that has an encoder-decoder architecture.
The early solutions to this problem assumed the existence of an invertible mapping y from the first domain to the
second domain. This mapping takes a sample a in domain
A and maps it to an analog sample in domain B. The cir-

3445

