Employing Deep Part-Object Relationships for Salient Object Detection
Yi Liu1
Qiang Zhang1∗
Dingwen Zhang1
Jungong Han2∗
1
School of Mechano-Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China
2
WMG, University of Warwick, U.K.
yLiu 89@stu.xidian.edu.cn, qzhang@xidian.edu.cn
zhangdingwen2006yyy@gmail.com, jungonghan77@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) based
methods have been successful in detecting salient objects,
their underlying mechanism that decides the salient intensity of each image part separately cannot avoid inconsistency
of parts within the same salient object. This would ultimately result in an incomplete shape of the detected salient object. To solve this problem, we dig into part-object relationships and take the unprecedented attempt to employ these
relationships endowed by the Capsule Network (CapsNet)
for salient object detection. The entire salient object detection system is built directly on a Two-Stream Part-Object
Assignment Network (TSPOANet) consisting of three algorithmic steps. In the first step, the learned deep feature maps of the input image are transformed to a group of primary
capsules. In the second step, we feed the primary capsules
into two identical streams, within each of which low-level
capsules (parts) will be assigned to their familiar high-level
capsules (object) via a locally connected routing. In the final step, the two streams are integrated in the form of a fully
connected layer, where the relevant parts can be clustered
together to form a complete salient object. Experimental
results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed salient
object detection network over the state-of-the-art methods.

Image

GT

Amulet

DLS

ELE

MDF

OUR

Figure 1. Some problems arose in existing CNNs based salient object detection methods. Inconsistent saliency values or even some
“holes” (marked by the red boxes) appear within the salient object.

45] are mostly based on hand-crafted features, which are
trivial for further improvements. The development of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has successfully broken the limits of hand-crafted features by learning deep features and thus substantial improvements have been made in
the last three years [25, 29, 33, 47].
Existing CNNs based salient object detection methods
attempt to learn rich deep features at multiple scales such
as the contrast information of the image parts, which in turn
infer the saliency of each part in the image. However, this
mechanism does not take into account the relationships between the object parts and the complete salient object, thus
giving rise to several problems. For example, as shown in
Fig. 1, inconsistent saliency values are assigned to different parts within the salient object, thus resulting in a nonuniform segmentation of the salient object. In the worse
scenario, as highlighted by the red boxes in Fig. 1, some
un-prominent parts within the salient object are mistakenly
labeled as non-salient such that a few “holes” appear on the
salient object.
As can be observed from Fig. 2, a salient object is usually composed of several associated parts. For instance, the
flower in the second row of Fig. 2 consists of two parts
including stamens and petals. In turn, the two parts (stamens and petals) can make up an object (flower), which is
based on the fact that stamens and petals share the familiar
properties of the flower. This reveals that the relationships
do exist between parts and objects. In a full image, based
on the above discussions, those parts familiar to an object
will be clustered together to make a complete object. In-

1. Introduction
Salient object detection aims to grab the most attractive
object and segment it out from the backgrounds in an image.
Serving as a preprocessing step, it has been widely applied
for a variety of computer vision applications, including image segmentation [13, 34], image fusion [14], object recognition [36, 41], image and video compression [11, 12, 18],
image retrieval [5, 10], etc.
Traditional salient object detection methods [3,26,27,39,
∗ Equally corresponding authors.

1232

