Robust Motion Segmentation From Pairwise Matches
Federica Arrigoni and Tomas Pajdla
CIIRC – Czech Technical University in Prague
Federica.Arrigoni@cvut.cz, pajdla@cvut.cz

Abstract
In this paper we consider the problem of motion segmentation, where only pairwise correspondences are assumed as
input without prior knowledge about tracks. The problem is
formulated as a two-step process. First, motion segmentation is performed on image pairs independently. Secondly,
we combine independent pairwise segmentation results in a
robust way into the final globally consistent segmentation.
Our approach is inspired by the success of averaging methods. We demonstrate in simulated as well as in real experiments that our method is very effective in reducing the
errors in the pairwise motion segmentation and can cope
with large number of mismatches.

Figure 1: Segmentation results are reported on four images for the
technique in [58] combined with [30] (top) and our method (middle). Image points are drawn in different colours: green (correctly
classified); red (misclassified); blue (unknown). Ground-truth segmentation is also reported (bottom) where different colors encode
the membership to different motions.

1. Introduction
Motion segmentation is an essential task in many applications in Computer Vision and Robotics, such as surveillance [18], action recognition [56] and scene understanding [12]. The classic way to state the problem is the following: given a set of feature points that are tracked through
a sequence of images, the goal is to cluster those trajectories according to the different motions they belong to. It
is assumed that the scene contains multiple objects that are
moving rigidly and independently in 3-space. There is a
plenty of available techniques to accomplish such task, as
detailed in Sec. 1.1. Among them, the methods developed
in [17, 21, 58] achieve a very low misclassification error
on the Hopkins155 benchmark [47], which is a well established dataset to test the performance of motion segmentation. However, the tracks available in the dataset are not
realistic at all since they were filtered with the aid of manual
operations. In this paper we take motion segmentation one
step further by considering more difficult/realistic assumptions, namely we assume that pairwise matches (e.g. those
computed from SIFT keypoints [26]) are available only, and
we address the task of classifying image points (instead of
tracks), as shown in Fig. 1. This problem has not been considered before but it has great practical relevance since it
does not require to compute tracks in advance, which is a

challenging task in the presence of multiple moving objects.
More precisely, we formulate motion segmentation as a
two-step process:
1. segmentation of corresponding points is performed on
each image pair in isolation;
2. segmentation of image points is computed without relying on the feature locations, using only the classification of matching points derived in Step 1.
Our new formulation is detailed in Sec. 2. Regarding Step 2,
we develop a simple scheme that classifies each point based
on the frequencies of labels of that point in different image
pairs, which is reported in Sec. 3. The resulting method is a
general framework that can be combined with any algorithm
able to perform motion segmentation in two images.
The idea of combining results from individual image
pairs was also present in [24], where all the pairs were considered, and in [21, 58], where only pairs of consecutive
frames were used. These techniques, however, are different
from our approach since they do not completely perform
segmentation of image pairs but they rely on partial results
only (i.e. correlation of corresponding points). Such results
are used to build an affinity matrix that encodes the similarity between different tracks, to which spectral clustering

671

