SkyScapes – Fine-Grained Semantic Understanding of Aerial Scenes
Seyed Majid Azimi1
1

Corentin Henry1

Lars Sommer2

German Aerospace Center (DLR), Wessling, Germany

Arne Schumann2
2

Eleonora Vig1

Fraunhofer IOSB, Karlsruhe, Germany

https://www.dlr.de/eoc/en/desktopdefault.aspx/tabid-12760

Aerial image with overlaid annotation: dense (19 classes) and lane markings (12 classes); the dataset covers 5.7 km2 .

Abstract
Understanding the complex urban infrastructure with
centimeter-level accuracy is essential for many applications
from autonomous driving to mapping, infrastructure monitoring, and urban management. Aerial images provide
valuable information over a large area instantaneously;
nevertheless, no current dataset captures the complexity
of aerial scenes at the level of granularity required by
real-world applications. To address this, we introduce
SkyScapes, an aerial image dataset with highly-accurate,
fine-grained annotations for pixel-level semantic labeling.
SkyScapes provides annotations for 31 semantic categories
ranging from large structures, such as buildings, roads
and vegetation, to fine details, such as 12 (sub-)categories
of lane markings. We have defined two main tasks on
this dataset: dense semantic segmentation and multi-class
lane-marking prediction. We carry out extensive experiments to evaluate state-of-the-art segmentation methods
on SkyScapes. Existing methods struggle to deal with the
wide range of classes, object sizes, scales, and fine details
present. We therefore propose a novel multi-task model,
which incorporates semantic edge detection and is better
tuned for feature extraction from a wide range of scales.
This model achieves notable improvements over the baselines in region outlines and level of detail on both tasks.

1. Introduction
Automated methods for creating maps of today’s urban
and rural infrastructures with centimeter-level (cm-level)

accuracy are of great aid in handling their growing complexity. Applications of such accurate maps include urban management, city planning, and infrastructure monitoring/maintenance. Another prominent example is the creation of high definition (HD) maps for autonomous driving.
Applications here include the use of a general road network
for navigation and more advanced automation tasks in Advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS), such as lane departure warnings, which rely on precise information about
lane boundaries, sidewalks, etc. [37, 40, 33, 51, 31].
Currently, the data collection process to generate HD
maps is mainly carried out by so-called mobile mapping
systems, which comprise of a vehicle equipped with a broad
range of sensors (e.g., Radar, LiDAR, cameras) followed
by automated analysis of the collected data [17, 18, 5, 24].
The limited field-of-view and occlusions due to the oblique
sensor angle make this automated analysis complicated. In
addition, mapping large urban areas in this way requires
a lot of time and resources. An aerial perspective can
alleviate many of these problems and simultaneously allow for processing of much larger areas of cm-level georeferenced data in a short time. Existing aerial semantic
segmentation datasets, however, are limited in the range
of their annotations. They either focus on a few individual classes, such as roads or building footprints in the INRIA [30], Massachusetts [35], SpaceNet [43], or DeepGlobe [11] datasets, or they provide very coarse classes,
such as the GRSS DFC 2018 [1], or the ISPRS Vaihingen
and Potsdam datasets [20]. Other datasets are recorded at
sensor angles and at flight heights unsuitable for HD mapping [29, 15] or contain potentially inaccurate annotations

7393

