PointAE: Point Auto-encoder for 3D Statistical Shape and Texture Modelling
Hang Dai, Ling Shao
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
Abu Dhabi, UAE
hang.dai@inceptioniai.org, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
The outcome of standard statistical shape modelling is
a vector space representation of objects. Any convex combination of vectors of a set of object class examples generates a real and valid example. In this paper, we propose
a Point Auto-Encoder (PointAE) with skip-connection, attention block for 3D statistical shape modelling directly on
3D points. The proposed PointAE is able to refine the correspondence with a correspondence refinement block. The
data with refined correspondence can be fed to the PointAE
again and bootstrap the constructed statistical models. Instead of two separate models, PointAE can simultaneously
model the shape and texture variation. The extensive evaluation in three open-sourced datasets demonstrates that the
proposed method achieves better performance in representation ability of the shape variations.

1. Introduction
With prior knowledge and experience, people can easily
observe rich shape and texture variation for a certain type of
object, such as human faces, cats or chairs, in both 2D and
3D images. This ability helps us recognise the same person,
distinguish different kinds of creatures and sketch unseen
samples of the same object class. The process of capturing
this prior knowledge is mathematically interpreted as statistical modelling. One such outcome is a 3D morphable
model (3DMM), a vector space representation of objects,
that captures the variation of shape and texture. Any convex combination of vectors of a set of object class examples
generates a real and valid example in this vector space. Statistical shape modelling is extensively studied in a variety of
disciplines; for example computer vision, where researchers
focus on applications in medical imaging, biometrics and
the creative industries.
Statistical shape modelling aims to characterise the mean
shape, and the variances and covariances of different object
parts for various classes of object. Shape, as defined by
D.G. Kendall [26], is all the geometrical information that

remains when location, scale and rotational effects are filtered out from an object. In other words, those similarity
effects need to be filtered out by aligning a collection of
shape when doing shape analysis. A shape is described by
locating a number of points on the outline. These points
are defined as points of correspondence on each object that
matches between and within populations. Statistical shape
modelling is perhaps most commonly performed by Principal Component Analysis (PCA) over a set of meshes, which
finds the directions in the vector space that have maximum
variance, whilst being mutually orthogonal. However, PCA
filters out high frequency signals, thereby losing shape detail in shape reconstruction. To overcome this, we employ
point auto-encoder to extract latent representation of shapes
and reconstruct the shapes.
The latent representation is a distributed representation
that captures the coordinates along the main factors of variation in the data. This is similar to the way the projection
on principal components would capture the main factors of
variation in the data. Indeed, if there is one linear hidden
layer and the mean squared error criterion is used to train
the network, then the m hidden units learn to project the input in the span of the first m principal components of the
data. If the hidden layer is non-linear, the auto-encoder
behaves differently from PCA, with the ability to capture
multi-modal aspects of the input distribution.
We propose a deep method to model 3D shape. In particular, our approach features a novel Point Auto-Encoder
(PointAE) with skip-connection and attention block with
contributions in:
• Unlike the previous deep methods which requires
transferring the mesh into other geometric representations/features or remeshing the surface, 3D points can
be directly fed to the proposed pointAE for statistical
shape modelling.
• We propose a correspondence refinement block following PointAE to refine the correspondence. Then
we bootstrap the modelling process by feeding the data
with refined correspondence to PointAE. The ablation
study shows that this process enhanced the shape rep-

5410

