Bridging the Gap Between Detection and Tracking: A Unified Approach
Lianghua Huang1,2 Xin Zhao1,2∗ Kaiqi Huang1,2,3
1
CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
huanglianghua2017@ia.ac.cn, {xzhao, kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Object detection models have been a source of inspiration for many tracking-by-detection algorithms over the
past decade. Recent deep trackers borrow designs or
modules from the latest object detection methods, such as
bounding box regression, RPN and ROI pooling, and can
deliver impressive performance. In this paper, instead of
redesigning a new tracking-by-detection algorithm, we aim
to explore a general framework for building trackers directly upon almost any advanced object detector. To achieve
this, three key gaps must be bridged: (1) Object detectors
are class-specific, while trackers are class-agnostic. (2)
Object detectors do not differentiate intra-class instances,
while this is a critical capability of a tracker. (3) Temporal cues are important for stable long-term tracking while
they are not considered in still-image detectors. To address
the above issues, we first present a simple target-guidance
module for guiding the detector to locate target-relevant objects. Then a meta-learner is adopted for the detector to fast
learn and adapt a target-distractor classifier online. We
further introduce an anchored updating strategy to alleviate the problem of overfitting. The framework is instantiated on SSD [40] and FasterRCNN [15], the typical oneand two-stage detectors, respectively. Experiments on OTB,
UAV123 and NfS have verified our framework and show that
our trackers can benefit from deeper backbone networks, as
opposed to many recent trackers.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking refers to the task of sequentially
locating a specified moving object in a video, given only
its initial state. It is currently an active research area of
computer vision and significant progresses have been made
in recent years [57, 31, 30, 12]. However, the task is still
challenging due to several factors such as object interac∗ Corresponding author

tions, cluttered background, occlusions and target deformation [43, 24].
Accurate localization of specified objects in complex
scenes, as well as distinguishing different objects are crucial for tracking, which, at the same time, are extensively
studied in the area of object detection [15, 37, 39]. In
effect, object detection algorithms have been the inspiration of many popular trackers. For example, the correlation filters are previously applied in object detection
(e.g., UMACE [41] and ASEF [6]) and later improved and
adapted for tracking [5, 22, 23, 9, 8]. Similar examples include the bounding box regression [13, 49] used in MDNet [45, 26] and GOTURN [21], structured output SVM [4]
applied in Struck [17], region proposal networks [15] used
in SiamRPN [34, 59, 32] and the precise ROI pooling [25]
used in the ATOM tracker [7], to name a few. Detection
modules may either improve the trackers in terms of higher
localization precision [13, 25] and/or better discriminability
against occlusions and background clutters [4, 6, 15].
The goal of this work is not to redesign a new detectionbased tracker. Instead, we would like to explore a simple and universal framework for building trackers upon advanced deep detectors. Our motivations for such framework are three fold: 1) Detection algorithms are specialized
in precisely locating and differentiating objects in complex
scenes, which may lead to more accuracy and robust trackers. 2) Reusing detection models reduces duplicated works
in tracking, thus we can focus more on tracking-specific issues, such as target domain adaptation and temporal dependencies. 3) Such framework potentially enables multi-task
models, i.e. joint detection and tracking of visual objects,
which is close to the industry’s needs. However, developing
such a framework is not straightforward and several issues
must be addressed. First, object detection only works on
specific classes while a tracker is supposed to track arbitrary moving objects [30, 24]. Second, a detector cannot
differentiate intra-class instances, which is, however, a crucial ability of a robust tracker. Finally, temporal cues in
videos are important for stable tracking while they are not

3999

