CompenNet++: End-to-end Full Projector Compensation
Bingyao Huang
Temple University

Haibin Ling*
Stony Brook University

bingyao.huang@temple.edu

hling@cs.stonybrook.edu
Camera FOV

Abstract

a

b

c

e

f

Surface

Full projector compensation aims to modify a projector input image such that it can compensate for both geometric and photometric disturbance of the projection surface. Traditional methods usually solve the two parts separately, although they are known to correlate with each
other. In this paper, we propose the first end-to-end solution, named CompenNet++, to solve the two problems
jointly. Our work non-trivially extends CompenNet [15],
which was recently proposed for photometric compensation
with promising performance. First, we propose a novel geometric correction subnet, which is designed with a cascaded
coarse-to-fine structure to learn the sampling grid directly
from photometric sampling images. Second, by concatenating the geometric correction subset with CompenNet, CompenNet++ accomplishes full projector compensation and
is end-to-end trainable. Third, after training, we significantly simplify both geometric and photometric compensation parts, and hence largely improves the running time efficiency. Moreover, we construct the first setup-independent
full compensation benchmark to facilitate the study on this
topic. In our thorough experiments, our method shows clear
advantages over previous arts with promising compensation
quality and meanwhile being practically convenient.

1. Introduction
With the recent advance in projector technologies, projectors have been gaining increasing popularity with many
applications [1, 4, 8, 9, 11, 16, 24, 29, 35, 36, 39]. Existing
systems typically request the projection surface (screen) to
be planar, white and textureless, under reasonable environment illumination. These requests often create bottlenecks
for generalization of projector systems. Projector geometric correction [5, 24, 28, 29, 38] and photometric compensation [1, 3, 10, 15, 39], or full projector geometric correction
and photometric compensation1 [2, 4, 12, 30, 35, 36] aim to
address this issue by modifying a projector input image to
* Corresponding author.
1 In the rest of the text, we call it full compensation for conciseness.

Camera

Projector

d

Figure 1: Full projector geometric correction and photometric compensation: (a) system setup with nonplanar and
textured surface (b), (c) projection result without compensation, (d) fully compensated image by our method, (e)
camera-captured compensated projection result (i.e. (d) projected onto (b)), and (f) desired visual effect. Comparing (c)
and (e) we see clearly improved geometry, color and details.
compensate for the projection setup geometry and associated photometric environment. An example from our solution is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the compensated projection result (e) is clearly more visually pleasant than the
uncompensated one in (c).
A typical full compensation system consists of a
projector-camera (pro-cam) pair and a nonplanar textured
projection surface placed at a fixed distance and orientation
(Fig. 1(a)). Most existing methods work in two separate
steps: (1) geometric surface modeling, e.g., via a sequence
of structured light (SL) patterns [8, 22], and (2) color compensation on top of the geometrically corrected projection.
Despite relatively easy to implement, this two-step pipeline
has two major issues. First, geometric mapping/correction
is usually performed offline and assumed independent of
photometric compensation. This step typically requests certain patterns (e.g. SL grid) that may be disturbed by surface appearance (e.g. reflection, see Fig. 6). Second, due
to the extremely complex photometric process involved in
pro-cam systems, it is hard for traditional photometric compensation solutions to faithfully accomplish their task.
17165

