Fine-Grained Action Retrieval Through Multiple Parts-of-Speech Embeddings
Michael Wray
University of Bristol

Diane Larlus
Naver Labs Europe

Gabriela Csurka
Naver Labs Europe

Dima Damen
University of Bristol

Abstract
We address the problem of cross-modal fine-grained action retrieval between text and video. Cross-modal retrieval
is commonly achieved through learning a shared embedding space, that can indifferently embed modalities. In
this paper, we propose to enrich the embedding by disentangling parts-of-speech (PoS) in the accompanying captions. We build a separate multi-modal embedding space
for each PoS tag. The outputs of multiple PoS embeddings are then used as input to an integrated multi-modal
space, where we perform action retrieval. All embeddings
are trained jointly through a combination of PoS-aware and
PoS-agnostic losses. Our proposal enables learning specialised embedding spaces that offer multiple views of the
same embedded entities.
We report the first retrieval results on fine-grained actions for the large-scale EPIC dataset, in a generalised
zero-shot setting. Results show the advantage of our approach for both video-to-text and text-to-video action retrieval. We also demonstrate the benefit of disentangling
the PoS for the generic task of cross-modal video retrieval
on the MSR-VTT dataset.

1. Introduction
With the onset of the digital age, millions of hours of
video are being recorded and searching this data is becoming a monumental task. It is even more tedious when searching shifts from video-level labels, such as ‘dancing’ or ‘skiing’, to short action segments like ‘cracking eggs’ or ‘tightening a screw’. In this paper, we focus on the latter and
refer to them as fine-grained actions. We thus explore the
task of fine-grained action retrieval where both queries and
retrieved results can be either a video sequence, or a textual
caption describing the fine-grained action. Such free-form
action descriptions allow for a more subtle characterisation
of actions but require going beyond training a classifier on
a predefined set of action labels [20, 30].
As is common in cross-modal search tasks [26, 36], we
learn a shared embedding space onto which we project both
videos and captions. By nature, fine-grained actions can

Figure 1. We target fine-grained action retrieval. Action captions
are broken using part-of-speech (PoS) parsing. We create separate
embedding spaces for the relevant PoS (e.g. Noun or Verb) and
then combine these embeddings into a shared embedding space
for action retrieval (best viewed in colour).

be described by an actor, an act and the list of objects involved in the interaction. We thus propose to learn a separate embedding for each part-of-speech (PoS), such as for
instance verbs, nouns or adjectives. This is illustrated in
Fig. 1 for two PoS (verbs and nouns). When embedding
verbs solely, relevant entities are those that share the same
verb/act regardless of the nouns/objects used. Conversely,
for a PoS embedding focusing on nouns, different actions
performed on the same object are considered relevant entities. This enables a PoS-aware embedding, specialised for
retrieving a variety of relevant entities, given that PoS. The
outputs from the multiple PoS embedding spaces are then
combined within an encoding module that produces the final action embedding. We train our approach end-to-end,
jointly optimising the multiple PoS embeddings and the final fine-grained action embedding.
This approach has a number of advantages over training
a single embedding space as is standardly done [7, 8, 15,
22, 24]. Firstly, this process builds different embeddings
that can be seen as different views of the data, which contribute to the final goal in a collaborative manner. Secondly,
it allows to inject, in a principled way, additional information but without requiring additional annotation, as parsing
a caption for PoS is done automatically. Finally, when considering a single PoS at a time, for instance verbs, the cor-

450

