Scaling and Benchmarking Self-Supervised Visual Representation Learning
Priya Goyal

Dhruv Mahajan
Abhinav Gupta∗
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Self-supervised learning aims to learn representations
from the data itself without explicit manual supervision.
Existing efforts ignore a crucial aspect of self-supervised
learning - the ability to scale to large amount of data because self-supervision requires no manual labels. In this
work, we revisit this principle and scale two popular selfsupervised approaches to 100 million images. We show that
by scaling on various axes (including data size and problem
‘hardness’), one can largely match or even exceed the performance of supervised pre-training on a variety of tasks
such as object detection, surface normal estimation (3D)
and visual navigation using reinforcement learning. Scaling these methods also provides many interesting insights
into the limitations of current self-supervised techniques
and evaluations. We conclude that current self-supervised
methods are not ‘hard’ enough to take full advantage of
large scale data and do not seem to learn effective high
level semantic representations. We also introduce an extensive benchmark across 9 different datasets and tasks. We
believe that such a benchmark along with comparable evaluation settings is necessary to make meaningful progress.
Code is at: https://github.com/facebookresearch/
fair_self_supervision_benchmark.

1. Introduction
Computer vision has been revolutionized by high capacity Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) [39]
and large-scale labeled data (e.g., ImageNet [10]). Recently [42, 64], weakly-supervised training on hundreds of
millions of images and thousands of labels has achieved
state-of-the-art results on various benchmarks. Interestingly, even at that scale, performance increases only loglinearly with the amount of labeled data. Thus, sadly, what
has worked for computer vision in the last five years has
now become a bottleneck: the size, quality, and availability
of supervised data.
One alternative to overcome this bottleneck is to use
the self-supervised learning paradigm. In discriminative
self-supervised learning, which is the main focus of this
∗ Equal contribution

Ishan Misra∗

work, a model is trained on an auxiliary or ‘pretext’ task
for which ground-truth is available for free. In most cases,
the pretext task involves predicting some hidden portion of
the data (for example, predicting color for gray-scale images [11, 37, 74]). Every year, with the introduction of new
pretext tasks, the performance of self-supervised methods
keeps coming closer to that of ImageNet supervised pretraining. The hope around self-supervised learning outperforming supervised learning has been so strong that a researcher has even bet gelato [1].
Yet, even after multiple years, this hope remains unfulfilled. Why is that? In attempting to come up with clever
pretext tasks, we have forgotten a crucial tenet of selfsupervised learning: scalability. Since no manual labels
are required, one can easily scale training from a million to
billions of images. However, it is still unclear what happens
when we scale up self-supervised learning beyond the ImageNet scale to 100M images or more. Do we still see performance improvements? Do we learn something insightful
about self-supervision? Do we surpass the ImageNet supervised performance?
In this paper, we explore scalability which is a core
tenet of self-supervised learning. Concretely, we scale two
popular self-supervised approaches (Jigsaw [48] and Colorization [74]) along three axes:
1. Scaling pre-training data: We first scale up both methods to 100× more data (YFCC-100M [65]). We observe
that low capacity models like AlexNet [35] do not show
much improvement with more data. This motivates our
second axis of scaling.
2. Scaling model capacity: We scale up to a higher capacity model, specifically ResNet-50 [28], that shows much
larger improvements as the data size increases. While
recent approaches [14, 33, 72] used models like ResNet50 or 101, we explore the relationship between model
capacity and data size which we believe is crucial for
future efforts in self-supervised learning.
3. Scaling problem complexity: Finally, we observe that
to take full advantage of large scale data and higher capacity models, we need ‘harder’ pretext tasks. Specifically, we scale the ‘hardness’ (problem complexity) and
observe that higher capacity models show a larger improvement on ‘harder’ tasks.

6391

