Bridging the Domain Gap for Ground-to-Aerial Image Matching
Krishna Regmi and Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
krishna.regmi7@gmail.com, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
The visual entities in cross-view (e.g. ground and aerial)
images exhibit drastic domain changes due to the differences in viewpoints each set of images is captured from.
Existing state-of-the-art methods address the problem by
learning view-invariant images descriptors. We propose a
novel method for solving this task by exploiting the generative powers of conditional GANs to synthesize an aerial
representation of a ground-level panorama query and use it
to minimize the domain gap between the two views. The
synthesized image being from the same view as the reference (target) image, helps the network to preserve important cues in aerial images following our Joint Feature
Learning approach. We fuse the complementary features
from a synthesized aerial image with the original groundlevel panorama features to obtain a robust query representation. In addition, we employ multi-scale feature aggregation in order to preserve image representations at different scales useful for solving this complex task. Experimental results show that our proposed approach performs
significantly better than the state-of-the-art methods on the
challenging CVUSA dataset in terms of top-1 and top-1%
retrieval accuracies. Furthermore, we evaluate the generalization of the proposed method for urban landscapes
on our newly collected cross-view localization dataset with
geo-reference information.

1. Introduction
Estimating the geo-location of an image has been tackled
as an image-matching task, where the query image is compared against a database of reference images with known
locations. Traditionally, the matching has been conducted
between images taken from the same view, primarily streetview [14, 34, 43], which have a high degree of visual similarity in terms of scene contents. Since these ground level
reference images are typically concentrated around urban
areas with more human accessibility, the applicability of the
method is limited to those regions. With the availability of
aerial images from Google maps, Bing maps, etc. that cover

Ground Panorama (Ig) + Edgemap

Synthesized Aerial (Ia’) +
Segmentation map (Sg’)

Generator

fg

Ig

fa’

Ia’

FC

fg*

feature matching

weight sharing

Ia

⊕

fa

FC

fa*

Figure 1: The ground panorama query and its edgemap are inputs
to the Generator (X-Fork [31]) network to synthesize aerial image
Ia′ and its segmentation map (shown in upper panel). We then
jointly learn the feature representations for image triads (Ig , Ia′
and Ia ). The features fg for Ig and fa′ for Ia′ are fused, followed
by fully-connected operation to obtain a robust query representation fg∗ and is matched with the aerial feature representation fa∗
(shown in lower panel).

the earth surface densely, researchers have lately explored
the prospect of cross-view image matching [18, 24, 40],
where the query ground image is matched against aerial images. This comes with additional challenges due to variation in viewpoints between the ground and aerial images,
which capture the same scene differently in two views. This
motivates us to explore transforming the query street-view
image into aerial view, so that the transformed image has
scene representations similar to the images it is matched
against.
The recent success of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [12] in synthesizing realistic images from randomly sampled noise vectors [29] or conditional variables
such as text [30, 46], images [19, 31], labels [27], etc. has
inspired us to frame the problem as viewpoint translation
followed by feature matching. Moreover, GANs have been
used for domain transfer problems as in [20, 47] to learn the
mapping between different domain representations. Recent
cross-view synthesis works by [31, 32, 9, 48] are successful

470

