Hyperpixel Flow: Semantic Correspondence with Multi-layer Neural Features
Juhong Min1,2
1

Jongmin Lee1,2

POSTECH

2

Jean Ponce3,4

NPRC∗

3

Minsu Cho1,2
4

Inria

DI ENS†

http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/HPF/

Abstract
Establishing visual correspondences under large intraclass variations requires analyzing images at different levels, from features linked to semantics and context to local
patterns, while being invariant to instance-specific details.
To tackle these challenges, we represent images by “hyperpixels” that leverage a small number of relevant features
selected among early to late layers of a convolutional neural network. Taking advantage of the condensed features of
hyperpixels, we develop an effective real-time matching algorithm based on Hough geometric voting. The proposed
method, hyperpixel flow, sets a new state of the art on three
standard benchmarks as well as a new dataset, SPair-71k,
which contains a significantly larger number of image pairs
than existing datasets, with more accurate and richer annotations for in-depth analysis.

1. Introduction
Establishing visual correspondences under large intraclass variations, i.e., matching scenes depicting different
instances of the same object categories, remains a challenging problem in computer vision. It requires analyzing
scenes at different levels, from features linked to semantics
and context to local image patterns, while being invariant
to irrelevant instance-specific details. Recent methods have
addressed this problem using deep convolutional features.
Many of them [5, 16, 24, 42] formulate this task as local region matching and learn to assign a local region in an image
to a correct match in another image. Others [23, 41, 42, 45]
cast it as image alignment and learn to regress the parameters of global geometric transformation, e.g., using an affine
or thin plate spline model [8]. These methods, however,
mainly perform the prediction based on the output of the
last convolutional layer, and fail to fully exploit the different
levels of semantic features available to resolve the severe
∗ The Neural Processing Research Center, Seoul, Korea
† Département d’informatique de l’ENS, ENS, CNRS, PSL University,
Paris, France

Multi-scale receptive fields
Features of all intermediate conv layers at the position

Feature layer selection

Hyperpixel

Figure 1: Hyperpixel flow. Top: The hyperpixel is a multilayer pixel representation created with selected levels of
features optimized for semantic correspondence. It provides
multi-scale features, resolving local ambiguities. Bottom:
The proposed method, hyperpixel flow, establishes dense
correspondences in real time using hyperpixels.
ambiguities in matching linked with intra-class variations.
We propose a novel dense matching method, dubbed hyperpixel flow (Figure 1). Inspired by the hypercolumns [18]
used in object segmentation and detection, we represent images by “hyperpixels” that leverage different levels of features among early to late layers of a convolutional neural
network and disambiguate parts of images in multiple visual aspects. The corresponding feature layers for hyperpixels are selected by a simple yet effective search process
which requires only a small validation set of supervised image pairs. We show that the resultant hyperpixels provide
both fine-grained and context-aware features suited for semantic correspondence and that only a few layers are sufficient and even better for the purpose, thus making hyperpixels an effective representation for light-weight computation.
To obtain a geometrically consistent flow of hyperpixels,
we present a real-time dense matching algorithm, regularized Hough matching (RHM), building on a recent region
matching method using geometric voting [4]. Furthermore,
13395

