Detecting Photoshopped Faces by Scripting Photoshop
Sheng-Yu Wang1

Oliver Wang2

Andrew Owens1

UC Berkeley1

(a) Manipulated photo

Richard Zhang2

Alexei A. Efros1

Adobe Research2

(b) Detected manipulations

(c) Suggested “undo”

(d) Original photo

Figure 1: Given an input face (a), our tool can detect that the face has been warped with the Face-Aware Liquify tool from Photoshop,
predict where the face has been warped (b), and attempt to “undo” the warp (c) and recover the original image (d).

Abstract
Most malicious photo manipulations are created using standard image editing tools, such as Adobe R
Photoshop R . We present a method for detecting one very
popular Photoshop manipulation – image warping applied
to human faces – using a model trained entirely using fake
images that were automatically generated by scripting Photoshop itself. We show that our model outperforms humans
at the task of recognizing manipulated images, can predict the specific location of edits, and in some cases can
be used to “undo” a manipulation to reconstruct the original, unedited image. We demonstrate that the system can be
successfully applied to real, artist-created image manipulations.

1. Introduction
In an era when digitally edited visual content is ubiquitous, the public is justifiably eager to know whether
the images they see on TV, in glossy magazines, and on
the Internet are, in fact, real. While the popular press
∗ The code and instructions can be found in our github repository
(https://peterwang512.github.io/FALdetector).

has mostly focused on “DeepFakes” and other GAN-based
methods that may one day be able to convincingly simulate
a real person’s appearance, movements, and facial expressions [32, 10, 7, 16], for now, such methods are prone to
degeneracies and exhibit visible artifacts [22]. Rather, it is
the more subtle image manipulations, performed with classic image processing techniques, typically in Adobe Photoshop, that have been the largest contributors to the proliferation of manipulated visual content [13]. While such editing
operations have helped enable creative expression, if done
without the viewer’s knowledge, they can have serious negative implications, ranging from body image issues set by
unrealistic standards, to the consequences of “fake news” in
politics.
In this work, we focus on one specific type of Photoshop manipulation – image warping applied to faces. This
is an extremely common task used for “beautification” and
expression editing. Face warping is an interesting problem
as it is a domain that is surprisingly hard for people to detect, but it is commonly used and has wide reaching implications. We show in a user study that humans have only
53.5% accuracy in identifying such edits (chance is 50%).
We propose a lens through which these subtle edits become
110072

