MMAct: A Large-Scale Dataset for Cross Modal
Human Action Understanding
Quan Kong1

Ziming Wu2∗ Ziwei Deng1 Martin Klinkigt1 Bin Tong1,3† Tomokazu Murakami1
1
Hitachi, Ltd. R&D Group, Japan
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 Alibaba Group, China

{quan.kong.xz, ziwei.deng.qq, martin.klinkigt.ut, tomokazu.murakami.xr}@hitachi.com
zwual@connect.ust.hk, tongbin.tb@alibaba.com

Abstract
view1

Unlike vision modalities, body-worn sensors or passive
sensing can avoid the failure of action understanding in
vision related challenges, e.g. occlusion and appearance
variation. However, a standard large-scale dataset does not
exist, in which different types of modalities across vision
and sensors are integrated. To address the disadvantage
of vision-based modalities and push towards multi/cross
modal action understanding, this paper introduces a new
large-scale dataset recorded from 20 distinct subjects with
seven different types of modalities: RGB videos, keypoints,
acceleration, gyroscope, orientation, Wi-Fi and pressure
signal. The dataset consists of more than 36k video clips for
37 action classes covering a wide range of daily life activities such as desktop-related and check-in-based ones in four
different distinct scenarios. On the basis of our dataset, we
propose a novel multi modality distillation model with attention mechanism to realize an adaptive knowledge transfer from sensor-based modalities to vision-based modalities. The proposed model significantly improves performance of action recognition compared to models trained
with only RGB information. The experimental results confirm the effectiveness of our model on cross-subject, -view,
-scene and -session evaluation criteria. We believe that this
new large-scale multimodal dataset will contribute the community of multimodal based action understanding.

1. Introduction
Human action understanding is an important fundamental technology for supporting several real world applications
such as surveillance system, health care services and factory
efficiency services. In recent years, vision-based models
dominate the community of action understanding due to the
∗ Work is done during internship at Hitachi.
† Work is done at Hitachi. Current at Alibaba.

carry

carry heavy

check time

pocket out

close

set down

enter

sit down

exit

fall

jump

talk on phone

pull

pick up

open

use phone

view2

view3

view4

Free space

Occlusion

Entrance

Desk work

Figure 1. The illustration of our dataset. Each column shows actions under a scenario. Each row denotes the action under one of
four camera views.

advance of deep learning technologies [39, 27, 34]. Meanwhile, utilizing of body-worn inertial sensors, e.g. accelerator, gyroscope and orientation, to capture human motions is
another typical way of realizing human action recognition
[28, 22, 7]. It is well known that vision-based and sensorbased information in action recognition is complementary.
To go beyond vision-only modalities which can not address
vision related challenges, e.g. occlusions and appearance
variation, it is considerable to leverage both vision-based
and sensor-based modalities to improve performance of action understanding in multimodal [26, 10, 20] and crossmodal [38, 3, 19] manners.
However, in the community of action understanding, a
standard large-scale benchmark does not exist, in which
both vision-based and sensor-based modalities are aggregated and a wide range of activities are provided. The
current multimodal datasets for action understanding have
following four limitations. First, there is the limited scale
of vision-based and sensor-based modalities. There are
some but limited number of large-scale multimodal action
datasets [25, 17] focusing on 3D human action recognition
or detection. However, only three to four vision related

8658

