Learning to Paint With Model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning
Zhewei Huang1,2
Wen Heng1
Shuchang Zhou1
1
Megvii Inc 2 Peking University
{huangzhewei, hengwen, zsc}@megvii.com

Abstract
We show how to teach machines to paint like human
painters, who can use a small number of strokes to create fantastic paintings. By employing a neural renderer
in model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), our
agents learn to determine the position and color of each
stroke and make long-term plans to decompose texturerich images into strokes. Experiments demonstrate that
excellent visual effects can be achieved using hundreds of
strokes. The training process does not require the experience of human painters or stroke tracking data. The
code is available at https://github.com/hzwer/
ICCV2019-LearningToPaint.

1. Introduction
Painting, being an important form of visual art, symbolizes human wisdom and creativity. In recent centuries,
artists have used a diverse array of tools to create their
masterpieces. But it’s hard for people to master this skill
without spending a large amount of time in proper training.
Therefore, teaching machines to paint is a challenging task
and helps to shed light on the mystery of painting. Furthermore, the study of this topic can help us build painting
assistant tools.
We train an artificial intelligence painting agent that can
paint strokes on a canvas in sequence to generate a painting
that resembles a given image. Neural networks are used to
produce parameters that control the position, shape, color,
and transparency of strokes. Previous works have studied teaching machines to learn painting-related skills, such
as sketching [7, 3, 29], doodling [35] and writing characters [34]. In contrast, we aim to teach machines to handle
more complex tasks, such as painting portraits of humans
and natural scenes in the real world, which have rich textures and complex structural compositions.
We address three challenges for training an agent to paint
real-world images. First, painting like humans requires an
agent to have the ability to decompose a given target image into an ordered sequence of strokes. The agent needs to

Figure 1: The painting process. The first column shows
the target images. Our agent tends to draw in a coarse-tofine manner.
parse the target image visually, understand the current status of the canvas, and have foresightful plans about future
strokes. To achieve this planning, one method is to give the
supervised loss for stroke decomposition at each step, as
in [7]. However, such a method require ground truth stroke
decomposition, which is hard to define. Also, texture-rich
image painting usually requires hundreds of strokes to generate a painting that resembles a target image, which is tens
of times more than doodling, sketching or character writing
require and increases the difficulty of planning. To handle the ill-definedness of the problem, and the long-term
planning challenge, we propose using reinforcement learning (RL) to train the agent, because RL can maximize the
cumulative rewards of a whole painting process rather than
minimizing supervised loss at each step. Experiments show
that an RL agent can build plans for stroke decomposition
with hundreds of steps. Moreover, we apply the adversarial training strategy [5] to improve the pixel-level quality of
the generated images, as the strategy has proved effective in
other image generation tasks [17].
Second, we design continuous stroke parameter space,
including stroke location, color, and transparency, to improve the painting quality. Previous works [7, 35, 4] de-

8709

