Temporal Structure Mining for Weakly Supervised Action Detection
Tan Yu1∗, Zhou Ren2∗, Yuncheng Li3 , Enxu Yan3 , Ning Xu4∗ and Junsong Yuan5
1
Cognitive Computing Lab, Baidu Research 2 Wormpex AI Research
3
Snap Inc. 4 Amazon 5 State University of New York at Buffalo
v yutan@baidu.com, renzhou200622@gmail.com, raingomm@gmail.com,
eyan2@snap.com, ningxu01@gmail.com, jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Different from the fully-supervised action detection problem that is dependent on expensive frame-level annotations,
weakly supervised action detection (WSAD) only needs
video-level annotations, making it more practical for realworld applications. Existing WSAD methods detect action
instances by scoring each video segment (a stack of frames)
individually. Most of them fail to model the temporal relations among video segments and cannot effectively characterize action instances possessing latent temporal structure. To alleviate this problem in WSAD, we propose the
temporal structure mining (TSM) approach. In TSM, each
action instance is modeled as a multi-phase process and
phase evolving within an action instance, i.e., the temporal
structure, is exploited. In this framework, phase filters are
used to calculate the confidence scores of the presence of an
action’s phases in each segment. Since in the WSAD task,
frame-level annotations are not available and thus phase
filters cannot be trained directly. To tackle the challenge,
we treat each segment’s phase as a hidden variable. We use
segments’ confidence scores from each phase filter to construct a table and determine hidden variables, i.e., phases of
segments, by a maximal circulant path discovery along the
table. Experiments conducted on three benchmark datasets
demonstrate good performance of the proposed TSM.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the video representation learned by deep neural network, the community has achieved excellent performance in action recognition task on trimmed video clips
[30, 35, 41, 5, 38, 37]. Nevertheless, people are usually interested in action instances occurring in short intervals of a
video. Therefore, directly applying the classifier trained by
trimmed videos in untrimmed videos usually leads to failure. In order to alleviate the above problem, research community turns to the action detection task [9, 15, 3, 43, 19, 7],
which is to temporally localize action instances and mean∗ This work was done when the authors were at Snap Inc.

a1
a1

a2
a2

a3
a3

(a) SMS [46].

a0
a0

Background

a1
a1

a2
a2

a3
a3

Background

(b) The proposed TSM.

Figure 1. Comparisons between SMS [46] and the proposed TSM.
In SMS, the phase evolves in start(a1 )-middle(a2 )-end(a3 ) order
and thus it can only model a single action instance. In contrast,
the proposed TSM additionally introduces a background phase,
a0 . The phase evolves in a recurrent order, which is simple but
effectively models the videos contains multiple action instances.

while recognize their categories. Recently, substantial success has been achieved in fully-supervised action detection
[36, 10, 12, 43, 19, 7], which relies on precise frame-level
action labels. Nevertheless, in a large-scale application, labelling frame-level annotations is too costly.
To relieve the demand for frame-level annotations,
weakly supervised action detection methods are proposed
recently [40, 21]. These methods only require video-level
labels, which indicates the presence of certain action instances. Compared with frame-level annotations, videolevel labels are easier to obtain. UntrimmedNets [40] partitions a video into overlapped sliding windows, and the
detection is conducted by selecting sliding windows with
high salient scores. More recently, STPN [21] decomposes
a video into multiple short video segments of a uniform size
and learns to select a subset of segments. Nevertheless, both
UntrimmedNets and STPN score segments individually and
ignore the relation among them in action instances. Observing the limitations of existing methods, we are motivated to
exploit the temporal relations among segments.
Temporal relations have been extensively exploited in
the fully-supervised action detection. Representative works
include RNN-based approach [16], 3D-convolution approach [23] and temporal pyramid pooling [47]. Nevertheless, these methods are not applicable to weakly-supervised
4321
5522

