Wasserstein GAN with Quadratic Transport Cost
Huidong Liu, Xianfeng Gu, Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
{huidliu, gu, samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Wasserstein GANs are increasingly used in Computer
Vision applications as they are easier to train. Previous
WGAN variants mainly use the l1 transport cost to compute
the Wasserstein distance between the real and synthetic data
distributions. The l1 transport cost restricts the discriminator to be 1-Lipschitz. However, WGANs with l1 transport cost were recently shown to not always converge. In
this paper, we propose WGAN-QC, a WGAN with quadratic
transport cost. Based on the quadratic transport cost, we
propose an Optimal Transport Regularizer (OTR) to stabilize the training process of WGAN-QC. We prove that the
objective of the discriminator during each generator update
computes the exact quadratic Wasserstein distance between
real and synthetic data distributions. We also prove that
WGAN-QC converges to a local equilibrium point with finite discriminator updates per generator update. We show
experimentally on a Dirac distribution that WGAN-QC converges, when many of the l1 cost WGANs fail to [22]. Qualitative and quantitative results on the CelebA, CelebA-HQ,
LSUN and the ImageNet dog datasets show that WGAN-QC
is better than state-of-art GAN methods. WGAN-QC has
much faster runtime than other WGAN variants.
Figure 1. Faces of size 256 × 256 randomly generated by WGANQC on CelebA-HQ. (Best seen in color)

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11] successfully model data distributions, and have been used in many
vision applications such as image synthesis [20, 34, 28], image inpainting [39, 40], semantic segmentation [15, 26], etc.
While widely used, GANs are known to be hard to train.
GANs need to solve a min-max saddle point optimization
problem [1]. Due to the competition between the discriminator and the generator, it is difficult to train a GAN to
consistently produce meaningful images. Hence, a number of authors have attempted to stabilize GAN training
[3, 29, 12, 24, 14]. The Boundary Equilibrium GAN (BEGAN) [3] adopts Proportional Control Theory to balance
the training between generator and discriminator. [29] pro-

poses strategies to regularize the gradient of the discriminator, leading to more stable GAN training. The Wasserstein
GAN family [2, 12, 19, 24, 13, 10, 9] employs the Wasserstein distance to measure the distance between the distributions of real and synthetic data. The Wasserstein distance
guarantees that even if there is no support between the real
and generated data distributions, the discriminator still provides gradients to the generator, unlike the Jensen-Shannon
(JS) divergence used in the original GAN objective [2].
It is still unclear whether GANs converge. Recent work
[25, 23, 22] has shown that analyzing the Jacobian of the
gradient field of the GAN parameters near the equilibrium

4832

