XRAI: Better Attributions Through Regions
Andrei Kapishnikov∗, Tolga Bolukbasi∗, Fernanda Viégas, Michael Terry
Google Research
Cambridge, MA
{kapishnikov, tolgab, viegas, michaelterry}@google.com

Abstract
Saliency methods can aid understanding of deep neural
networks. Recent years have witnessed many improvements
to saliency methods, as well as new ways for evaluating
them. In this paper, we 1) present a novel region-based attribution method, XRAI, that builds upon integrated gradients [26], 2) introduce evaluation methods for empirically
assessing the quality of image-based saliency maps (Performance Information Curves (PICs)), and 3) contribute an
axiom-based sanity check for attribution methods. Through
empirical experiments and example results, we show that
XRAI produces better results than other saliency methods
for common models and the ImageNet dataset.

evaluation methods provide ways to validate the saliency
method’s outputs (e.g., to ensure they can be relied upon
to explain model behavior) [2, 1], or to empirically measure the methods’ outputs, enabling comparison of two or
more techniques. For example, “sanity checks” have been
developed that help determine whether a saliency method’s
results meaningfully correspond to a model’s learned parameters [1], while Sensitivity-n [2] empirically measures
the quality of a saliency method’s output by comparing the
change in the output prediction to the sum of attributions.

1. Introduction
Saliency methods link a deep neural network’s (DNN)
prediction to the inputs that most influence that prediction.
These capabilities can be useful in a wide range of contexts, including debugging a model’s prediction, verifying
that the model is not learning spurious correlations [17], and
inspecting the model for issues related to fairness [19]. In
this paper, we focus on image-based saliency methods.
A rich set of image-based saliency methods have been
developed over the years (e.g., [24, 29, 14, 26, 3, 6]). One
common approach of determining salient inputs is to rely
on the changes in the model output, such as gradients of
the output with respect to the input features. For example,
Integrated Gradients (IG) determines the salient inputs by
gradually varying the network input from a baseline to the
original input and aggregating the gradients [26]. While
existing saliency methods provide very compelling results,
there are opportunities to further improve identification of
the most important inputs leading to a model’s prediction.
Given the potential utility of saliency methods, recent research has begun to critically examine these techniques and
has proposed various methods for evaluating them. These
∗ These two authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Comparison of Integrated Gradients (middle) and the
proposed XRAI method (right) at 5% area threshold for object
class “balloon”. Areas that may have high pixel-level attributions
are removed at the region level as they sum up close to zero.

In this paper, we make three sets of contributions. First,
we propose a novel region-based saliency method, XRAI
(Figure 2), based on the widely used Integrated Gradients (IG) [26]. Our method first over-segments the image, then iteratively tests the importance of each region,
coalescing smaller regions into larger segments based on
attribution scores. Through examples and empirical results, we show that this strategy yields high quality, tightly
bounded saliency regions that outperform existing saliency
techniques. Importantly, XRAI can be used with any DNNbased model as long as there is a way to cluster the input
features into segments through some similarity metric (e.g.
color similarity in images).
Second, we add to the growing body of sanity checks for
attribution methods [1] by introducing a perturbation-based
sanity check that can be used to test the reliability of an attribution method. Our sanity check can be seen as a relaxed

4948

