Is This the Right Place?
Geometric-Semantic Pose Verification for Indoor Visual Localization
Hajime Taira1

Ignacio Rocco2 Jiri Sedlar3 Masatoshi Okutomi1 Josef Sivic2,3
Tomas Pajdla3 Torsten Sattler4 Akihiko Torii1
1
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2 Inria∗, 3 CIIRC CTU in Prague†, 4 Chalmers University of Technology

Abstract
Visual localization in large and complex indoor scenes,
dominated by weakly textured rooms and repeating geometric patterns, is a challenging problem with high practical
relevance for applications such as Augmented Reality and
robotics. To handle the ambiguities arising in this scenario,
a common strategy is, first, to generate multiple estimates
for the camera pose from which a given query image was
taken. The pose with the largest geometric consistency with
the query image, e.g., in the form of an inlier count, is then
selected in a second stage. While a significant amount of
research has concentrated on the first stage, there has been
considerably less work on the second stage. In this paper,
we thus focus on pose verification. We show that combining different modalities, namely appearance, geometry, and
semantics, considerably boosts pose verification and consequently pose accuracy. We develop multiple hand-crafted
as well as a trainable approach to join into the geometricsemantic verification and show significant improvements
over state-of-the-art on a very challenging indoor dataset.

1. Introduction
Visual localization is the problem of estimating the 6
Degree-of-Freedom (DoF) pose from which an image was
taken with respect to a 3D scene. Visual localization is
vital to applications such as Augmented and Mixed Reality [15,44], intelligent systems such as self-driving cars and
other autonomous robots [41], and 3D reconstruction [61].
State-of-the-art approaches for accurate visual localization are based on matches between 2D image and 3D scene
coordinates [10, 11, 16, 40, 46, 47, 56, 71, 72, 85]. These
2D-3D matches are either established using explicit feature
∗ WILLOW project, Departement d’Informatique de l’École Normale
Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, PSL Research University.
† CIIRC - Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics,
Czech Technical University in Prague.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(l)

Figure 1: Using further modalities for indoor visual localization. Given a set of camera pose estimates for a query
image (a, g), we seek to identify the most accurate estimate.
(b, h) Due to severe occlusion and weak textures, a stateof-the-art method [72] fails to identify the correct camera
pose. To overcome those difficulties, we use several modalities along with visual appearance: (top) surface normals
and (bottom) semantics. (c, i) Our approach verifies the estimated pose by comparing the semantics and surface normals extracted from the query (d, j) and database (f, l).
matching [40, 56, 71, 72, 85] or via learning-based scene coordinate regression [10, 11, 16, 46, 47, 65]. At large scale
or in complex scenes with many repeating structural elements, establishing unique 2D-3D matches becomes a hard
problem due to global ambiguities [40, 71, 85]. A strategy
to avoid such ambiguities is to restrict the search space for
2D-3D matching. For example, image retrieval [49, 69] can

4373

