Gravity as a Reference for Estimating a Person’s Height from Video
Didier Bieler1
Semih Günel1
1
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Pascal Fua1
Helge Rhodin1,2
2
UBC, Vancouver, Canada

firstname.lastname@epfl.ch

Abstract
Estimating the metric height of a person from monocular
imagery without additional assumptions is ill-posed. Existing solutions either require manual calibration of ground
plane and camera geometry, special cameras, or reference
objects of known size. We focus on motion cues and exploit
gravity on earth as an omnipresent reference ’object’ to
translate acceleration, and subsequently height, measured
in image-pixels to values in meters. We require videos of
motion as input, where gravity is the only external force.
This limitation is different to those of existing solutions that
recover a person’s height and, therefore, our method opens
up new application fields. We show theoretically and empirically that a simple motion trajectory analysis suffices
to translate from pixel measurements to the person’s metric
height, reaching a MAE of up to 3.9 cm on jumping motions, and that this works without camera and ground plane
calibration.

1. Introduction
Estimating metric scale from a monocular image or
video recordings is a fundamental problem in computer
vision [5, 14] and important for determining distances in
forensics, autonomous driving, person re-identification, and
structure-from-motion (SfM). In general, object size and
distance cancel in perspective projection—which makes the
problem ill-posed. However, solutions exist if cameras and
ground floor are manually calibrated [12, 31, 18], special
cameras for depth-of-field sweeping are available [10], or
reference objects of known scale are present [30, 14, 30,
20]. Some solutions studied relationships that are particular for persons, such as height, appearance, facial features,
body proportions [3, 13]. However, only uncertain and biased predictions could be obtained.
This paper aims at a new approach to estimating a person’s height using motion cues in videos. The main idea is
to use the omnipresent gravity on earth as a reference ’object’. Newton’s second equation of motion dictates that the
trajectory of an object is a parabola, a function of time, its

Gravity as a reference
for translation

Figure 1. Idea. We exploit gravity as a reference object for mapping image height measurements in pixel [px] to metric height [m].

initial speed and position, with the curvature determined by
the acceleration induced by constant external forces [22].
To this end, we restrict ourselves to cases where gravitation
is the only source of external acceleration and the camera
is static, so that acceleration in the image can be uniquely
attributed to gravity. By relating acceleration in the image
and to gravity on earth, we can then translate measurements
in pixels to metric height in meters, as sketched in Figure 1.
Although this strategy restricts the application to scenarios entailing free-fall motions, it applies to any video of
a person jumping or running, where air friction and other
sources of acceleration are negligible. Because this limitation is orthogonal to those of existing solutions, our method
opens up new application fields, such as metric monocular
SfM, automatic person re-identification in videos with unknown camera geometry, and metric human pose estimation
from a single camera, as demonstrated in Figure 2.
Our method is inspired by approaches that estimate the
3D trajectory of rigid objects in free fall [16, 23, 24, 17, 29].
All these methods assume a calibrated camera, known gravity direction, rigid objects and focus on object position instead of scale estimation. In contrast, we show that our strategy for height estimation is applicable without knowing or
constraining the initial object speed or position, that it can
be generalized to account for the internal forces present in
articulated person motion, and does not require knowledge
of any camera parameters nor ground plane position.

8569

