O2U-Net: A Simple Noisy Label Detection Approach for Deep Neural Networks
Jinchi Huang
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, China

Lie Qu
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, China

Rongfei Jia
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, China

jinchi.hjc@alibaba-inc.com

qulie.ql@alibaba-inc.com

rongfei.jrf@alibaba-inc.com

Binqiang Zhao
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, China
binqiang.zhao@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel noisy label detection approach, named O2U-net, for deep neural networks without
human annotations. Different from prior work which requires specifically designed noise-robust loss functions or
networks, O2U-net is easy to implement but effective. It
only requires adjusting the hyper-parameters of the deep
network to make its status transfer from overfitting to
underfitting (O2U) cyclically. The losses of each sample
are recorded during iterations. The higher the normalized
average loss of a sample, the higher the probability of being
noisy labels. O2U-net is naturally compatible with active
learning and other human annotation approaches. This introduces extra flexibility for learning with noisy labels. We
conduct sufficient experiments on multiple datasets in various settings. The experimental results prove the state-ofthe-art of O2S-net.

ing noise-robust models on unclean data; 2) detecting and
cleansing noisy labels before training. The noise-robust solutions [3, 14, 19, 13] typically focus on introducing regularization to reduce the effect of the overfitting on noisy
labels. In the solutions of noise cleansing, potential noisy
labels are first detected, and then removed from the training set [5] or fed to the model after clean samples [7, 4] to
reduce their negative impact. Although these two types of
solutions have their own advantages in different cases, the
noise-cleansing-based approaches have value add for practical usage in industry because of the following reasons:
• Clean Dataset: Data is the most expensive and valuable asset for industries. Removing noisy labels naturally generates clean datasets, which can be reused for
other tasks via transfer learning without considering
the impact of noisy labels.
• Human Annotations: The combination of noisy label
detection and active learning [16] can further benefit
supervised learning. In industry, a raw dataset is typically allowed to be verified and annotated for multiple
rounds to guarantee its cleanness. Active learning can
be conducted after noisy label detection to further reduce human annotations.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks have already achieved
tremendous success in computer vision, their performance
suffers from noisy labels in training data. Noisy labels refer
to labels which areassigned to wrong classes in supervised
learning. In real-world situations, acquiring high-quality
annotated data is costly and time-consuming. It needs massive human annotation and verification. As a result, most of
the deep models applied in industry have to be trainedbased
on data with a large amount of noise. As deep neural networks have the capability to memorize all training samples
[20], noisy labels would be overfitted. That greatlydegenerates the performance of deep models.
Recent studies draw attention to learning with noisy labels. There are two types of solutions: 1) directly train-

• Applicability: Noisy label detection can also benefit noise-robust models. Recent studies [4, 7] leverage curriculum learning [2] to build noise-robust models. Estimating the probabilities of noisy labels can
help develop such a curriculum to model the difficulty
of samples. That extends the applicability of noise
cleansing models.
In this paper, we address noisy label detection in supervised learning. We propose a simple but effective approach

3326

