GA-DAN: Geometry-Aware Domain Adaptation Network for Scene Text
Detection and Recognition

Fangneng Zhan, Chuhui Xue, and Shijian Lu
Nanyang Technological University
{fnzhan, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg, XUEC0003@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent adversarial learning research has achieved very
impressive progress for modelling cross-domain data shifts
in appearance space but its counterpart in modelling crossdomain shifts in geometry space lags far behind. This paper
presents an innovative Geometry-Aware Domain Adaptation Network (GA-DAN) that is capable of modelling crossdomain shifts concurrently in both geometry space and appearance space and realistically converting images across
domains with very different characteristics. In the proposed
GA-DAN, a novel multi-modal spatial learning technique is
designed which converts a source-domain image into multiple images of different spatial views as in the target domain. A new disentangled cycle-consistency loss is introduced which balances the cycle consistency in appearance
and geometry spaces and improves the learning of the whole
network greatly. The proposed GA-DAN has been evaluated for the classic scene text detection and recognition
tasks, and experiments show that the domain-adapted images achieve superior scene text detection and recognition
performance while applied to network training.

1. Introduction
A large amount of labelled or annotated images is critical
for training robust and accurate deep neural network (DNN)
models, but collecting and annotating large datasets are often extremely expensive. In addition, state-of-the-art DNN
models usually assume that images in the training and inference stages are collected under similar conditions which
often experience clear performance drops while applied to
images from different domains. Such lack of scalability and
transferability makes collection and annotation even more
expensive while dealing with images collected under different conditions from different domains. Unsupervised Do-

Figure 1. Domain adaptation by the proposed GA-DAN: For scene
text images with clear shifts from the Source Domain to the Target Domain, GA-DAN models the domain shifts in appearance
and geometry spaces simultaneously and generates Adapted images with high-fidelity in both appearance and geometry spaces.

main Adaptation (DA), which transfers images and features
from a source domain to a target domain, has achieved very
impressive performance especially with the recent advances
of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11]. Different DA techniques have been developed and applied to different computer vision problems successfully such as style
transfer, image synthesis, etc.
State-of-the-art DA still faces various problems. In particular, most existing systems focus on learning feature shift
in appearance space only whereas the feature shift in geometry space is largely neglected. On the other hand, images
from different domains often differ in both appearance and
geometry spaces. Take various texts in scenes as an ex-

9105

