Deep Joint-Semantics Reconstructing Hashing for Large-Scale
Unsupervised Cross-Modal Retrieval
Shupeng Su†
Zhisheng Zhong†
Chao Zhang∗
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
{sushupeng, zszhong, c.zhang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-modal hashing encodes the multimedia data into a common binary hash space in which the correlations among the samples from different modalities can be effectively measured. Deep cross-modal hashing further improves the retrieval performance as the deep neural networks can generate more semantic relevant features and
hash codes. In this paper, we study the unsupervised
deep cross-modal hash coding and propose Deep JointSemantics Reconstructing Hashing (DJSRH), which has the
following two main advantages. First, to learn binary codes
that preserve the neighborhood structure of the original data, DJSRH constructs a novel joint-semantics affinity matrix
which elaborately integrates the original neighborhood information from different modalities and accordingly is capable to capture the latent intrinsic semantic affinity for the
input multi-modal instances. Second, DJSRH later trains
the networks to generate binary codes that maximally reconstruct above joint-semantics relations via the proposed
reconstructing framework, which is more competent for the
batch-wise training as it reconstructs the specific similarity value unlike the common Laplacian constraint merely preserving the similarity order. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the significant improvement by DJSRH in various cross-modal retrieval tasks.

1. Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval is a classic scenario which aims to
search the semantic relevant samples from different modalities, e.g., using a text description to retrieve the relevant
images. Owing to the explosive increase of the multimedia
data, hashing based cross-modal methods which encode the
correlative samples with similar binary features are gaining
importance due to the high efficiency of the binary vectors
in storage and the mutual Hamming distance computation.
† Equal contribution
∗ Corresponding author

Although the fundamental idea is applicable to any combination of content modalities, we focus on the image-text
cross-modal retrieval in this paper which has been a compelling research topic in the computer vision community
recently [24, 8, 18, 2, 36].
Since the heterogeneity (a.k.a. the modality gap) confines the direct measurement of the similarity among the
samples from different modalities, cross-modal hashing
proposes to embed the original data into a common binary hash space, in which the correlations across different
modalities can be effectively and efficiently measured with
their Hamming distance. Specifically, traditional crossmodal hashing can be grouped into the supervised and unsupervised categories. Unsupervised methods [16, 25, 6, 37]
only utilize the co-occurrence information of the input
image-text pair to maximize their correlation in the common hash space. The supervised ones [20, 1, 34, 30, 12]
can further exploit the semantic labels to learn more consistent hash codes for the semantic relevant cross-modal data,
which significantly mitigate the modality gap and achieve
superior retrieval performance.
Deep cross-modal hashing makes a further development with the remarkable competence of the deep neural networks to generate more semantic relevant features
[15, 33] which facilitates to learn more consistent hash
codes subsequently. However, compared with the supervised deep cross-modal hashing which has been widely studied [3, 14, 24, 8, 18, 2, 36], the unsupervised field that
our paper focuses on lacks sufficient explorations. Among
the related research, UDCMH [31] is one of the latest unsupervised deep cross-modal hashing methods that integrates
the graph Laplacian constraint term into the network training. It explicitly constrains the hash codes to preserve the
neighborhood structure of the original data and consequently achieves the state-of-the-art retrieval results.
Although the related work achieves breakthrough, there
are still two main problems worthy of attention. First, most
previous methods including UDCMH preserve the original
neighborhood relations from different modalities respectively, while the similarity information from different views

3027

