Fingerspelling recognition in the wild with iterative visual attention
Bowen Shi1 , Aurora Martinez Del Rio2 , Jonathan Keane2 , Diane Brentari2
Greg Shakhnarovich1 , Karen Livescu1
1
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, USA 2 University of Chicago, USA
{bshi,greg,klivescu}@ttic.edu

{amartinezdelrio,jonkeane,dbrentari}@uchicago.edu

Abstract

ation. Sign language recognition could also enable web services like content search and retrieval in such media.

Sign language recognition is a challenging gesture sequence recognition problem, characterized by quick and
highly coarticulated motion. In this paper we focus on
recognition of fingerspelling sequences in American Sign
Language (ASL) videos collected in the wild, mainly from
YouTube and Deaf social media. Most previous work on
sign language recognition has focused on controlled settings where the data is recorded in a studio environment
and the number of signers is limited. Our work aims to
address the challenges of real-life data, reducing the need
for detection or segmentation modules commonly used in
this domain. We propose an end-to-end model based on an
iterative attention mechanism, without explicit hand detection or segmentation. Our approach dynamically focuses
on increasingly high-resolution regions of interest. It outperforms prior work by a large margin. We also introduce
a newly collected data set of crowdsourced annotations of
fingerspelling in the wild, and show that performance can
be further improved with this additional data set.

From a computer vision perspective, sign language
recognition is a complex gesture recognition problem, involving quick and fine-grained motion, especially in realistic visual conditions. It is also relatively understudied, with
little existing data in natural day-to-day conditions.

1. Introduction
Automatic recognition of sign language has the potential to overcome communication barriers for deaf individuals. With the increased use of online media, sign language
video-based web sites (e.g., deafvideo.tv) are increasingly used as a platform for communication and media cre-

In this paper, we study the problem of American Sign
Language (ASL) fingerspelling recognition from naturally
occurring sign language videos collected from web sites.
Fingerspelling is a component of ASL in which words are
signed letter by letter, using an alphabet of canonical letter
handshapes (Figure 2). Words are fingerspelled mainly (but
not only) when they do not have their own ASL signs, for
example technical items or proper nouns. Fingerspelling accounts for up to 35% [29] of ASL and is used frequently for
content words in social interaction or conversations involving current events or technical topics. In Deaf online media,
fingerspelling recognition is crucial as there is often a high
proportion of such content words. Fingerspelling recognition is in some ways simpler than general sign language
recognition. In ASL, fingerspelled signs are usually onehanded, and the hand remains in a similar position throughout a fingerspelled sequence. However, the task is challenging in other ways, due to the quick, highly coarticulated, and
often hard-to-distinguish finger motions, as well as motion
blur in lower-quality video “in the wild” (Figures 1, 4).
Automatic sign language recognition is commonly addressed with approaches borrowed from computer vision

Figure 1: Fingerspelling images in studio data vs. in the wild. Leftmost: example frame from the ChicagoFSVid studio data
set [17]. Rest: Example frames from the ChicagoFSWild data set [33] (see Section 4).
15400

