JPEG Artifacts Reduction via Deep Convolutional Sparse Coding
Xueyang Fu1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1∗, Feng Wu1 , Xinghao Ding2 , John Paisley3
1

School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
3

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China

Department of Electrical Engineering & Data Science Institute, Columbia University, USA

{xyfu, zhazj, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn, dxh@xmu.edu.cn, jpaisley@columbia.edu

Abstract
To effectively reduce JPEG compression artifacts, we
propose a deep convolutional sparse coding (DCSC) network architecture. We design our DCSC in the framework
of classic learned iterative shrinkage-threshold algorithm
[16]. To focus on recognizing and separating artifacts only,
we sparsely code the feature maps instead of the raw image.
The final de-blocked image is directly reconstructed from
the coded features. We use dilated convolution to extract
multi-scale image features, which allows our single model
to simultaneously handle multiple JPEG compression levels. Since our method integrates model-based convolutional
sparse coding with a learning-based deep neural network,
the entire network structure is compact and more explainable. The resulting lightweight model generates comparable or better de-blocking results when compared with stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Image compression methods such as JPEG, WebP and
HEVC-MSP, allow for efficient image storage and transmission. However, their possibly coarse quantization can result
in visible artifacts. These artifacts severely degrade both
perceptual quality and subsequent computer vision systems. Reducing the artifacts of lossy compression is an important computer vision task, most notably for the most widely
used JPEG format.
JPEG compression is achieved by applying a discrete
cosine transformation (DCT) on 8×8 pixel blocks. The
DCT coefficients are further coarsely quantized to save storage space. However, this scheme results in image discontinuities at the boundaries of blocks, which generate
∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National
Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2017YFB1300201, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants 61622211,
61620106009 and 61701158 as well as the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities under Grant WK2100100030.

blocking and blurring artifacts. To improve the quality of
JPEG compressed images, different methods have been explored. In general, JPEG artifacts reduction methods are
either model-based [31, 46, 11, 33, 29] or learning-based
[8, 41, 53, 6, 14, 55]. The former is usually designed using
domain knowledge while the latter aims to learn a nonlinear
mapping function directly from training data.
Though learning-based methods have achieved competitive performance compared with model-based methods for
JPEG artifacts reduction, these two methods have complementary merits. Model-based methods usually have clear
physical meaning, but suffer from time-consuming optimization, while learning-based methods have fast testing
speed, but the learned model has insufficient explainability. Recent work has shown the advantage of combining
powerful deep learning modeling approaches with modelbased sparse coding (SC) for JPEG artifacts reduction via a dual-domain network [41]. In this paper, we develop
this initial line of work based on shallow, fully connected layers by using ideas from convolutional sparse coding
[4, 22, 36]. Since convolutional sparse coding (CSC) is spatially invariant and can directly process the whole image, it
is suitable for various low-level vision tasks, such as image
super-resolution [18] and layer decomposition [50, 17, 51].
Our main contribution is to propose a deep model for
JPEG artifacts reduction that has increased explainability. Using the framework of learned iterative shrinkagethreshold algorithm (LISTA) for CSC, we construct a recursive deep model that isolates artifacts from the latent feature
maps. We utilize dilated convolutions for multi-scale image features extraction, allowing our single model to handle multiple JPEG qualities. Since we follow the classical
optimization algorithm in building our deep convolutional
sparse coding, each module is specifically designed rather
than simply stacked, making our model compact and easy
to implement. Compared with several state-of-the-art methods, our model achieves comparable or better de-blocking
performance based on both qualitative and quantitative evaluations.

2501

