Language-Agnostic Visual-Semantic Embeddings
Jônatas Wehrmann, Douglas M. Souza, Mauricio A. Lopes, Rodrigo C. Barros
School of Technology
Pontifı́cia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul
{jonatas.wehrmann@edu,rodrigo.barros@}pucrs.br

Abstract
This paper proposes a framework for training languageinvariant cross-modal retrieval models. We also introduce a
novel character-based word-embedding approach, allowing
the model to project similar words across languages into
the same word-embedding space. In addition, by performing cross-modal retrieval at the character level, the storage
requirements for a text encoder decrease substantially, allowing for lighter and more scalable retrieval architectures. The
proposed language-invariant textual encoder based on characters is virtually unaffected in terms of storage requirements
when novel languages are added to the system. Our contributions include new methods for building character-level-based
word-embeddings, an improved loss function, and a novel
cross-language alignment module that not only makes the
architecture language-invariant, but also presents better predictive performance. We show that our models outperform
the current state-of-the-art in both single and multi-language
scenarios. This work can be seen as the basis of a new path
on retrieval research, now allowing for the effective use of
captions in multiple-language scenarios. Code is available
at https://github.com/jwehrmann/lavse.

new languages for the retrieval task. Also, our method can
be extended to learn novel languages without requiring extra machine translation models that are much more costly
in terms of processing. For such, we present a novel training procedure that performs both cross-modal and crosslanguage alignment by enforcing similar sentences to have
high-similarity in the embedding space, while projecting
correlated image-caption pairs into the same space.

1. Introduction

Our contributions also include better image and text encoding functions to explicitly leverage inner-attention maps,
which allow for better semantic encoding of both modalities.
We show that the use of region-based non-linear non-local
modules provide a large improvement in predictive performance, capable of outperforming state-of-the-art approaches
based on stacked attention layers [22]. We also provide experiments training the text encoder with distinct granularity
of the text being learned. For instance, current state-of-theart approaches [36, 7, 14, 38, 22] are based on networks
trained over word-embeddings [25], whereas our proposed
method can be trained in an end-to-end fashion for learning
both word-level and character-level features from scratch
without any preprocessing for the text encoder. More specifically, raw characters are mapped to a word-latent space that
is learned during training, which allows the resulting model
to project words from distinct languages into the very same
word-based embedding space.

This paper addresses the problem of cross-modal retrieval.
The task consists in retrieving content from one modality
given a query on a different modality, e.g., returning an
image based on a textual description. Several important applications benefit from successful retrieval strategies, such
as image and video retrieval, captioning [32, 37], and navigation for the blind, just to name a few.
One of the contributions of this paper is incorporating an
important feature towards robustness over different retrieval
domains: language-invariant behavior. Besides making the
task language-invariant, we also propose a versatile strategy
that relies solely on character-level learning of word embeddings. This means that our embedding approach is virtually
not affected in terms of storage requirements when adding

We perform a thorough set of experiments to evaluate multiple aspects of the proposed architecture. In summary, our
contributions are as follows: (i) novel character-based wordembedding methods; (ii) a cross-language, cross-modal retrieval framework; (iii) an improved pairwise ranking loss
function that enables training of word and character-level
models in multilingual scenarios; (iv) an improved image
representation strategy that maps object representations into
the shared semantic space, discarding cross-modality attention layers, and (v) we provide a transliterated version of YJ
Captions dataset with novel retrieval splits. The proposed
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in both
image retrieval and image annotation tasks, while performing much faster when compared to the best baseline strategy.
15804

