Discriminatively Learned Convex Models for Set Based Face Recognition
Hakan Cevikalp
Golara Ghorban Dordinejad
Eskisehir Osmangazi University
Machine Learning and Computer Vision Laboratory
hakan.cevikalp@gmail.com, golaradordinejad@gmail.com

Abstract
Majority of the image set based face recognition methods use a generatively learned model for each person that is
learned independently by ignoring the other persons in the
gallery set. In contrast to these methods, this paper introduces a novel method that searches for discriminative convex models that best fit to an individual’s face images but at
the same time are as far as possible from the images of other
persons in the gallery. We learn discriminative convex models for both affine and convex hulls of image sets. During
testing, distances from the query set images to these models are computed efficiently by using simple matrix multiplications, and the query set is assigned to the person in the
gallery whose image set is closest to the query images. The
proposed method significantly outperforms other methods
using generative convex models in terms of both accuracy
and testing time, and achieves the state-of-the-art results on
three of the five tested datasets. Especially, the accuracy improvement is significant on the challenging PaSC, COX and
ESOGU video datasets.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is an important computer vision problem that has many applications in various fields. Initially,
single images are used for face recognition, but more recently, set based methods have begun to dominate the field
mostly because face image sets allow to model the variability of the individuals’ appearances. For set based face
recognition, both gallery and query sets are given in terms
of sets of images rather than a single image. The classification system must return the individual whose gallery set
is the most similar to the given query set. Face recognition methods using image sets are also more practical owing to the fact that they usually do not require any cooperation from the subjects. However, despite these advantages,
traditional classifiers such as the support vector machines
(SVMs), classification trees, k-nearest neighbor classifier,
etc. cannot be used directly for set based recognition.

There are two important factors that determine the success of the set based face recognition methods: the models
used to approximate the face image sets, and the distance
metric used to measure the similarity between these models.
A variety of different models were used to approximate face
image sets. As a pioneering work for set based recognition,
Yamaguchi et al. [34] used linear subspaces to approximate
image sets, and canonical angles between subspaces are
used to measure the distance between them. Another way
of dealing with image set based classification is to consider
each sample set as a point in a Grassmannian manifold.
Hamm and Lee [10] used Grassmannian discriminant analysis on fixed dimensional linear subspaces. Wang and Shi
[30] proposed kernel Grassmannian distances to compare
image sets. More recently, manifolds of symmetric positive
definite (SPD) matrices are used to model images sets, and
the similarities between these manifolds are computed by
using different Riemannian metrics such as Affine-Invariant
metric or Log-Euclidean metric [20, 18, 19]. Cevikalp and
Triggs [3] introduced affine and convex hulls to approximate image sets, and geometric distances between these
models are used to measure the similarity. Different variants
of affine and convex hulls have been proposed in [16, 36].
Among these, Sparse Approximated Nearest Points (SANP)
of [16] enforces the sparsity of samples used for affine hull
combination. Similarly, [36] used regularized affine hull
models that require the minimization of L2-norms of affine
hull combination coefficients during computing the smallest
distances between image sets. Wang et al. [31] proposed a
method to learn more compact affine hulls when the affine
hulls of different classes overlap. More recently, new extensions [32,37] of these methods used the so-called collaborative representations for affine and convex hull models.
In contrast to the traditional methods using an independent
affine and convex hull for each image set, these methods approximate all gallery sets by using a single affine or convex
hull, and the query set is labeled by using the reconstruction residuals computed from only individual gallery sets.
Other representative methods using sparse models in image
set based recognition can be found in [9, 8, 7]. Most of the

110123

