Phrase Localization Without Paired Training Examples
Josiah Wang
Imperial College London

Lucia Specia
Imperial College London

http://www.josiahwang.com

l.specia@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Localizing phrases in images is an important part of image understanding and can be useful in many applications
that require mappings between textual and visual information. Existing work attempts to learn these mappings from
examples of phrase-image region correspondences (strong
supervision) or from phrase-image pairs (weak supervision). We postulate that such paired annotations are unnecessary, and propose the first method for the phrase localization problem where neither training procedure nor
paired, task-specific data is required. Our method is simple but effective: we use off-the-shelf approaches to detect objects, scenes and colours in images, and explore different approaches to measure semantic similarity between
the categories of detected visual elements and words in
phrases. Experiments on two well-known phrase localization datasets show that this approach surpasses all weakly
supervised methods by a large margin and performs very
competitively to strongly supervised methods, and can thus
be considered a strong baseline to the task. The non-paired
nature of our method makes it applicable to any domain and
where no paired phrase localization annotation is available.

1. Introduction
Significant progress has been made in recent years in the
task of detecting and localizing instances of object categories in images, especially with deep convolutional neural network (CNN) approaches to object detection [7, 8,
10, 19, 26, 27, 28, 31]. In most work, object detection
labels are treated as a fixed set of category labels, and visual detectors are trained to localize each category in the
image. In more realistic applications, however, people re* The authors thank the anonymous reviewers and area chairs for their
feedback. This work was supported by the MultiMT project (H2020 ERC
Starting Grant No. 678017); and by the MMVC project, via an Institutional Links grant (ID 352343575) under the Newton-Katip Çelebi Fund
partnership funded by the UK Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) and Scientific and Technological Research Council
of Turkey (TÜBİTAK) and delivered by the British Council.

Fully supervised
phrase localization

Weakly supervised
phrase localization

Non-paired
phrase localization

object
detectors

text
corpora

knowledge
bases

the handles of the slide

the handles of the slide

Figure 1. We investigate the task of phrase localization without
paired training examples. Conventional settings require phrase and
image localization annotations (fully supervised) or phrase and
image pairs (weakly supervised) at training time. In contrast, the
non-paired setting does not provide such annotations for training,
but instead allows models to exploit resources such as off-the-shelf
visual detectors, large-scale general corpora, knowledge bases and
generic images to localize previously unseen phrases at test time.
This non-paired setting is thus a baseline to supervised settings.

fer to objects in images via free-form textual phrases, instead of object categories. For example, a brown and furry
puppy instead of dog. Phrase-level localization has been
introduced [11, 15, 17, 20, 24, 37] to address this need
by combining visual object recognition and natural language processing. What we refer to as ‘phrases’ can include single words, short clauses or phrases, or even complete sentences. All previous work assume some form of
supervision at training time: either strong supervision (object localization for the phrase in the image is provided)
[2, 3, 11, 12, 22, 23, 29, 33, 39] or weak supervision (the
phrase and image pair is provided, but not the object’s localization in the image) [1, 34, 35, 40] (Figure 1). Such
specific bounding box annotations and even image-phrase
pairs, however, are hard and labourious to obtain. This
makes it difficult to scale detection up to more realistic settings covering the large space of possible phrases that can
be uttered by a person.
In this paper, we tackle the novel task of phrase localization in images without any paired examples, i.e. the
model has access to neither phrase-image pairs nor their localization in the image at training time (a ‘training’ phase
may not even be required). To our knowledge, no previous

4663

