Enhancing 2D Representation via Adjacent Views for 3D Shape Retrieval
Cheng Xu1 , Zhaoqun Li1 , Qiang Qiu2 , Biao Leng1,3,4∗, Jingfei Jiang5
School of Computer Science & Engineering, Beihang University, 2 Duke University
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University
4
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
5
National Laboratory for Parallel and Distributed Processing, National University of
Defense Technology
{cxu, lizhaoqun, lengbiao}@buaa.edu.cn, qiang.qiu@duke.edu, jingfeijiang@nudt.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Multi-view shape descriptors obtained from various 2D
images are commonly adopted in 3D shape retrieval. One
major challenge is that significant shape information is discarded during 2D view rendering through projection. In this
paper, we propose a convolutional neural network based
method, Neighbor-Center Enhanced Network, to enhance
each 2D view using its neighboring ones. By exploiting
cross-view correlations, Neighbor-Center Enhanced Network learns how adjacent views can be maximally incorporated for an enhanced 2D representation to effectively
describe shapes. We observe that a very small amount
of, e.g., six, enhanced 2D views, are already sufficient for
panoramic shape description. Thus, by simply aggregating
features from six enhanced 2D views, we arrive at a highly
compact yet discriminative shape descriptor. The proposed
shape descriptor significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
3D shape retrieval methods on the ModelNet and ShapeNetCore55 benchmarks, and also exhibits robustness against
object occlusion.

1. Introduction
3D shape retrieval is widely applied in ﬁelds such as biological analysis, virtual reality, and medical imaging. Recent years have witnessed signiﬁcant progress in 3D shape
retrieval [25, 29, 6, 14]. By mimicking the human visual
perception of 3D shapes with 2D observations, 2D viewbased 3D shape retrieval methods have shown impressive
performance.
The state-of-the-art view-based methods adopt deep
learning. These methods ﬁrst apply deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [12, 18] over rendered views from 3D
shapes to obtain a set of discriminative features, and then as∗ Corresponding author.

projection

Ƚ

(a)
neighboring views

Ƚ

NCENet
Ƚ

(c)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The original 2D view shows ineffective in identifying
a shape. (b) This 2D view can be enhanced from a set of neighboring views by exploring cross-view correlations. (c) Our method
learns how adjacent views can be maximally incorporated for an
enhanced shape representation, and the intensity of the green line
indicates the value of the learned correlation attention.

semble multiple visual features across the spatial dimension
using methods such as the max-pooling operation [23] or an
active concatenation technique [10]. We note that the discriminative visual representation of each projected view is
vital in existing methods. However, due to the information
deﬁciency in projection, certain views contain insufﬁcient
shape information, as shown in Figure 1 (a), to effectively
identify a shape, restricting the discrimination of the features. Moreover, this deleterious effect is even more signiﬁcant under object occlusion in real applications of 3D shape
recognition.

3732

