Adaptive Activation Thresholding: Dynamic Routing Type Behavior for
Interpretability in Convolutional Neural Networks

†

Yiyou Sun† Sathya N. Ravi‡∗ Vikas Singh†
University of Wisconsin-Madison ‡ University of Illinois at Chicago

sunyiyou@cs.wisc.edu

sathya@uic.edu vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
There is growing interest in strategies that can help us
understand or interpret neural networks – that is, not merely
provide a prediction, but also offer additional context explaining why and how. While many current methods offer tools to perform this analysis for a given (trained) network post-hoc, recent results (especially on capsule networks) suggest that when classes map to a few high level
“concepts” in the preceding layers of the network, the
behavior of the network is easier to interpret or explain.
Such training may be accomplished via dynamic/EM routing where the network “routes” for individual classes (or
subsets of images) are dynamic and involve few nodes even
if the full network may not be sparse. In this paper, we
show how a simple modification of the SGD scheme can
help provide dynamic/EM routing type behavior in convolutional neural networks. Through extensive experiments,
we evaluate the effect of this idea for interpretability where
we obtain promising results, while also showing that no
compromise in attainable accuracy is involved. Further,
we show that the minor modification is seemingly ad-hoc,
the new algorithm can be analyzed by an approximate
method which provably matches known rates for SGD. Code
is available at: https://github.com/sunyiyou/
dynamic-k-activation.

1. Introduction
Machine learning and computer vision methods are now
becoming closely interwined with our lives. There is consensus that this trend will clearly continue, but the need for
human comprehension (i.e., interpretability) of what/why
a model predicts will become a pressing issue – and potentially a key constraint that may limit broader adoption
across in a number of different disciplines. Clearly, if a human can comprehend the model, then its utility increases
[12, 10, 29, 16, 34]. But perhaps in other settings, this
∗ Worked was performed while SNR was a dissertator at UW-Madison.

need is also driven by regulatory requirements, robustness
or societal issues. Why did the system suggest that a person
be selected for secondary screening at the airport? Why is
a biopsy being requested based on a radiographic image?
Why is the autonomous vehicle inadvertently deciding to
change lanes when there is no apparent obstruction? Models that are easy to comprehend broadly fall under the umbrella of interpretable models [8], and recent work shows
that apart from use in vision tasks such as visual question
answering [2], interpretability also facilitates the development of fair/causal models [8].
At a high level, interpreting and understanding deep
models in vision can be roughly partitioned into one or more
of three broad categories. The first line of work seeks to
generate iconic examples of what the network has learned.
This idea relates to finding the pre-image of a trained model.
Deep image priors [31], an inverse network [17] and Plug
and play networks [21] are some examples of this line of
work. But instead of interpreting the network as a whole,
one may also seek attribution: in other words, what parts
of an image are salient for a network and/or for individual
examples. This can be approached by generating informative heatmaps such as CAM [36] and grad-CAM [27], or
through back-propagation conditioned on the final prediction [29] and layer-wise relevance propagation [3]. Network
Dissection [4] and variants can be used to quantify the interpretability of hidden units through segmentation, helping
us identify what may be thought of as causal features. This
work is also loosely related to the idea behind the third category of methods based on semantic identification which
assumes that concepts (or neurons) activate only on a subset of images. This behavior induces equivalence classes in
the image set. For example, the Net2Vec paper [9] seeks to
associate concepts between concepts and filters in a given
architecture.
Interpretability, explainability, post-hoc analysis:
Most techniques that focus on interpretability approach the
problem in a post hoc manner. This means that interpretability analysis is carried out on an already trained network. Recently, [24] investigated some of the pros/cons of
14938

