Specifying Object Attributes and Relations in Interactive Scene Generation
Oron Ashual
Tel Aviv University

Lior Wolf
Tel Aviv University and Facebook AI Research

oron.ashual@gmail.com

wolf@cs.tau.ac.il, wolf@fb.com

Abstract
We introduce a method for the generation of images from
an input scene graph. The method separates between a layout embedding and an appearance embedding. The dual
embedding leads to generated images that better match
the scene graph, have higher visual quality, and support
more complex scene graphs. In addition, the embedding
scheme supports multiple and diverse output images per
scene graph, which can be further controlled by the user.
We demonstrate two modes of per-object control: (i) importing elements from other images, and (ii) navigation in
the object space, by selecting an appearance archetype.
Our code is publicly available at https://www.
github.com/ashual/scene_generation.

1. Introduction
David Marr has defined vision as the process of discovering from images what is present in the world, and where
it is [15]. The combination of what and where captures the
essence of an image at the semantic level and therefore, also
plays a crucial role when defining the desired output of image synthesis tools.
In this work, we employ scene graphs with per-object location and appearance attributes as an accessible and easyto-manipulate way for users to express their intentions, see
Fig. 1. The what aspect is captured hierarchically: objects
are defined as belonging to a certain class (horse, tree, boat,
etc.) and as having certain appearance attributes. These attributes can be (i) selected from a predefined set obtained
by clustering previously seen attributes, or (ii) copied from
a sample image. The where aspect, is captured by what is
often called a scene graph, i.e., a graph where the scene objects are denoted as nodes, and their relative position, such
as “above” or “left of”, are represented as edge types.
Our method employs a dual encoding for each object in
the image. The first part encodes the object’s placement and
captures a relative position and other global image features,
as they relate to the specific object. It is generated based
on the scene graph, by employing a graph convolution net-

work, followed by the concatenation of a random vector z.
The second part encodes the appearance of the object and
can be replaced, e.g., by importing it from the same object
as it appears in another image, without directly changing the
other objects in the image. This copying of objects between
images is done in a semantic way, and not at the pixel level.
In the scene graph that we employ, each node is equipped
with three types of information: (i) the type of object, encoded as a vector of a fixed dimension, (ii) the location attributes of the objects, which denote the approximate location in the generated image, using a coarse 5 × 5 grid and
its size, discretized to ten values, and (iii) the appearance
embedding mentioned above. The edges denote relations:
“right of”, “left of”, “above”, “below”, “surrounding”, and
“inside”. The method is implemented within a convenient
user interface, which supports a dynamic placement of objects and the creation of a scene graph. The edge relations
are inferred automatically, given the relative position of the
objects. This eliminates the need for mostly unnecessary
user intervention. Rendering is done in real time, supporting the creation of novel scenes in an interactive way, see
Fig. 1 and more examples in the supplementary.
The neural network that we employ has multiple subparts, as can be seen in Fig. 2: (i) A graph convolutional
network that converts the input scene graph to a per-object
embedding to their location. (ii) A CNN that converts the
location embedding of each object to an object’s mask.
(iii) A parallel network that converts the location embedding to a bounding box location, where the object mask is
placed. (iv) An appearance embedding CNN that converts
image information into an embedding vector. This process
is done off-line and when creating a new image, the vectors
can be imported from other images, or selected from a set
of archetypes. (v) A multiplexer that combines the object
masks and the appearance embedding information, to create a one multidimensional tensor, where different groups
of layers denote different objects. (vi) An encoder-decoder
residual network that creates the output image.
Our method is related to the recent work of [9], who
create images based on scene graphs. Their method also
uses a graph convolutional network to obtain masks, a mul-

4561

