Unconstrained Motion Deblurring for Dual-lens Cameras
M. R. Mahesh Mohan, Sharath Girish, and A. N. Rajagopalan
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
{ee14d023,ee15b058,raju}@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Recently, there has been a renewed interest in leveraging multiple cameras, but under unconstrained settings.
They have been quite successfully deployed in smartphones,
which have become de facto choice for many photographic
applications. However, akin to normal cameras, the functionality of multi-camera systems can be marred by motion
blur which is a ubiquitous phenomenon in hand-held cameras. Despite the far-reaching potential of unconstrained
camera arrays, there is not a single deblurring method for
such systems. In this paper, we propose a generalized blur
model that elegantly explains the intrinsically coupled image formation model for dual-lens set-up, which are by far
most predominant in smartphones. While image aesthetics is the main objective in normal camera deblurring, any
method conceived for our problem is additionally tasked
with ascertaining consistent scene-depth in the deblurred
images. We reveal an intriguing challenge that stems from
an inherent ambiguity unique to this problem which naturally disrupts this coherence. We address this issue by devising a judicious prior, and based on our model and prior
propose a practical blind deblurring method for dual-lens
cameras, that achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Motion blur due to camera shake is a ubiquitous phenomenon in hand-held photography. The challenging problem of blind motion deblurring (BMD) deals with estimating a clean image from a single motion blurred observation.
Since most computer vision works are designed for blurfree images, BMD is a continuing research endeavour, replete with several theories and methods [5, 23, 40, 26, 48].
Most modern cameras come with dual-lens (DL) configuration, that can have different or identical focal lengths or
field-of-views (FOVs), exposure times, and image resolutions (which we refer to as unconstrained set-up). Works
already exist that have generously invoked such flexibility.
For example, HDR imaging [29, 2, 43], low-light photography [47], and stereoscopics [30] require differently-exposed

stereo images with overlapping exposure times; whereas
in super-resolution [14] and visual odometry [24, 13] the
stereo images are captured with nearly-identical exposure
times. The world of smartphones is today experiencing
a proliferation of unconstrained DL cameras, wherein almost all devices consider a narrow-FOV camera paired to a
conventional wide-FOV camera (for portrait photography),
with possibly different resolutions. Akin to normal cameras ([12, 56, 22, 32]), images captured with DL cameras
are also susceptible to motion blur. However, there does not
exist a single BMD method that addresses the growing trend
of unconstrained DL set-up.
The problem of BMD for DL cameras is fraught with
additional challenges over those present in normal cameras. First, a DL set-up warrants deblurring based on scene
depth [51], whereas methods for normal cameras are typically independent of depth [26, 52, 48, 9], as recovering
scene depth from a single blurred image is a difficult problem [12, 9]. Second, any method for DL-BMD must ensure scene-consistent disparities in the deblurred imagepair (akin to angular coherence in light fields [23, 40]),
which also incidentally opens up many potential applications [14, 29, 37, 24]. This is an additional conformity
condition in DL-BMD. The narrow-FOV genre popularized by current smartphones admits further issues. The
higher focal length of narrow-FOV camera amplifies the
effect of camera shake [48], and thereby renders motion
blur more severe. Moreover, the assumption of center-ofrotation (COR) of the camera at the optical center significantly affects ego-motion estimation, and hence the deblurring quality [12, 10]. In practice, COR may be located at a
point far away, such as in the photographer’s wrist in case
of handheld shake [39, 15]. It must be noted that none of
the existing BMD methods are designed to handle the COR
issue. The higher focal length exacerbates the issue of COR
as well in DL set-up.
Traditional BMD methods for normal cameras restrict
themselves to space-invariant blur [6, 53, 55, 46, 57, 41].
Whyte et al. [48] showed that motion blur in general
is space-variant and is primarily caused by camera rotations. This is predominantly followed in later methods
17870

