Revisiting Radial Distortion Absolute Pose
Viktor Larsson1 Torsten Sattler2 Zuzana Kukelova3 Marc Pollefeys1,4
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 2 Chalmers University of Technology
3
VRG, Department of Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague 4 Microsoft

Abstract
To model radial distortion there are two main approaches; either the image points are undistorted such that
they correspond to pinhole projections, or the pinhole projections are distorted such that they align with the image
measurements. Depending on the application, either of the
two approaches can be more suitable. For example, distortion models are commonly used in Structure-from-Motion
since they simplify measuring the reprojection error in images. Surprisingly, all previous minimal solvers for pose estimation with radial distortion use undistortion models. In
this paper we aim to fill this gap in the literature by proposing the first minimal solvers which can jointly estimate distortion models together with camera pose. We present a
general approach which can handle rational models of arbitrary degree for both distortion and undistortion.

1. Introduction
Jointly estimating the 6 degree-of-freedom (6DOF) pose
of a camera and its intrinsic calibration is an important problem with applications in camera calibration [2], visual localization [37], and Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [38, 41]
for uncalibrated images, e.g. from Internet photo collections
such as Flickr. A common approach to this problem is to
use a minimal solver [13, 20, 28, 29] inside a RANSAC [11]
loop. Given a set of 2D-3D matches between pixels in an
image and 3D point coordinates in the scene, the solvers
provide an initial estimate of the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters. Later, the best model estimated by RANSAC is
typically refined by minimizing the reprojection errors [46].
The images taken by real cameras do not perfectly follow a pinhole model. For perfectly centered lenses consisting of flawless elements, the distortion is radially symmetric around the principal point1 . Such lens distortion is
known as radial distortion. Due to manufacturing imperfections, the optical centers of various lens elements may be
misaligned and the CCD sensor array may not be perfectly
1 Which often gives a good approximation of the true distortion center.

Figure 1: Two-step approach for radial distortion absolute
pose. First, using radial alignment constraints we estimate
the pose of the camera up to an unknown translation along
the principal axis (blue line). Using the full projection equations we then solve for the remaining translational degree of
freedom jointly with focal length and distortion parameters.
perpendicular to the optical axis. These misalignments can
be modeled by adding a tangential component. For most
modern cameras, the radial component of the lens distortion
is dominant and the tangential component is often negligible. Therefore, most methods for camera calibration or joint
estimation of camera pose and its intrinsic calibration consider distortion models consisting only of the radial component. The tangential component is either neglected entirely
or is estimated only in a final, non-linear, refinement step.
There are two approaches for handling radial distortion:
undistortion models estimate a function that maps the original distorted 2D pixel measurements to undistorted measurements. Such models are useful if unprojection, i.e.
mapping from image space to world space, is of particular
interest. For example, undistorting an image for processing
in Multi-View Stereo [39, 40]. In the context of minimal
solvers, the main advantage of undistortion models is that
they decouple the camera pose parameters, i.e., the parameters describing the rotation and translation of the camera,
from the distortion parameters. To the best of our knowledge, all minimal solvers for problems with radial distortion [6, 12, 16, 20–22, 24, 25, 27–29, 34–36] in the literature
are based on undistortion models.
Distortion models determine a mapping from undistorted

1062

