Point-Based Multi-View Stereo Network
Rui Chen1,3*
1
Tsinghua University

Songfang Han2,3*
Jing Xu1
Hao Su3
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
University of California, San Diego

chenr17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
jingxu@tsinghua.edu.cn

haosu@eng.ucsd.edu

GT
surface

GT
surface

Coarse prediction
before ow

shanaf@connect.ust.hk

Rened prediction
after ow

PointFlow

Final prediction
Dynamic Feature Fetching

Figure 1: Point-MVSNet performs multi-view stereo reconstruction in a coarse-to-fine fashion, learning to predict the 3D flow of each point
to the groundtruth surface based on geometry priors and 2D image appearance cues dynamically fetched from multi-view images and regress
accurate and dense point clouds iteratively.

Abstract
We introduce Point-MVSNet, a novel point-based deep
framework for multi-view stereo (MVS). Distinct from
existing cost volume approaches, our method directly
processes the target scene as point clouds. More specifically,
our method predicts the depth in a coarse-to-fine manner.
We first generate a coarse depth map, convert it into a point
cloud and refine the point cloud iteratively by estimating
the residual between the depth of the current iteration
and that of the ground truth. Our network leverages 3D
geometry priors and 2D texture information jointly and
effectively by fusing them into a feature-augmented point
cloud, and processes the point cloud to estimate the 3D flow
for each point. This point-based architecture allows higher
accuracy, more computational efficiency and more flexibility
than cost-volume-based counterparts. Experimental results
show that our approach achieves a significant improvement
in reconstruction quality compared with state-of-the-art
methods on the DTU and the Tanks and Temples dataset.
Our source code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/callmeray/PointMVSNet.

* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Recent learning-based multi-view stereo (MVS)
methods [12, 29, 10] have shown great success compared
with their traditional counterparts as learning-based
approaches are able to learn to take advantage of scene
global semantic information, including object materials,
specularity, and environmental illumination, to get more
robust matching and more complete reconstruction. All
these approaches apply dense multi-scale 3D CNNs to
predict the depth map or voxel occupancy. However, 3D
CNNs require memory cubic to the model resolution,
which can be potentially prohibitive to achieving optimal
performance. While Maxim et al. [24] addressed this
problem by progressively generating an Octree structure,
the quantization artifacts brought by grid partitioning
still remain, and errors may accumulate since the tree is
generated layer by layer.
In this work, we propose a novel point cloud multi-view
stereo network, where the target scene is directly processed
as a point cloud, a more efficient representation, particularly
when the 3D resolution is high. Our framework is composed
of two steps: first, in order to carve out the approximate
object surface from the whole scene, an initial coarse depth
map is generated by a relatively small 3D cost volume and

1538

