Transductive Episodic-Wise Adaptive Metric for Few-Shot Learning
Limeng Qiao1,4 , Yemin Shi2,4 , Jia Li3,4∗, Yaowei Wang4 , Tiejun Huang2,4 and Yonghong Tian2,4∗ ,
1
Center for Data Science, AAIS, Peking University
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of EE&CS, Peking University
3
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
4
Peng Cheng Laborotory, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Few-shot learning, which aims at extracting new concepts rapidly from extremely few examples of novel classes, has been featured into the meta-learning paradigm recently. Yet, the key challenge of how to learn a generalizable classifier with the capability of adapting to specific tasks with severely limited data still remains in this domain. To this end, we propose a Transductive Episodic-wise
Adaptive Metric (TEAM) framework for few-shot learning,
by integrating the meta-learning paradigm with both deep
metric learning and transductive inference. With exploring the pairwise constraints and regularization prior within each task, we explicitly formulate the adaptation procedure into a standard semi-definite programming problem.
By solving the problem with its closed-form solution on the
fly with the setup of transduction, our approach efficiently
tailors an episodic-wise metric for each task to adapt all
features from a shared task-agnostic embedding space into
a more discriminative task-specific metric space. Moreover,
we further leverage an attention-based bi-directional similarity strategy for extracting the more robust relationship
between queries and prototypes. Extensive experiments on
three benchmark datasets show that our framework is superior to other existing approaches and achieves the state-ofthe-art performance in the few-shot literature.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved great success on
many practical applications recently and even have surpassed humans in image recognition domain [8, 15, 28].
However, these successes largely benefit from tens of thousands of labeled data, enormous number of parameters and
sophisticated training strategies. In terms of the low-data
scenarios, such as medical images classification and ma∗ Correspondence should be addressed to Yonghong Tian and Jia Li.
(yhtian@pku.edu.cn and jiali@buaa.edu.cn).

Figure 1. The left part shows a general framework of previous approaches based on meta learning. The model embeds all samples
into a task-independent metric space with a shared CNN. However, considering the distinctive information within each task, we
further learn an episodic-wise adaptive metric for classification.
The right part illustrates the motivation of our approach briefly.

rine biological recognition, deep neural networks will be
over-fitting and severely collapse because only rare labeled
samples are provided for training. To this end, by exploring the exciting idea that tries to learn new concepts rapidly
and generalize well with extremely few examples, or even
single, few-shot learning has attracted significant research
interest recently [5, 19, 24, 27, 29, 35, 38].
Concretely, we focus on the case of few-shot classification with the meta-learning paradigm, which leverages a
series of independent and identically distributed few-shot
tasks to learn a desired classifier at training time and applies
the model directly to non-overlap unseen target classification problem during testing phase. The so-called episodictraining strategy, which has been widely developed in many
previous work [29, 35], keeps the consistency between the
training and real test scenario and improve the generalization performances. In each task (or episode), only a handful
of labeled examples per classes (the support set) are provided to the classifier for training and then plenty of unlabeled
points (the query set) need to be assigned labels for prediction. Specifically, [29, 35, 38] jointed the meta-learning
with metric learning as a feed-forward manner, with opti13603

