MONET: Multiview Semi-supervised Keypoint Detection
via Epipolar Divergence
Yuan Yao
University of Minnesota

Yasamin Jafarian
University of Minnesota

Hyun Soo Park
University of Minnesota

yaoxx340@umn.edu

yasamin@umn.edu

hspark@umn.edu

Figure 1: This paper presents MONET-an semi-supervised learning for keypoint detection, which is able to localize customized keypoints of
diverse species, e.g., humans, dogs, and monkeys with very limited number of labeled data without a pre-trained model. The right most
figure illustrates 3D reconstruction of monkey movement using our pose detection.

Abstract
This paper presents MONET—an end-to-end semisupervised learning framework for a keypoint detector using
multiview image streams. In particular, we consider general
subjects such as non-human species where attaining a large
scale annotated dataset is challenging. While multiview
geometry can be used to self-supervise the unlabeled data,
integrating the geometry into learning a keypoint detector is
challenging due to representation mismatch. We address this
mismatch by formulating a new differentiable representation
of the epipolar constraint called epipolar divergence—a generalized distance from the epipolar lines to the corresponding keypoint distribution. Epipolar divergence characterizes
when two view keypoint distributions produce zero reprojection error. We design a twin network that minimizes the
epipolar divergence through stereo rectification that can significantly alleviate computational complexity and sampling
aliasing in training. We demonstrate that our framework
can localize customized keypoints of diverse species, e.g.,
humans, dogs, and monkeys.

1. Introduction
Human pose detection has advanced significantly over
the last few years [8, 43, 64, 69], driven in large part to new
approaches based on deep learning. But these techniques
require large amounts of labeled training data. For this
reason, pose detection is almost always demonstrated on
humans, for which large-scale datasets are available (e.g.,

MS COCO [37] and MPII [2]). What about pose detectors
for other animals, such as monkeys, mice, and dogs? Such
algorithms could have enormous scientific impact [41], but
obtaining large-scale labeled training data would be a substantial challenge: each individual species may need its own
dataset, some species have large intra-class variations, and
domain experts may be needed to perform the labeling accurately. Moreover, while there is significant commercial
interest in human pose recognition, there may be little incentive for companies and research labs to invest in collecting
large-scale datasets for other species.
This paper addresses this annotation challenge by leveraging multiview image streams. Our insight is that the manual
effort of annotation can be significantly reduced by using
the redundant visual information embedded in the multiview
imagery, allowing cross-view self-supervision: one image
can provide a supervisionary signal to another image through
epipolar geometry without 3D reconstruction. To this end,
we design a novel end-to-end semi-supervised framework
to utilize a large set of unlabeled multiview images using
cross-view supervision.
The key challenge of integrating the epipolar geometry
for building a strong keypoint (pose) detector lies in a representational mismatch: the geometric quantities such as
points, lines, and planes are represented as a vectors [18]
(Figure 2(a) left) while the raster representation via pixel
response (heatmap [8, 43, 69]) has been shown strong performance on keypoint detection. For instance, applying the
epipolar constraint [40]—a point x ∈ R2 must lie in the
1753

