Be Your Own Teacher: Improve the Performance of Convolutional Neural
Networks via Self Distillation
Linfeng Zhang1 Jiebo Song3 Anni Gao3 Jingwei Chen4 Chenglong Bao2∗ Kaisheng Ma1∗
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University
3
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Core Technology
4
HiSilicon
{zhang-lf19, kaisheng, clbao}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
{songjb, gaoan}@iiisct.com, jean.chenjingwei@hisilicon.com

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks have been widely deployed in various application scenarios. In order to extend the applications’ boundaries to some accuracy-crucial
domains, researchers have been investigating approaches
to boost accuracy through either deeper or wider network
structures, which brings with them the exponential increment of the computational and storage cost, delaying the
responding time.
In this paper, we propose a general training framework named self distillation, which notably enhances the
performance (accuracy) of convolutional neural networks
through shrinking the size of the network rather than aggrandizing it. Different from traditional knowledge distillation - a knowledge transformation methodology among
networks, which forces student neural networks to approximate the softmax layer outputs of pre-trained teacher neural
networks, the proposed self distillation framework distills
knowledge within network itself. The networks are firstly
divided into several sections. Then the knowledge in the
deeper portion of the networks is squeezed into the shallow
ones. Experiments further prove the generalization of the
proposed self distillation framework: enhancement of accuracy at average level is 2.65%, varying from 0.61% in
ResNeXt as minimum to 4.07% in VGG19 as maximum. In
addition, it can also provide flexibility of depth-wise scalable inference on resource-limited edge devices. Our codes
have been released on github5 .
5 https://github.com/ArchipLab-LinfengZhang/
pytorch-self-distillation.
6 This paper is supported by Institute for Interdisciplinary Information
Core Technology, Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence and Zhongguancun Haihua Institute for Frontier Information Technology.
∗ Corresponding Authors.

1. Introduction
With the help of convolutional neural networks, applications such as image classification [22, 34] ,object detection [28], and semantic segmentation [7, 40] are developing at an unprecedented speed nowadays. Yet, in some applications demanding intolerate errors such as automated
driving and medical image analysis, prediction and analysis accuracy needs to be further improved, while at the
same time, shorter response time is required. This leads
to tremendous challenges on current convolutional neural
networks. Traditional methods were focused on either performance improvement or reduction of computational resources (thus response time). On the one hand, for instance, ResNet 150 or even larger ResNet 1000 have been
proposed to improve very limited performance margin but
with massive computational penalty. On the other hand,
with a pre-defined performance lost compared with best effort networks, various techniques have been proposed to reduce the computation and storage amount to match the limitations brought by hardware implementation. Such techniques include lightweight networks design [19, 16], pruning [12, 13] and quantization [5, 31]. Knowledge Distillation (KD) [15] was one of the available approaches, or even
regarded as a trick, to achieve model compression.
As one of the popular compression approaches, knowledge distillation [15] is inspired by knowledge transfer from
teachers to students. Its key strategy is to orientate compact
student models to approximate over-parameterized teacher
models. As a result, student models can gain significant performance boost which is sometimes even better than that
of teacher’s. By replacing the over-parameterized teacher
model with a compact student model, high compression
and rapid acceleration can be achieved. However, glories
come with remaining problems. The first setback is low efficiency on knowledge transfer, which means student mod-

3713

