Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation via Minimax Entropy
Kuniaki Saito1 , Donghyun Kim1 , Stan Sclaroff1 , Trevor Darrell2 and Kate Saenko1
1
Boston University, 2 University of California, Berkeley
1

{keisaito, donhk, sclaroff, saenko}@bu.edu, 2 trevor@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract

Task-specific
Classifier
Domain Classifier

Contemporary domain adaptation methods are very effective at aligning feature distributions of source and target domains without any target supervision. However,
we show that these techniques perform poorly when even
a few labeled examples are available in the target domain. To address this semi-supervised domain adaptation (SSDA) setting, we propose a novel Minimax Entropy
(MME) approach that adversarially optimizes an adaptive
few-shot model. Our base model consists of a feature
encoding network, followed by a classification layer that
computes the features’ similarity to estimated prototypes
(representatives of each class). Adaptation is achieved
by alternately maximizing the conditional entropy of unlabeled target data with respect to the classifier and minimizing it with respect to the feature encoder. We empirically demonstrate the superiority of our method over
many baselines, including conventional feature alignment
and few-shot methods, setting a new state of the art for
SSDA. Our code is available at http://cs-people.
bu.edu/keisaito/research/MME.html.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks [16] have significantly improved image classification accuracy with the help
of large quantities of labeled training data, but often generalize poorly to new domains. Recent unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) methods [11, 19, 20, 28, 37] improve
generalization on unlabeled target data by aligning distributions, but can fail to learn discriminative class boundaries
on target domains (see Fig. 1.) We show that in the SemiSupervised Domain Adaptation (SSDA) setting where a few
target labels are available, such methods often do not improve performance relative to just training on labeled source
and target examples, and can even make it worse.
We propose a novel approach for SSDA that overcomes
the limitations of previous methods and significantly improves the accuracy of deep classifiers on novel domains
with only a few labels per class. Our approach, which we

Conventional Domain Classifier Based Method
Train Domain Classifier

Update features

Labeled Source
Labeled Target
Unlabeled Target
Deceive
Domain Classifier

Estimated Prototypes

Minimax Entropy (Ours)
Estimate prototype
with labeled examples

Update prototype

Maximize entropy
on unlabeled target

Update features

Minimize entropy
on unlabeled target

Figure 1: We address the task of semi-supervised domain adaptation. Top: Existing domain-classifier based methods align source
and target distributions but can fail by generating ambiguous features near the task decision boundary. Bottom: Our method estimates a representative point of each class (prototype) and extracts
discriminative features using a novel minimax entropy technique.

call Minimax Entropy (MME), is based on optimizing a
minimax loss on the conditional entropy of unlabeled data,
as well as the task loss; this reduces the distribution gap
while learning discriminative features for the task.
We exploit a cosine similarity-based classifier architecture recently proposed for few-shot learning [12, 5]. The
classifier (top layer) predicts a K-way class probability vector by computing cosine similarity between K class-specific
weight vectors and the output of a feature extractor (lower
layers), followed by a softmax. Each class weight vector is
an estimated “prototype” that can be regarded as a representative point of that class. While this approach outperformed
more advanced methods in few-shot learning and we confirmed its effectiveness in our setting, as we show below it
is still quite limited. In particular, it does not leverage unlabeled data in the target domain.
Our key idea is to minimize the distance between the
class prototypes and neighboring unlabeled target samples,
thereby extracting discriminative features. The problem is
how to estimate domain-invariant prototypes without many

8050

