Layout-induced Video Representation for
Recognizing Agent-in-Place Actions
Ruichi Yu1,2∗ Hongcheng Wang2
Ang Li Jingxiao Zheng1 Vlad I. Morariu3† Larry S. Davis1
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Comcast Applied AI Research 3 Adobe Research
1

1
2

{yrcbsg, angli, jxzheng, lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu,

hongcheng_wang@comcast.com, 3 morariu@adobe.com

Abstract
We address scene layout modeling for recognizing agentin-place actions, which are actions associated with agents
who perform them and the places where they occur, in the
context of outdoor home surveillance. We introduce a novel
representation to model the geometry and topology of scene
layouts so that a network can generalize from the layouts
observed in the training scenes to unseen scenes in the test
set. This Layout-Induced Video Representation (LIVR) abstracts away low-level appearance variance and encodes
geometric and topological relationships of places to explicitly model scene layout. LIVR partitions the semantic features of a scene into different places to force the network
to learn generic place-based feature descriptions which are
independent of specific scene layouts; then, LIVR dynamically aggregates features based on connectivities of places
in each specific scene to model its layout. We introduce a
new Agent-in-Place Action (APA) dataset to show that our
method allows neural network models to generalize significantly better to unseen scenes.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep neural networks have brought
significant improvements to many fundamental computer
vision tasks, including video action recognition [8, 36, 46,
48, 22, 37, 19, 4]. Current action recognition methods are
able to detect, recognize or localize general actions and
identify the agents (people, vehicles, etc.) [8, 36, 46, 22, 37,
19, 4, 7, 28, 26, 42, 40, 18]. However, in applications such
as surveillance, relevant actions often involve locations and
moving directions that relate to to scene layouts–for example, it might be of interest to detect (and issue an alert about)
a person walking towards the front door of a house, but not
∗ Work done at the Comcast Applied AI Research.
† Was affiliated with the University of Maryland during the work.

<vehicle, move away
(home), driveway>

<pet, move along, sidewalk> <person, move away
<person, move along, sidewalk> (home), driveway>

Figure 1. Example agent-in-place actions and segmentation maps.
Different colors represent different places. We zoom in to the
agents performing the actions for clarity. An agent-in-place action
is represented as <agent, action, place>. Same colors indicate
same place types (e.g., green for lawn, blue for walkway, etc.).

to detect a person walking along the sidewalk. So, what
makes an action "interesting" is how the it interacts with the
geometry and topology of the scene.
Examples of these actions in outdoor home surveillance
scenarios and the semantic segmentation maps of scenes
are shown in Fig.1. We refer to these actions as "agentin-place" actions to distinguish them from the widely studied generic action categories. From those examples we
observe that although the types of place are limited (e.g.,
street, walkway, lawn), the layout (i.e., structure of places,
including reference to location, size, appearance of places
and their adjacent places) vary significantly from scene to
scene. Without large-scale training data (which is hard to
collect considering privacy issues), a naive method that directly learns from raw pixels in training videos without layout modeling can easily overfit to scene-specific patterns
and absolute pixel coordinates, and exhibit poor generalization on layouts of new scenes.
To address the generalization problem, we propose the
Layout-Induced Video Representation (LIVR), which explicitly models scene layout for action recognition by encoding the layout in the network architecture given semantic segmentation maps. The representation has three com11262

