From Open Set to Closed Set: Counting Objects by Spatial Divide-and-Conquer∗
Haipeng Xiong† , Hao Lu‡ , Chengxin Liu† , Liang Liu† , Zhiguo Cao† , Chunhua Shen‡
†
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
‡
The University of Adelaide, Australia
{hpxiong,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn, hao.lu@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Visual counting, a task that predicts the number of objects from an image/video, is an open-set problem by nature,
i.e., the number of population can vary in [0, +∞) in theory.
However, the collected images and labeled count values are
limited in reality, which means only a small closed set is
observed. Existing methods typically model this task in a
regression manner, while they are likely to suffer from an
unseen scene with counts out of the scope of the closed set.
In fact, counting is decomposable. A dense region can always be divided until sub-region counts are within the previously observed closed set. Inspired by this idea, we propose a simple but effective approach, Spatial Divide-andConquer Network (S-DCNet). S-DCNet only learns from
a closed set but can generalize well to open-set scenarios
via S-DC. S-DCNet is also efficient. To avoid repeatedly
computing sub-region convolutional features, S-DC is executed on the feature map instead of on the input image. SDCNet achieves the state-of-the-art performance on three
crowd counting datasets (ShanghaiTech, UCF CC 50 and
UCF-QNRF), a vehicle counting dataset (TRANCOS) and
a plant counting dataset (MTC). Compared to the previous best methods, S-DCNet brings a 20.2% relative improvement on the ShanghaiTech Part B, 20.9% on the UCFQNRF, 22.5% on the TRANCOS and 15.1% on the MTC.
Code has been made available at: https://github.
com/xhp-hust-2018-2011/S-DCNet.

1. Introduction
The task of visual counting in Computer Vision is to infer the number of objects (people, cars, maize tassels, etc.)
from an image/video. It has wide applications, such as automatic crowd management [15, 16, 17, 37, 38], traffic monitoring [14, 25], and crop yield estimation [10, 13, 23]. Extensive attention has been received in recent years.
∗ Haipeng Xiong and Hao Lu contributed equally. Zhiguo Cao is the
corresponding author.

Figure 1. The histogram of count values of 64 × 64 local patches
on the test set of ShanghaiTech Part A dataset [38]. The orange
curve denotes the relative mean absolute error (rMAE) of CSRNet [20] on local patches.

Counting is an open-set problem by nature as a count
value can range from 0 to +∞ in theory. It is thus typically modeled in a regression manner. Benefiting from the
success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), state-ofthe-art deep counting networks often adopt a multi-branch
architecture to enhance the feature robustness to dense regions [2, 4, 38]. However, the observed patterns in datasets
are limited in practice, which means networks can only
learn from a closed set. Are these counting networks still
able to generate accurate predictions when the number of
objects is out of the scope of the closed set? Meanwhile, observed local counts exhibit a long-tailed distribution shown
in Figure 1. Extremely dense patches are rare while sparse
patches take up the majority. As what can be observed, the
relative mean absolute error (rMAE) increases significantly
with increased local density. Is it necessary to set the working range of CNN-based regressors to the maximum count
value observed, even with a majority of samples are sparse
such that the regressor works poorly in this range?
In fact, counting has an unique property—spatially decomposable. The above problem can be largely alleviated
with the idea of spatial divide-and-conquer (S-DC). Suppose that a network has been trained to accurately predict a
closed set of counts, say 0 ∼ 20. When facing an image
with extremely dense objects, one can keep dividing the

8362

