Mono-SF: Multi-View Geometry Meets Single-View Depth
for Monocular Scene Flow Estimation of Dynamic Traffic Scenes
Fabian Brickwedde1,2 Steffen Abraham1 Rudolf Mester3,2
1
Robert Bosch GmbH, Hildesheim, Germany
2
VSI Lab, CS Dept., Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany
3
Norwegian Open AI Lab, CS Dept. (IDI), NTNU Trondheim, Norway
{Fabian.Brickwedde;Steffen.Abraham}@de.bosch.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
In applications such as mobile robots or autonomous vehicles a representation of the surrounding environment is
utilized, e.g. to fulfill a navigation task. From a computer
vision point of view, the 3D position and motion of a pixel
in the image is denoted as 3D scene flow [59, 60], which is
traditionally estimated based on a temporal series of stereo
images [4, 44, 61]. In this work, we propose a novel scene
flow estimation method, Mono-SF, for a monocular camera
setup focusing on dynamic traffic scenes. Monocular camera systems are often preferred over stereo cameras due to
being more cost efficient and to avoid the effort of calibrat-

t=1

Probprobabilistic depth distributions
DepthNets
uncertainty
depth

photometric
distance
6D motion of
rigid bodies 3D planes
of superpixels

probabilistic
optimization

depth
consistency
depth
consistency

depth

t=0

Existing 3D scene flow estimation methods provide the
3D geometry and 3D motion of a scene and gain a lot of
interest, for example in the context of autonomous driving.
These methods are traditionally based on a temporal series of stereo images. In this paper, we propose a novel
monocular 3D scene flow estimation method, called MonoSF. Mono-SF jointly estimates the 3D structure and motion
of the scene by combining multi-view geometry and singleview depth information. Mono-SF considers that the scene
flow should be consistent in terms of warping the reference
image in the consecutive image based on the principles of
multi-view geometry. For integrating single-view depth in
a statistical manner, a convolutional neural network, called
ProbDepthNet, is proposed. ProbDepthNet estimates pixelwise depth distributions from a single image rather than
single depth values. Additionally, as part of ProbDepthNet, a novel recalibration technique for regression problems
is proposed to ensure well-calibrated distributions. Our
experiments show that Mono-SF outperforms state-of-theart monocular baselines and ablation studies support the
Mono-SF approach and ProbDepthNet design.

images + instance masks

uncertainty

3D scene model

Figure 1. Overview of Mono-SF for monocular scene flow estimation. Mono-SF jointly optimizes the 3D geometry of a set of planes
with the 6D motion of rigid bodies considering a) a photometric
distance by warping the reference image into the consecutive image, b) probabilistic depth distributions provided by ProbDepthNet
and c) scene model smoothness priors.

ing the stereo rig. However, 3D scene flow estimation is an
ill-posed problem in a monocular camera setup. To solve
the ambiguity, previous monocular methods assumed that
the moving objects are in contact with the surrounding environment [6, 8, 51] or that the scene follows a smoothness
prior regarding surface and motion [36, 46, 66]. These assumptions might be violated and the methods still require
a relative translational motion of the camera to the scene.
In contrast to the multi-view geometry-based approaches,
methods were proposed (e.g. [10,14,19]) that provide depth
estimates from a single image at a reasonable level of quality. However, single-view depth estimation and multi-view
geometry are mostly tackled as two individual tasks or fused
in a way that is only applicable for static scenes [12,54,71].
Our proposed Mono-SF method combines multi-view geometry with single-view depth information in a probabilistic optimization framework to provide consistent 3D scene
flow estimates. Thereby, both kinds of information are exploited and the single-view depth serves to solve the multiview geometry-based ambiguity.

2780

