Face-to-Parameter Translation for Game Character Auto-Creation
Tianyang Shi
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab

Yi Yuan*
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab

Changjie Fan
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab

shitianyang@corp.netease.com

yuanyi@corp.netease.com

fanchangjie@corp.netease.com

Zhengxia Zou
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Zhenwei Shi*
Beihang University

Yong Liu
Zhejiang University

zzhengxi@umich.edu

shizhenwei@buaa.edu.cn

yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Character customization system is an important component in Role-Playing Games (RPGs), where players are allowed to edit the facial appearance of their in-game characters with their own preferences rather than using default
templates. This paper proposes a method for automatically
creating in-game characters of players according to an input face photo. We formulate the above “artistic creation”
process under a facial similarity measurement and parameter searching paradigm by solving an optimization problem over a large set of physically meaningful facial parameters. To effectively minimize the distance between the created face and the real one, two loss functions, i.e. a “discriminative loss” and a “facial content loss”, are specifically designed. As the rendering process of a game engine
is not differentiable, a generative network is further introduced as an “imitator” to imitate the physical behavior of
the game engine so that the proposed method can be implemented under a neural style transfer framework and the
parameters can be optimized by gradient descent. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves a high
degree of generation similarity between the input face photo
and the created in-game character in terms of both global
appearance and local details. Our method has been deployed in a new game last year and has now been used by
players over 1 million times.

1. Introduction
The character customization system is an important component in role-playing games (RPGs), where players are allowed to edit the profiles of their in-game characters according to their own preferences (e.g. a pop star or even themselves) rather than using default templates. In recent RPGs,

Figure 1. An overview of our method: We propose a method for
game character auto-creation based on an input face photo, which
can be formulated under a facial similarity measurement and the
searching of a large set of physically meaningful facial parameters.
Users can further optionally fine-tune the facial parameters on our
creation according to their needs.

to improve the player’s immersion, character customization
systems are becoming more and more sophisticated. As a
result, the character customization process turns out to be
time-consuming and laborious for most players. For example, in “Grand Theft Auto Online1 ”, “Dark Souls III2 ”, and
“Justice3 ”, to create an in-game character with a desired facial appearance according to a real face photo, a player has
to spend several hours manually adjusting hundreds of parameters, even after considerable practice.
A standard work-flow for the creation of the character’s
face in RPGs begins with the configuration of a large set of
facial parameters. A game engine then takes in these userspecified parameters as inputs and generates the 3D faces.
Arguably, the game character customization can be considered as a special case of a “monocular 3D face reconstruc1 https://www.rockstargames.com/GTAOnline
2 https://www.darksouls.jp
3 https://n.163.com

* Corresponding authors

161

