Spatial-Temporal Relation Networks for Multi-Object Tracking
Jiarui Xu13∗, Yue Cao23∗ , Zheng Zhang3 , Han Hu3
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Software, Tsinghua University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
jxuat@ust.hk, caoyue10@gmail.com, {zhez,hanhu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent progress in multiple object tracking (MOT) has
shown that a robust similarity score is key to the success of
trackers. A good similarity score is expected to reflect multiple cues, e.g. appearance, location, and topology, over a
long period of time. However, these cues are heterogeneous,
making them hard to be combined in a unified network. As
a result, existing methods usually encode them in separate
networks or require a complex training approach. In this
paper, we present a unified framework for similarity measurement between a tracklet and an object, which simultaneously encode various cues across time. We show a crucial
principle to achieve this unified framework is the design of
compatible feature representation for different cues and different sources (tracklet and object). A key technique behind
this principle is a spatial-temporal relation module, which
jointly models appearance and topology, and makes tracklet and object features compatible. The resulting method,
named spatial-temporal relation networks (STRN), runs in
a feed-forward way and can be trained in an end-to-end
manner. The state-of-the-art accuracy was achieved on all
of the MOT15∼17 benchmarks using public detection and
online settings.

1. Introduction
Multiple object tracking (MOT) aims at locating objects
and maintaining their identities across video frames. It has
attracted a lot of attention because of its broad applications such as surveillance, sports game analysis, and autonomous driving. Most recent approaches follow the popular “tracking-by-detection” paradigm [12, 19, 27, 33, 35,
47, 58], where objects are firstly localized in each frame and
then associated across frames. Such a decoupled pipeline
reduces the overall complexity and shifts the major attention of MOT to a more unitary problem: object association.
∗ This work is done when Jiarui Xu and Yue Cao are interns at Microsoft
Research Asia.

Frame t-k

Frame 1

Temporal
Relation

Enriched
Relation
Features

Frame t

Spatial
Relation

Enriched
x,y,h,w x,y,h,w Location
Features
Similarity
Score

Figure 1. The proposed spatial-temporal relation networks (STRN)
to compute similarity scores between tracklets and objects. The
networks can combine various cues such as appearance, location,
and topology, and aggregation information over time. The orange
boxes and blue box indicate the same person in different frames.

This paradigm also benefits from the rapid progress in the
field of object detection [15, 42, 60, 13] and has led several
popular benchmarks for years, i.e. MOT15∼17 [28, 34].
In general, the performance of object association highly
depends on a robust similarity score. The similarities in the
most existing approaches are only based on the appearance
features extracted from the cropped object patches [29].
The performance by such similarities is limited due to
the following reasons: Firstly, the objects are often from
the same category in tracking scenario, e.g. person in
MOT15∼17 benchmark, with appearance hard to be distinguished. Secondly, objects across frames also suffer from
frequent occlusions and pose variations, which further increases the difficulty in building a robust similarity score.
The pioneering works of exploring varying cues to build
the similarity score have been proven to be effective[46,
12, 63, 58]. Convolutional neural networks have been well
studied and employed to encode appearance cue [56, 63],
13988

