Deep SR-ITM: Joint Learning of Super-Resolution and
Inverse Tone-Mapping for 4K UHD HDR Applications
Soo Ye Kim
Jihyong Oh
Munchurl Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{sooyekim, jhoh94, mkimee} @kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent modern displays are now able to render high
dynamic range (HDR), high resolution (HR) videos of up to
8K UHD (Ultra High Definition). Consequently, UHD
HDR broadcasting and streaming have emerged as high
quality premium services. However, due to the lack of
original UHD HDR video content, appropriate conversion
technologies are urgently needed to transform the legacy
low resolution (LR) standard dynamic range (SDR) videos
into UHD HDR versions. In this paper, we propose a joint
super-resolution (SR) and inverse tone-mapping (ITM)
framework, called Deep SR-ITM, which learns the direct
mapping from LR SDR video to their HR HDR version.
Joint SR and ITM is an intricate task, where high frequency
details must be restored for SR, jointly with the local
contrast, for ITM. Our network is able to restore fine
details by decomposing the input image and focusing on the
separate base (low frequency) and detail (high frequency)
layers. Moreover, the proposed modulation blocks apply
location-variant operations to enhance local contrast. The
Deep SR-ITM shows good subjective quality with increased
contrast and details, outperforming the previous joint
SR-ITM method.

1. Introduction
Modern TVs come with 4K/8K UHD (Ultra High
Definition) displays and high dynamic range (HDR)
capabilities. Nevertheless, the current Digital TV and
Internet TV (IPTV) services still provide the legacy video
contents of Full HD (FHD) resolution and standard
dynamic range (SDR), which then, must be rendered on the
premium TV displays that support 4K/8K UHD and HDR
videos. Therefore at the terminal end, it is necessary to
convert the FHD SDR videos to 4K/8K UHD HDR in order
to display them on the premium displays. Furthermore, the
new media services of high quality suffer from the lack of
original 4K/8K UHD and HDR visual content. Thus, it is
also essential to convert the legacy contents of Full HD and
SDR video to 4K/8K UHD and HDR videos at the content
production end.
In this paper, we aim to tackle the joint super-resolution
(SR) and inverse tone-mapping (ITM) problem, where

3116

EDSR+Huo
(a)

EDSR+Kovaleski
(b)

EDSR+Eilertsen
(c)

Ours
(d)

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison with other methods. Our
method shows enhanced contrast compared to the cascade of
existing SR [20] and ITM methods [9, 13, 15].

low-resolution (LR) SDR video can be directly converted
into high–resolution (HR) HDR video. Along with the
benefits in the terminal and content production ends, less
bandwidth is necessary if the transmitted LR SDR videos
are directly reconstructed as HR HDR on the device, with
this joint SR-ITM framework. Moreover, users can benefit
from high quality HR HDR visual content on their high-end
TVs.
However, such joint SR-ITM is a complex problem. In
LR images, high frequency details are lost with the reduced
spatial resolution compared to HR images. In SDR images,
local variations of contrast and local details are lost with the
reduced signal range (amplitude) compared to HDR images.
Therefore, for the joint SR-ITM task, it is important to
jointly restore the fine details and contrast while increasing
the spatial resolution and the signal amplitudes when
predicting the HR HDR image from the LR SDR input.
In our proposed architecture, called Deep SR-ITM, the

