VrR-VG: Refocusing Visually-Relevant Relationships∗
Yuanzhi Liang1,2 , Yalong Bai2 , Wei Zhang2 , Xueming Qian1 , Li Zhu1 , and Tao Mei2
1

2

Xi’an Jiaotong University
JD AI Research, Beijing, China

liangyzh13@stu.xjtu.edu.cn ylbai@outlook.com wzhang.cu@gmail.com {qianxm,
zhuli}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn tmei@live.com

Abstract
Relationships encode the interactions among individual
instances, and play a critical role in deep visual scene understanding. Suffering from the high predictability with
non-visual information, existing methods tend to fit the statistical bias rather than “learning” to “infer” the relationships from images. To encourage further development in visual relationships, we propose a novel method to automatically mine more valuable relationships by pruning visuallyirrelevant ones. We construct a new scene-graph dataset
named Visually-Relevant Relationships Dataset (VrR-VG)
based on Visual Genome. Compared with existing datasets,
the performance gap between learnable and statistical
method is more significant in VrR-VG, and frequency-based
analysis does not work anymore. Moreover, we propose to
learn a relationship-aware representation by jointly considering instances, attributes and relationships. By applying the representation-aware feature learned on VrRVG, the performances of image captioning and visual question answering are systematically improved with a large
margin, which demonstrates the gain of our dataset and
the features embedding schema. VrR-VG is available via
http://vrr-vg.com/.

1. Introduction
Although visual perception tasks (e.g., classification,
detection) have witnessed great advancement in the past
decade, visual cognition tasks (e.g., image captioning, question answering) are still limited due to the difficulty of reasoning [16]. Existing vision tasks are mostly based on individual objects analysis. However, a natural image usually
consists of multiple instances in a scene, and most of them
are related in some ways. To fully comprehend a visual im∗ This work was performed at JD AI Research.

people
light

train

on

on

sign

track

person

walk toward

platform
sign
hang on
platform

face

train
leave

person

Figure 1. Example scene graphs in VG150 (left) and VrR-VG
(right, ours). More visually-relevant relationships are included in
VrR-VG.

age, a holistic view is required to understand the relationships and interactions among object instances.
Visual relationships [19, 6, 33, 38, 40], which encode the
interplay between individual instances, become the indispensable factor for visual cognitive tasks such as image captioning [36], visual question answering (VQA) [21]. In existing literature, visual relationships are mostly represented
as a scene graph (Fig. 1): a node represents a specific instance (either as subject or object), and an edge encodes
the relation label (r) between a subject (s) and an object
(o). Equivalently, a scene graph can also be represented as
a set of triplets hs, r, oi. Recently, extensive research efforts [33, 38, 20, 35] are conducted on scene graph generation, which aims to extract the scene graph from an image
(Fig. 1). Essentially, scene graph generation bridges the gap
between visual perception and high-level cognition.
Among the datasets [26, 16, 19, 34, 24] adopted in visual relationship, Visual Genome (VG) [16] provides the
largest set of relationship annotations, offering large-scale
(2.3 million relationships) and dense (21 relationships per
image) relationship annotations. However, the relationships

10403

