Convex Shape Prior for Multi-object Segmentation Using a Single Level Set
Function
Shousheng Luo
Beijing Computational Science Research Center
Building 9, East Zone, ZPark II,
Haidian District, Beijing, China

Xue-Cheng Tai
Department of Mathematics
Hong Kong Baptist University
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong

Sluo1983@csrc.ac.cn

xuechengtai@hkbu.edu.hk

Limei Huo
School of Mathematics and
Statistics, Henan University
Kaifeng, China.
limei.huo@qq.com

Yang Wang
Department of Mathematics
Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong

Roland Glowinski
Department of Mathematics
University of Houston,
Houston, TX 77204, USA
roland@math.uh.edu

yangwang@ust.hk

Abstract
Many objects in real world have convex shapes. It is a
difficult task to have representations for convex shapes with
good and fast numerical solutions. This paper proposes a
method to incorporate convex shape prior for multi-object
segmentation using level set method. The relationship between the convexity of the segmented objects and the signed
distance function corresponding to their union is analyzed
theoretically. This result is combined with Gaussian mixture
method for the multiple objects segmentation with convexity shape prior. Alternating direction method of multiplier
(ADMM) is adopted to solve the proposed model. Special
boundary conditions are also imposed to obtain efficient algorithms for 4th order partial differential equations in one
step of ADMM algorithm. In addition, our method only
needs one level set function regardless of the number of objects. So the increase in the number of objects does not
result in the increase of model and algorithm complexity.
Various numerical experiments are illustrated to show the
performance and advantages of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is important in image processing
and computer vision. It has been an active research area
and numerous methods have been proposed, see [2, 3, 4, 16]
and the references therein. However, it is a challenging task
to segment the object of interest precisely and accurately
for poor quality images, such as occlusion and low contrast

images. Image segmentation with shape priors, such as convexity [8], star shape [26], geodesic star [9], hedgehog [11],
can effectively improve the segmentation accuracy and precision. Convexity is one of the widely used shape priors
[7, 8, 19]. In this paper, we propose a continuous model for
multiple disjoint convex objects segmentation. Our method
is based on convexity shape representation by level set function. One important advantage of the proposed model is
that its computational cost is independent of the number of
objects. We only need one level set function to represent
the convexity all the considered convex objects. The convexity of the represented objects is equivalent to a simple
constraint on the signed distance function. Labels on foreground and background can be incorporated in the model
easily to improve the segmentation accuracy. Some special
techniques are used to combine ADMM and proper boundary conditions to get very efficient algorithm. Experiments
on various images show the effectiveness of the model and
the efficiency of the algorithms.
Related works: Image segmentation with convex shape
prior has attracted much attention. It is well-known that
convexity is an important cue for human vision [12, 15].
Many objects in optical images and images created from
some inverse problems (such as CT, ultrasound, MRI, sonic)
are convex. However, the object integrity is often broken
due to occlusions, illumination bias and artifacts caused by
inverse crimes. In order to tackle the problem, convexity
prior has been investigated for image segmentation.
Several methods have been proposed in the literature.
According to the definition of convex region, the authors of

613

