Towards Unconstrained End-to-End Text Spotting
Siyang Qin, Alessandro Bissacco, Michalis Raptis, Yasuhisa Fujii, Ying Xiao
Google AI
{qinb,bissacco,mraptis,yasuhisaf,yingxiao}@google.com

Abstract
BAKE

We propose an end-to-end trainable network that can simultaneously detect and recognize text of arbitrary shape,
making substantial progress on the open problem of reading
scene text of irregular shape. We formulate arbitrary shape
text detection as an instance segmentation problem; an attention model is then used to decode the textual content of
each irregularly shaped text region without rectification. To
extract useful irregularly shaped text instance features from
image scale features, we propose a simple yet effective RoI
masking step. Additionally, we show that predictions from
an existing multi-step OCR engine can be leveraged as partially labeled training data, which leads to significant improvements in both the detection and recognition accuracy
of our model. Our method surpasses the state-of-the-art
for end-to-end recognition tasks on the ICDAR15 (straight)
benchmark by 4.6%, and on the Total-Text (curved) benchmark by more than 16%.

1. Introduction
Automatically detecting and recognizing text in images
can benefit a large number of practical applications, such as
autonomous driving, surveillance, or visual search and can
increase the environmental awareness of visually impaired
people [44].
Traditional optical character recognition (OCR) pipeline
methods usually partition the scene text reading task into
two sub-problems, scene text detection and cropped text
line recognition. Text detection methods try to spot text
instances (words or lines) in the input image, while text
recognition models take a cropped text patch and decode
its textual content. Since most scene text detection methods
are unable to directly predict the correct text reading direction, an additional direction identification step is necessary
for successful OCR engines [56].
Despite their long history and great success, the use of
multiple models within an OCR pipeline engine has several disadvantages: errors can accumulate in such a cascade
which may lead to a large fraction of garbage predictions.

BOUDIN

SHOP

B

PUNALUU

1849

SINCE

SOURDOUGH

SWEETBREAD

BAKERY
VISITOR

CAFE

CENTER

Figure 1. Our end-to-end model can predict the locations and transcriptions of text with arbitrary shape in a single forward pass.

Furthermore, each model in the pipeline depends on the outputs of the previous step, which makes it hard to jointly
maximize the end-to-end performance, and fine-tune the engine with new data or adapt it to a new domain. Finally,
maintaining such a cascaded pipeline with data and model
dependencies requires substantial engineering effort.
End-to-end OCR models overcome those disadvantages
and thus have recently started gaining traction in the research community [42, 54, 37, 24, 32]. The basic idea behind end-to-end OCR is to have the detector and recognizer
share the same CNN feature extractor. During training, the
detector and recognizer are jointly optimized; at inference
time, the model can predict locations and transcriptions in
a single forward pass. While producing superior accuracy
in straight text reading benchmarks, these methods struggle
to generalize and produce convincing results on more challenging datasets with curved text, which arise naturally and
frequently in everyday environments (see Figure 1 for two
such examples). Handling arbitrary shaped text is a crucial
open problem in order for OCR to move beyond its traditional straight text applications.
In this paper, we propose a simple and flexible end-toend OCR model based on a Mask R-CNN detector and a
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) attention decoder [3]. We
make no assumptions on the shape of the text: our model
can detect and recognize text of arbitrary shape, not just the
limited case of straight lines. The key idea underlying our
model is to skip the feature rectification step between the
detector and the recognizer, and directly feed cropped and

4704

