GP2 C: Geometric Projection Parameter Consensus for
Joint 3D Pose and Focal Length Estimation in the Wild
Alexander Grabner1
1
2

Peter M. Roth1

Vincent Lepetit2,1

Institute of Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria

Laboratoire Bordelais de Recherche en Informatique, University of Bordeaux, France
{alexander.grabner,pmroth,lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We present a joint 3D pose and focal length estimation
approach for object categories in the wild. In contrast to
previous methods that predict 3D poses independently of the
focal length or assume a constant focal length, we explicitly
estimate and integrate the focal length into the 3D pose estimation. For this purpose, we combine deep learning techniques and geometric algorithms in a two-stage approach:
First, we estimate an initial focal length and establish 2D3D correspondences from a single RGB image using a deep
network. Second, we recover 3D poses and refine the focal
length by minimizing the reprojection error of the predicted
correspondences. In this way, we exploit the geometric
prior given by the focal length for 3D pose estimation. This
results in two advantages: First, we achieve significantly
improved 3D translation and 3D pose accuracy compared
to existing methods. Second, our approach finds a geometric consensus between the individual projection parameters,
which is required for precise 2D-3D alignment. We evaluate our proposed approach on three challenging real-world
datasets (Pix3D, Comp, and Stanford) with different object
categories and significantly outperform the state-of-the-art
by up to 20% absolute in multiple different metrics.

1. Introduction
3D object pose estimation aims at predicting the 3D rotation and 3D translation of objects relative to the camera. It is
a fundamental yet unsolved computer vision problem with
many applications, including augmented reality, robotics,
and scene understanding. Recently, there have been great
advances in 3D object pose estimation from single RGB images on the category level [8, 28, 34, 41], thanks to the development of deep learning and the creation of large-scale
datasets providing 3D annotations for RGB images [46, 47].
While recent approaches achieve high accuracy in terms
of 3D rotation, their accuracy in terms of 3D translation is

Figure 1: Images captured with two cameras having different focal lengths. The appearance of the chair is similar in
both images, but the 3D poses are significantly different due
to the distinct focal lengths and object-to-camera distances.
often low [27, 42]. The main reason for this discrepancy
is illustrated in Figure 1, where we compare two images
of an object captured with cameras having different focal
lengths. The appearance of the object is similar in both images, even though the 3D poses are significantly different.
In fact, the appearance of an object in an image is not only
determined by the 3D pose, but also by the camera intrinsics. While changes in the 3D rotation always significantly
effect the appearance, changes in the 3D translation do not if
the translation direction and the ratio between the object-tocamera distance and the focal length remain constant. Thus,
estimating the 3D translation of objects from RGB images
in the case of unknown intrinsics is highly ambiguous.
Existing approaches assume that the 3D pose estimation
method will implicitly learn the subtle appearance variations caused by different focal lengths from the data and
adapt the prediction accordingly [27, 42]. In practice, however, this is not the case, because deep networks do not find
the solutions we intend without explicit guidance.
To overcome this limitation, we propose to explicitly estimate and integrate the focal length into the 3D pose estimation. For this purpose, we introduce a two-stage approach that combines deep learning techniques and geomet-

2222

