Continual Learning by Asymmetric Loss Approximation
with Single-Side Overestimation
Dongmin Park1,2
1

Seokil Hong1

Bohyung Han1

ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea

2

Kyoung Mu Lee1

Samsung Electronics, Korea

dmpark04@gmail.com, {hongceo96, bhhan, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

1. Introduction
It is common to learn machine learning models versatile
for multiple tasks in an incremental manner when new tasks
are given one by one, not in a batch. Continual learning is
a concept to learn a model for a large number of tasks sequentially without forgetting knowledge obtained from the
preceding tasks, where the data in the old tasks are not available any more during training new ones.
Catastrophic forgetting is a critical issue in realizing continual learning using deep neural networks. With a naı̈ve
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method, deep neural networks easily forget the knowledge obtained from the earlier
tasks while adapting to the new information quickly from
the incoming tasks [26, 8]. This is mainly because, without

Observed side
n
s

Catastrophic forgetting is a critical challenge in training deep neural networks. Although continual learning has
been investigated as a countermeasure to the problem, it
often suffers from the requirements of additional network
components and the limited scalability to a large number of
tasks. We propose a novel approach to continual learning
by approximating a true loss function using an asymmetric
quadratic function with one of its sides overestimated. Our
algorithm is motivated by the empirical observation that the
network parameter updates affect the target loss functions
asymmetrically. In the proposed continual learning framework, we estimate an asymmetric loss function for the tasks
considered in the past through a proper overestimation of
its unobserved sides in training new tasks, while deriving
the accurate model parameter for the observable sides. In
contrast to existing approaches, our method is free from the
side effects and achieves the state-of-the-art accuracy that
is even close to the upper-bound performance on several
challenging benchmark datasets.

True loss
Synaptic intelligence (SI)
Overestimated loss
ALASSO (ours)

Optimal quadratic loss
n

1

n

Figure 1. Conceptual diagram to illustrate why our loss approximation is required. The symmetric loss approximations such as the
quadratic approximation used in SI [37](yellow) is prone to underestimate the unobserved sides of potentially asymmetric real surrogate loss functions (black). We claim that properly introduced
asymmetry in the loss approximation (blue) prevents this problem.
Note that the other side are observed during the optimization of the
network in training the previous tasks and we can derive a more
accurate parameter for the quadratic optimization of the surrogate
function.

any countermeasure, the optimization based on the losses
of new tasks may not be desirable to retain the knowledge
about the tasks learned in the past. The catastrophic forgetting problem limits the capability and potential of deep
neural networks to be applied to dynamic real-world problems that require continuous adaptation to new environments. The continual learning or life-long learning is a
well-known framework to handle the catastrophic forgetting problem. It can be categorized into three categories:
architectural approach, functional approach, and structural
regularization approach. The architectural and functional
approaches typically need additional network components

3335

