Temporal Knowledge Propagation for Image-to-Video Person Re-identification
Xinqian Gu1,2 , Bingpeng Ma2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, 200031, China
xinqian.gu@vipl.ict.ac.cn, bpma@ucas.ac.cn, {changhong, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
TKP

Query

In many scenarios of Person Re-identification (Re-ID),
the gallery set consists of lots of surveillance videos and the
query is just an image, thus Re-ID has to be conducted between image and videos. Compared with videos, still person
images lack temporal information. Besides, the information
asymmetry between image and video features increases the
difficulty in matching images and videos. To solve this problem, we propose a novel Temporal Knowledge Propagation
(TKP) method which propagates the temporal knowledge
learned by the video representation network to the image
representation network. Specifically, given the input videos,
we enforce the image representation network to fit the outputs of video representation network in a shared feature
space. With back propagation, temporal knowledge can
be transferred to enhance the image features and the information asymmetry problem can be alleviated. With additional classification and integrated triplet losses, our model
can learn expressive and discriminative image and video
features for image-to-video re-identification. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method and
the overall results on two widely used datasets surpass the
state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Person Re-identificaiton (Re-ID) aims to find the sample
among the gallery set which has the same identity with a
given query. In general, Re-ID problems fall into two categories: image-based Re-ID [1, 36, 12, 8] and video-based
Re-ID [34, 32, 13]. The main difference is that the query
and gallery in image-based Re-ID are both images, while
the query and gallery in video-based Re-ID are both videos.
However, in many real-world scenarios, the gallery set
is usually constituted by lots of surveillance videos, while
the query only consists of one image, thus Re-ID has to

Gallery

…

Samples

…

Feature Maps

Figure 1: Visualisation of the feature maps. Due to lack of temporal information, compared with video features, the query image
feature only pays attention to some local regions. With the proposed TKP method, temporal knowledge can be transferred to enhance the image feature and the learned image feature focuses on
more foreground of person image.

be conducted between image and videos. One instance is
rapidly locating and tracking a criminal suspect among a
mass of surveillance videos according to one photo of the
suspect (e.g., Boston marathon bombings event). Due to
its crucial role in video surveillance system, image-to-video
(I2V) Re-ID [44, 45] has attracted increasing attention in
recent years.
In I2V Re-ID, the query is a still image, while the gallery
of videos contains additional temporal information. Some
research [37, 44] indicates that modeling temporal relations
between video frames makes the gallery video features robust to disturbing conditions. However, these methods ignore that the query of I2V Re-ID only consists of one still
image and lacks temporal information. As a result, on one
hand, the image feature cannot benefit from the advantages
of modeling temporal relations (see Figure 1). On the other
hand, the information asymmetry between image and video
features increases the difficulty in measuring the image-tovideo similarity. Hence, it is essential and desirable to develop a method to supplement temporal information to im-

9647

