Interpolated Convolutional Networks for 3D Point Cloud Understanding
Jiageng Mao Xiaogang Wang Hongsheng Li
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{maojiageng@link, xgwang@ee, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Point cloud is an important type of 3D representation.
However, directly applying convolutions on point clouds
is challenging due to the sparse, irregular and unordered
data structure. In this paper, we propose a novel Interpolated Convolution operation, InterpConv, to tackle the point
cloud feature learning and understanding problem. The key
idea is to utilize a set of discrete kernel weights and interpolate point features to neighboring kernel-weight coordinates by an interpolation function for convolution. A normalization term is introduced to handle neighborhoods of
different sparsity levels. Our InterpConv is shown to be
permutation and sparsity invariant, and can directly handle irregular inputs. We further design Interpolated Convolutional Neural Networks (InterpCNNs) based on InterpConv layers to handle point cloud recognition tasks including shape classification, object part segmentation and
indoor scene semantic parsing. Experiments show that
the networks can capture both fine-grained local structures
and global shape context information effectively. The proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on
public benchmarks including ModelNet40, ShapeNet Parts
and S3DIS.

1. Introduction
Point cloud is an important data format obtained by 3D
sensors and has shown extensive usage in many real-world
tasks including autonomous driving [7], robotics [32], etc.
Efficient learning from point cloud data remains a challenge
to the research community, given the fact that point clouds
are usually irregular, unordered and sparse.
In view of the great success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on 2D images, many endeavors have been
made to adapt the convolution operation to 3D point clouds.
Currently there are two main approaches to tackle this problem. The first type of attempts [24] is to directly rasterize irregular point clouds into regular voxel grids, and
adopts standard 3D convolutions to learn shape features.
However, the transformation of irregular inputs leads to a
loss of geometric information, and convolutions on dense
voxel grids lead to heavy computational burden. Other ap-

(a) 3D convolutions with rasterization

(b) Graph neural networks

(c) InterpConv with trilinear in- (d) InterpConv with Gaussian interpolation
terpolation

Figure 1. Illustration of different types of convolutions on point
clouds. Red points denote point clouds and green points denote
spatially-discrete kernel weights. Green lines in (b) denote continuous convolutional kernels. Our InterpConv directly takes irregular point clouds as inputs and interpolates point features to the
neighboring kernel weights by an interpolation function.

proaches [43, 45, 28, 49, 34, 20, 46, 39] build local graphs
in the neighborhood of each point in the Euclidean or feature space, then a continuous convolutional kernel is applied on each edge of the graph to learn geometric features.
Continuous kernels are commonly modeled by Multi-layer
Perceptrons (MLPs). These graph-based methods are able
to directly process irregular data structure but have some
drawbacks. The construction of local graphs is not sparsity
invariant. Namely, different point cloud densities sampled
from the same object surface lead to different neighborhood
selections, thus it may produce various graph construction
results. Besides, compared with discrete convolutions, uti-

1578

