Semi-Supervised Learning by Augmented Distribution Alignment
∗

Qin Wang1 , Wen Li1 , Luc Van Gool1,2
1

ETH Zurich 2 KU Leuven

qwang@student.ethz.ch {liwen,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this work, we propose a simple yet effective semisupervised learning approach called Augmented Distribution Alignment. We reveal that an essential sampling bias
exists in semi-supervised learning due to the limited number of labeled samples, which often leads to a considerable
empirical distribution mismatch between labeled data and
unlabeled data. To this end, we propose to align the empirical distributions of labeled and unlabeled data to alleviate the bias. On one hand, we adopt an adversarial
training strategy to minimize the distribution distance between labeled and unlabeled data as inspired by domain
adaptation works. On the other hand, to deal with the
small sample size issue of labeled data, we also propose
a simple interpolation strategy to generate pseudo training
samples. Those two strategies can be easily implemented
into existing deep neural networks. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed approach on the benchmark
SVHN and CIFAR10 datasets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/qinenergy/adanet.

1. Introduction
Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) aims to learn a robust
model with a limited number of labeled samples and a abundant number of unlabeled samples. As a classical learning paradigm, it has gained many interests from both machine learning and computer vision communities. Many
approaches have been proposed in recent decades, including label propagation, graph regularization, etc. [7, 6, 3, 22,
5, 55]. Recently, there is an increasing interest in training deep neural networks in the semi-supervised learning
scenario[33, 47, 32, 37, 39, 11, 10]. This is partially due
to the data-intensive nature of the conventional deep learning techniques, which often impose heavy demands on data
annotation and bring high cost.
∗ The corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of the empirical distribution mismatch between labeled and unlabeled samples with the two-moon data. The
labeled and unlabeled samples are shown in the bottom left and
bottom middle figures, and the kernel density estimations of their
x-axis projection are plotted in the top left and top middle figures,
respectively. Our approach aims to address the empirical distribution mismatch by aligning sample distributions in the latent space
(top right) and augmenting training samples with interpolation
between labeled and unlabeled data (bottom right).

While many strategies have been proposed to utilize the
unlabeled data for boosting the model performance, the essential sampling bias issue in SSL has rarely been discussed
in the literature. That is, the empirical distribution of labeled data often deviates from the true samples distribution, due to the limited sampling size of labeled data. We
illustrate this issue with the classical two-moon data in Figure 1, in which we plot 6 labeled samples (bottom left) and
1, 000 unlabeled samples (bottom middle). It can be observed the two-moon structure is well depicted by the unlabeled samples. However, due to the randomness in sampling and the small sample size, it can hardly tell the underlying distribution with the labeled data, though it is also
sampled from the same two-moon distribution. In terms of
empirical distribution, this also leads to a considerable difference between labeled and unlabeled data, as shown by
the density estimation results on their x-axis projection (top
left and top middle).

1466

