Deep Optics for Monocular Depth Estimation and 3D Object Detection
Julie Chang
Stanford University

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

jchang10@stanford.edu

gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu

Abstract
Depth estimation and 3D object detection are critical
for scene understanding but remain challenging to perform
with a single image due to the loss of 3D information during
image capture. Recent models using deep neural networks
have improved monocular depth estimation performance,
but there is still difficulty in predicting absolute depth and
generalizing outside a standard dataset. Here we introduce
the paradigm of deep optics, i.e. end-to-end design of optics
and image processing, to the monocular depth estimation
problem, using coded defocus blur as an additional depth
cue to be decoded by a neural network. We evaluate several optical coding strategies along with an end-to-end optimization scheme for depth estimation on three datasets,
including NYU Depth v2 and KITTI. We find an optimized
freeform lens design yields the best results, but chromatic
aberration from a singlet lens offers significantly improved
performance as well. We build a physical prototype and validate that chromatic aberrations improve depth estimation
on real-world results. In addition, we train object detection networks on the KITTI dataset and show that the lens
optimized for depth estimation also results in improved 3D
object detection performance.

1. Introduction
Depth awareness is crucial for many 3D computer vision tasks, including semantic segmentation [33, 38, 10],
3D object detection [37, 22, 11, 40, 41], 3D object classification [45, 24, 30], and scene layout estimation [49]. The
required depth information is usually obtained with specialized camera systems, for example using time-of-flight,
structured illumination, pulsed LiDAR, or stereo camera
technology. However, the need for custom sensors, highpower illumination, complex electronics, or bulky device
form factors often makes it difficult or costly to employ
these specialized devices in practice.
Single-image depth estimation with conventional cameras has been an active area of research. Traditional approaches make use of pre-defined image features that are

Figure 1. We apply deep optics, i.e. end-to-end design of optics
and image processing, to build an optical-encoder, CNN-decoder
system for improved monocular depth estimation and 3D object
detection.

statistically correlated with depth, e.g. shading, perspective distortions, occlusions, texture gradients, and haze
[17, 35, 16, 48, 36, 18]. Recently, significant improvements
have been achieved by replacing hand-crafted features with
learned features via convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[5, 19, 8, 6]. While these methods tend to perform decently
within consistent datasets, they do not generalize well to
scenes that were not part of the training set. In essence, the
problem of estimating a depth map from pictorial cues alone
is ill-posed. Optically encoding depth-dependent scene information has the potential to remove some of the ambiguities inherent in all-in-focus images, for example using
(coded) defocus blur [28, 26, 20, 43, 1] or chromatic aberrations [42]. However, it is largely unclear how different
optical coding strategies compare to one another and what
the best strategy for a specific task may be.
Inspired by recent work on deep optics [2, 39, 12], we
interpret the depth estimation problem with coded defocus blur as an optical-encoder, electronic-decoder system
that can be trained in an end-to-end manner. Although codesigning optics and image processing is a core idea in computational photography, only differentiable estimation algorithms, such as neural networks, allow for true end-to-end
computational camera designs. Here, error backprograpagation during training not only optimizes network weights
but also physical lens parameters. With the proposed deep
110193

