Distilling Knowledge From a Deep Pose Regressor Network
Muhamad Risqi U. Saputra, Pedro P. B. de Gusmao, Yasin Almalioglu, Andrew Markham, Niki Trigoni
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
firstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method to distill knowledge from a deep pose regressor network for efficient Visual Odometry (VO). Standard distillation relies on “dark
knowledge” for successful knowledge transfer. As this
knowledge is not available in pose regression and the
teacher prediction is not always accurate, we propose to
emphasize the knowledge transfer only when we trust the
teacher. We achieve this by using teacher loss as a confidence score which places variable relative importance on
the teacher prediction. We inject this confidence score to
the main training task via Attentive Imitation Loss (AIL)
and when learning the intermediate representation of the
teacher through Attentive Hint Training (AHT) approach.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work which
successfully distill the knowledge from a deep pose regression network. Our evaluation on the KITTI and Malaga
dataset shows that we can keep the student prediction close
to the teacher with up to 92.95% parameter reduction and
2.12× faster in computation time.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have received increased
attention in the last decade due to their success in image
and natural language understanding. The availability of
large datasets, increased computing power, and advancement of learning algorithms play a pivotal role in their glory.
Despite their successes, DNN-based approaches typically
require tens or hundreds of million weights. As a consequence, the huge computational and space requirement
prevents DNN models from being widely implemented in
resource-constrained environment (e.g. mobile phones,
quadcopter, etc.). To compound the issue, these applications typically require near real-time inference.
Within the last few years, there have been tremendous
efforts towards compressing DNNs. State-of-the-art approaches for network compression such as quantization
[9, 6, 17], pruning [12, 10, 35], or low-rank decomposition
[30, 2] can yield significant speed-ups but at the cost of ac-

curacy. On the other hand, an approach called Knowledge
Distillation (KD) proposed by Hinton et al. [16] offers to
recover the accuracy drop by transferring the knowledge of
a large teacher model to a small student model. Some recent works show that a small network trained by KD could
match or even exceed the accuracy of a large network if it
is trained with careful optimization [25].
Most works in network compression, including KD, focus on the problem of classification. KD works very well
in classification since it has the advantage of “dark knowledge” which refers to the softened logits output of the
teacher. This provides more information than mere onehot encoding of the class label and contains hidden knowledge about the correlations of class labels [16]. By using
the logits output for training, the student network can emulate the generalization capability of the teacher network.
However, this advantage does not exist in regression. In
the regression problem, a deep regression network predicts
sequential, continuous, values which have the exact same
characteristics as the ground truth, with the exception of
being plagued with an unknown error distribution. Without access to any dark knowledge, it is unclear how KD
could help in compressing a regression network. In recent
surveys, it is even stated that the main drawback of KD is
that it only works for classification problems [5].
KD methods for classification [16, 25, 20, 36, 32, 19,
23] rely solely on the teacher prediction without considering
the error made w.r.t. ground truth. In regression however,
the real-valued predictions are unbounded, and hence the
teacher can give highly erroneous guidance to the student
network. Previous work [4] alleviated this issue by using
teacher loss as an upper bound. However, it was designed
for standard bounding box regression which has different
characteristic to pose regression as it belongs to SE(3) (Lie
Groups). Moreover, they directly transferred the knowledge
from the teacher without filtering which one is good and
which one is bad. To this end, our novel insight is to use
the teacher loss as a confidence score to decide when we
can trust the teacher. We demonstrate that this is key to
successfully distilling deep pose regression networks.
We will demonstrate our work in distillation for cam1263

