Hiding Video in Audio via Reversible Generative Models
Hyukryul Yang*
HKUST

Hao Ouyang*
HKUST

Abstract
We present a method for hiding video content inside audio files while preserving the perceptual fidelity of the cover
audio. This is a form of cross-modal steganography and
is particularly challenging due to the high bitrate of video.
Our scheme uses recent advances in flow-based generative
models, which enable mapping audio to latent codes such
that nearby codes correspond to perceptually similar signals. We show that compressed video data can be concealed in the latent codes of audio sequences while preserving the fidelity of both the hidden video and the cover
audio. We can embed 128x128 video inside same-duration
audio, or higher-resolution video inside longer audio sequences. Quantitative experiments show that our approach
outperforms relevant baselines in steganographic capacity
and fidelity.

1. Introduction
Consider an activist who needs to publicize a video
record of human rights violations under a repressive regime.
The regime monitors communication in and out of the country. How can the activist transmit the video without detection? The field of steganography investigates techniques for
hiding information within media such as images, video, and
audio. Steganography aims to enable concealment of secret
content inside publicly transmitted files [29].
In this work, we consider the possibility of hiding video
content inside audio files. This pushes the boundaries
of steganography, which commonly deals with hiding text
messages or embedding media of the same type as the cover
file (e.g., images within images) [25]. We choose to conceal video due to its effectiveness in depiction and communication (e.g., the 1992 Los Angeles riots were sparked
by video footage of police brutality). We choose audio as
the cover medium because audio has higher embedding capacity than text or image files, and because audio sharing
platforms such as CLYP and YourListen will not transcode
the audio files, which eases the embedding of content inside
the file [37].

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Qifeng Chen
HKUST

Hiding video in audio while preserving the fidelity of
both the secret and the cover media is extremely challenging. Consider concealing a one-second 128 × 128 color
video in one-second audio with 22K samples. There are
128 × 128 × 30 × 24 = 12M bits in one second of video,
an order of magnitude more than the audio samples. Although a variety of traditional and deep learning methods
for steganography have been proposed [3, 41], a direct application of these techniques to our setting would require
more than five minutes of audio to absorb one second of
video. We aim for much more efficient embedding, such as
hiding a video clip in an audio segment of the same length.
(One second of video inside one second of audio.)
Our steganography scheme for hiding video in audio
builds upon flow-based generative models. Specifically, we
use WaveGlow, a reversible generative model that computes
bijective mappings between audio signals and latent variables [33]. Although this model is invertible, the latent
variable reconstructed from encoded audio may not be exactly the same. Some bits in the reconstructed latent variable may be flipped due to numerical errors in floating-point
arithmetic. Therefore, we apply a novel optimization-based
strategy to convert binary codes to latent variables. The optimization takes into consideration the average flip rate of
each bit in a latent variable and the importance of each bit
in a binary code.
We conduct experiments to evaluate the performance of
our proposed model and several learning-based and heuristic baselines. Our optimized flow-based model significantly
outperforms other baselines in video reconstruction quality
and capacity. Our model can efficiently hide a 128 × 128
video in a same-duration audio file with a sampling rate of
22,050 Hz. The concealed video can be recovered at high fidelity (MS-SSIM 0.965) while the modification to the cover
audio is unnoticeable to human listeners. Our approach can
also embed one second of high-resolution 848 × 480 video
in a 10-second audio file. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We study a new cross-modal steganography task: hiding video in audio. The encoded audio signals are perceptually indistinguishable from the original.
• We propose a new steganography scheme based on

*Joint first authors

11100

