Episodic Training for Domain Generalization
Da Li1,2, Jianshu Zhang3, Yongxin Yang2
Cong Liu4, Yi-Zhe Song2 and Timothy M. Hospedales1,2,5
1

3

Samsung AI Center, Cambridge 2SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey
University of Science and Technology of China 4iFlytek Research 5University of Edinburgh
{d.li, yongxin.yang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk, xysszjs@mail.ustc.edu.cn
congliu2@iflytek.com, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) is the challenging and topical problem of learning models that generalize to novel testing
domains with different statistics than a set of known training domains. The simple approach of aggregating data from all source
domains and training a single deep neural network end-to-end
on all the data provides a surprisingly strong baseline that surpasses many prior published methods. In this paper we build on
this strong baseline by designing an episodic training procedure
that trains a single deep network in a way that exposes it to
the domain shift that characterises a novel domain at runtime.
Specifically, we decompose a deep network into feature extractor and classifier components, and then train each component
by simulating it interacting with a partner who is badly tuned for
the current domain. This makes both components more robust,
ultimately leading to our networks producing state-of-the-art
performance on three DG benchmarks. Furthermore, we consider the pervasive workflow of using an ImageNet trained CNN
as a fixed feature extractor for downstream recognition tasks.
Using the Visual Decathlon benchmark, we demonstrate that
our episodic-DG training improves the performance of such a
general purpose feature extractor by explicitly training a feature
for robustness to novel problems. This shows that DG training
can benefit standard practice in computer vision.

1. Introduction
Machine learning methods often degrade rapidly in performance if they are applied to domains with very different statistics
to the data used to train them. This is the problem of domain
shift, which domain adaptation (DA) aims to address in the case
where some labelled or unlabelled data from the target domain
is available for adaptation [2, 36, 22, 10, 23, 4]; and domain generalisation (DG) aims to address in the case where no adaptation
to the target problem is possible [27, 12, 18, 33] due to lack of

data or computation. DG is a particularly challenging problem
setting, since explicit training on the target is disallowed;
yet it is particularly valuable due to its lack of assumptions.
For example, it would be valuable to have a domain-general
visual feature extractor that performs well ‘out of the box’ as a
representation for any novel problem, even without fine-tuning.
The significance of the DG challenge has led to many studies in the literature. These span robust feature space learning
[27, 12], model architectures that are purpose designed to enable robustness to domain shift [16, 39, 17] and specially designed learning algorithms for optimising standard architectures
[33, 18] that aim to fit them to a more robust minima. Among
all these efforts, it turns out that the naive approach [17] of
aggregating all the training domains’ data together and training a single deep network end-to-end is very competitive with
state-of-the-art, and better than many published methods – while
simultaneously being much simpler and faster than more elaborate alternatives. In this paper we aim to build on the strength and
simplicity of this simple data aggregation strategy, but improve
it by designing an episodic training scheme to improve DG.
The paradigm of episodic training has recently been
popularised in the area of few-shot learning [9, 28, 34]. In
this problem, the goal is to use a large amount of background
source data, to train a model that is capable of few-shot learning
when adapting to a novel target problem. However despite the
data availability, training on all the source data would not be
reflective of the target few-shot learning condition. So in order
to train the model in a way that reflects how it will be tested,
multiple few-shot learning training episodes are setup among
all the source datasets [9, 28, 34].
How can an episodic training approach be designed for
domain generalisation? Our insight is that, from the perspective
of any layer l in a neural network, being exposed to a novel
domain at testing-time is experienced as that layer’s neighbours
l−1 or l+1 being badly tuned for the problem at hand. That is,
neighbours provide input to the current layer (or accept output
from it) with different statistics to the current layer’s expectation.

1446

