Deep Appearance Maps
Maxim Maximov

Laura Leal-Taixé

Mario Fritz

Tobias Ritschel

Technical University
Munich

Technical University
Munich

CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security

University College
London

Abstract
We propose a deep representation of appearance, i. e.,
the relation of color, surface orientation, viewer position,
material and illumination. Previous approaches have used
deep learning to extract classic appearance representations
relating to reflectance model parameters (e. g., Phong) or
illumination (e. g., HDR environment maps). We suggest to
directly represent appearance itself as a network we call a
Deep Appearance Map (DAM). This is a 4D generalization
over 2D reflectance maps, which held the view direction fixed.
First, we show how a DAM can be learned from images or
video frames and later be used to synthesize appearance,
given new surface orientations and viewer positions. Second, we demonstrate how another network can be used to
map from an image or video frames to a DAM network to
reproduce this appearance, without using a lengthy optimization such as stochastic gradient descent (learning-to-learn).
Finally, we show the example of an appearance estimationand-segmentation task, mapping from an image showing
multiple materials to multiple deep appearance maps.

1. Introduction
The visual appearance of an object depends on the combination of four main factors: viewer, geometry, material and
illumination. When capturing and processing appearance,
one wishes to change one or more of those factors and predict what the new appearance is. This can be achieved using
methods ranging from implicit image-based representations
[6, 13] to explicit Computer Graphics-like representations
[27]. Implicit methods take a couple of photos as input
and allow to predict high-quality imagery in a limited set of
conditions, but modest flexibility, e. g., interpolating an image between two photos but not extrapolating to new views.
Explicit representations allow for more flexibility when acquiring Phong parameters and HDR illumination maps [27],
but incur substantial acquisition effort, e. g., taking a large
number of calibrated (HDR) photos.
DAMs propose a new direction to represent appearance:

Figure 1. Frames from a video with a moving viewer (columns)
comparing a re-synthesis using our novel deep appearance maps
(DAMs) (top) and reflectance maps (RMs) (bottom) to a photo
reference of a decorative sphere with a complex material under
natural illumination (middle).

we move away from the pixel-based nature of implicit imagebased representations into a deep representation, but without
any explicit reconstruction, as we do not target a direct mapping to any explicit reflectance model or illumination either.
Still, we show that such a representation can be used to solve
actual tasks, such as image synthesis, appearance acquisition and estimation-and-segmentation of appearance. This is
enabled by four contributions:
First, we will introduce a generalization of 2D reflectance
maps [13] to 4D, which we call an Appearance Map (AM).
AMs represent appearance for varying geometry under varying views. This allows freely changing the viewer and surface geometry, which is not possible for classic reflectance
maps that fix the relation between view and illumination (cf.
Fig. 1).
Second, while classic Reflectance Maps (RM) can be
simply tabulated using a single 2D image, the full appearance
is a 4D phenomenon that is more challenging to represent
and process. Storing 4D appearance as a table, modestly
resolving 10 degree features, would require storing (and
somehow also capturing) 364 = 17 M ; impractical. Instead,
we suggest using DAMs, neural networks that compactly
represent AMs in only a couple of thousand parameters. This
representation is efficient, does not require any look-ups and

8729

