Boundless: Generative Adversarial Networks for Image Extension

Piotr Teterwak
Aaron Sarna
Dilip Krishnan
Aaron Maschinot
David Belanger
Ce Liu
William T. Freeman
Google Research
{pteterwak, sarna, dilipkay, amaschinot, dbelanger, celiu, wfreeman}@google.com

Abstract

Input

DeepFill

PConv

Ours

Image extension models have broad applications in
image editing, computational photography and computer
graphics. While image inpainting has been extensively studied in the literature, it is challenging to directly apply the
state-of-the-art inpainting methods to image extension as
they tend to generate blurry or repetitive pixels with inconsistent semantics. We introduce semantic conditioning
to the discriminator of a generative adversarial network
(GAN), and achieve strong results on image extension with
coherent semantics and visually pleasing colors and textures. We also show promising results in extreme extensions,
such as panorama generation.

1. Introduction
Across many disparate disciplines there exists a strong
need for high quality image extensions. In virtual reality,
for example, it is often necessary to simulate different camera extrinsics than were actually used to capture an image,
which generally requires filling in content outside of the
original image bounds [19]. Panorama stitching generally
requires cropping the jagged edges of stitched projections
to achieve a rectangular panorama, but high quality image
extension could enable filling in the gaps instead [23]. Similarly, extending videos has been shown to create more immersive experiences for viewers [3]. As televisions transition to the 16:9 HDTV aspect ratio, it is appealing to display videos filmed at a different aspect ratio than the screen.
[22, 33].
We desire a seamless blending between the original
and extended image regions. Moreover, the extended region should match the original at the textural, structural
and semantic levels, while appearing a plausible extension.
Boundary conditions are only available on one side of the
extended region. This is in contrast to the image inpaint-

Figure 1. Some examples of image extension: Our method (right
column) generates better object shapes (top/middle rows) and produce good textures (middle/bottom rows), compared with two state
of the art inpainting methods: DeepFill [48] and PConv [26]. The
input image is extended onto the masked area (shown in gray).

ing problem [26, 48], where the region to be filled in is
surrounded in all directions by original image data, significantly constraining the problem. Therefore, inpainting algorithms tend to have more predictable and higher quality
results than image extension algorithms. In fact, we demonstrate in this paper that using inpainting algorithms with no
modifications leads to poor results for image extension.
In the literature, image extension has been studied using
both parametric and non-parametric methods [41, 50, 31, 7,
5]. While these methods generally do a good job of blending the extended and original regions, they have significant
drawbacks. They either require the use of a carefully chosen guide image from which patches are borrowed, or they
mostly extend texture, without taking into account larger
scale structure or the semantics of an image. These models
are only applicable in a narrow range of use cases and can-

10521

