Hierarchical Shot Detector
Jiale Cao1 , Yanwei Pang1∗, Jungong Han2 , Xuelong Li3
1
Tianjin University 2 University of Warwick 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University
connor@tju.edu.cn, pyw@tju.edu.cn, jungong.han@warwick.ac.uk, li@nwpu.edu.cn
classification

Abstract

default box (b0)
regressed box (b1)

Single shot detector simultaneously predicts object catebox (b2)
gories and regression offsets of the default boxes. regressed
Despite
of high efficiency, this structure has some inappropriate
defeatures for
reg1
signs: (1) The classification result of the default boxoffset
is features
im-for cls1
regression 1
offset features
classification
classification
features for reg1
properly assigned
to that of
the regressed
box duringoffset
inference, (2) Only regression once is not good enough for
ac-for cls2
offset features
curate object detection. To solve the first problem, a novel
reg-offset-cls (ROC) module is proposed. It contains three
hierarchical steps: box regression, the feature sampling location predication, and the regressed box classification with
the features of offset locations. To further solve the second
regression 2
2
offset features 2
2
problem, aclassification
hierarchical
shot detector regression
(HSD)
is proposed,
which stacks two ROC modules and one feature enhanced
module. The second ROC treats the regressed boxes and
the feature sampling locations of features in the first ROC
as the inputs. Meanwhile, the feature enhanced module
injected between two ROCs aims to extract the local and
non-local context. Experiments on the MS COCO and PASCAL VOC datasets demonstrate the superiority of proposed
HSD. Without the bells or whistles, HSD outperforms all
one-stage methods at real-time speed.

1. Introduction
Object detection based on deep convolutional neural network can be mainly divided into two classes: two-stage
methods [15, 40, 16] and one-stage methods [39, 31, 28].
Two-stage methods firstly extract some candidate object
proposals and then classify and regress these proposals.
One-stage methods directly predict object categories and
regression offsets of dense default boxes (anchors). Compared with two-stage methods, one-stage methods are more
efficient but inferiorly accurate.
In one-stage methods, class imbalance problem between
the positive and negative samples is considered as a main
challenge, which has been solved by OHEM [42] and focal
loss [28] in some degree. Besides class imbalance problem,
∗ Yanwei Pang is the corresponding author. Code will be available at
https://github.com/JialeCao001/HSD.

default box (b0)

regressed box (b1)
box regression

sampling offset 1

classification 1

regressed box (b2)

features for reg1
offset features for cls1

offset features for reg2

offset features for cls2
classification 2

sampling offset 2

regression 2

legend

Figure 1. The detection pipeline. HSD consists of two stacked
reg-offset-cls (ROC) modules. Each ROC firstly regresses the box,
secondly calculates the feature sampling offset based on the box
offset, and finally classifies the regressed box by the features of
offset sampling locations. The feature sampling locations for the
first classification and second regression are the same. To simplify,
the feature enhanced module between two ROCs is not shown.

there are two inappropriate designs which can be further
improved: (1) Most one-stage methods simultaneously conduct the classification and regression of default box during
training. As a result, the classification result of default box
is improperly assigned to that of the regressed box during
inference. In fact, we want to output the true classification
result of the regressed box. Meanwhile, training the classification task with the default boxes ignores some accurately
regressed boxes, which are helpful for object detection. (2)
Only one regression of the default box is not good enough
to accurately detect the object. Recently, cascade structure
has been proposed for accurate detection in both two-stage
methods and one-stage methods [54, 2]. However, each
stage in the cascade structure still suffers from the above
problem of classification inconsistency.
To better solve the above problems, a novel hierarchical
shot detector (HSD) is proposed in Fig. 1 to hierarchically
conduct regression and classification. In HSD, the key and
novel structure is the reg-offset-cls (ROC) module. Instead
of simultaneous classification and regression, ROC firstly

9705

