Unsupervised Microvascular Image Segmentation
Using an Active Contours Mimicking Neural Network
Shir Gur1 , Lior Wolf1,2 , Lior Golgher3,4 , and Pablo Blinder3,4
1

The School of Computer Sceince, Tel Aviv University
2
Facebook AI Research
3
School of Neurobiology, Biochemistry & Biophysics, Tel Aviv University
4
Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
The task of blood vessel segmentation in microscopy images is crucial for many diagnostic and research applications. However, vessels can look vastly different, depending
on the transient imaging conditions, and collecting data for
supervised training is laborious.
We present a novel deep learning method for unsupervised segmentation of blood vessels. The method is inspired
by the field of active contours and we introduce a new loss
term, which is based on the morphological Active Contours
Without Edges (ACWE) optimization method. The role of
the morphological operators is played by novel pooling layers that are incorporated to the network’s architecture.
We demonstrate the challenges that are faced by previous supervised learning solutions, when the imaging conditions shift. Our unsupervised method is able to outperform such previous methods in both the labeled dataset, and
when applied to similar but different datasets. Our code, as
well as efficient pytorch reimplementations of the baseline
methods VesselNN and DeepVess is available on GitHub
https://github.com/shirgur/UMIS

1. Introduction
The field of microscopic imaging of blood vessels is
evolving rapidly. For example, several emerging techniques
allow rapid volumetric imaging of vascular dynamics in optically clear [5] and turbid [20, 12] living brains. Such
technologies can lead to breakthroughs, both in understanding neuro-vascular interactions in the neocortex and in finegrained medical diagnosis. However, this potential can only
materialize when automatic segmentation algorithms capable of fast and accurate estimation of vascular dynamics
from large volumetric movies become available.
In this work, we propose a novel unsupervised algorithm
for blood vessel segmentation. The need for an unsuper-

vised technique arises from the limitations of the currently
available training data. These limitations include: (i) the
datasets size, due to the amount of expert labor required,
(ii) the datasets do not represent the very high variability
that exists in imaging conditions between microscopes, imaged samples, and along the same experiment. (iii) Highthroughput imaging modalities[5, 12, 20] necessitate faster
segmentation algorithms that do not rely on human curation.
Since blood vessels and microvessels have a welldefined tree shape, and are typically brighter than their
surroundings (due to the contrast agent), classical (nonlearning) algorithms can be used to tackle the problem. One
relatively successful method is the Active Contours Without
Edges (ACWE) method. However, the method is not accurate enough to outperform learning-based techniques.
We build an unsupervised deep learning technique that
is inspired by the morphological ACWE method. The main
loss that we employ is motivated by the energy function of
ACWE. In addition, we introduce layers that implement the
morphological operators that ACWE employs. The result
is an unsupervised method that outperforms the supervised
methods that were applied in this field.
As an unsupervised method, our models are less likely
than the supervised methods to overfit the specific training
dataset. We are able to present evidence that applied across
datasets (trained on one dataset, applied to another), the new
method has an even larger performance gap from the supervised deep learning methods in the literature.

2. Related Work
Microvasscular segmentation Multi-photon laser scanning microscopy (MPLSM) allows minimally-invasive investigation of turbid samples, such as living brains, with
sub-cellular resolutions [7, 35, 14, 32]. Rapid volumetric movies can be reconstructed by steering the laser beam
across the volume and attributing the collected photons to
the illuminated voxels [12, 20], thereby utilizing photons

10722

