Attribute Manipulation Generative Adversarial Networks for Fashion Images
Kenan E. Ak1,2 Joo Hwee Lim 2 Jo Yew Tham3 Ashraf A. Kassim1
1
National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
ESP xMedia Pte. Ltd., Singapore
emir.ak@u.nus.edu, joohwee@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, thamjy@espxmedia.com, ashraf@nus.edu.sg

Recent advances in Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) have made it possible to conduct multi-domain
image-to-image translation using a single generative network [7]. While recent methods such as Ganimation
[24] and SaGAN [34] are able to conduct translations on
attribute-relevant regions using attention, they do not perform well when the number of attributes increases as the
training of attention masks mostly rely on classification
losses. To address this and other limitations, we introduce
Attribute Manipulation Generative Adversarial Networks
(AMGAN) for fashion images. While AMGAN’s generator network uses class activation maps (CAMs) to empower
its attention mechanism, it also exploits perceptual losses
by assigning reference (target) images based on attribute
similarities. AMGAN incorporates an additional discriminator network that focuses on attribute-relevant regions to
detect unrealistic translations. Additionally, AMGAN can
be controlled to perform attribute manipulations on specific
regions such as the sleeve or torso regions. Experiments
show that AMGAN outperforms state-of-the-art methods using traditional evaluation metrics as well as an alternative
one that is based on image retrieval.

1. Introduction
Attribute manipulation involves making translations/adjustments to images based on the target attributes.
For fashion products, attributes of interest relate to visual
qualities such as sleeve length, color and pattern while
attribute values correspond to certain labels such as long
sleeve, red color and plain pattern. Being able to manipulate attributes of images is especially useful in a variety
of situations including a user not satisfied with some
attributes. Recently, this task was studied from an image
retrieval perspective which involved retrieving the target
images in a dataset after conducting attribute manipulation
[37, 2, 1, 4]. However, the image retrieval approach is

Shopping100k

DeepFashion

Abstract

Input

Red Color

Black Color

Short Sleeve

Input

Red Color

Short Sleeve

Hood Collar

Figure 1: Multi-domain image-to-image translation examples of
the proposed AMGAN using images from the Deepfashion [20]
and Shopping100k [3] datasets.

limited by the dataset size and the increasing number of
attributes.
Since the introduction of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10], the task of image generation has received significant attention. Along with many computer
vision tasks, GANs can be applied for the image-to-image
translation problem [14, 39]. The StarGAN [7] architecture
has shown to be able to perform multi-domain image-toimage translations with a single generative network. More
recently, several approaches that incorporate an attention
mechanism on the generative network have emerged such
as Ganimation [24] and SaGAN [34]. Having an attention mechanism is especially useful when attribute manipulation needs to be performed on attribute-relevant regions
while others remain the same. However, as the number
of attributes increases, these attention-based methods become unstable as the attended regions are mostly learned
through classification losses. Additionally, the discriminator network can also benefit from an attention mechanism
and force the generative network to perform more realistic
attribute manipulations.
In this paper, we propose Attribute Manipulation Generative Adversarial Networks (AMGAN) which focuses on

10541

