Learning Combinatorial Embedding Networks for Deep Graph Matching
Runzhong Wang1,2
Junchi Yan1,2 ∗
Xiaokang Yang2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{runzhong.wang,yanjunchi,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph matching refers to finding node correspondence
between graphs, such that the corresponding node and
edge’s affinity can be maximized. In addition with its NPcompleteness nature, another important challenge is effective modeling of the node-wise and structure-wise affinity across graphs and the resulting objective, to guide the
matching procedure effectively finding the true matching
against noises. To this end, this paper devises an end-toend differentiable deep network pipeline to learn the affinity for graph matching. It involves a supervised permutation loss regarding with node correspondence to capture
the combinatorial nature for graph matching. Meanwhile
deep graph embedding models are adopted to parameterize
both intra-graph and cross-graph affinity functions, instead
of the traditional shallow and simple parametric forms e.g.
a Gaussian kernel. The embedding can also effectively capture the higher-order structure beyond second-order edges.
The permutation loss model is agnostic to the number of
nodes, and the embedding model is shared among nodes
such that the network allows for varying numbers of nodes
in graphs for training and inference. Moreover, our network
is class-agnostic with some generalization capability across
different categories. All these features are welcomed for
real-world applications. Experiments show its superiority
against state-of-the-art graph matching learning methods.

cal information in the matching procedure, graph matching
in general can be more robust to deformation noise and outliers. For its expressiveness and robustness, graph matching
has lied at the heart of many computer vision applications
e.g. visual tracking, action recognition, robotics, weakperspective 3-D reconstruction – refer to [40] for a more
comprehensive survey on graph matching applications.
Due to its high-order combinatorial nature, graph matching is in general NP-complete [13] such that researchers employ approximate techniques to seek inexact solutions. For
the classic setting of two-graph matching between graphs
G1 , G2 , the problem can be written by the following general
quadratic assignment programming (QAP) problem [25]:
J(X) = vec(X)⊤ Kvec(X),
X ∈ {0, 1}N ×N ,

X1 = 1,

(1)
X⊤ 1 ≤ 1

where X is a permutation matrix indicating the node cor2
2
respondence, and K ∈ RN ×N is the so-called affinity
matrix [22] whose diagonal elements and off-diagonal ones
encode the node-to-node and edge-to-edge affinity between
two graphs, respectively. One
 popular
embodiment of K in
(fij −fab )2
literature is Kia,jb = exp
where fij is the feaσ2
ture vector of the edge ij, which can also incorporate the
node similarity when node index ia = jb.
Eq. (1) is called Lawler’s QAP [20]. It can incorporate
other forms e.g. Koopmans-Beckmann’s QAP [25]:
J(X) = tr(X⊤ F1 XF2 ) + tr(K⊤
p X)

1. Introduction and Preliminaries
Graph matching (GM) refers to establishing node correspondences between two or among multiple graphs. Graph
matching incorporates both the unary similarity between
nodes and pairwise [7, 14] (or even higher-order [21, 29,
43]) similarity between edges from separate graphs to find
a matching such that the similarity between the matched
graphs is maximized. By encoding the high-order geometri-

(2)

where F1 ∈ RN ×N , F2 ∈ RN ×N are weighted adjacency
matrices of graph G1 , G2 respectively, and Kp is the nodeto-node affinity matrix. Its connection to the Lawler’s QAP
can be established by setting K = F2 ⊗ F1 .
Beyond the second-order affinity modeling, recent methods also explore the way of utilizing higher-order affinity
information. Based on tensor marginalization as adopted
by several hypergraph matching works [5, 9, 43, 46]:
x∗ = arg max(H ⊗1 x ⊗2 x . . . ⊗m x)

∗ Corresponding author.

This work is supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFB1001003), STCSM
(18DZ1112300), NSFC (61602176).

⊤

X1 = 1, X 1 ≤ 1, x = vec(X) ∈ {0, 1}

3056

s.t.
N 2 ×1

(3)

