No-Frills Human-Object Interaction Detection: Factorization, Layout
Encodings, and Training Techniques
Tanmay Gupta
Alexander Schwing
Derek Hoiem
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{tgupta6, aschwing, dhoiem}@illinois.edu http://tanmaygupta.info/no_frills/

Straddle

Walk

Abstract
We show that for human-object interaction detection a
relatively simple factorized model with appearance and layout encodings constructed from pre-trained object detectors
outperforms more sophisticated approaches. Our model includes factors for detection scores, human and object appearance, and coarse (box-pair configuration) and optionally fine-grained layout (human pose). We also develop
training techniques that improve learning efficiency by: (1)
eliminating a train-inference mismatch; (2) rejecting easy
negatives during mini-batch training; and (3) using a ratio of negatives to positives that is two orders of magnitude
larger than existing approaches. We conduct a thorough ablation study to understand the importance of different factors and training techniques using the challenging HICODet dataset [4].

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection is the task of
localizing all instances of a predetermined set of humanobject interactions. For example, detecting the HOI
“human-row-boat” refers to localizing a “human,” a “boat,”
and predicting the interaction “row” for this human-object
pair. Note that an image may contain multiple people rowing boats (or even the same boat), and the same person
could simultaneously interact with the same or a different
object. For example, a person can simultaneously “sit on”
and “row” a boat while “wearing” a backpack.
Recently, increasingly sophisticated techniques have
been proposed for encoding position and appearance for
HOI detection. For instance, Chao et al. [4] encode the
configuration of human-object box pairs using a CNN operating on a two channel binary image called the interaction pattern. Gkioxari et al. [10] predict a distribution over
target object locations based on human appearance using a
mixture density network [1]. For encoding appearance, approaches range from multitask training of a human-centric

Horse
Horse

Figure 1: Outputs of pretrained object and human-pose detectors provide strong cues for predicting interactions. Top:
human and object boxes, object label, and human pose predicted
by Faster-RCNN [20] and OpenPose [2] respectively. We encode
appearance and layout using these predictions (and Faster-RCNN
features) and use a factored model to detect human-object interactions. Bottom: boxes and pose overlaid on the input image.

branch [10] alongside object classification, to using an attention mechanism which gathers contextual information
from the image [9].
In this work, we propose a no-frills model for HOI
detection. In contrast to sophisticated end-to-end models, we use appearance features from pretrained object detectors, and encode layout using hand-crafted boundingbox coordinate features (optionally human pose keypoints).
Our network architecture is also modest, comprising of
light-weight multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) that operate
on these appearance and layout features. In spite of these
simplifications, our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on the challenging HICO-Det dataset.
Our gains are due to the choice of factorization, direct
encoding and scoring of layout, and improved training techniques. Our model consists of human/object detection terms
and an interaction term. The interaction term further consists of human and object appearance, box-configuration,
and pose or fine-layout factors. We perform a thorough ablation study to evaluate the effect of each factor.
In contrast to existing work, which needs to train a

9677

