DDSL: Deep Differentiable Simplex Layer for Learning Geometric Signals
Chiyu “Max” Jiang∗ 1
1

Dana Lansigan∗ 1

UC Berkeley

2

Philip Marcus1

Technical University of Munich

Abstract
We present a Deep Differentiable Simplex Layer (DDSL)
for neural networks for geometric deep learning. The DDSL
is a differentiable layer compatible with deep neural networks for bridging simplex mesh-based geometry representations (point clouds, line mesh, triangular mesh, tetrahedral mesh) with raster images (e.g., 2D/3D grids). The
DDSL uses Non-Uniform Fourier Transform (NUFT) to
perform differentiable, efficient, anti-aliased rasterization
of simplex-based signals. We present a complete theoretical
framework for the process as well as an efficient backpropagation algorithm. Compared to previous differentiable renderers and rasterizers, the DDSL generalizes to arbitrary
simplex degrees and dimensions. In particular, we explore
its applications to 2D shapes and illustrate two applications
of this method: (1) mesh editing and optimization guided by
neural network outputs, and (2) using DDSL for a differentiable rasterization loss to facilitate end-to-end training of
polygon generators. We are able to validate the effectiveness of gradient-based shape optimization with the example
of airfoil optimization, and using the differentiable rasterization loss to facilitate end-to-end training, we surpass state
of the art for polygonal image segmentation given groundtruth bounding boxes.

1. Introduction
The simplicial complex (i.e., simplex mesh) is a flexible and general representation for non-uniform geometric signals. Various commonly-used geometric representations, including point clouds, wire-frames, polygons, triangular mesh, tetrahedral mesh etc., are examples of simplicial complexes. Leveraging deep learning architectures for
such non-uniform geometric signals has been of increasing
interest, and varied methodologies and architectures have
been presented to deal with varied representations [3].
In this study, we propose a Deep Differentiable Simplex
Layer (DDSL), which performs differentiable rasterization
of arbitrary simplex mesh-based geometric signals. The
* Equal contributions

Matthias Nießner2

j=0
point
cloud
j=1
line
mesh

gradient backward
∂pixel
∂vertex

forward
DDSL
DDSL(V, E, D)

j=2
polygon

Simplex
NUFT

Filter

iFFT

Figure 1: A schematic of the DDSL layer with 2D simplex meshes. The DDSL algorithm is general for handling
simplex meshes of arbitrary dimensions and simplex degrees. The input to DDSL is a simplex mesh described by
three matrices: float matrix V for vertex coordinates, uint
matrix E for simplex connectivity, and float matrix D for
per-simplex density (constant density of 1 in the example
above). A raster image of arbitrary resolution can be produced. The gradient of per-pixel intensity with respect to
each spatial coordinate in V can be computed analytically
within the DDSL layer.

DDSL is based upon simplex Non-Uniform Fourier Transform (NUFT) [18] for the forward-pass, which is highly
generalizable across arbitrary topologies. Furthermore, we
find the general differential form of the simplex NUFT, allowing for an efficient backward pass. Our work differs
from previous work in the literature on differentiable rendering in two major ways. First, our network is generalizable across arbitrary simplex degrees and dimensions, making it a unified framework for a range of geometric representations. Second, while other differentiable renderers are
specifically posed for projective-rendering by projecting 3D
meshes to 2D grids, the DDSL is capable of in-situ rasterization in the original dimension. Building on the differentiable nature of the rasterizer, we explore two unique use
cases. First, using the differentiablity of the DDSL, we can

8769

