DAGMapper: Learning to Map by Discovering Lane Topology
Namdar Homayounfar1,2 Wei-Chiu Ma1,3
Justin Liang1 Xinyu Wu 1 Jack Fan 1 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Toronto 3 MIT
{namdar,weichiu,justin.liang,xinyuw,jackwindows,urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
One of the fundamental challenges to scale self-driving
is being able to create accurate high definition maps (HD
maps) with low cost. Current attempts to automate this process typically focus on simple scenarios, estimate independent maps per frame or do not have the level of precision
required by modern self driving vehicles. In contrast, in this
paper we focus on drawing the lane boundaries of complex
highways with many lanes that contain topology changes
due to forks and merges. Towards this goal, we formulate
the problem as inference in a directed acyclic graphical
model (DAG), where the nodes of the graph encode geometric and topological properties of the local regions of the
lane boundaries. Since we do not know a priori the topology
of the lanes, we also infer the DAG topology (i.e., nodes and
edges) for each region. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach on two major North American Highways in
two different states and show high precision and recall as
well as 89% correct topology.

1. Introduction
Self-driving vehicles are equipped with a plethora of sensors, including GPS, cameras, LiDAR, radar and ultrasonics. This allows the vehicle to see with a field of view of
360 degrees, potentially having super human capabilities.
Despite decades of research, building reliable solutions that
can handle the complexity of the real world is still an open
problem.
Most modern self-driving vehicles utilize a high definition map (HD map), which contains information about the
location of lanes, their types, crosswalks, traffic lights, rules
at intersections, etc. This information is very accurate, typically with error on the order of a few centimeters. It can
thus help localization [37, 8, 36], perception [60, 32, 12],
motion planning [62], and even simulation [16]. Building
these maps is however one of the main obstacles to building self driving cars at scale. The typical process is very
cumbersome, involving a fleet of vehicles passing multiple

Figure 1: The input to our model is an aggregated LiDAR
intensity image and the output is a DAG of the lane boundaries parametrized by a deep neural network.

times across the same area to build accurate geometric representations of the world. Annotators then label the location
of all these semantic landmarks by hand from a bird’s eye
view representation of the world. While building the geometric map is time consuming, manual annotation is costly
in terms of capital.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of automatically creating HD maps of highways that are consistent over large areas. Unlike the common practice in the industry, we aim to
map the whole region from a single pass of the vehicle. Towards this goal, we first capitalize on the LiDAR mounted
on our self-driving vehicles to build a bird’s eye view (BEV)
representation of the world. We then exploit a deep network
to extract the exact geometry and topology of the underlying lane network.
The main challenge of this task arises from the fact that
highways contain complex topological changes due to forks
and merges, where a lane boundary splits into two or two
lane boundaries merge into one. We address these challenges by formulating the problem as inference in a directed
acyclic graphical model (DAG), where the nodes of the
graph encode geometric and topological properties of the
12911

