Diverse Image Synthesis from Semantic Layouts via Conditional IMLE
Ke Li∗
UC Berkeley

Tianhao Zhang∗
Nanjing University

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

ke.li@eecs.berkeley.edu

bryanzhang@smail.nju.edu.cn

malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Most existing methods for conditional image synthesis
are only able to generate a single plausible image for any
given input, or at best a fixed number of plausible images. In this paper, we focus on the problem of generating images from semantic segmentation maps and present
a simple new method that can generate an arbitrary number of images with diverse appearance for the same semantic layout. Unlike most existing approaches which adopt
the GAN [11, 12] framework, our method is based on the
recently introduced Implicit Maximum Likelihood Estimation (IMLE) [22] framework. Compared to the leading
approach [3], our method is able to generate more diverse images while producing fewer artifacts despite using
the same architecture. The learned latent space also has
sensible structure despite the lack of supervision that encourages such behaviour. Videos and code are available
at https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/˜ke.
li/projects/imle/scene_layouts/.

nity has made great progress towards generating images of
high visual fidelity on a variety of tasks. However, most
proposed methods are only able to generate a single image
given each input, even though most image synthesis problems are ill-posed, i.e.: there are multiple equally plausible
images that are consistent with the same input. Ideally, we
should aim to predict a distribution of all plausible images
rather than just a single plausible image, which is a problem
known as multimodal image synthesis [42]. This problem is
hard for two reasons:
1. Model: Most state-of-the-art approaches for image
synthesis use generative adversarial nets (GANs) [11,
12], which suffer from the well-documented issue of
mode collapse. In the context of conditional image
synthesis, this leads to a model that generates only a
single plausible image for each given input regardless
of the latent noise and fails to learn the distribution of
plausible images.
2. Data: Multiple different ground truth images for the
same input are not available in most datasets. Instead,
only one ground truth image is given, and the model
has to learn to generate other plausible images in an
unsupervised fashion.

Figure 1: Samples generated by our model. The 9 images are samples generated by our model conditioned on the
same semantic layout as shown at the bottom-left corner.

1. Introduction
Conditional image synthesis is a problem of great importance in computer vision. In recent years, the commu∗ Equal contribution.

In this paper, we focus on the problem of multimodal
image synthesis from semantic layouts, where the goal is
to generate multiple diverse images for the same semantic
layout. Existing methods are either only able to generate a
fixed number of images [3] or are difficult to train [42] due
to the need to balance the training of several different neural
nets that serve opposing roles.
To sidestep these issues, unlike most image synthesis
approaches, we step outside of the GAN framework and
propose a method based on the recently introduced method
of Implicit Maximum Likelihood Estimation (IMLE) [22].
Unlike GANs, IMLE by design avoids mode collapse and
is able to train the same types of neural net architectures as
generators in GANs, namely neural nets with random noise
drawn from an analytic distribution as input.
This approach offers two advantages:
14220

