PointFlow: 3D Point Cloud Generation with Continuous Normalizing Flows
Guandao Yang1,2∗, Xun Huang1,2∗ , Zekun Hao1,2 , Ming-Yu Liu3 , Serge Belongie1,2 , Bharath Hariharan1
1
2
3
Cornell University
Cornell Tech
NVIDIA

Figure 1: Our model transforms points sampled from a simple prior to realistic point clouds through continuous normalizing
flows. The videos of the transformations can be viewed on our project website: https://www.guandaoyang.com/
PointFlow/.

Abstract
As 3D point clouds become the representation of choice
for multiple vision and graphics applications, the ability to
synthesize or reconstruct high-resolution, high-fidelity point
clouds becomes crucial. Despite the recent success of deep
learning models in discriminative tasks of point clouds,
generating point clouds remains challenging. This paper
proposes a principled probabilistic framework to generate 3D point clouds by modeling them as a distribution
of distributions. Specifically, we learn a two-level hierarchy of distributions where the first level is the distribution of shapes and the second level is the distribution of
points given a shape. This formulation allows us to both
sample shapes and sample an arbitrary number of points
from a shape. Our generative model, named PointFlow,
learns each level of the distribution with a continuous normalizing flow. The invertibility of normalizing flows enables the computation of the likelihood during training and
∗ Equal contribution.

allows us to train our model in the variational inference
framework. Empirically, we demonstrate that PointFlow
achieves state-of-the-art performance in point cloud generation. We additionally show that our model can faithfully
reconstruct point clouds and learn useful representations in
an unsupervised manner. The code is available at https:
//github.com/stevenygd/PointFlow.

1. Introduction
Point clouds are becoming popular as a 3D representation because they can capture a much higher resolution
than voxel grids and are a stepping stone to more sophisticated representations such as meshes. Learning a generative model of point clouds could benefit a wide range
of point cloud synthesis tasks such as reconstruction and
super-resolution, by providing a better prior of point clouds.
However, a major roadblock in generating point clouds is
the complexity of the space of point clouds. A cloud of
points corresponding to a chair is best thought of as sam14541

