advPattern: Physical-World Attacks on Deep Person Re-Identification via
Adversarially Transformable Patterns

†

Zhibo Wang† , Siyan Zheng† , Mengkai Song† , Qian Wang†,∗ , Alireza Rahimpour‡ , Hairong Qi‡
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, P. R. China
‡
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, USA
{zbwang, zhengsy, mksong, qianwang}@whu.edu.cn, {arahimpo, hqi}@utk.edu

Person re-identification (re-ID) is the task of matching
person images across camera views, which plays an important role in surveillance and security applications. Inspired by great progress of deep learning, deep re-ID models began to be popular and gained state-of-the-art performance. However, recent works found that deep neural
networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial examples,
posing potential threats to DNNs based applications. This
phenomenon throws a serious question about whether deep
re-ID based systems are vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
In this paper, we take the first attempt to implement robust physical-world attacks against deep re-ID. We propose
a novel attack algorithm, called advPattern, for generating
adversarial patterns on clothes, which learns the variations of image pairs across cameras to pull closer the image
features from the same camera, while pushing features from
different cameras farther. By wearing our crafted “invisible
cloak”, an adversary can evade person search, or impersonate a target person to fool deep re-ID models in physical
world. We evaluate the effectiveness of our transformable
patterns on adversaries’ clothes with Market1501 and our
established PRCS dataset. The experimental results show
that the rank-1 accuracy of re-ID models for matching the
adversary decreases from 87.9% to 27.1% under Evading
Attack. Furthermore, the adversary can impersonate a target person with 47.1% rank-1 accuracy and 67.9% mAP
under Impersonation Attack. The results demonstrate that
deep re-ID systems are vulnerable to our physical attacks.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) [9] is an image retrieval
problem that aims at matching a person of interest across
∗ Qian Wang is the corresponding author.

Mismatch

Adversarial Pattern

Abstract

The Adversary

Re-ID models

ID1

Match

Target
ID2

Figure 1. The illustration of Impersonation Attack on re-ID models. The adversary with the adversarial patterns lures re-ID models
into mismatching herself as the target person.

multiple non-overlapping camera views. It has been increasingly popular in research area and has broad applications in video surveillance and security, such as searching
suspects and missing people [30], cross-camera pedestrian tracking [33], and activity analysis [20]. Recently, inspired by the success of deep learning in various vision tasks
[12, 14, 26, 27, 34, 35], deep neural networks (DNNs) based
re-ID models [1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 18, 29, 31, 32] started to become
a prevailing trend and have achieved state-of-the-art performance. Existing deep re-ID methods usually solve re-ID as
a classification task [1, 18, 32], or a ranking task [4, 6, 7],
or both [5, 29].
Recent studies found that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attack [3, 10, 13, 16, 17, 22, 24, 28]. These carefully
modified inputs generated by adding visually imperceptible
perturbations, called adversarial examples, can lure DNNs
into working in abnormal ways, which pose potential threats
to DNNs based applications, e.g., face recognition [25], autonomous driving [8], and malware classification [11]. The
broad deployment of deep re-ID in security related systems makes it critical to figure out whether such adversarial
examples also exist on deep re-ID models. Serious consequences will be brought if deep re-ID systems are proved to
be vulnerable to adversarial attacks, for example, a suspect
who utilizes this vulnerability can escape from the person
search of re-ID based surveillance systems.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to investigate robust physical-world attacks on deep re-ID. In this
paper, we propose a novel attack algorithm, called advPat-

8341

