Conservative Wasserstein Training for Pose Estimation
Xiaofeng Liu1,2†∗ , Yang Zou1† , Tong Che3† , Peng Ding4 , Ping Jia4 , Jane You5 , B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar1
1

Carnegie Mellon University; 2 Harvard University; 3 MILA
4
CIOMP, Chinese Academy of Sciences; 5 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
†

Contribute equally ∗ Corresponding to: liuxiaofengcmu@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper targets the task with discrete and periodic
class labels (e.g., pose/orientation estimation) in the context of deep learning. The commonly used cross-entropy or
regression loss is not well matched to this problem as they
ignore the periodic nature of the labels and the class similarity, or assume labels are continuous value. We propose to
incorporate inter-class correlations in a Wasserstein training framework by pre-defining (i.e., using arc length of a
circle) or adaptively learning the ground metric. We extend
the ground metric as a linear, convex or concave increasing
function w.r.t. arc length from an optimization perspective.
We also propose to construct the conservative target labels
which model the inlier and outlier noises using a wrapped
unimodal-uniform mixture distribution. Unlike the one-hot
setting, the conservative label makes the computation of
Wasserstein distance more challenging. We systematically
conclude the practical closed-form solution of Wasserstein
distance for pose data with either one-hot or conservative
target label. We evaluate our method on head, body, vehicle and 3D object pose benchmarks with exhaustive ablation studies. The Wasserstein loss obtaining superior performance over the current methods, especially using convex mapping function for ground metric, conservative label,
and closed-form solution.

1. Introduction
There are some prediction tasks where the output labels
are discrete and are periodic. For example, consider the
problem of pose estimation. Although pose can be a continuous variable, in practice, it is often discretized e.g., in
5-degree intervals. Because of the periodic nature of pose,
a 355-degree label is closer to 0-degree label than the 10degree label. Thus it is important to consider the periodic
and discrete nature of the pose classiﬁcation problem.
In previous literature, pose estimation is often cast as a
multi-class classiﬁcation problem [49], a metric regression

‫ݐ‬௝‫כ‬

Pose with true label
Expected probability (i.e., 1 in one-hot case)

‫ݏ‬௝‫כ‬

More ideaů
Distribution

‫ݏ‬ଷ

‫ݏ‬ଶ

‫ݏ‬ଵ

‫ݏ‬଴

‫ݏ‬ேିଵ

‫ݏ‬ேିଶ

‫ݐ‬௝‫כ‬

Probability of Softmax prediction
of each pose (σேିଵ
௜ୀ଴ ‫ݏ‬௜ ൌ ͳ)

‫ݏ‬௝‫כ‬

Same
Cross-entropy

Inferior
Distribution

‫ݏ‬ଷ

‫ݏ‬ଶ

‫ݏ‬ேିଶ

‫ݏ‬ଵ

‫ݏ‬଴

‫ݏ‬ேିଵ

Figure 1. The limitation of CE loss for pose estimation. The
ground truth direction of the car is tj ∗. Two possible softmax
predictions (green bar) of the pose estimator have the same probability at tj ∗ position. Therefore, both predicted distributions have
the same CE loss. However, the left prediction is preferable to the
right, since we desire the predicted probability distribution to be
larger and closer to the ground truth class.

problem [46], or a mixture of both [37].
In a multi-class classiﬁcation formulation using the
cross-entropy (CE) loss, the class labels are assumed to be
independent from each other [49, 25, 33]. Therefore, the
inter-class similarity is not properly exploited. For instance,
in Fig. 1, we would prefer the predicted probability distribution to be concentrated near the ground truth class, while
the CE loss does not encourage that.
On the other hand, metric regression methods treat the
pose as a continuous numerical value [35, 27, 31], although the label of pose itself is discrete. As manifested
in [36, 30, 26], learning a regression model using discrete
labels will cause over-ﬁtting and exhibit similar or inferior
performance compared with classiﬁcation.
Recent works either use a joint classiﬁcation and regression loss [37] or divide a circle into several sectors with a
coarse classiﬁcation that ignores the periodicity, and then
applying regression networks to each sector independently
as an ordinal regression problem [20]. Unfortunately, none
of them fundamentally address the limitations of CE or regression loss in angular data.
In this work, we employ the Wasserstein loss as an alternative for empirical risk minimization. The 1st Wasser-

8262

