Stochastic Exposure Coding for Handling Multi-ToF-Camera Interference
Jongho Lee
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Mohit Gupta
University of Wisconsin-Madison

jongho@cs.wisc.edu

mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
As continuous-wave time-of-flight (C-ToF) cameras become popular in 3D imaging applications, they need to contend with the problem of multi-camera interference (MCI).
In a multi-camera environment, a ToF camera may receive
light from the sources of other cameras, resulting in large
depth errors. In this paper, we propose stochastic exposure coding (SEC), a novel approach for mitigating. SEC
involves dividing a camera’s integration time into multiple
slots, and switching the camera off and on stochastically
during each slot. This approach has two benefits. First, by
appropriately choosing the on probability for each slot, the
camera can effectively filter out both the AC and DC components of interfering signals, thereby mitigating depth errors while also maintaining high signal-to-noise ratio. This
enables high accuracy depth recovery with low power consumption. Second, this approach can be implemented without modifying the C-ToF camera’s coding functions, and
thus, can be used with a wide range of cameras with minimal changes. We demonstrate the performance benefits of
SEC with theoretical analysis, simulations and real experiments, across a wide range of imaging scenarios.

1. Introduction
Time-of-flight (ToF) cameras are fast becoming the
method of choice in various 3D imaging applications, such
as 3D mapping [8, 13], human-machine interaction [5], augmented reality [11] and robot navigation [17]. ToF cameras
have compact form-factors and low computational complexity, resulting in emergence of several commodity ToF
cameras [2, 1]. As these cameras become ubiquitous in mobile devices and cell-phones, they will face an important
problem: multi-camera interference (MCI). This is especially critical for continuous wave ToF (C-ToF) imaging,
where the light source emits light continuously. When several C-ToF cameras capture the same scene concurrently,
each sensor may receive light from the sources of other
cameras. This interfering signal prevents correct depth estimation, resulting in potentially large, structured errors.
One way to address MCI is to use orthogonal coding
functions for different C-ToF cameras, for example, sinusoids of different frequencies or phases [23, 18, 16], or

pseudo-random functions [6, 7, 10]. These approaches,
while theoretically capable of mitigating interference, have
a practical limitation. The intensity of light emitted by a
ToF camera’s source is positive, with both a constant (DC)
and an oscillating (AC) component; the depth information
is encoded in the time-shift of the AC component. Although
the orthogonal-coding approaches can remove the AC interference, the DC interference remains. The DC interference
acts as additional ambient light, resulting in higher photon
noise. As the number of interfering cameras increases, the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) can degrade considerably, making it challenging to recover meaningful information.
We propose a novel MCI reduction technique with the
goal of mitigating both DC and AC interference. Our approach is based on time-division multiple access (TDMA),
a widely used scheme for facilitating multi-user access
of shared communication channels. In TDMA, a single,
shared communication channel is divided into multiple time
slots, one slot assigned to each user [21]. In order to prevent interference, the timing across different users must be
synchronized, which is done by a central authority, e.g.,
base stations. Applying TDMA directly for addressing MCI
will require high-speed temporal synchronization of different cameras, which, unfortunately, is challenging [7].
Stochastic exposure coding: Is it possible to implement
a TDMA-like approach without synchronization? Our key
idea is to leverage stochasticity to avoid explicit synchronization. The proposed approach, called stochastic exposure coding (SEC), divides the total exposure time of each
camera into multiple slots. In each slot, the camera and the
source are turned on with a certain probability pON . By
design, if a slot doesn’t have a clash, i.e., only one camera
is active during that slot, both DC and AC interference are
avoided since the camera receives light only from its own
source. Since the approach is stochastic, without explicit
synchronization, there may still be clashes. We design a
simple, light-weight clash-check algorithm to identify and
discard clash-slots so they do not affect depth estimation. 1
1 This approach is similar to random-access protocols in communication such as ALOHA [3] and CSMA [14] in that packets are sent randomly.
However, while communication protocols need to re-send packets whenever collision happens, in our case, we can simply discard clashed slots.
This is because in communication, each packet has unique information,
whereas in our case, all slots have the same depth information.

7880

