Attributing Fake Images to GANs: Learning and Analyzing GAN Fingerprints
Ning Yu 1,2

Larry Davis 1
Mario Fritz 3
1
University of Maryland, College Park
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
3
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany

ningyu@mpi-inf.mpg.de

lsd@cs.umd.edu

fritz@cispa.saarland

Abstract
Recent advances in Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) have shown increasing success in generating photorealistic images. But they also raise challenges to visual forensics and model attribution. We present the first
study of learning GAN fingerprints towards image attribution and using them to classify an image as real or GANgenerated. For GAN-generated images, we further identify
their sources. Our experiments show that (1) GANs carry
distinct model fingerprints and leave stable fingerprints in
their generated images, which support image attribution;
(2) even minor differences in GAN training can result in
different fingerprints, which enables fine-grained model authentication; (3) fingerprints persist across different image
frequencies and patches and are not biased by GAN artifacts; (4) fingerprint finetuning is effective in immunizing
against five types of adversarial image perturbations; and
(5) comparisons also show our learned fingerprints consistently outperform several baselines in a variety of setups 1 .

1. Introduction
In the last two decades, photorealistic image generation
and manipulation techniques have rapidly evolved. Visual
contents can now be easily created and edited without leaving obvious perceptual traces [72]. Recent breakthroughs
in generative adversarial networks (GANs) [31, 52, 10, 32,
38, 19] have further improved the quality and photorealism of generated images. The adversarial framework of
GANs can also be used in conditional scenarios for image translation [36, 70, 71] or manipulation in a given context [60, 61, 57, 12, 64], which diversifies media synthesis.
1 Code, data, models, and supplementary material are available at
GitHub.

Figure 1. A t-SNE [43] visual comparison between our fingerprint
features (right) and the baseline inception features [52] (left) for
image attribution. Inception features are highly entangled, indicating the challenge to differentiate high-quality GAN-generated
images from real ones. However, our result shows any single difference in GAN architectures, training sets, or even initialization
seeds can result in distinct fingerprint features for effective attribution.

At the same time, however, the success of GANs has
raised two challenges to the vision community: visual
forensics and intellectual property protection.
GAN challenges to visual forensics. There is a
widespread concern about the impact of this technology
when used maliciously. This issue has also received increasing public attention, in terms of disruptive consequences to visual security, laws, politics, and society in general [6, 1, 3]. Therefore, it is critical to look into effective
visual forensics against threats from GANs.
While recent state-of-the-art visual forensics techniques
demonstrate impressive results for detecting fake visual media [16, 53, 27, 13, 22, 11, 35, 67, 68, 26], they have
only focused on semantic, physical, or statistical inconsistency of specific forgery scenarios, e.g., copy-move
manipulations[16, 26] or face swapping [67]. Forensics on
GAN-generated images [44, 47, 59] shows good accuracy,
but each method operates on only one GAN architecture by
identifying its unique artifacts and results deteriorate when
the GAN architecture is changed. It is still an open question
of whether GANs leave stable marks that are commonly

7556

