A Graph-Based Framework to Bridge Movies and Synopses
Yu Xiong1
1

Qingqiu Huang1 Lingfeng Guo2 Hang Zhou1 Bolei Zhou1 Dahua Lin1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
University of California, Berkeley

{xy017,hq016,bzhou,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

zhouhang@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Inspired by the remarkable advances in video analytics, research teams are stepping towards a greater ambition
– movie understanding. However, compared to those activity videos in conventional datasets, movies are significantly different. Generally, movies are much longer and
consist of much richer temporal structures. More importantly, the interactions among characters play a central role
in expressing the underlying story. To facilitate the efforts
along this direction, we construct a dataset called Movie
Synopses Associations (MSA) over 327 movies, which provides a synopsis for each movie, together with annotated
associations between synopsis paragraphs and movie segments. On top of this dataset, we develop a framework
to perform matching between movie segments and synopsis paragraphs. This framework integrates different aspects of a movie, including event dynamics and character
interactions, and allows them to be matched with parsed
paragraphs, based on a graph-based formulation. Our study shows that the proposed framework remarkably improves the matching accuracy over conventional featurebased methods. It also reveals the importance of narrative structures and character interactions in movie understanding. Dataset and code are available at: https://
ycxioooong.github.io/projects/moviesyn

1. Introduction
Among various forms of media, movies are often considered as the best to convey stories. While creating a
movie, the director can leverage a variety of elements
– the scene, the characters, and the narrative structures
– to express. From the perspective of computer vision,
movies provide a great arena with a number of new challenges, e.g. substantially greater length, richer presentation
styles, and more complex temporal structures. Recent studies [23, 26, 31, 32, 24, 16] attempted to approach this problem from different angles, only achieving limited progress.
Over the past decade, extensive studies have been devoted to video analytics. A number of video-based tasks,
e.g. action recognition [34, 4] and event classification [10],
have become active research topics. However, methods devised for these tasks are not particularly suitable for movie

lingfeng guo@berkeley.edu

understanding. Specifically, for such tasks, visual features,
which can be a combination of various cues, are often sufficient for obtaining good accuracies. However, movies are
essentially different. A movie is created to tell a story, instead of demonstrating a scene or an event of a certain category. To analyze movies effectively, we need new data, new
perspectives, and thus new approaches.
Recently, several datasets are constructed on movies,
including LSMDC [26] and MovieGraphs [31]. These
datasets, however, are limited in that they are small or have
a narrow focus on very short clips, i.e. those that last for
a few seconds. To facilitate the research in movie understanding, we need a new dataset that is large and diverse,
and more importantly allows high-level semantics and temporal structures to be extracted and analyzed. In this work,
we construct a large dataset called Movie Synopses Associations (MSA) over 327 movies. This dataset not only provides a high-quality detailed synopsis for each movie, but
also associates individual paragraphs of the synopsis with
movie segments via manual annotation. Here, each movie
segment can last for several minutes and capture a complete
event. These movie segments, combined with the associated synopsis paragraphs, allow one to conduct analysis with
a larger scope and at a higher semantic level.
Figure 1 shows a movie segment and the corresponding
synopsis paragraph, where we have two important observations: (1) The story is presented with a flow of events,
governed by the underlying narrative structures. The sentences in the synopsis often follow a similar order. (2) The
characters and their interactions are the key elements of the
underlying story. These two key aspects, namely the dynamic flow of events and the interaction among characters,
distinguish movies from those videos in conventional tasks.
In this work, we develop a new framework for matching
between movie segments and synopsis paragraphs. Rather
than encoding them with feature vectors, we choose to use
graphs for representation, which provide a flexible way to
capture middle-level elements and the relationships among
them. Specifically, the framework integrates two key modules: (1) Event flow module for aligning the sequence of
shots in a movie segment, each showing a particular event, to the sequence of sentences in a synopsis paragraph.

4592

