Teacher Supervises Students How to Learn
From Partially Labeled Images for Facial Landmark Detection

1

Xuanyi Dong1,2 and Yi Yang1,3
SUSTech-UTS Joint Centre of CIS, Southern China University of Science and Technology
2
Baidu Research, 3 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
xuanyi.dong@student.uts.edu.au, yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

unlabeled samples
retrain

Facial landmark detection aims to localize the anatomically defined points of human faces. In this paper, we study
facial landmark detection from partially labeled facial images. A typical approach is to (1) train a detector on the labeled images; (2) generate new training samples using this
detector’s prediction as pseudo labels of unlabeled images;
(3) retrain the detector on the labeled samples and partial
pseudo labeled samples. In this way, the detector can learn
from both labeled and unlabeled data to become robust.
In this paper, we propose an interaction mechanism between a teacher and two students to generate more reliable
pseudo labels for unlabeled data, which are beneficial to
semi-supervised facial landmark detection. Specifically, the
two students are instantiated as dual detectors. The teacher
learns to judge the quality of the pseudo labels generated
by the students and filter out unqualified samples before the
retraining stage. In this way, the student detectors get feedback from their teacher and are retrained by premium data
generated by itself. Since the two students are trained by
different samples, a combination of their predictions will be
more robust as the final prediction compared to either prediction. Extensive experiments on 300-W and AFLW benchmarks show that the interactions between teacher and students contribute to better utilization of the unlabeled data
and achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection aims to find some pre-defined
anatomical keypoints of human faces [44, 27, 43, 37].
These keypoints include the corners of a mouth, the boundary of eyes, the tip of a nose, etc [36, 35, 21]. It is usually a prerequisite of a large number of computer vision
tasks [26, 39, 3]. For example, facial landmark coordinates are required to align faces to ease the visualization
for users when people would like to sort their faces by time

student detector A

pseudo label
generation

retrain

student detector B
labeled
samples

qualified pseudo
labeled samples

filter out
unqualified
samples
by teacher
residual block-1
residual block-N

teacher

Figure 1. The interaction mechanism between teacher and students. Two student detectors learn to generate pseudo labels for
unlabeled samples, among which qualified samples are selected
by the teacher. These premium pseudo labeled data along with real
labeled data is used for the retraining of the students detectors.

and see the changes over time [9]. Other examples include
face morphing [3], face replacement [39], etc.
The main challenge in recent landmark detection literatures is how to obtain abundant facial landmark labels.
The annotation challenge comes from two perspectives.
First, a large number of keypoints are required for a single
face image, e.g., 68 keypoints for each face in the 300-W
dataset [35]. To precisely depict the facial features for a
whole dataset, millions of keypoints are usually required.
Second, different annotators have a semantic gap. There is
no universal standard for the annotation of the keypoints,
so different annotators give different positions for the same
keypoints. A typical way to reduce such semantic deviations among various annotators is to merge the labels from
several annotators. This will further increase the costs of
the whole annotation work.

783

