AutoGAN: Neural Architecture Search for Generative Adversarial Networks
Xinyu Gong1 Shiyu Chang2 Yifan Jiang1 Zhangyang Wang1
1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{xy gong, yifanjiang97, atlaswang}@tamu.edu shiyu.chang@ibm.com
Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) has witnessed prevailing success in image classification and (very recently) segmentation tasks. In this paper, we present the first preliminary study on introducing the NAS algorithm to generative
adversarial networks (GANs), dubbed AutoGAN. The marriage of NAS and GANs faces its unique challenges. We
define the search space for the generator architectural variations and use an RNN controller to guide the search, with
parameter sharing and dynamic-resetting to accelerate the
process. Inception score is adopted as the reward, and a
multi-level search strategy is introduced to perform NAS
in a progressive way. Experiments validate the effectiveness of AutoGAN on the task of unconditional image generation. Specifically, our discovered architectures achieve
highly competitive performance compared to current stateof-the-art hand-crafted GANs, e.g., setting new state-of-theart FID scores of 12.42 on CIFAR-10, and 31.01 on STL-10,
respectively. We also conclude with a discussion of the current limitations and future potential of AutoGAN. The code
is avaliable at https://github.com/TAMU-VITA/
AutoGAN .

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have been prevailing since its origin [11]. One of their most notable successes lies in generating realistic natural images with various convolutional architectures [47, 5, 61, 26, 13, 67]. In
order to improve the quality of generated images, many
efforts have been proposed, including modifying discriminator loss functions [3, 68], enforcing regularization terms
[6, 13, 42, 5], introducing attention mechanism [61, 64], and
adopting progressive training [26].
However, the backbone architecture design of GANs
has received relatively less attention, and was often considered a less significant factor accounting for GAN performance [39, 32]. Most earlier GANs stick to relatively
shallow generator and discriminator architectures, mostly

owing to the notorious instability in GAN training. Lately,
several state-of-the-art GANs [13, 42, 64, 5] adopted deep
residual network generator backbones for better generating high-resolution images. In most other computer vision
tasks, a lot of the progress arises from the improved design of network architectures, such as image classification
[15, 16, 52, 51, 35], segmentation [8, 9, 49], and pose estimation [43]. Hereby, we advocate that enhanced backbone
designs are also important for improving GANs further.
In recent years, there are surging interests in designing
sophisticated neural network architectures automatically.
Neural architecture search (NAS) has been successfully developed and evaluated on the task of image classification
[71, 46], and lately on image segmentation as well [7, 36].
The discovered architectures outperform human-designed
models. However, naively porting existing NAS ideas from
image classification/segmentation to GAN would not suffice. First and foremost, even given hand-designed architectures, the training of GANs is notoriously unstable and
prone to collapse [50]. Mingling NAS into the training process will undoubtedly amplify the difficulty. As another
important challenge, while the validation accuracy makes a
natural reward option for NAS in image classification, it is
less straightforward to choose a good metric for evaluating
and guiding the GAN search process.
This paper presents an architecture search scheme
specifically tailored for GANs, dubbed AutoGAN. Up to
our best knowledge, AutoGAN describes the first attempt
to incorporate NAS with GANs, and belongs to one of the
first attempts to extend NAS beyond image classification
too. Our technical innovations are summarized as follows:
• We define the search space to capture the GAN architectural variations. On top of that, we use an RNN controller [71] to guide the architecture search. Based on
the parameter sharing strategy in [46], we further introduce a parameter dynamic-resetting strategy in our
search progress, to boost the training speed.
• We use Inception score (IS) [50] as the reward, in
the reinforcement-learning-based optimization of AutoGAN. The discovered models are found also to show

3224

