Detecting Unseen Visual Relations Using Analogies
Julia Peyre1,2

Ivan Laptev1,2

Cordelia Schmid2,4

Josef Sivic1,2,3

Abstract
We seek to detect visual relations in images of the form
of triplets t = (subject, predicate, object), such as “person riding dog”, where training examples of the individual
entities are available but their combinations are unseen at
training. This is an important set-up due to the combinatorial nature of visual relations : collecting sufficient training
data for all possible triplets would be very hard. The contributions of this work are three-fold. First, we learn a representation of visual relations that combines (i) individual
embeddings for subject, object and predicate together with
(ii) a visual phrase embedding that represents the relation
triplet. Second, we learn how to transfer visual phrase embeddings from existing training triplets to unseen test triplets
using analogies between relations that involve similar objects. Third, we demonstrate the benefits of our approach
on three challenging datasets : on HICO-DET, our model
achieves significant improvement over a strong baseline for
both frequent and unseen triplets, and we observe similar
improvement for the retrieval of unseen triplets with out-ofvocabulary predicates on the COCO-a dataset as well as the
challenging unusual triplets in the UnRel dataset.

1. Introduction
Understanding interactions between objects is one of the
fundamental problems in visual recognition. To retrieve
images given a complex language query such as “a woman
sitting on top of a pile of books” we need to recognize
individual entities “woman” and “a pile of books” in the
scene, as well as understand what it means to “sit on top of
something”. In this work we aim to recognize and localize
unseen interactions in images, as shown in Figure 1, where
the individual entities (“person”, “dog”, “ride”) are available
at training, but not in this specific combination. Such ability
is important in practice given the combinatorial nature of
visual relations where we are unlikely to obtain sufficient
1 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, Ecole normale supérieure,
CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
2 INRIA
3 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech
Technical University in Prague.
4 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France.

Figure 1: Illustration of transfer by analogy with our model described in 3.2. We transfer visual representations of relations seen
in the training set such as “person ride horse” to represent new
unseen relations in the test set such as “person ride dog”.

training data for all possible relation triplets.
Existing methods [8, 25, 28] to detect visual relations in
the form of triplets t = (subject, predicate, object) typically learn generic detectors for each of the entities, i.e. a
separate detector is learnt for subject (e.g. “person”), object
(e.g. “horse”) and predicate (e.g. “ride”). The outputs of the
individual detectors are then aggregated at test time. This
compositional approach can detect unseen triplets, where
subject, predicate and object are observed separately but not
in the specific combination. However, it often fails in practice [31, 46], due to the large variability in appearance of the
visual interaction that often heavily depends on the objects
involved; it is indeed difficult for a single “ride” detector
to capture visually different relations such as “person ride
horse” and “person ride bus”.
An alternative approach [41] is to treat the whole triplet
as a single entity, called a visual phrase, and learn a separate
detector for each of the visual phrases. For instance, separate
detectors would be learnt for relations “person ride horse”
and “person ride surfboard”. While this approach better
11981

