Where Is My Mirror?
Xin Yang1,⋆ , Haiyang Mei1,⋆ , Ke Xu1,3 , Xiaopeng Wei1 , Baocai Yin1,2 , Rynson W.H. Lau3,†
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Mirrors are everywhere in our daily lives. Existing computer vision systems do not consider mirrors, and hence
may get confused by the reflected content inside a mirror,
resulting in a severe performance degradation. However,
separating the real content outside a mirror from the reflected content inside it is non-trivial. The key challenge is
that mirrors typically reflect contents similar to their surroundings, making it very difficult to differentiate the two.
In this paper, we present a novel method to segment mirrors from an input image. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work to address the mirror segmentation problem
with a computational approach. We make the following contributions. First, we construct a large-scale mirror dataset
that contains mirror images with corresponding manually
annotated masks. This dataset covers a variety of daily life
scenes, and will be made publicly available for future research. Second, we propose a novel network, called MirrorNet, for mirror segmentation, by modeling both semantical
and low-level color/texture discontinuities between the contents inside and outside of the mirrors. Third, we conduct
extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed method, and
show that it outperforms the carefully chosen baselines from
the state-of-the-art detection and segmentation methods.

1. Introduction
Mirrors are very common and important in our daily
lives. The presence of mirrors may, however, severely degrades the performance of existing computer vision tasks,
e.g., by producing wrong depth predictions (Figure 1(b)) or
falsely detecting the reflected objects as real ones (Figure
1(c)). Hence, it is essential to these systems to be able to
detect and segment mirrors from the input images.
Automatically segmenting mirrors from the background
is extremely challenging, due to the fact that the contents
reflected by the mirrors are very similar to those outside
them (i.e., their surroundings). This makes them fundamentally different from other objects that have been addressed
⋆ Joint first authors. † Rynson Lau is the corresponding author, and
he led this project. Project page: https://mhaiyang.github.io/
ICCV2019_MirrorNet/index

near

far

(a) image

(b) depth

(c) segmentation

(d) MirrorNet

(e) our depth

(f) our segmentation

Figure 1: Problems with mirrors in existing vision tasks. In
depth prediction, NYU-v2 dataset [32] uses a Kinect to capture depth as ground truth. It wrongly predicts the depths of
the reflected contents, instead of the mirror depths (b). In
instance semantic segmentation, Mask RCNN [12] wrongly
detects objects inside the mirrors (c). With MirrorNet, we
first detect and mask out the mirrors (d). We then obtain
the correct depths (e), by interpolating the depths from surrounding pixels of the mirrors, and segmentation maps (f).
well by the state-of-the-art segmentation methods [47, 12].
Meanwhile, as the contents reflected by the mirrors may
not necessarily be salient, directly applying state-of-the-art
saliency detection methods [8, 21] for detecting mirrors is
also not appropriate.
In this work, we aim to address the mirror segmentation
problem. We note that humans can generally detect the existence of mirrors well. To do this, we observe that humans
typically try to identify content discontinuity at the mirror
boundaries in order to differentiate if some content belong
to the reflection of a mirror. Hence, a straightforward solution to this problem is to apply low-level features to detect
mirror boundaries. Unfortunately, this may fail if an object partially appears in front of a mirror, e.g., the second

8809

