A Robust Learning Approach to Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Mehran Khodabandeh
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, Canada

Arash Vahdat
NVIDIA
California, USA

Mani Ranjbar
Quadrant
Burnaby, Canada

William G. Macready
Quadrant
Burnaby, Canada

mkhodaba@sfu.ca

avahdat@nvidia.com

mani@quadrant.ai

bill@quadrant.ai

Abstract
Domain shift is unavoidable in real-world applications
of object detection. For example, in self-driving cars, the
target domain consists of unconstrained road environments
which cannot all possibly be observed in training data. Similarly, in surveillance applications sufficiently representative training data may be lacking due to privacy regulations.
In this paper, we address the domain adaptation problem
from the perspective of robust learning and show that the
problem may be formulated as training with noisy labels.
We propose a robust object detection framework that is resilient to noise in bounding box class labels, locations and
size annotations. To adapt to the domain shift, the model
is trained on the target domain using a set of noisy object bounding boxes that are obtained by a detection model
trained only in the source domain. We evaluate the accuracy of our approach in various source/target domain pairs
and demonstrate that the model significantly improves the
state-of-the-art on multiple domain adaptation scenarios on
the SIM10K, Cityscapes and KITTI datasets.

1. Introduction
Object detection lies at the core of computer vision and
finds application in surveillance, medical imaging, selfdriving cars, face analysis, and industrial manufacturing.
Recent advances in object detection using convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have made current models fast, reliable and accurate.
However, domain adaptation remains a significant challenge in object detection. In many discriminative problems
(including object detection) it is usually assumed that the
distribution of instances in both train (source domain) and
test (target domain) set are identical. Unfortunately, this assumption is easily violated, and domain changes in object
detection arise with variations in viewpoint, background,
object appearance, scene type and illumination. Further,
object detection models are often deployed in environments

which differ from the training environment.
Common domain adaptation approaches are based on either supervised model fine-tuning in the target domain or
unsupervised cross-domain representation learning. While
the former requires additional labeled instances in the target domain, the latter eliminates this requirement at the cost
of two new challenges. Firstly, the source/target representations should be matched in some space (e.g., either in input space [69, 23] or hidden representations space [14, 54]).
Secondly, a mechanism for feature matching must be defined (e.g. maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [40, 35],
H divergence [2], or adversarial learning).
In this paper, we approach domain adaptation differently,
and address the problem through robust training methods.
Our approach relies on the observation that, although a (primary) model trained in the source domain may have suboptimal performance in the target domain, it may nevertheless
be used to detect objects in the target domain with some
accuracy. The detected objects can then be used to retrain
a detection model on both domains. However, because the
instances detected in the target domain may be inaccurate,
a robust detection framework (which accommodates these
inaccuracies) must be used during retraining.
The principal benefit of this formulation is that the detection model is trained in an unsupervised manner in the
target domain. Although we do not explicitly aim at matching representations between source and target domain, the
detection model may implicitly achieve this because it is fed
by instances from both source and target domains.
To accommodate labeling inaccuracies we adopt a probabilistic perspective and develop a robust training framework for object detection on top of Faster R-CNN [47]. We
provide robustness against two types of noise: i) mistakes
in object labels (i.e., a bounding box is labeled as person
but actually is a pole), and ii) inaccurate bounding box location and size (i.e., a bounding box does not enclose the
object). We formulate the robust retraining objective so
that the model can alter both bounding box class labels and
bounding box location/size based on its current belief of labels in the target domain. This enables the robust detection

480

