Symmetry-constrained Rectification Network for Scene Text Recognition
Mingkun Yang1 , Yushuo Guan2 , Minghui Liao1 , Xin He4 ,
Kaigui Bian2 , Song Bai3 , Cong Yao4 and Xiang Bai1∗
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
Peking University, 3 University of Oxford, 4 Megvii (Face++) Inc.
{yangmingkun, mhliao, xbai}@hust.edu.cn

{david.guan, bkg}@pku.edu.cn

{yaocong2010, songbai.site, hexin7257}@gmail.com

Abstract
Reading text in the wild is a very challenging task due to
the diversity of text instances and the complexity of natural
scenes. Recently, the community has paid increasing attention to the problem of recognizing text instances of irregular
shapes. One intuitive and effective solution to this problem
is to rectify irregular text to a canonical form before recognition. However, these methods might struggle when dealing with highly curved or distorted text instances. To tackle
this issue, we propose a Symmetry-constrained Rectification
Network (ScRN) in this paper, based on the local attributes
of text instances, such as center line, scale, and orientation.
Such constraints with an accurate description of text shape
enable ScRN to generate better rectification results than existing methods thus leading to higher recognition accuracy.
Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on text
of both regular and irregular shapes. Specifically, the system outperforms existing algorithms by a large margin on
datasets that contain quite a proportion of irregular text instances, e.g., ICDAR 2015, SVT-Perspective and CUTE80.

1. Introduction
Scene text reading [60, 32, 59, 54, 53, 36, 35] is an important, active research area in computer vision, which can
be applied to a wide range of real-world applications, such
as self-driving cars, assistant position systems, and guide
board recognition [43]. Scene text recognition, which aims
at converting text regions in the images to machine-readable
symbols, is a critical step in scene text reading systems. It
remains challenging due to complex backgrounds, irregular
shapes, varying fonts, non-uniform illuminations, etc.
Text instances in real-world scenarios have diverse
shapes, e.g., in horizontal, oriented, or curved forms. There
have been a lot of works that focus on dealing with irregular text instances. AON [8] applies sequence recognition
∗ corresponding author.

TPS
transformation

STN

(a)
TPS
transformation

ScRN

(b)

Figure 1: Comparison between ASTER [46] and ScRN
(proposed in this paper), shown in (a) and (b) respectively.
in four different orientations, which enables the recognition
model to handle oriented text instances. RARE [45] and
ASTER [46] employ a rectiﬁcation module before recognition. The rectiﬁcation modules can improve text recognition accuracy by rectifying text in irregular shapes into
regular forms. These rectiﬁcation modules are based on
spatial transform network (STN) [21], which predicts the
control points of the text outlines in a weakly supervised
way, as shown in Fig. 1a. They can deal with the text of
various shapes only with word-level supervision. Ideally,
the control points should evenly spread along the upper and
lower edges of the text region, and the paired upper and
lower points should be symmetrical about the center line of
text. However, these STN-based methods predict the control points separately and neglect the priors. Without any
constraints for such priors, the rectiﬁcation effect in highly
curved or distorted occasions might be unsatisfactory.
To further improve the performance of irregular text rectiﬁcation, we propose a Symmetry-constrained Rectiﬁcation Network (ScRN) that uses the center line of each text
instance and adds symmetrical constraints via some geometrical attributes, including the orientations of the text
center line, the orientations and the scales of the characters.
Speciﬁcally, each text center line is more ﬂexible to describe
the pose of either straight or curved text. Its associated geometrical attributes can reliably estimate the orientation and
the boundary of text lines in vertical direction. Furthermore, the generation process of control points ensures the

9147

