Co-Separating Sounds of Visual Objects
Ruohan Gao
UT Austin

Kristen Grauman
UT Austin and Facebook AI Research

rhgao@cs.utexas.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Learning how objects sound from video is challenging,
since they often heavily overlap in a single audio channel.
Current methods for visually-guided audio source separation sidestep the issue by training with artificially mixed
video clips, but this puts unwieldy restrictions on training
data collection and may even prevent learning the properties of “true” mixed sounds. We introduce a co-separation
training paradigm that permits learning object-level sounds
from unlabeled multi-source videos. Our novel training objective requires that the deep neural network’s separated
audio for similar-looking objects be consistently identifiable, while simultaneously reproducing accurate videolevel audio tracks for each source training pair. Our approach disentangles sounds in realistic test videos, even in
cases where an object was not observed individually during training. We obtain state-of-the-art results on visuallyguided audio source separation and audio denoising for the
MUSIC, AudioSet, and AV-Bench datasets.

cello

guitar

violin

guitar

consistently identifiable
Figure 1: We propose a co-separation training objective to learn
audio-source separation from unlabeled video containing multiple
sound sources. Our approach learns to associate consistent sounds
to similar-looking objects across pairs of training videos. Then,
given a single novel video, it returns a separate sound track for
each object. Image credit: [1, 2].

1. Introduction
Multi-modal perception is important to capture the richness of real-world sensory data for objects, scenes, and
events. The sounds made by objects, whether actively generated or incidentally emitted, offer valuable signals about
their physical properties and spatial locations—the cymbals
crash on stage, the bird tweets up in the tree, the truck revs
down the block, the silverware clinks in the drawer.
Objects often generate sounds while coexisting or interacting with other surrounding objects. Thus, rather than
observe them in isolation, we hear them intertwined with
sounds coming from other sources. Likewise, a realistic
video records the various objects with a single audio channel that mixes all their acoustic frequencies together. Automatically separating the sounds of each object in a video is
of great practical interest, with applications including audio
denoising, audio-visual video indexing, instrument equalization, audio event remixing, and dialog following.
Whereas traditional methods assume access to multiple

microphones or carefully supervised clean audio samples
[22, 48, 9], recent methods tackle the audio(-visual) source
separation problem using a “mix-and-separate” paradigm
to train deep neural networks in a self-supervised manner [41, 50, 8, 31, 52]. Namely, such methods randomly mix
audio/video clips, and the learning objective is to recover
the original unmixed signals. For example, one can create “synthetic cocktail parties” that mix clean speech with
other sounds [8], add pseudo “off-screen” human speakers
to other real videos [31], or superimpose audio from clips
of musical instruments [52].
There are two key limitations with this current training
strategy. First, it implicitly assumes that the original real
training videos are dominated by single-source clips containing one primary sound maker. However, gathering a
large number of such clean “solo” recordings is impractical and will be difficult to scale beyond particular classes
13879

