Joint Monocular 3D Vehicle Detection and Tracking
Hou-Ning Hu1∗, Qi-Zhi Cai2∗, Dequan Wang3 , Ji Lin4∗,
Min Sun1 , Philipp Krähenbühl5 , Trevor Darrell3 , Fisher Yu3
1
National Tsing Hua University 2 Sinovation Ventures AI Institute
3
UC Berkeley 4 MIT 5 UT Austin

Abstract
Vehicle 3D extents and trajectories are critical cues for
predicting the future location of vehicles and planning future
agent ego-motion based on those predictions. In this paper,
we propose a novel online framework for 3D vehicle detection and tracking from monocular videos. The framework
can not only associate detections of vehicles in motion over
time, but also estimate their complete 3D bounding box information from a sequence of 2D images captured on a moving
platform. Our method leverages 3D box depth-ordering
matching for robust instance association and utilizes 3D
trajectory prediction for re-identification of occluded vehicles. We also design a motion learning module based on
an LSTM for more accurate long-term motion extrapolation. Our experiments on simulation, KITTI, and Argoverse
datasets show that our 3D tracking pipeline offers robust
data association and tracking. On Argoverse, our imagebased method is significantly better for tracking 3D vehicles
within 30 meters than the LiDAR-centric baseline methods.

[R|t]

[R|t]

Figure 1: Joint online detection and tracking in 3D. Our
dynamic 3D tracking pipeline predicts 3D bounding box association of observed vehicles in image sequences captured
by a monocular camera with an ego-motion sensor.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving motivates much of contemporary
visual deep learning research. However, many commercially
successful approaches to autonomous driving control rely on
a wide array of views and sensors, reconstructing 3D point
clouds of the surroundings before inferring object trajectories
in 3D. In contrast, human observers have no difficulty in
perceiving the 3D world in both space and time from simple
sequences of 2D images rather than 3D point clouds, even
though human stereo vision only reaches several meters.
Recent progress in monocular object detection and scene
segmentation offers the promise to make low-cost mobility
widely available. In this paper, we explore architectures and
datasets for developing similar capabilities using deep neural
networks.
∗ Work was done while Hou-Ning Hu, Qi-Zhi Cai and Ji Lin were at the
Berkeley DeepDrive Center

Monocular 3D detection and tracking are inherently illposed. In the absence of depth measurements or strong
priors, a single view does not provide enough information
to estimate 3D layout of a scene accurately. Without a good
layout estimate, tracking becomes increasingly difficult, especially in the presence of large ego-motion (e.g., a turning
car). The two problems are inherently intertwined. Robust
tracking helps 3D detection, as information along consecutive frames is integrated. Accurate 3D detection helps to
track, as ego-motion can be factored out.
In this paper, we propose an online network architecture
to jointly track and detect vehicles in 3D from a series of
monocular images. Figure 1 provides an overview of our 3D
tracking and detection task. After detecting 2D bounding
boxes of objects, we utilize both world coordinates and reprojected camera coordinates to associate instances across
frames. Notably, we leverage novel occlusion-aware associ15390

