RIO: 3D Object Instance Re-Localization in Changing Indoor Environments
Johanna Wald 1

Armen Avetisyan 1 Nassir Navab 1 Federico Tombari 1,2,∗
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Google

Matthias Nießner 1,∗

Figure 1: 3D object instance re-localization benchmark: we want to robustly estimate the 6DoF pose (T1 , T2 , ...Tn ) of changed rigid
object instances from a segmented source to a target scan taken at a later point in time.

Abstract
In this work, we introduce the task of 3D object instance
re-localization (RIO): given one or multiple objects in an
RGB-D scan, we want to estimate their corresponding 6DoF
poses in another 3D scan of the same environment taken
at a later point in time. We consider RIO a particularly
important task in 3D vision since it enables a wide range
of practical applications, including AI-assistants or robots
that are asked to find a specific object in a 3D scene. To
address this problem, we first introduce 3RScan, a novel
dataset and benchmark, which features 1482 RGB-D scans
of 478 environments across multiple time steps. Each scene
includes several objects whose positions change over time,
together with ground truth annotations of object instances
and their respective 6DoF mappings among re-scans. Automatically finding 6DoF object poses leads to a particular
challenging feature matching task due to varying partial
observations and changes in the surrounding context. To this
end, we introduce a new data-driven approach that efficiently
finds matching features using a fully-convolutional 3D correspondence network operating on multiple spatial scales.
Combined with a 6DoF pose optimization, our method outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on our newly-established
benchmark, achieving an accuracy of 30.58%.

1. Introduction
3D scanning and understanding of indoor environments is
a fundamental research direction in computer vision laying
the foundation for a large variety of applications ranging
from indoor robotics to augmented and virtual reality. In
particular, the rapid progress in RGB-D scanning systems
[17, 18, 31, 6] allows to obtain 3D reconstructions of indoor scenes using only low-cost scanning devices such as
the Microsoft Kinect, Intel Real Sense, or Google Tango.
Along with the ability to capture 3D maps, researchers have
shown significant interest in using these representations to
perform 3D scene understanding and developed a rapidlyemerging line of research focusing on tasks such as 3D
semantic segmentation [4, 19, 26] or 3D instance segmentation [10]. However, the shared commonality between these
works is that they only consider static scene environments.
In this work, we focus on environments that change over
time. Specifically, we introduce the task of object instance
re-localization (RIO): given one or multiple objects in an
RGB-D scan, we want to estimate their corresponding 6DoF
poses in another 3D scan of the same environment taken
at a different point in time. Therefore, the captured reconstructions naturally cover a variety of temporal changes; see
Fig. 1. We believe this is a critical task for many indoor
applications, for instance, for a robot or virtual assistant to
find a specific object in its surrounding environment.
The main challenge in RIO – finding the 6DoF of each
object – lies in establishing good correspondences between
re-scans, which is non-trivial due to different scanning pat-

* Authors share senior authorship.

https://waldjohannau.github.io/RIO/

7658

