Semantics-enhanced Adversarial Nets for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Hongchen Tan1∗, Xiuping Liu1†, Xin Li2∗ , Yi Zhang1 , Baocai Yin1,3
Dalian University of Technology1 , Louisiana State University2 , Peng Cheng Laboratory3
{tanhongchenphd, dlutzy}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {xinli}@cct.lsu.edu, {xpliu, ybc}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a new model, Semantics-enhanced
Generative Adversarial Network (SEGAN), for fine-grained
text-to-image generation. We introduce two modules, a Semantic Consistency Module (SCM) and an Attention Competition Module (ACM), to our SEGAN. The SCM incorporates image-level semantic consistency into the training
of the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), and can diversify the generated images and improve their structural
coherence. A Siamese network and two types of semantic
similarities are designed to map the synthesized image and
the groundtruth image to nearby points in the latent semantic feature space. The ACM constructs adaptive attention
weights to differentiate keywords from unimportant words,
and improves the stability and accuracy of SEGAN. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our SEGAN significantly
outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in generating
photo-realistic images. All source codes and models will be
released for comparative study.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing photographic images from text description has tremendous applications such as photo editing and
computer-aided design. However, it remains as a challenging vision problem. Recently, based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [6], many effective approaches [28, 42, 9, 44, 40, 16] have been developed and achieved
promising results. One issue that hinders the synthesis of
realistic images with good resolutions is the big arbitrariness of the image contents to generate from limited text semantics. Most existing text-to-image synthesis approaches
condition the training of content generation only using semantic information from textual data. However, from these
limited words, it is sometimes difficult for a generator to
learn rich-enough contents to form realistic images. The
generated images, hence, are often prone to semantic structure ambiguity and class information confusion.
∗ indicates equal contributions
† indicates corresponding author

The training of image synthesizer is usually performed
on data with both descriptive texts and corresponding
groundtruth images. We believe these groundtruth images
provide highly valuable content semantics to help train the
image synthesizer. Therefore, our basic idea is to train an
image synthesizer using both text semantics and image contents. We expect images generated by such a synthesizer
would contain more structured context information and be
more vivid.
In addition, many existing text-to-image synthesizers
create contents based on the global sentence feature, which
may miss important fine-grained information at the word
level and impact the quality of synthesized images. Recently, AttnGAN [40] incorporate word-level and sentence-level
attention mechanism to produce fine-grained image generation. However, in the word-level attention mechanism of
AttnGAN [40], attention is paid to every word in the sentence. Our second technical development in this paper is
to generate adaptive attention mechanism so that important words will gain plenty attention and unimportant words
can be ignored. This could improve the description ability
of detail to SEGAN, and further improve the stability and
accuracy of the trained synthesizer.
Based on the above observations, we specifically design two new modules in our image synthesis GAN. The
first module is the Semantic Consistency Module (SCM), in
which we propose a Siamese network (SiaNet) to pull a synthesized image Ia′ towards its corresponding groundtruth
image Ia , and pushes the image of Ia′ away from another image Ib that is associated with a different text description. SCM improves the semantic consistency by mapping
the synthesized image and its corresponding groundtruth to
nearby points on the output manifold in the latent semantic feature space. Furthermore, we observe the training of
SCM involves both easy and difficult samples. We further
revise the Contrastive Loss of SiaNets according to difficulty of samples to tackle this imbalance. The second module
is the Attention Competition Module (ACM), which constructs attention weight for key words and suppresses the
influence of unimportant words. We achieve this through
an attention regularization term in the training of ACM.

10501

