Multi-View Stereo by Temporal Nonparametric Fusion
Yuxin Hou
Juho Kannala
Arno Solin
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University, Finland
firstname.lastname@aalto.fi

Abstract
We propose a novel idea for depth estimation from multiview image-pose pairs, where the model has capability to
leverage information from previous latent-space encodings
of the scene. This model uses pairs of images and poses,
which are passed through an encoder–decoder model for
disparity estimation. The novelty lies in soft-constraining
the bottleneck layer by a nonparametric Gaussian process
prior. We propose a pose-kernel structure that encourages
similar poses to have resembling latent spaces. The flexibility of the Gaussian process (GP) prior provides adapting memory for fusing information from previous views.
We train the encoder–decoder and the GP hyperparameters
jointly end-to-end. In addition to a batch method, we derive
a lightweight estimation scheme that circumvents standard
pitfalls in scaling Gaussian process inference, and demonstrate how our scheme can run in real-time on smart devices.

(a) Reference frames

(b) Multi-view depth-estimation w/o GP

(c) Multi-view depth-estimation with GP
Figure 1. An example sequence of depth estimation results, where
introducing information sharing in the latent space helps improving the depth maps by making them more stable and edges sharper.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) refers to the problem of reconstructing 3D scene structure from multiple images with
known camera poses and internal parameters. For example,
estimation of depth maps from multiple video frames captured by a moving monocular video camera [34] is a variant
of MVS when the motion is known. Other variants of the
problem include depth estimation using conventional twoview stereo rigs [15] and image-based 3D modelling from
image collections [8, 27]. MVS reconstructions have various applications. For instance, image-based 3D models can
be used for measurement and visualization of large environments to aid design and planning [1], and depth estimation from stereo rigs or monocular videos benefits perception and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) in
the context of autonomous machines.
In this paper, we focus on depth map estimation for video
frames captured by a monocular camera, whose motion is
unconstrained but known. In practice, the motion could

be estimated using visual-inertial odometry techniques (see,
e.g., [29]), which are capable of providing high-precision
camera poses in real-time with very small drift and are also
commonly available in standard mobile platforms (e.g., ARCore on Android and ARKit on iOS).
Depth estimation from multiple video frames under
varying and arbitrary motion is more challenging than depth
estimation using a rigid two-view stereo rig, but there can be
potential benefits in using a moving monocular camera instead of a fixed rig. Firstly, in small mobile devices the baseline between the two cameras of the rig can not be large and
this limits the range of depth measurements. With a moving monocular camera the motion usually provides a larger
baseline than the size of the device and thus measurement
accuracy for distant regions can be improved. Secondly,
when the camera is translating and rotating in a given space,
it typically observes the same scene regions from multiple
continuously varying viewpoints, and it would be beneficial

2651

