TSM: Temporal Shift Module for Efficient Video Understanding
Ji Lin
MIT

Chuang Gan
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Song Han
MIT

jilin@mit.edu

ganchuang@csail.mit.edu

songhan@mit.edu

T H,W

Abstract

1. Introduction
Hardware-efficient video understanding is an important
step towards real-world deployment, both on the cloud and
on the edge. For example, there are over 105 hours of videos
uploaded to YouTube every day to be processed for recommendation and ads ranking; tera-bytes of sensitive videos
in hospitals need to be processed locally on edge devices to
protect privacy. All these industry applications require both
accurate and efficient video understanding.
Deep learning has become the standard for video understanding over the years [45, 48, 4, 49, 61, 53, 58]. One key
difference between video recognition and image recognition
is the need for temporal modeling. For example, to distinguish between opening and closing a box, reversing the order
will give opposite results, so temporal modeling is critical.

C

Channel C

truncate
t=0

temporal shift

Temporal T

The explosive growth in video streaming gives rise to
challenges on performing video understanding at high accuracy and low computation cost. Conventional 2D CNNs
are computationally cheap but cannot capture temporal
relationships; 3D CNN based methods can achieve good
performance but are computationally intensive, making it
expensive to deploy. In this paper, we propose a generic
and effective Temporal Shift Module (TSM) that enjoys both
high efficiency and high performance. Specifically, it can
achieve the performance of 3D CNN but maintain 2D CNN’s
complexity. TSM shifts part of the channels along the temporal dimension; thus facilitate information exchanged among
neighboring frames. It can be inserted into 2D CNNs to
achieve temporal modeling at zero computation and zero
parameters. We also extended TSM to online setting, which
enables real-time low-latency online video recognition and
video object detection. TSM is accurate and efficient: it
ranks the first place on the Something-Something leaderboard upon publication; on Jetson Nano and Galaxy Note8,
it achieves a low latency of 13ms and 35ms for online video
recognition. The code is available at: https://github.
com/mit-han-lab/temporal-shift-module.

Channel C

t=1
t=2

pad zero

t=3
…

(a) The original ten- (b) Offline temporal (c) Online temporal
sor without shift.
shift (bi-direction). shift (uni-direction).
Figure 1. Temporal Shift Module (TSM) performs efficient temporal modeling by moving the feature map along the temporal
dimension. It is computationally free on top of a 2D convolution,
but achieves strong temporal modeling ability. TSM efficiently
supports both offline and online video recognition. Bi-directional
TSM mingles both past and future frames with the current frame,
which is suitable for high-throughput offline video recognition.
Uni-directional TSM mingles only the past frame with the current
frame, which is suitable for low-latency online video recognition.

Existing efficient video understanding approaches directly
use 2D CNN [24, 39, 48, 58]. However, 2D CNN on individual frames cannot well model the temporal information. 3D
CNNs [45, 4] can jointly learn spatial and temporal features
but the computation cost is large, making the deployment on
edge devices difficult; it cannot be applied to real-time online video recognition. There are works to trade off between
temporal modeling and computation, such as post-hoc fusion [13, 9, 58, 7] and mid-level temporal fusion [61, 53, 46].
Such methods sacrifice the low-level temporal modeling for
efficiency, but much of the useful information is lost during
the feature extraction before the temporal fusion happens.
In this paper, we propose a new perspective for efficient temporal modeling in video understanding by proposing a novel Temporal Shift Module (TSM). Concretely, an
activation in a video model can be represented as A ∈
RN ×C×T ×H×W , where N is the batch size, C is the number of channels, T is the temporal dimension, H and W are
the spatial resolutions. Traditional 2D CNNs operate independently over the dimension T ; thus no temporal modeling
takes effects (Figure 1a). In contrast, our Temporal Shift
Module (TSM) shifts the channels along the temporal dimension, both forward and backward. As shown in Figure 1b,
the information from neighboring frames is mingled with
the current frame after shifting. Our intuition is: the convo17083

