AVT: Unsupervised Learning of Transformation Equivariant Representations by
Autoencoding Variational Transformations
Guo-Jun Qi1,2,∗, Liheng Zhang1 , Chang Wen Chen3 , Qi Tian4
1

Laboratory for MAchine Perception and LEarning (MAPLE)
http://maple-lab.net/
2
Huawei Cloud, 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong at Shenzhen and Peng Cheng Laboratory
guojun.qi@huawei.com
http://maple-lab.net/projects/AVT.htm

Abstract
The learning of Transformation-Equivariant Representations (TERs), which is introduced by Hinton et al. [16],
has been considered as a principle to reveal visual structures under various transformations. It contains the celebrated Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) as a special case that only equivary to the translations. In contrast, we seek to train TERs for a generic class of transformations and train them in an unsupervised fashion. To
this end, we present a novel principled method by Autoencoding Variational Transformations (AVT), compared with
the conventional approach to autoencoding data. Formally,
given transformed images, the AVT seeks to train the networks by maximizing the mutual information between the
transformations and representations. This ensures the resultant TERs of individual images contain the intrinsic information about their visual structures that would equivary
extricably under various transformations in a generalized
nonlinear case. Technically, we show that the resultant optimization problem can be efficiently solved by maximizing
a variational lower-bound of the mutual information. This
variational approach introduces a transformation decoder
to approximate the intractable posterior of transformations,
resulting in an autoencoding architecture with a pair of the
representation encoder and the transformation decoder. Experiments demonstrate the proposed AVT model sets a new
record for the performances on unsupervised tasks, greatly
closing the performance gap to the supervised models.

∗ Corresponding author: G.-J. Qi. Email: guojunq@gmail.com. The
idea was conceived and formulated by G.-J. Qi, and L. Zhang performed
experiments while interning at Huawei Cloud.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have demonstrated tremendous successes when a large volume of labeled data are available to train the models. Although a
solid theory is still lacking, it is thought that both equivalence and invariance to image translations play a critical
role in the success of CNNs [6, 7, 34, 16], particularly for
supervised tasks.
Specifically, while the whole network is trained in an
end-to-end fashion, a typical CNN model consists of two
parts: the convolutional feature maps of an input image
through multiple convolutional layers, and the classifier of
fully connected layers mapping the feature maps to the target labels. It is obvious that a supervised classification task
requires the fully connected classifier to predict labels invariant to transformations. For training a CNN model, such
a transformation invariance criterion is achieved by minimizing the classification errors on the labeled examples
augmented with various transformations [22]. Unfortunately, it is impossible to simply apply transformation invariance to learn an unsupervised representation without label
supervision, since this would result in a trivial constant representation for any input images.
On the contrary, it is not hard to see that the representations generated through convolutional layers are equivariant to the transformations – the feature maps of translated images are also shifted in the same way subject to edge
padding effect [22]. It it natural to generalize this idea by
considering more types of transformations beyond translations, e.g., image warping and projective transformations
[6].
In this paper, we formalize the concept of transformation equivariance as the criterion to train an unsupervised
representation. We expect it could learn the representation18130

