Universally Slimmable Networks and Improved Training Techniques
Jiahui Yu
Thomas Huang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Slimmable networks [25] are a family of neural networks
that can instantly adjust the runtime width. The width can
be chosen from a predefined widths set to adaptively optimize accuracy-efficiency trade-offs at runtime. In this
work, we propose a systematic approach to train universally slimmable networks (US-Nets), extending slimmable
networks to execute at arbitrary width, and generalizing to
networks both with and without batch normalization layers.
We further propose two improved training techniques for
US-Nets, named the sandwich rule and inplace distillation,
to enhance training process and boost testing accuracy. We
show improved performance of universally slimmable MobileNet v1 and MobileNet v2 on ImageNet classification
task, compared with individually trained ones and 4-switch
slimmable network baselines. We also evaluate the proposed US-Nets and improved training techniques on tasks
of image super-resolution and deep reinforcement learning. Extensive ablation experiments on these representative
tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods. Our discovery opens up the possibility to directly evaluate FLOPs-Accuracy spectrum of network architectures.
Code and models are available at: https://github.
com/JiahuiYu/slimmable_networks.

1. Introduction
The ability to run neural network models within latency
budget is of paramount importance for applications on mobile phones, augmented reality glasses, self-driving cars, security cameras and many others [22, 10, 15]. Among these
applications, many are required to deploy trained models
across different devices or hardware versions [25, 9, 13].
However, a single trained network cannot achieve optimal accuracy-efficiency trade-offs across different devices
(e.g., face recognition model running on diverse mobile
phones). To address the problem, recently slimmable networks [25] were introduced that can switch among different
widths at runtime, permitting instant and adaptive accuracyefficiency trade-offs. The width can be chosen from a predefined widths set, for example [0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0]×, where

Width
0.25×
0.375×
0.5×
0.625×
0.75×
0.875×
1.0×

49.8
63.3
68.4
70.9

55.7 (5.9)
60.1
64.2 (0.9)
67.5
69.5 (1.1)
70.9
71.8 (0.9)

Figure 1. FLOPs-Accuracy spectrum of single US-MobileNet v1
model, compared with four individual MobileNet v1 models.

[·]× denotes available widths, and 0.25× represents that
the width in all layers is scaled by 0.25 of the full model.
To train a slimmable network, switchable batch normalization [25] is proposed that privatizes batch normalization [11] layers for each sub-network. A slimmable network
has accuracy similar to that of individually trained ones with
the same width [25].
Driven by slimmable networks, a further question arises:
can a single neural network run at arbitrary width? The
question motivates us to rethink the basic form of feature
aggregation. In deep neural networks, the value of a single output neuron is an aggregation ofP
all input neurons
n
weighted by learnable coefficients y = i=1 wi xi , where
x is input neuron, y is output neuron, w is learnable coefficient and n is number of input channels. This formulation
indicates that each input channel or group of channels can
be viewed as a residual component [6] to an output neuron. Thus, a wider network should have no worse performance than its slim one (the accuracy of slim one can always be achieved by learning new connections to zeros). In
other words, if we consider a single layer, the residual error
between full aggregation and partial aggregation decreases
and is bounded:
|y n − y k+1 | ≤ |y n − y k | ≤ |y n − y k0 |,

1803

(1)

