Unpaired Image-to-Speech Synthesis with Multimodal Information Bottleneck∗
Shuang Ma
SUNY Buffalo
Buffalo, NY

Daniel McDuff
Microsoft
Redmond, WA

Yale Song
Microsoft
Redmond, WA

shuangma@buffalo.edu

damcduff@microsoft.com

yalesong@microsoft.com

Abstract
Deep generative models have led to significant advances
in cross-modal generation such as text-to-image synthesis.
Training these models typically requires paired data with
direct correspondence between modalities. We introduce
the novel problem of translating instances from one modality to another without paired data by leveraging an intermediate modality shared by the two other modalities. To
demonstrate this, we take the problem of translating images to speech. In this case, one could leverage disjoint
datasets with one shared modality, e.g., image-text pairs
and text-speech pairs, with text as the shared modality.
We call this problem “skip-modal generation” because the
shared modality is skipped during the generation process.
We propose a multimodal information bottleneck approach
that learns the correspondence between modalities from unpaired data (image and speech) by leveraging the shared
modality (text). We address fundamental challenges of skipmodal generation: 1) learning multimodal representations
using a single model, 2) bridging the domain gap between
two unrelated datasets, and 3) learning the correspondence
between modalities from unpaired data. We show qualitative results on image-to-speech synthesis; this is the first
time such results have been reported in the literature. We
also show that our approach improves performance on traditional cross-modal generation, suggesting that it improves
data efficiency in solving individual tasks.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep generative models have shown
impressive results across many cross-modal generation
tasks, including text-to-image [36], text-to-speech [27],
image-to-video [29], video-to-sound [56] synthesis. Training these models typically requires a large amount of paired
samples with direct correspondence between instances from
the different modalities, which limits their applicability to
new (“unseen”) modalities. Some attempts have been made
∗ Code: https://github.com/yunyikristy/skipNet

Figure 1. Cross-modal generation typically requires paired data
with direct correspondence between modalities. However, this
data is not always available (e.g., image-to-speech), in which case
generation could be done by bridging two existing datasets via an
intermediate modality (text). We propose an approach that directly
generates outputs by learning multimodal correspondences from
unpaired data provided by multiple disjoint datasets.

to eliminate such constraint in the context of image-toimage cross-domain translation, training a network on unpaired examples with the cycle consistency constraint [58,
59, 9]. However, those methods generally assume that two
domains come from the same modality, e.g., images of
horses and zebras; as we show later, these methods tend
to fail in a cross-modal scenario (such as image-to-speech)
where the assumption no longer holds.
In this work, we aim to learn a mapping from one modality to another without using paired samples. Our main
idea is to leverage readily available datasets that do not
directly provide paired samples of the two modalities we
are interested in, but have “skip” correspondence between
the two desired modalities via a shared one. For example,
for image-to-speech synthesis we may leverage two existing datasets with image-text and text-speech pairs, where
text serves as the shared modality. A naive solution to this
would be training two networks separately, each solving either of the tasks with the paired data, and running them sequentially, e.g., given an image, generate text, and use it to
generate speech. However, this approach is not trainable
end-to-end and suffers from several issues such as domain
discrepancy and information loss between the two models.
We introduce a new task skip-modal generation that aims
to translate one modality to another by “skipping” an inter-

7598

