Sequential Latent Spaces for Modeling the Intention During Diverse Image
Captioning
Jyoti Aneja˚1 , Harsh Agrawal˚2 , Dhruv Batra2,3 , Alexander Schwing1
1

University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 2 Georgia Institute of Technology, 3 Facebook AI Research
1

{janeja2, aschwing}@illinois.edu , 2 {hagrawal9, dbatra}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Diverse and accurate vision+language modeling is an
important goal to retain creative freedom and maintain user
engagement. However, adequately capturing the intricacies of diversity in language models is challenging. Recent works commonly resort to latent variable models augmented with more or less supervision from object detectors or part-of-speech tags [10, 40]. In common to all
those methods is the fact that the latent variable either only
initializes the sentence generation process or is identical
across the steps of generation. Both methods offer no finegrained control. To address this concern, we propose SeqCVAE which learns a latent space for every word position.
We encourage this temporal latent space to capture the ‘intention’ about how to complete the sentence by mimicking
a representation which summarizes the future. We illustrate
the efficacy of the proposed approach to anticipate the sentence continuation on the challenging MSCOCO dataset,
significantly improving diversity metrics compared to baselines while performing on par w.r.t. sentence quality.

1. Introduction
Diverse yet accurate image captioning is an important
goal towards augmenting present-day editing and autoresponse tools with technology that maintains creative freedom while providing meaningful and inspiring suggestions.
On the quest to succeed in this tightrope walk, methods need
to maintain accuracy of the provided descriptions while
elaborately managing the intricacies of the respective language. This balancing act to aesthetically craft short yet
precise statements that hit the point is an art.
Despite best efforts, any description is always and inherently targeted towards a group of readers. Because words
‹ First two authors contributed equally.

Figure 1: Meaningful diverse captions generated (blue arrows) for a given
image by linearly interpolating from one latent vector (green arrows) to
another (red arrows).

are overloaded, the crisp picture that we intend to draw blurs
rapidly if we don’t use language and associations that readers are familiar with. Without the right language the message of the description is diluted, remains hard to access or
even inaccessible.
Going forward, imagine your description to automatically adjust depending on the background knowledge of the
reader. Obviously we are far from this idea being remotely
feasible. Nonetheless, in recent years, remarkable progress
has been made in image captioning [3,6,7,12–14,21,22,24,
25, 30, 36, 39, 41] and particularly controllable [10, 40] and
diverse [9, 10, 26, 34, 38, 40] image captioning. Many of the
proposed mechanisms for image captioning rely on longshort-term-memory (LSTM) [18] nets where words are generated one at a time. For diversity, LSTM based variational
auto-encoders [23] or generative adversarial nets [16] and
their conditional counterparts [37] are employed. For highlevel control, one-hot encodings that represent observed objects or groups of objects are injected at the first step of the
LSTM [40]. Very recently [10], more low-level control has
also been discussed by conditioning on abstract representations of part-of-speech tags. Again, the conditioning was
achieved by changing the initial LSTM input.
Because of this single initial conditioning input, none
of the aforementioned methods provide the fine-grained diversity that is desirable for adjusting individual words of a
sentence. We address this shortcoming by developing SeqCVAE, a method which learns a latent space for every word.
Importantly, we want the latent space to be predictive of

4261

