Bayesian Graph Convolution LSTM for Skeleton Based Action Recognition
Rui Zhao1 , Kang Wang1 , Hui Su1,2 , Qiang Ji1
1
RPI, 2 IBM Research
{zhaorui.zju,kangwang.kw}@gmail.com, huisuibmres@us.ibm.com, qji@ecse.rpi.edu
/(1|3)

Abstract

GCU
&'()

&'

&'*)

Graph
Convolution

+'()

+'

+'*)

⨂

We propose a framework for recognizing human actions
from skeleton data by modeling the underlying dynamic process that generates the motion pattern. We capture three
major factors that contribute to the complexity of the motion
pattern including spatial dependencies among body joints,
temporal dependencies of body poses, and variation among
subjects in action execution. We utilize graph convolution
to extract structure-aware feature representation from pose
data by exploiting the skeleton anatomy. Long short-term
memory (LSTM) network is then used to capture the temporal dynamics of the data. Finally, the whole model is
extended under the Bayesian framework to a probabilistic
model in order to better capture the stochasticity and variation in the data. An adversarial prior is developed to regularize the model parameters to improve the generalization
of the model. A Bayesian inference problem is formulated to
solve the classification task. We demonstrate the benefit of
this framework in several benchmark datasets with recognition under various generalization conditions.

1. Introduction
In recent years, skeleton based action recognition attracts
an increasing attention as the quality of 2D/3D pose estimation methods improve [56, 48, 8]. Derived from RGB or
depth videos, skeleton data provides a succinct and informative representation for the action execution. Pure skeleton based action recognition can achieve quite good results
[17, 57] despite being a much lower dimensional representation. These results make skeleton an attractive modality
for action recognition. However, recognizing actions from
skeleton data remains challenging partially due to the complex nature of human motion dynamics.
In particular, there are three major factors that contribute
to the complex dynamics. First, human motion often involves coordination of different body parts, which introduces spatio-temporal dependencies among body parts. For
example, to complete a bowling action, the four limbs need
to move in a particular way to complete the action of throw-

,'

Classifier

LSTM
Ht
Ht
+'

&-

1

Bayesian
Inference
/(1′|3′, 7)

Discriminator
&-

.

1′

Figure 1. Overview of our framework. The red and blue arrows
show the flow of training and testing data, respectively. Details of
each component are discussed in Section 3.

ing the ball, while keeping the balance of the whole body.
Furthermore, the kinematics of a motion pattern can be nonlinear and complex, e.g., boxing and dancing. Second, there
exists long-term dependency in motion pattern. The body
pose of different actions may be similar at certain time.
However, the cause of such pose and its specific meaning
in the context depend on the motion in the past. Finally,
there exists significant subject-dependent variation due to
different habits. Different subjects may perform the same
action differently in terms of the extent and speed of the
movement. In a word, the coupling of spatial, temporal and
subject factors increases the challenge of recognizing actions from skeleton data.
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end trainable framework that combines neural networks with probabilistic
modeling to simultaneously handle the three factors contributing to the complex dynamics. More specifically, we
propose a Bayesian neural network (BNN) model. Our
model is first built on a combination of graph convolution
with long short-term memory (LSTM) network, in which
graph convolution is used to capture the spatial dependency
among different body joints and LSTM is used to capture
temporal dependency of pose change over time. The neural
network model is further extended to a probabilistic model
following the Bayesian modeling framework by treating
model parameters as random variables. This extension allows the model to better handle randomness in the motion
data. To further increase the capability of generalization
to unseen data, we introduce an adversarial prior, inspired
by adversarial learning to regularize the model parameters.
We formulate the classification task as a Bayesian inference
problem in order to fully exploit the proposed probabilistic

6882

