Multi-view Image Fusion
Marc Comino Trinidad1 Ricardo Martin Brualla2 Florian Kainz2
1
Polytechnic University of Catalonia, 2 Google

Janne Kontkanen2

Inputs

Outputs

Color Transfer

Mono

Color
High-def mono

Color

High-def color

Color EV+2

Color EV-1

Denoised

DSLR

Low-def stereo

High-def stereo

HDR Fusion

Color EV+2 Color EV-1

Detail Transfer
DSLR

Stereo

Figure 1: We present a method for multi-view image fusion that is a applicable to a variety of scenarios: a higher resolution monochrome
image is colorized with a second color image (top row), two color images with different exposures are fused into an HDR lower-noise
image (middle row), and a high quality DSLR image is warped to the lower quality stereo views captured by a VR-camera (bottom row).

Abstract
We present an end-to-end learned system for fusing multiple misaligned photographs of the same scene into a chosen target view. We demonstrate three use cases: 1) color
transfer for inferring color for a monochrome view, 2) HDR
fusion for merging misaligned bracketed exposures, and 3)
detail transfer for reprojecting a high definition image to
the point of view of an affordable VR180-camera. While the
system can be trained end-to-end, it consists of three distinct steps: feature extraction, image warping and fusion.
We present a novel cascaded feature extraction method that
enables us to synergetically learn optical flow at different
resolution levels. We show that this significantly improves
the network’s ability to learn large disparities. Finally, we
demonstrate that our alignment architecture outperforms a
state-of-the art optical flow network on the image warping
task when both systems are trained in an identical manner.

1. Introduction
In this paper we focus on the problem of fusing multiple
misaligned photographs into a chosen target view. Multiview image fusion has become increasingly relevant with
the recent influx of multi-camera mobile devices.
The form factor of these devices constrains the size of
lenses and sensors, and this limits their light capturing ability. Cameras with larger lens apertures and larger pixels
capture more photons per pixel, and thus show less prominent photon shot noise. This is the reason mobile cameras
have been lagging behind large DSLR systems in quality.
4101
In recent years the use of computational photography has
narrowed the gap significantly [11, 17, 19], but the fundamentals have not changed: more light means better images.
Lately it has become common to fit 2, 3 or even 5 cameras [1, 6] into a single mobile device. The use of multiple
cameras significantly improves the light gathering ability of
the device. At the minimum two cameras capture twice the
light of a single camera, but often it is possible to do better
by recording different aspects of the scene with each camera
1

