Optimizing Network Structure for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Hai Ci1 , Chunyu Wang2 , Xiaoxuan Ma1 , and Yizhou Wang1,3,4
1
Computer Science Dept., Peking University
2
Microsoft Research, Asia
3
Deepwise AI Lab 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{cihai, maxiaoxuan, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, chnuwa@microsoft.com

10. head

Abstract
A human pose is naturally represented as a graph where
the joints are the nodes and the bones are the edges. So
it is natural to apply Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)
to estimate 3D poses from 2D poses. In this work, we propose a generic formulation where both GCN and Fully Connected Network (FCN) are its special cases. From this formulation, we discover that GCN has limited representation
power when used for estimating 3D poses. We overcome
the limitation by introducing Locally Connected Network
(LCN) which is naturally implemented by this generic formulation. It notably improves the representation capability
over GCN. In addition, since every joint is only connected
to a few joints in its neighborhood, it has strong generalization power. The experiments on public datasets show it:
(1) outperforms the state-of-the-arts; (2) is less data hungry than alternative models; (3) generalizes well to unseen
actions and datasets.

1. Introduction
A 3D human pose is naturally represented by a skeletal graph parameterized by the 3D locations of the body
joints such as elbows and knees. See Figure 1. When we
project a 3D pose to a 2D image by the camera parameters,
the depth of all joints is lost. The task of 3D pose estimation solves the inverse problem of depth recovery from 2D
poses. This is an ambiguous problem because multiple 3D
poses may correspond to the same 2D pose after projection. But it is practically solvable because 3D poses lie on a
low-dimensional manifold which provides strong structural
priors to reduce the ambiguities [36].
A recent work [18] introduces a variant of Fully Connected Network (FCN) to map a 2D pose to 3D space. It
achieves promising results on the benchmark datasets. But
we experimentally find it has degraded cross action and
cross dataset performance which is also observed in [17].
This may be attributed to the dense connections in FCN

9. nose
11. left shoulder

8. neck
14. right shoulder

12. left elbow

7.belly

13. left hand
4. left hip

0. hip

15. right elbow
16. right hand

1. right hip

5. left knee

2. right knee

6. left foot

3. right foot

Figure 1. Human pose is essentially a skeletal graph model consisting of a number of body joints linked by the bones. The figure
shows the graph model used in this paper.

and limited variations in the training set, which increase the
chance of linking unrelated joints. This also contradicts the
fact that human can perceive a 3D joint by only seeing the
2D joints in its neighborhood.
The Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [3, 5, 6, 8, 10,
14, 27, 28, 34] is a promising alternative for 3D pose estimation because it only aggregates the features of the “selected” nodes to compute features for a node of interest.
See Figure 2 (b) for conceptual illustration. We propose a
generic formulation in which both GCN and FCN are special cases. We factor the Laplacian operator in GCN [6] into
the product of a structure matrix which encodes the dependence relation among the nodes, and a weight matrix which
defines how to aggregate the dependent features. Based
on the formulation, we discover two main limitations of
GCN. First, the weight matrix has an inherent weight sharing scheme which harms the model’s representation ability.
For example, in Figure 2 (b), the learnable operators T are
the same for all nodes. Second, the structure matrix is directly determined by node distance which lacks flexibility
to support customized node dependence.
In this work, we present Locally Connected Network
(LCN) on top of our generic formulation to overcome the
limitations of GCN. First, we discard the weight sharing
scheme by freeing all of the parameters in the weight ma-

2262

