Label-PEnet: Sequential Label Propagation and Enhancement Networks
for Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation
Weifeng Ge1,2,3 , Sheng Guo1,2 , Weilin Huang1,2 *, and Matthew R. Scott1,2
1
Malong Technologies, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Malong Artificial Intelligence Research Center, Shenzhen, China
3
The University of Hong Kong
{terrencege,sheng,whuang,mscott}@malong.com

Abstract

the object level or pixel level [27, 7, 12, 43], i.e. when there
are only image-level labels available.

Weakly-supervised instance segmentation aims to detect and segment object instances precisely, given imagelevel labels only. Unlike previous methods which are composed of multiple offline stages, we propose Sequential Label Propagation and Enhancement Networks (referred as
Label-PEnet) that progressively transforms image-level labels to pixel-wise labels in a coarse-to-fine manner. We design four cascaded modules including multi-label classification, object detection, instance refinement and instance
segmentation, which are implemented sequentially by sharing the same backbone. The cascaded pipeline is trained
alternatively with a curriculum learning strategy that generalizes labels from high-level images to low-level pixels
gradually with increasing accuracy. In addition, we design a proposal calibration module to explore the ability of
classification networks to find key pixels that identify object
parts, which serves as a post validation strategy running in
the inverse order. We evaluate the efficiency of our LabelPEnet in mining instance masks on standard benchmarks:
PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012. Experimental results show
that Label-PEnet outperforms the state-of-art algorithms by
a clear margin, and obtains comparable performance even
with fully supervised approaches.

To investigate the ability of CNNs to estimate pixelwise labels by given image-level supervision only, various
weakly-supervised approaches have been developed for object detection or instance segmentation. A number of methods [4, 36, 37] exploit a bottom-up approach to group pixels
into proposals, and then evaluate the proposals repetitively
in an effort to search exact object locations. Several algorithms dissect the classification process of CNNs in a topdown [41, 24] or bottom-up manner [42], to generate seeds
for instance segmentation [43]. There are also some hybrid approaches that combine both bottom-up and top-down
cues [32, 12].

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have made
a series of breakthroughs in computer vision by, using largescale manually-labeled data for training. By designing
strong network architectures, CNNs can detect object locations and segment object instances precisely. However, the
performance on object detection or segmentation will drop
considerably due to lack of strong annotation provided at
* Weilin Huang is the corresponding author.

Existing weakly-supervised methods can achieve competitive results, but the performance is still significantly
lower than that of fully-supervised counterparts. Although
we can roughly identify an object using a classification network, it is particularly challenging to precisely infer pixelwise labels from a classification model, even using multiple post-processing methods. This inspired us to re-think
the ability of CNNs for various vision tasks, such as image classification, object detection and instance segmentation. We observed that full supervision with accurate annotations is the key to success. Therefore, the central issue for
weakly-supervised detection and segmentation is to transfer
image-level supervision to pixel-wise labels gradually and
smoothly, in a coarse-to-fine manner by designing multiple
cascaded modules.
The 2-D structure of convolutional kernels allows
CNNs to grasp local information accurately, and enlarge
the size of receptive fields gradually with the increase
of convolutional layers, which enable the CNN model
to memorize and classify objects accurately. Our goal
is to enable CNNs to segment objects by just providing
image-level labels. We design CNNs by introducing four
new modules: (1) multi-label classification module, (2)

3345

