CAMP: Cross-Modal Adaptive Message Passing for Text-Image Retrieval
Zihao Wang1∗ Xihui Liu1∗ Hongsheng Li1 Lu Sheng3 Junjie Yan2 Xiaogang Wang1 Jing Shao2
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research 3 Beihang University
zihaowang@cuhk.edu.hk
lsheng@buaa.edu.cn

{xihuiliu, hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
{yanjunjie, shaojing}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Text-image cross-modal retrieval is a challenging task in
the ﬁeld of language and vision. Most previous approaches
independently embed images and sentences into a joint
embedding space and compare their similarities. However, previous approaches rarely explore the interactions
between images and sentences before calculating similarities in the joint space. Intuitively, when matching between
images and sentences, human beings would alternatively attend to regions in images and words in sentences, and select
the most salient information considering the interaction between both modalities. In this paper, we propose Crossmodal Adaptive Message Passing (CAMP), which adaptively controls the information flow for message passing
across modalities. Our approach not only takes comprehensive and ﬁne-grained cross-modal interactions into account,
but also properly handles negative pairs and irrelevant information with an adaptive gating scheme. Moreover, instead of conventional joint embedding approaches for textimage matching, we infer the matching score based on the
fused features, and propose a hardest negative binary crossentropy loss for training. Results on COCO and Flickr30k
signiﬁcantly surpass state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach. 1

1. Introduction
Text-image cross-modal retrieval has made great
progress recently [16, 9, 22, 5, 4]. Nevertheless, matching images and sentences is still far from being solved,
because of the large visual-semantic discrepancy between
language and vision. Most previous work exploits visualsemantic embedding, which independently embeds images
and sentences into the same embedding space, and then
measures their similarities by feature distances in the joint
space [11, 5]. The model is trained with ranking loss, which
∗ The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
1 https://github.com/ZihaoWang-CV/CAMP_iccv19

A person in a blue shirt rides a skateboard along a railing not far from a brick wall.

Figure 1. Illustration of how our model distinguish the subtle differences by cross-modal interactions. Green denotes positive evidence, while red denotes negative cross-modal evidence.

forces the similarity of positive pairs to be higher than that
of negative pairs. However, such independent embedding
approaches do not exploit the interaction between images
and sentences, which might lead to suboptimal features for
text-image matching.
Let us consider how we would perform the task of textimage matching ourselves. Not only do we concentrate on
salient regions in the image and salient words in the sentence, but also we would alternatively attend to information
from both modalities, take the interactions between regions
and words into consideration, ﬁlter out irrelevant information, and ﬁnd the ﬁne-grained cues for cross-modal matching. For example, in Figure 1, all of the three images seem
to match with the sentence at ﬁrst glance. When we take a
closer observation, however, we would notice that the sentence describes “blue shirt” which cannot be found in the
second image. Similarly, the description of “a railing not
far from a brick wall” cannot be found in the third image.
Those ﬁne-grained misalignments can only be noticed if we
have a gist of the sentence in mind when looking at the
images. As a result, incorporating the interaction between
images and sentences should beneﬁt in capturing the ﬁnegrained cross-modal cues for text-image matching.
In order to enable interactions between images and sentences, we introduce a Cross-modal Adaptive Message
Passing model (CAMP), composed of the Cross-modal
Message Aggregation module and the Cross-modal Gated
Fusion module. Message passing for text-image retrieval is

5764

