Dynamic PET Image Reconstruction
Using Nonnegative Matrix Factorization Incorporated With Deep Image Prior
Tatsuya Yokota∗,⋆ , Kazuya Kawai∗ , Muneyuki Sakata† , Yuichi Kimura‡ , and Hidekata Hontani∗
∗
Nagoya Institute of Technology, Nagoya, Japan, {t.yokota, hontani}@nitech.ac.jp
⋆
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan
†
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan
‡
Kindai University, Wakayama, Japan
Observed
dynamic sinogram

Abstract

Reconstructed
dynamic sinogram

minimize KL div.

We propose a method that reconstructs dynamic positron
emission tomography (PET) images from given sinograms
by using non-negative matrix factorization incorporated
with a deep image prior for appropriately constraining the
spatial patterns of resultant images. The proposed method
can reconstruct dynamic PET images with higher signalto-noise ratio and blindly decompose an image matrix into
pairs of spatial and temporal factors. The former represent homogeneous tissues with different kinetic parameters
and the latter represent the time activity curves that are observed in the corresponding homogeneous tissues. We employ U-Nets combined in parallel for deep image prior and
each of the U-Nets is used to extract each spatial factor decomposed from the data matrix. Experimental results show
that the proposed method outperforms conventional methods and can extract spatial factors that represent the homogeneous tissues.

1. Introduction
Positron emission tomography (PET) is the most modern
nuclear medicine modality [27] and is used for observing
biomolecular mechanisms such as the metabolic processes
in the body. The biomolecular mechanisms at each location in the body can be represented by a set of physiological
kinetic parameters and their parameter values can be estimated from the temporal change of each voxel value in dynamic PET images, which is a temporal series of 3D static
PET images [20, 19, 32, 10, 25, 9]; Each 3D static PET
image represents the spatial distribution of the concentration of radioactive tracer, and the temporal change of each
voxel value, called as a time-activity curve (TAC), of dynamic PET describes the kinetics of the radioactive tracer at
each location in the body. The accuracy of the estimation
of the kinetic parameters largely changes depending on the

noise

U-Net

noise

U-Net

noise

U-Net

Reconstructed Multiplied by
dynamic PET temporal factor

Radon trans.

vectorize
concatenate

vectorize

vectorize

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed PET image reconstruction
method with U-Nets for the deep image prior (DIP)

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of a TAC of each voxel in given
dynamic PET images, and it is still a challenging problem
to reconstruct high-quality dynamic PET images.
A set of dynamic PET images is reconstructed from a
temporal series of sinograms, each of which is a Radon
transformation of the spatial concentration distribution of
the radio active tracer and is measured by a PET scanner at
each time. It is known that the PET image reconstruction is
highly sensitive to measurement noises and is an ill-posed
problem [28]. Models that appropriately constrain PET images are therefore needed for stable reconstruction of dynamic PET images.
In this study, we discuss the priors/models for dynamic
PET images from spatial, temporal, and spatio-temporal
aspects. First, the spatio-temporal low-rank structure of
dynamic PET images should be considered. This means
that the matrix representation of dynamic PET image, Z ∈
i ×T
RN
, is low-rank, where Ni denotes the number of the
+
voxels and T denotes the number of frames. In the human
body, there exist homogeneous tissues; in each of them the
temporal tracer behavior is the same and the TACs are the
13126

