SME-Net: Sparse Motion Estimation for Parametric Video Prediction through
Reinforcement Learning
Yung-Han Ho
Chuan-Yuan Cho
Wen-Hsiao Peng
Guo-Lun Jin
Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
{hectorho0409.cs04g@, fountaintin.cs05g@, wpeng@cs., jingjing963.iie07g@}nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper leverages a classic prediction technique,
known as parametric overlapped block motion compensation (POBMC), in a reinforcement learning framework for
video prediction. Learning-based prediction methods with
explicit motion models often suffer from having to estimate
large numbers of motion parameters with artificial regularization. Inspired by the success of sparse motion-based
prediction for video compression, we propose a parametric video prediction on a sparse motion field composed of
few critical pixels and their motion vectors. The prediction
is achieved by gradually refining the estimate of a future
frame in iterative, discrete steps. Along the way, the identification of critical pixels and their motion estimation are addressed by two neural networks trained under a reinforcement learning setting. Our model achieves the state-of-theart performance on CaltchPed, UCF101 and CIF datasets
in one-step and multi-step prediction tests. It shows good
generalization results and is able to learn well on small
training data.

(a) Conventional dense motion model

1. Introduction
Video prediction is one challenging computer vision
task. It is to predict future frames by observing a sequence
of past frames. The task is complicated by the needs to
address the variety of natural videos in both their motion
dynamics and texture appearance.
There are several prior arts on learning-based video
prediction. One class of approaches [2, 9, 12, 13, 22]
use generative models to synthesize future frames directly.
These models often involve using Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks to capture motion dynamics from
past frames to assist with the generation of future frames
by convolutional neural networks (CNN). Typical examples are MCNet [22], PredNet [12] and BeyondMSE [13],
where BeyondMSE [13] additionally introduces a multiscale, pyramid generation process. One common problem
with these methods is blurry synthesis results because raw
pixel values often follow a multi-modal distribution that

(b) Proposed sparse motion model

Figure 1: Comparison of video prediction on (a) a dense
and (b) a sparse motion fields.
calls for subtle training objectives. This downside can be
worsened by multi-step prediction when future frames have
to be predicted recursively.
Instead of generating video frames directly, another class
of methods model the motion dynamics explicitly by estimating a dense motion field [5, 10, 11, 16, 17] that connects pixel values of a future frame to those in the most
recent past frame, as depicted in Fig. 1(a). This dense motion field can be specified in terms of optical flows/motion
vectors [11, 8], pixel-adaptive kernels [5, 15], or the combination of both [17]. Since the motion parameters have to
be estimated for every target pixel, these methods demand
complex models with artificial regularization.
110462

