Unsupervised 3D Reconstruction Networks
Geonho Cha†∗
Minsik Lee‡∗
Songhwai Oh†
Electrical and Computer Engineering, ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea†
Division of Electrical Engineering, Hanyang University, Korea‡
geonho.cha@rllab.snu.ac.kr

mleepaper@hanyang.ac.kr

songhwai@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose 3D unsupervised reconstruction networks (3D-URN), which reconstruct the 3D structures of instances in a given object category from their 2D
feature points under an orthographic camera model. 3DURN consists of a 3D shape reconstructor and a rotation
estimator, which are trained in a fully-unsupervised manner incorporating the proposed unsupervised loss functions.
The role of the 3D shape reconstructor is to reconstruct the
3D shape of an instance from its 2D feature points, and the
rotation estimator infers the camera pose. After training,
3D-URN can infer the 3D structure of an unseen instance in
the same category, which is not possible in the conventional
schemes of non-rigid structure from motion and structure
from category. The experimental result shows the state-ofthe-art performance, which demonstrates the effectiveness
of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised 3D reconstruction from 2D observations
is one of the key problems in computer vision, which has
numerous applications such as human computer interaction and augmented reality. Structure from motion (SfM)
and non-rigid structure from motion (NRSfM) have handled
the unsupervised 3D reconstruction problem, of which the
goals are to reconstruct 3D trajectories and motions from
2D feature trajectories of rigid and non-rigid objects, respectively. Thanks to the significant advances [16, 29], SfM
is considered as a mature area in computer vision. However,
NRSfM has been generally considered as an ill-conditioned
problem due to the increased degrees of freedom. To alleviate this issue, some prior information on the nature of
deformation has been incorporated. For example, the shape
space model [4, 7, 8] and the trajectory space model [3, 15]
assume that the aligned deformations of a non-rigid instance
can be represented by a low-rank matrix. However, most
∗ Authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. The proposed 3D unsupervised reconstruction networks
(3D-URN) reconstructs the 3D structures of instances in an object
category from their 2D feature points. After training, 3D-URN
can reconstruct the 3D structure of an unseen instance in the same
category as the one used in the training process.

schemes of NRSfM have focused on the reconstruction of
a specific instance of an object and have assumed smooth
input trajectories.
These limitations have been alleviated in the field of
structure from category (SfC) [1, 2, 12, 20], which is a problem to reconstruct the 3D structures of instances in an object category and no smoothness assumption of input feature points is needed. Furthermore, SfC can handle a general object category, unlike NRSfM that has conventionally
dealt with limited object categories such as human face or
body [20]. However, despite their promising results, most
works of NRSfM and SfC can only produce the 3D reconstruction of a given input, i.e., the information learned from
reconstructing a certain input cannot be reused, and a sufficient number of samples are needed in the reconstruction
process. That is, the optimization process should be repeated with a sufficient number of samples to reconstruct

3849

