Vision-Infused Deep Audio Inpainting
Hang Zhou1 Ziwei Liu1 Xudong Xu1 Ping Luo2 Xiaogang Wang1
1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
The University of Hong Kong
{zhouhang@link,xx018@ie,xgwang@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

zwliu.hust@gmail.com

pluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
infuse Information

Multi-modality perception is essential to develop interactive intelligence. In this work, we consider a new
task of visual information-infused audio inpainting, i.e.
synthesizing missing audio segments that correspond to
their accompanying videos. We identify two key aspects
for a successful inpainter: (1) It is desirable to operate
on spectrograms instead of raw audios. Recent advances
in deep semantic image inpainting could be leveraged to
go beyond the limitations of traditional audio inpainting.
(2) To synthesize visually indicated audio, a visual-audio
joint feature space needs to be learned with synchronization of audio and video. To facilitate a large-scale
study, we collect a new multi-modality instrument-playing
dataset called MUSIC-Extra-Solo (MUSICES) by enriching
MUSIC dataset [51]. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our framework is capable of inpainting realistic and
varying audio segments with or without visual contexts.
More importantly, our synthesized audio segments are
coherent with their video counterparts, showing the effectiveness of our proposed Vision-Infused Audio Inpainter
(VIAI). Code, models, dataset and video results are available at https://github.com/Hangz-nju-cuhk/
Vision-Infused-Audio-Inpainter-VIAI.

1. Introduction
Audio-visual analysis provides valuable and complementary information that is crucial for comprehensively
modeling sequential data. Substantial progress has been
achieved in recent years. For example, it has been shown
that the two modalities of audio and video can be transformed from one to the other [10, 23], that is, from video
to audio [11, 9] and from audio to video [18, 52, 53].
This work focuses on a new task of audio inpainting, by
using both video and audio as constraints. The inpainted
audio segment is required to have the semantic concepts of
the constraints, meaning that it has to be not only auditory
reasonable but also visually coherent with the video. The

Intact Video
Corrupted Spectrogram
Corrupted Audio

Inpaint
Inpainted Spectrogram

Inpainted Audio

Figure 1. Problem description. We study the problem of inpainting
a clip of missing audio data, particularly with its corresponding
video given. It is formulated into deep spectrogram inpainting,
and video information is infused for generating coherent audio.

setting of the problem is illustrated in Fig. 1.
In real life, audio signals often suffer from local distortions where the intervals are corrupted by impulsive noise
and clicks. Even more, a clip of audio might be wiped out
due to accident or transmission failure loss. To deal with
such cases, a feasible operation is to fill the corrupted parts
with newly generated samples, which can be referred to as
audio inpainting [1].
While directly predicting a missing piece of audio is
difficult, concrete information about audio signals could
be provided by intact visual information accompanying the
audio data. The visual cue can be regarded as both a
constraint and self-supervision to guide audio generation.
In this paper, we present a vision-infused method that
can deal with both audio-only and audio-visual associated
inpainting.
Audio inpainting is significantly challenging as a consequence of audio’s property of high sampling rate and longrange dependency. Traditional methods normally exploit
the sparse representation of audio [1, 7, 8, 38, 43], and seek
to find similar signal structures. However, similar structures
do not always exist in the given inputs, especially when
the inputs are short. Moreover, most of the previous work
cannot handle missing lengths longer than 0.25 seconds [7].
And neither are these methods able to associate with given
videos.
Another idea is to apply recent advances in audio generative tasks by using deep learning. A recent work that closely

283

