Learning to Reconstruct 3D Human Pose and Shape
via Model-fitting in the Loop
Nikos Kolotouros*1 , Georgios Pavlakos*1 , Michael J. Black2 , Kostas Daniilidis1
1
University of Pennsylvania 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
Model-based human pose estimation is currently approached through two different paradigms. Optimizationbased methods fit a parametric body model to 2D observations in an iterative manner, leading to accurate imagemodel alignments, but are often slow and sensitive to the
initialization. In contrast, regression-based methods, that
use a deep network to directly estimate the model parameters from pixels, tend to provide reasonable, but not pixel
accurate, results while requiring huge amounts of supervision. In this work, instead of investigating which approach
is better, our key insight is that the two paradigms can form
a strong collaboration. A reasonable, directly regressed estimate from the network can initialize the iterative optimization making the fitting faster and more accurate. Similarly,
a pixel accurate fit from iterative optimization can act as
strong supervision for the network. This is the core of our
proposed approach SPIN (SMPL oPtimization IN the loop).
The deep network initializes an iterative optimization routine that fits the body model to 2D joints within the training
loop, and the fitted estimate is subsequently used to supervise the network. Our approach is self-improving by nature, since better network estimates can lead the optimization to better solutions, while more accurate optimization
fits provide better supervision for the network. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in different settings,
where 3D ground truth is scarce, or not available, and
we consistently outperform the state-of-the-art model-based
pose estimation approaches by significant margins. The
project website with videos, results, and code can be found
at https://seas.upenn.edu/˜nkolot/projects/spin.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of deep learning architectures, the
dilemma between regression-based and optimization-based
approaches for many computer vision problems has been
more relevant than ever. Should we regress the relative cam∗ equal contribution

Input image

Optimization result

Regression result

Figure 1: Both optimization and regression approaches have successes and failures, so this motivates our approach to build a tight
collaboration between the two.

era pose, or use bundle adjustment? Is it more appropriate
to regress the parameters of a face model, or fit the model to
facial landmarks? These types of questions are ubiquitous
within our community. Among others, 3D model-based human pose estimation has initiated similar discussions, since
both optimization-based [4, 18] and regression-based approaches [15, 24, 27] have had significant success recently.
However, one can argue that both paradigms have weak and
strong points (Figure 1). Based on this, in this work we advocate that instead of focusing on which paradigm is better,
if we aim to push the field forward, we need to consider
ways for collaboration between the two.
Although 3D model-based human pose is a very challenging and highly ambiguous problem, there have been
fundamental works that attempt to address it. Optimizationbased methods [4, 8, 18], are pretty well explored and understood. Given a parametric model of the human body,
e.g., SMPL [20], an iterative fitting approach attempts to estimate the body pose and shape that best explains 2D observations, most typically 2D joint locations. Since we explicitly optimize for the agreement of the model with image fea-

2252

