IL2M: Class Incremental Learning With Dual Memory
Eden Belouadah
CEA, LIST,
F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

Adrian Popescu
CEA, LIST,
F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

eden.belouadah@cea.fr

adrian.popescu@cea.fr

Abstract
This paper presents a class incremental learning (IL)
method which exploits fine tuning and a dual memory to reduce the negative effect of catastrophic forgetting in image
recognition. First, we simplify the current fine tuning based
approaches which use a combination of classification and
distillation losses to compensate for the limited availability
of past data. We find that the distillation term actually hurts
performance when a memory is allowed. Then, we modify the usual class IL memory component. Similar to existing works, a first memory stores exemplar images of past
classes. A second memory is introduced here to store past
class statistics obtained when they were initially learned.
The intuition here is that classes are best modeled when all
their data are available and that their initial statistics are
useful across different incremental states. A prediction bias
towards newly learned classes appears during inference because the dataset is imbalanced in their favor. The challenge is to make predictions of new and past classes more
comparable. To do this, scores of past classes are rectified
by leveraging contents from both memories. The method
has negligible added cost, both in terms of memory and of
inference complexity. Experiments with three large public
datasets show that the proposed approach is more effective
than a range of competitive state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Incremental learning (IL) is the ability of artificial agents
to learn from data that are presented to them sequentially.
Our focus is on class IL which assumes that data are labeled. The problem is trivial if enough computational power
and storage are available and if long delays are allowed for
model updates. These conditions are often not met in real
applications and class IL becomes hard to solve. This is the
case in contexts such as robotics, mobile apps and military
applications, where visual recognition capacities need to be
incremented without access to large infrastructures [21].
Recent class IL methods exploit Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) which obtain very good performance for many AI

tasks, including image recognition [10]. The main problem faced by DNN based IL methods is catastrophic forgetting [18], i.e. their inability to integrate new data without forgetting previously learned knowledge. Minimizing computation, storage and time requirements simultaneously is not doable and existing methods make compromises on one or two of these conditions. A stream of research [1, 17, 27, 29] assumes that deep architectures can
grow to some extent so as to integrate new data. Under this
assumption, no memory of the past is needed. Another research trend [5, 8, 12, 24] posits that the DNN architectures
should be fixed. They adapt the DNN fine tuning process
by adding a distillation loss and use a bounded memory of
the past to limit catastrophic forgetting.
Our method, Incremental Learning with Dual Memory
(IL2M ) is summarized in Figure 1. with an example which
includes an initial and two incremental states. IL2M uses
a fixed DNN architecture and a bounded memory of the
past. Our main contribution is to propose a second memory which stores initial class statistics in a very compact
format. The introduction of this memory is based on the intuition that classes are best modeled when first learned, with
all data available. Initial class statistics are reused in each
subsequent incremental state to rectify the prediction scores
of past classes. Rectification is necessary because class IL
models are trained with imbalanced datasets in which past
classes have fewer examples. Consequently, their prediction scores are generally lower than those of new classes.
A second contribution is of practical nature and consists
in using vanilla fine tuning as basis for class IL. This use
challenges the common hypothesis that a distillation loss
term is necessary in IL with memory [5, 8, 12, 24]. We
show that, if each past class has at least a few exemplars,
the distillation loss actually hurts performance and vanilla
fine tuning provides significantly better performance.
The evaluation is done against strong baselines and their
adaptations based on vanilla fine tuning. Three large public datasets with different memory sizes and number of IL
states are used. Results indicate that IL2M obtains stateof-the-art results in a wide majority of tested conditions.

583

