Auto-ReID: Searching for a Part-Aware ConvNet for Person Re-Identification
Ruijie Quan1,2 , Xuanyi Dong1,2 , Yu Wu1,2 , Linchao Zhu2 , Yi Yang2
1
Baidu Research 2 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
{ruijie.quan,xuanyi.dong,yu.wu-3}@student.uts.edu.au
{linchao.zhu,yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Prevailing deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
for person re-IDentification (reID) are usually built upon
ResNet or VGG backbones, which were originally designed
for classification. Because reID is different from classification, the architecture should be modified accordingly. We
propose to automatically search for a CNN architecture that
is specifically suitable for the reID task. There are three aspects to be tackled. First, body structural information plays
an important role in reID but it is not encoded in backbones.
Second, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) automates the
process of architecture design without human effort, but no
existing NAS methods incorporate the structure information
of input images. Third, reID is essentially a retrieval task
but current NAS algorithms are merely designed for classification. To solve these problems, we propose a retrievalbased search algorithm over a specifically designed reID
search space, named Auto-ReID. Our Auto-ReID enables
the automated approach to find an efficient and effective
CNN architecture for reID. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the searched architecture achieves state-of-theart performance while reducing 50% parameters and 53%
FLOPs compared to others.

1. Introduction
Person re-IDentification (reID) aims to retrieve the images of a person recorded by different surveillance cameras [17, 38]. With the success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in recent years, researchers in this
area have mainly focused on improving the representation capability of the features extracted from CNN models [27, 38, 30]. Hundreds of different CNN models have
been designed for reID, and the rank-1 accuracy has been
improved from 44.4% [38] to 93.8% [30] on the Market1501 benchmark [38].
∗ Part of this work was done when Ruijie Quan, Xuanyi Dong, and Yu
Wu interned at Baidu Research. Yi Yang is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Our Auto-ReID learns to search for a suitable architecture on a specific reID dataset, and it is supervised by the retrieval
objective during searching. Auto-ReID finds architecture from a
reID search space, which consists of a large number of candidate
architectures. These candidates are generated by combining basic operations, such as a 3-by-3 convolutional layer, a 3-by-3 max
pooling operation, and the proposed part-aware module.

Most recent reID models are based on deep CNNs. They
are usually built upon convolutional neural network backbones for image classification [36, 17, 27, 28, 30], such as
VGG [26], Inception [31], and ResNet [13]. These backbones can be readily used for retrieval as the inputs of both
tasks are images. However, there are still a few differences
between the reID task and the classification task. For example, in image classification, the appearance of two objects
could be different, e.g., a cat looks different from a tree. In
contrast, all input examples of the reID task are person images with different attributes, e.g., apparel or hair styles. A
CNN focusing on recognizing over 1,000 objects [7] should
be modified when it is applied to the reID task.
A straightforward method is to manually design a
reID oriented CNN architecture which is specifically suit-

3750

