DSConv: Efficient Convolution Operator
Marcelo Gennari do Nascimento
University of Oxford
Active Vision Lab

Roger Fawcett
Intel Corporation
https://www.omnitek.tv/about

Victor Adrian Prisacariu
University of Oxford
Active Vision Lab

marcelo@robots.ox.ac.uk

roger.fawcett@intel.com

victor@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Quantization is a popular way of increasing the speed
and lowering the memory usage of Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs). When labelled training data is available,
network weights and activations have successfully been
quantized down to 1-bit. The same cannot be said about
the scenario when labelled training data is not available,
e.g. when quantizing a pre-trained model, where current approaches show, at best, no loss of accuracy at 8-bit quantizations.
We introduce DSConv, a flexible quantized convolution operator that replaces single-precision operations with
their far less expensive integer counterparts, while maintaining the probability distributions over both the kernel
weights and the outputs. We test our model as a plugand-play replacement for standard convolution on most
popular neural network architectures, ResNet, DenseNet,
GoogLeNet, AlexNet and VGG-Net and demonstrate stateof-the-art results, with less than 1% loss of accuracy, without retraining, using only 4-bit quantization. We also show
how a distillation-based adaptation stage with unlabelled
data can improve results even further.

1. Introduction
A popular method to make neural networks faster and
use less memory is quantization, which replaces 32-bit
floating point weights and, potentially, activations with
lower bit (i.e. lower precision) representations, while aiming to maintain accuracy.
Quantization is often used in neural network compression. This aims to reduce the memory occupied by the network weights as much as possible to, for example, lower
the overall memory footprint required to store the network.
It can also be used to increase neural network inference
speed (fast inference), when applied to both weights and
activations, by substituting expensive floating-point Multiply and Accumulate (MAC) operations with cheaper alternatives such as integer, bitwise operations or addition-only

operations.
The best quantization results are achieved when labelled
training data is available, as the quantized model can be fitted to the dataset, which feeds the training algorithm with
prior knowledge of what the activation maps will look like
and what the expected output will be. Maintaining a high
accuracy becomes much more difficult when only a pretrained model is available.
In this paper we focus on this latter scenario, and quantize both weights and activations to produce neural networks that are both smaller and have faster inference. Our
key insight is that, in the absence of training data, this can be
best achieved by forcing the probability distributions over
the weights and activations of the low precision quantized
model to mirror those of the original full-precision model.
We introduce a novel convolution operator, which we call
DSConv, that factorises the convolution weights into (i) a
low-precision component with the same size as the original kernel and (ii) a high-precision distribution shift component, with a variable size (e.g. as small as one float 32 value
per kernel). A similar procedure, inspired by the block floating point approach [35], is used to quantize activations. We
also show that accuracy can be improved when using a distillation [19] inspired weight adaptation approach, that uses
the original pre-trained model and unlabelled input data.
The main contribution of this paper is the introduction
of a convolution operator that (i) serves as a “drop-in and
play” replacement for standard convolution and uses lowbit fixed point computation for the bulk of operations without the need of retraining using labelled data, and (ii) provides a hyperparameter that can be tuned to favor accuracy
or memory usage/speed of computation for any given task.
Our quantization strategy is able to achieve state-of-the-art
results, as demonstrated by our experimental section.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. §2
presents the previous papers on quantization. §3 explains
the method in detail. §4 shows the results of the experiments performed in a variety of architectures and settings.
§5 concludes the paper with a discussion on its performance
and possible applications and limitations.

5148

