SCRDet: Towards More Robust Detection for Small, Cluttered
and Rotated Objects
Xue Yang1,2,3,4 , Jirui Yang2 , Junchi Yan3,4,∗, Yue Zhang1 , Tengfei Zhang1,2
Zhi Guo1 , Xian Sun1 , Kun Fu1,2
1
NIST, Institute of Electronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing (Suzhou), China.
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
4
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
{yangxue-2019-sjtu, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
zhangyue@aircas.ac.cn

Abstract
Object detection has been a building block in computer
vision. Though considerable progress has been made, there
still exist challenges for objects with small size, arbitrary
direction, and dense distribution. Apart from natural images, such issues are especially pronounced for aerial images of great importance. This paper presents a novel multicategory rotation detector for small, cluttered and rotated
objects, namely SCRDet. Specifically, a sampling fusion
network is devised which fuses multi-layer feature with effective anchor sampling, to improve the sensitivity to small
objects. Meanwhile, the supervised pixel attention network and the channel attention network are jointly explored
for small and cluttered object detection by suppressing the
noise and highlighting the objects feature. For more accurate rotation estimation, the IoU constant factor is added
to the smooth L1 loss to address the boundary problem for
the rotating bounding box. Extensive experiments on two
remote sensing public datasets DOTA, NWPU VHR-10 as
well as natural image datasets COCO, VOC2007 and scene
text data ICDAR2015 show the state-of-the-art performance
of our detector. The code and models will be available at
https://github.com/DetectionTeamUCAS.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision and various general-purpose detectors [12, 15,
11, 26, 30, 5, 31] have been devised. Promising results have
∗ Corresponding

{yangjirui16, zhangtengfei16}@mails.ucas.ac.cn

{guozhi, sunxian, fukun}@mail.ie.ac.cn

author is Junchi Yan.
The work is partially
supported by National Key Research and Development Program of
China (2016YFB1001003), STCSM (18DZ1112300), NSFC (61602176,
61725105, 41801349).

been achieved on a few benchmarks including COCO [24]
and VOC2007 [9] etc. However, most existing detectors do
not pay particular attention to some useful aspects for robust object detection in open environment: small objects,
cluttered arrangement and arbitrary orientations.
In real-world problems, due to limitation of camera resolution and other reasons, the objects of interest can be of
very small size e.g. for detection of traffic signs, tiny faces
under public cameras on the streets. Also, the objects can
range in a very dense fashion e.g. goods in shopping malls.
Moreover, the objects can no longer be positioned horizontally as in COCO, VOC2007, e.g. for scene text detection
whereby the texts can be in any direction and position.
In particular, the above three challenges are pronounced
for images in remote sensing, as analyzed as follows:
1) Small objects. Aerial images often contain small objects overwhelmed by complex surrounding scenes;
2) Cluttered arrangement. Objects for detection are
often densely arranged, such as vehicles and ships;
3) Arbitrary orientations. Objects in aerial images can
appear in various orientations. It is further challenged by the
large aspect ratio issue which is common in remote sensing.
In this paper, we mainly discuss our approach in the context of remote sensing, while the approach and the problems
are general and we have tested with various datasets beyond
aerial images as will be shown in the experiments.
Many existing general-purpose detectors such FasterRCNN [31] have been widely employed for aerial object
detection. However, the design of such detectors are often
based on the implicit assumption that the bounding boxes
are basically in horizontal position, which is not the case
for aerial images (and other detection tasks e.g. scene text
detection). This limitation is further pronounced by the popular non-maximum suppression (NMS) technique as post-

8232

