Variable Rate Deep Image Compression With a Conditional Autoencoder
Yoojin Choi, Mostafa El-Khamy, Jungwon Lee
SoC R&D, Samsung Semiconductor Inc., San Diego, CA 92121, USA
{yoojin.c,mostafa.e,jungwon2.lee}@samsung.com

1. Introduction
Image compression is an application of data compression
for digital images to lower their storage and/or transmission
requirements. Transform coding [8] has been successful to
yield practical and efficient image compression algorithms
such as JPEG [27] and JPEG2000 [18]. The transformation
converts an input to a latent representation in the transform
domain where lossy compression (that is typically a combination of quantization and lossless source coding) is more
amenable and more efficient. For example, JPEG utilizes
the discrete cosine transform (DCT) to convert an image
into a sparse frequency domain representation. JPEG2000
replaces DCT with an enhanced discrete wavelet transform.
Deep learning is now leading many performance breakthroughs in various computer vision tasks [13]. Along with
this revolutionary progress of deep learning, learned image
compression also has derived significant interests [1, 3, 4, 9,

Δ

Conditional
Encoder

Quantization bin size Δ
(training for mixed bin sizes)

Universal
Quantization

Entropy
Coding

𝜆

Reconstruction

In this paper, we propose a novel variable-rate learned
image compression framework with a conditional autoencoder. Previous learning-based image compression methods mostly require training separate networks for different
compression rates so they can yield compressed images of
varying quality. In contrast, we train and deploy only one
variable-rate image compression network implemented with
a conditional autoencoder. We provide two rate control parameters, i.e., the Lagrange multiplier and the quantization
bin size, which are given as conditioning variables to the
network. Coarse rate adaptation to a target is performed by
changing the Lagrange multiplier, while the rate can be further fine-tuned by adjusting the bin size used in quantizing
the encoded representation. Our experimental results show
that the proposed scheme provides a better rate-distortion
trade-off than the traditional variable-rate image compression codecs such as JPEG2000 and BPG. Our model also
shows comparable and sometimes better performance than
the state-of-the-art learned image compression models that
deploy multiple networks trained for varying rates.

Input Image

Abstract

Conditional
Decoder

Conditional
Entropy Model

Autoencoder, conditioned on
the Lagrange multiplier 𝝀

1
0
1
.

0
1
1
.

0 1
0 1
0 1
.

Entropy
Decoding

Figure 1: Our variable-rate image compression model. We
provide two knobs to vary the rate. First, we employ a conditional autoencoder, conditioned on the Lagrange multiplier λ that adapts the rate, and optimize the rate-distortion
Lagrangian for various λ values in one conditional model.
Second, we train the model for mixed values of the quantization bin size ∆ so we can vary the rate by changing ∆.
14–16, 19, 23, 24]. In particular, non-linear transform coding designed with deep neural networks has advanced to
outperform the classical image compression codecs sophisticatedly designed and optimized by domain experts, e.g.,
BPG [5], which is a still image version of the high efficiency
video codec (HEVC) standard [22]—we note that very recently, only a few of the learning-based image compression
schemes have reached the performance of the state-of-theart BPG codec on peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), a metric based on mean squared error (MSE) [14, 16].
The resemblance of non-linear transform coding and autoencoders has been established and exploited for image
compression in [3, 23]—an encoder transforms an image (a
set of pixels) into a latent representation in a lower dimensional space, and a decoder performs an approximate inverse transform that converts the latent representation back
to the image. The transformation is desired to yield a latent
representation with the smallest entropy, given a distortion
level, since the entropy is the minimum rate achievable with
lossless entropy source coding [7, Section 5.3]. In practice,

3146

