Noise Flow: Noise Modeling with Conditional Normalizing Flows
Abdelrahman Abdelhamed1,2
1
York University

Marcus A. Brubaker2
2
Borealis AI

Michael S. Brown1,3
3
Samsung AI Center, Toronto

{kamel,mbrown}@eecs.yorku.ca, marcus.brubaker@borealisai.com

a Gaussia

Abstract
Modeling and synthesizing image noise is an important aspect in many computer vision applications. The
long-standing additive white Gaussian and heteroscedastic (signal-dependent) noise models widely used in the literature provide only a coarse approximation of real sensor noise. This paper introduces Noise Flow, a powerful
and accurate noise model based on recent normalizing flow
architectures. Noise Flow combines well-established basic
parametric noise models (e.g., signal-dependent noise) with
the flexibility and expressiveness of normalizing flow networks. The result is a single, comprehensive, compact noise
model containing fewer than 2500 parameters yet able to
represent multiple cameras and gain factors. Noise Flow
dramatically outperforms existing noise models, with 0.42
nats/pixel improvement over the camera-calibrated noise
level functions, which translates to 52% improvement in the
likelihood of sampled noise. Noise Flow represents the first
serious attempt to go beyond simple parametric models to
one that leverages the power of deep learning and datadriven noise distributions.

1. Introduction
Image noise modeling, estimation, and reduction is an
important and active research area (e.g., [7, 14, 28, 29]) with
a long-standing history in computer vision (e.g., [12, 18, 19,
24]). A primary goal of such efforts is to remove or correct
for noise in an image, either for aesthetic purposes, or to
help improve other downstream tasks. Towards this end,
accurately modeling noise distributions is a critical step.
Existing noise models are not sufficient to represent the
complexity of real noise [1, 26]. For example, a univariate homoscedastic Gaussian model does not represent
the fact that photon noise is signal-dependent—that is, the
variance of the noise is proportional to the magnitude of
the signal. In turn, the signal-dependent heteroscedastic
model [7, 8, 22], often referred to as the noise level function (NLF), does not represent the spatial non-uniformity of
noise power (e.g., fixed-pattern noise) or other sources of

Ca era NLF

Noise Flow

d Real Noise

e Clea

Figure 1: Synthetic noisy images generated by (a) a Gaussian model, (b) a heteroscedastic signal-dependent model
represented by camera noise level functions (NLF), and (c)
our Noise Flow model. Synthetic noise generated from
Noise Flow is consistently the most similar to the real noise
in (d), qualitatively and quantitatively (in terms of KL divergence relative to the real noise, shown on each image).
(e) Reference clean image. Images are from the SIDD [1].
noise and non-linearities, such as amplification noise and
quantization [13]. See Figure 2. In spite of their wellknown limitations, these models are still the most commonly used. More complex models, such as a Poisson mixture [15, 32], exist, but still do not capture the complex noise
sources mentioned earlier.
Contribution We introduce Noise Flow, a new noise
model that combines the insights of parametric noise models and the expressiveness of powerful generative models.
Specifically, we leverage recent normalizing flow architec13165

