Deep Tensor ADMM-Net for Snapshot Compressive Imaging
Jiawei Ma†
Columbia University

Xiao-Yang Liu†
Columbia University

Zheng Shou
Columbia University

{jm4743, xl2427, zs2262}@columbia.edu

Xin Yuan
Nokia Bell Labs

xyuan@bell-labs.com

Abstract
Snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) systems have been
developed to capture high-dimensional (≥ 3) signals using
low-dimensional off-the-shelf sensors, i.e., mapping multiple video frames into a single measurement frame. One key
module of a SCI system is an accurate decoder that recovers
the original video frames. However, existing model-based
decoding algorithms require exhaustive parameter tuning
with prior knowledge and cannot support practical applications due to the extremely long running time. In this paper,
we propose a deep tensor ADMM-Net for video SCI systems
that provides high-quality decoding in seconds. Firstly, we
start with a standard tensor ADMM algorithm, unfold its
inference iterations into a layer-wise structure, and design a
deep neural network based on tensor operations. Secondly,
instead of relying on a pre-specified sparse representation
domain, the network learns the domain of low-rank tensor through stochastic gradient descent. It is worth noting
that the proposed deep tensor ADMM-Net has potentially
mathematical interpretations. On public video data, the
simulation results show the proposed method achieves average 0.8 ∼ 2.5 dB improvement in PSNR and 0.07 ∼ 0.1
in SSIM, and 1500× ∼ 3600× speedups over the state-ofthe-art methods. On real data captured by SCI cameras, the
experimental results show comparable visual results with the
state-of-the-art methods but in much shorter running time.

1. Introduction
Inspired by compressive sensing [4, 6, 7], various computational imaging systems [1] have been built, which employ
low-dimensional sensors to capture high-dimensional signals
by generating compressed measurements. One important
branch of computational imaging with promising applications is the snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) [19, 25],
which utilized a two-dimensional camera to capture the 3D
video or spectral data. Different from conventional cameras, such imaging systems adopt sampling on a set of con† Equal contribution. The code is available at https://github.
com/Phoenix-V/tensor-admm-net-sci.

Figure 1. Overview of the deep tensor ADMM-Net for SCI systems. The measurement by the video SCI camera [19] is modeled
as linear measurements with prior known sensing matrices. We use
video samples to train a neural net as a decoder.

secutive images–from sequenced temporal channels (i.e.,
CACTI [19, 34]) or with multiple spectral variations (i.e.,
CASSI [26])–in accordance with the sensing matrix and summing up those sampled signals along time or spectrum to
obtain the compressed measurements. With this technique,
SCI systems [8, 11, 22, 25, 26, 34] can capture the highspeed motion and high-resolution spectral information but
with low memory footprints.
In this paper, we focus on the video SCI systems (Fig. 1).
Different from other available high-speed cameras that are
suffering from great expense and bandwidth cost [23], the
video SCI systems [19, 34] enable high-resolution shooting,

10223

