Discriminative Feature Transformation for Occluded Pedestrian Detection
Chunluan Zhou1,2,4∗
Ming Yang3
Junsong Yuan4
1
Baidu Research 2 Wormpex AI Research 3 Horizon Robotics 4 State University of New York at Buffalo
chunluan.zhou@bianlifeng.com

m-yang4@u.northwestern.edu

jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Despite promising performance achieved by deep convolutional neural networks for non-occluded pedestrian detection, it remains a great challenge to detect partially occluded pedestrians. Compared with non-occluded pedestrian examples, it is generally more difficult to distinguish
occluded pedestrian examples from backgrounds in featue
space due to the missing of occluded parts. In this paper, we
propose a discriminative feature transformation which enforces feature separability of pedestrian and non-pedestrian
examples to handle occlusions for pedestrian detection.
Specifically, in feature space it makes pedestrian examples approach the centroid of easily classified non-occluded
pedestrian examples and pushes non-pedestrian examples
close to the centroid of easily classified non-pedestrian examples. Such a feature transformation partially compensates the missing contribution of occluded parts in feature
space, therefore improving the performance for occluded
pedestrian detection. We implement our approach in the
Fast R-CNN framework by adding one transformation network branch. We validate the proposed approach on two
widely used pedestrian detection datasets: Caltech and
CityPersons. Experimental results show that our approach
achieves promising performance for both non-occluded and
occluded pedestrian detection.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian is a core module for a wide range of applications such as video surveillance, robotics and autonomous
driving. With the development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the performance of pedestrian detection has been significantly improved in recent years
[4, 38, 3, 14, 39, 31, 34, 12, 40, 27]. As pointed out in
[41, 44], although reasonably good performance has been
achieved for detecting non-occluded pedestrians, existing
approaches still have difficulty in detecting partially occluded pedestrians. It is generally more challenging to de∗ The work was done during Chunluan’s visit at Baidu and UB

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Motivation. (a-b) Occluded and non-occluded pedestrian examples. Green and red boxes represent non-occluded and
occluded pedestrian examples respectively. (c) Discriminative
feature transformation. (Left) Before transformation, occluded
pedestrian examples are difficult to be distinguished from backgrounds. The black line represents the classification boundary.
Inside the green ellipse are easy non-occluded pedestrian examples and inside the yellow ellipse are easy background examples.
(Right) After transformation, occluded pedestrian examples are
moved close to the positive reference and background examples
are pushed towards the negative reference.

tect a pedestrian when some of its parts are occluded, as
illustrated in Fig. 1(a-b). Occlusions occur frequently in
practical applications. For example, on a street pedestrians
are often occluded by other objects like poles or cars and
may also be occluded by each other when walking closely.
Therefore, it is essential for a pedestrian detector to handle

9557

