A Geometry-Inspired Decision-Based Attack
Yujia Liu∗

Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli†

Pascal Frossard†

yjcaihon@mail.ustc.edu.cn

seyed.moosavi@epfl.ch

pascal.frossard@epfl.ch

Abstract
Deep neural networks have recently achieved tremendous success in image classification. Recent studies have
however shown that they are easily misled into incorrect
classification decisions by adversarial examples. Adversaries can even craft attacks by querying the model in blackbox settings, where no information about the model is released except its final decision. Such decision-based attacks usually require lots of queries, while real-world image
recognition systems might actually restrict the number of
queries. In this paper, we propose qFool, a novel decisionbased attack algorithm that can generate adversarial examples using a small number of queries. The qFool method can
drastically reduce the number of queries compared to previous decision-based attacks while reaching the same quality of adversarial examples. We also enhance our method
by constraining adversarial perturbations in low-frequency
subspace, which can make qFool even more computationally efficient. Altogether, we manage to fool commercial
image recognition systems with a small number of queries,
which demonstrates the actual effectiveness of our new algorithm in practice.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have led to major breakthroughs
in recent years and have been developing as powerful tools
in various applications, including computer vision [15, 14],
speech [19, 11], health-care [13, 17], etc. Despite their huge
success, it has been shown that these networks are vulnerable to deliberate attacks. An adversary can generate adversarial examples [26] that look very similar to the original
images, yet that can mislead a deep neural network to give
an incorrect output.
Many existing attacks focus on white-box settings [8, 4],
where adversaries have full access to all information of the
model. They can attack models by computing gradients
of the loss function. White-box attacks are interesting to
derive a better understanding of deep neural networks, but

they are unrealistic in a more practical setting, where adversaries have no knowledge about model parameters. In this
case, called the black-box setting, some recent works focus
on the score-based attacks [21, 5], where they make a large
number of queries to the target model and exploit the output
probabilities to generate adversarial examples. Most existing black-box attacks do however not consider that queries
are usually costly in terms of both time and money, especially for commercial models. And, in fact, some commercial models only provide users with the final decision (top1 label), and not even any output probabilities. This scenario corresponds to decision-based settings, where attacks
[3] are actually the most challenging for adversaries.
In this paper, we propose a novel method of decisionbased attack called qFool that computes adversarial examples with only a few queries. We consider both non-targeted
and targeted attacks, advantageously exploiting the fact that
the decision boundary is locally flat around adversarial examples. In non-targeted attacks, we estimate the gradient
direction of the decision boundary only by relying on the
top-1 label of each query result. We then search for an adversarial example directly from the original image in the estimated direction. In targeted attacks, we make iterative gradient estimations on multiple points along the boundary and
seek for adversarial examples with the help of a target image. Both our non-targeted and targeted attacks can mislead
networks with only few queries. Moreover, our experiments
show that searching perturbations in a low-dimensional subspace is even more efficient in query-limited settings. We
thus propose to extend qFool to subspaces in order to further reduce the number of queries. Finally, we use qFool to
fool a famous commercial image recognition service with
only a small number of queries to the model.
Our main contributions are the following:
• We propose a novel method, qFool, for generating adversarial examples when only having access to the top1 label decision of a trained deep network model.
• We demonstrate that qFool needs fewer queries than
previous decision-based attacks in both non-targeted
and targeted settings.

∗ University of Science and Technology of China

• We enhance the proposed qFool with properly chosen

† École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland

4890

