A Fast and Accurate One-Stage Approach to Visual Grounding
Zhengyuan Yang2∗ Boqing Gong1† Liwei Wang1 Wenbing Huang1 Dong Yu1
1
2
Tencent AI Lab
University of Rochester

Jiebo Luo2

{zyang39, jluo}@cs.rochester.edu, boqinggo@outlook.com
{liweiwang, dongyu}@tencent.com, hwenbing@126.com

Abstract
We propose a simple, fast, and accurate one-stage approach to visual grounding, inspired by the following insight. The performances of existing propose-and-rank twostage methods are capped by the quality of the region candidates they propose in the first stage — if none of the candidates could cover the ground truth region, there is no hope
in the second stage to rank the right region to the top. To
avoid this caveat, we propose a one-stage model that enables end-to-end joint optimization. The main idea is as
straightforward as fusing a text query’s embedding into the
YOLOv3 object detector, augmented by spatial features so
as to account for spatial mentions in the query. Despite being simple, this one-stage approach shows great potential
in terms of both accuracy and speed for both phrase localization and referring expression comprehension, according
to our experiments. Given these results along with careful
investigations into some popular region proposals, we advocate for visual grounding a paradigm shift from the conventional two-stage methods to the one-stage framework.

1. Introduction
We propose a simple, fast, and accurate one-stage approach to visual grounding, which aims to ground a natural
language query (phrase or sentence) about an image onto
a correct region of the image. By defining visual grounding at this level, we deliberately abstract away the subtle
distinctions between phrase localization [30, 42], referring
expression comprehension [15, 24, 48, 47, 22], natural language object retrieval [14, 16], visual question segmentation [9, 13, 20, 25], etc., each of which can be seen as a variation of the general visual grounding problem. We benchmark our one-stage approach for both phrase localization
and referring expression comprehension. Results show that
it is about 10 times faster than the state-of-the-art two-stage
methods and meanwhile more accurate than them. Hence,
∗ Work done while Z.Yang was an intern at Tencent AI Lab at Bellevue.
† Now at Google.

(a). Two-stage visual grounding

❌

✔

Query: center building

Query: bottom right grass

(b). The proposed one-stage method

Query: bottom right grass

Figure 1. Visual grounding is the task of localizing a language
query in an image. The output is often a bounding box as drawn in
the yellow color. (a). Existing two-stage methods first extract region candidates and then rank them according to their similarities
with the query. The inference speed is slow and the performance
is capped by the quality of the region proposals (e.g., on the right,
the “bottom right grass” is not covered by any of the region candidates). (b). Our proposed one-stage method directly predicts
a grounding box given the input image and a query. It is hence
significantly faster and also accurate in inference.

we expect this work provides for visual grounding a new
strong baseline, upon which one can conveniently build further to tackle variations (e.g., phrase localization) to the basic visual grounding problem by bringing in corresponding
domain knowledge (e.g., attributes, relationship between
phrases, spatial configuration of regions, etc.).
Visual grounding is key to machine intelligence and provides a natural channel for humans to communicate with
machines about the physical world. Its potential applications include but are not limited to robotics, humancomputer interaction, and early education. In addition, a
good visual grounding model can benefit a variety of research problems such as visual question answering [53, 9,
17], image captioning [45, 1, 8], and image retrieval [37].
There are mainly two thriving threads of work in visual
grounding: phrase localization [15, 30, 42] and referring expression comprehension [24, 48, 47, 14, 16] — plus some
work on grounding as segmentation [13, 9, 20, 25]. The language query in the former is a local phrase of a full sentence
14683

