Convolutional Sequence Generation for Skeleton-Based Action Synthesis
Sijie Yan∗

Zhizhong Li∗

Yuanjun Xiong
Huahan Yan
Dahua Lin
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{ys016, lz015, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {bitxiong, huahanyan2}@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work, we aim to generate long actions represented
as sequences of skeletons. The generated sequences must
demonstrate continuous, meaningful human actions, while
maintaining coherence among body parts. Instead of generating skeletons sequentially following an autoregressive
model, we propose a framework that generates the entire sequence altogether by transforming from a sequence of latent
vectors sampled from a Gaussian process (GP). This framework, named Convolutional Sequence Generation Network
(CSGN) 1 , jointly models structures in temporal and spatial
dimensions. It captures the temporal structure at multiple
scales through the GP prior and the temporal convolutions;
and establishes the spatial connection between the latent
vectors and the skeleton graphs via a novel graph refining
scheme. It is noteworthy that CSGN allows bidirectional
transforms between the latent and the observed spaces, thus
enabling semantic manipulation of the action sequences in
various forms. We conducted empirical studies on multiple
datasets, including a set of high-quality dancing sequences
collected by us. The results show that our framework can
produce long action sequences that are coherent across time
steps and among body parts.

1. Introduction
When the dancer is stepping, jumping and spinning on the
stage, attentions of all audiences are attracted by the stream
of the fluent and graceful movements. Building a model that
is capable of dancing is as fascinating a task as appreciating
the performance itself. In this paper, we aim to generate longduration human actions represented as skeleton sequences,
e.g. those that cover the entirety of a dance, with hundreds
of moves and countless possible combinations.
Skeleton-based action synthesis [2,5,6,9,17,29] is gaining
ground in recent years. It is used to aid human-centric video
∗ The two authors contributed equally.
1 Codes and data at https://github.com/yysijie/CSGN .

Figure 1. CSGN starts with latent signal sequences sampled from
Gaussian process prior and gradually constructs skeleton sequences
of the dance move via convolution and upsampling operations.
The blue skeleton and yellow skeleton share part of latent signals
(shown in green), resulting in a temporal dependency between them.
The relation for longer duration is brought by the Gaussian process.

generation [7] and sees potential applications in AR and 3D
character animations. Existing tools for generating skeleton
sequences [2, 5, 9, 17, 29] are mostly extended from frameworks for action prediction, which aim at predicting short
sequences of near future given a few seen frames. Therefore they are usually based on autoregressive models such
as LSTM [14], GRU [1] and Seq2seq [24]. When applied
to generating long-duration action sequences, two inherent
limitations of these methods emerge. First, they rely on the
assumption of Markovian dependency to model temporal
relations, i.e. the generation of a new frame at time step t
depends on the hidden states of a few preceding frames. This
makes it nontrivial to express structures at multiple temporal
scales. Second, the manner of generating frames one by one
along the time dimension creates a barrier for leveraging
backward dependencies. In particular, a frame generated at
a future time step cannot alter the ones in preceding steps.
We propose the Convolutional Sequence Generation Network (CSGN), a new framework for skeleton-based action

4394

