TRB: A Novel Triplet Representation for Understanding 2D Human Body
Haodong Duan1 , KwanYee Lin2 , Sheng Jin2 , Wentao Liu2 , Chen Qian2 , Wanli Ouyang3
1
CUHK-Sensetime Joint Lab, 2 SenseTime Group Limited
3
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia

Abstract
Human pose and shape are two important components
of 2D human body. However, how to efficiently represent
both of them in images is still an open question. In this paper, we propose the Triplet Representation for Body (TRB)
— a compact 2D human body representation, with skeleton keypoints capturing human pose information and contour keypoints containing human shape information. TRB
not only preserves the flexibility of skeleton keypoint representation, but also contains rich pose and human shape
information. Therefore, it promises broader application areas, such as human shape editing and conditional image
generation. We further introduce the challenging problem
of TRB estimation, where joint learning of human pose and
shape is required. We construct several large-scale TRB estimation datasets, based on popular 2D pose datasets: LSP,
MPII, COCO. To effectively solve TRB estimation, we propose a two-branch network (TRB-net) with three novel techniques, namely X-structure (Xs), Directional Convolution
(DC) and Pairwise Mapping (PM), to enforce multi-level
message passing for joint feature learning. We evaluate our
proposed TRB-net and several leading approaches on our
proposed TRB datasets, and demonstrate the superiority of
our method through extensive evaluations.

1. Introduction
A comprehensive 2D human body representation should
capture both human pose and shape information. Such representation is promising for applications beyond plain keypoint localization, such as graphics and human-computer
interaction. However, how to establish such 2D body representation is still an open problem. Current mainstream
2D human body representations are not able to simultaneously capture both information. Skeleton keypoint based
representation [2, 17, 21] well captures human poses. However, such representation loses the 2D human shape information which is essential for human body understanding.
Pixel-wise human parsing representations [19, 6, 15] contain 2D human shape cues. However, such kinds of representations lack accurate keypoint localization information,

since all pixels in one part share the same semantic label.
Meanwhile, they are inflexible to manipulate and costly to
label. This paper aims at discovering a new representation
for more comprehensive understanding of the human body.
To this end, a novel Triplet Representation for Body (TRB)
is introduced. It consists of skeleton and contour keypoint
representations, capturing both accurate pose localization
and rich semantic human shape information simultaneously,
while preserving its flexibility and simplicity.
Since there exists no dataset to quantitatively evaluate TRB estimation, we propose several challenging TRB
datasets based on three pose estimation datasets (LSP [17],
MPII [2] and COCO [21]). We quantitatively evaluate the
performance of several state-of-the-art 2D skeleton-based
keypoint detectors on the proposed TRB datasets. Our experiments indicate that they are not able to effectively solve
the more challenging TRB estimation tasks, which require
the approaches to not only understand the concept of human
pose and human shape simultaneously, but also exploit the
underlying relationship between them.
For effective representation learning, we design a twobranch multi-task framework called TRB-Net, which jointly
solves skeleton keypoint estimation and contour keypoint
estimation. These two tasks are closely related and will
promote each other. Therefore, we design a message passing block to enable information exchange. The message
received from the other branch will act as guidance for the
current branch to produce finer estimation results. Since
feature maps from the two branches have different patterns,
spatial feature transformation is necessary for feature alignment and more effective message passing scheme. Therefore, we propose a task-specific directional convolution operator to exploit the inside-out and outside-in spatial relationship between skeleton and contour feature maps. To
prevent inconsistent predictions for skeleton and contour
branch, we explicitly enforce pairwise mapping constraints.
With these techniques, we boost the TRB estimation performance beyond state-of-the-arts. Error is reduced by 13.3%
and 15.1% for skeleton and contour keypoint estimation respectively (Sec. 5.3).
Our contributions are three-fold: (1) We propose the
19479

