Teacher Guided Architecture Search
Pouya Bashivan
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
McGovern Institute for Brain Research
MIT

Mark Tensen
University of Amsterdam
mark.tensen@student.uva.nl

bashivan@mit.edu

James J DiCarlo
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and
McGovern Institute for Brain Research
MIT
dicarlo@mit.edu

Abstract
Much of the recent improvement in neural networks for
computer vision has resulted from discovery of new networks architectures. Most prior work has used the performance of candidate models following limited training to
automatically guide the search in a feasible way. Could further gains in computational efficiency be achieved by guiding the search via measurements of a high performing network with unknown detailed architecture (e.g. the primate
visual system)? As one step toward this goal, we use representational similarity analysis to evaluate the similarity
of internal activations of candidate networks with those of
a (fixed, high performing) teacher network. We show that
adopting this evaluation metric could produce up to an order of magnitude in search efficiency over performanceguided methods. Our approach finds a convolutional cell
structure with similar performance as was previously found
using other methods but at a total computational cost that
is two orders of magnitude lower than Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) and more than four times lower than progressive neural architecture search (PNAS). We further show
that measurements from only ∼300 neurons from primate
visual system provides enough signal to find a network with
an Imagenet top-1 error that is significantly lower than that
achieved by performance-guided architecture search alone.
These results suggest that representational matching can
be used to accelerate network architecture search in cases
where one has access to some or all of the internal representations of a teacher network of interest, such as the brain’s
sensory processing networks.

1. Introduction
The accuracy of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) for visual categorization has advanced substantially
from 2012 levels (AlexNet [25]) to current state-of-the-art
CNNs like ResNet [19], Inception [41], DenseNet [21].
This progress is mostly due to discovery of new network
architectures. Yet, even the space of feedforward neural network architectures is essentially infinite and given this complexity, the design of better architectures remains a challenging and time consuming task.
Many approaches have been proposed in recent years
to automate the discovery of neural network architectures,
including random search [32], reinforcement learning [44,
45], evolution [37, 36], and sequential model based optimization (SMBO) [28, 8]. These methods operate by iteratively sampling from the hyperparameter space, training the
corresponding architecture, evaluating it on a validation set,
and using the search history of those scores to guide further
architecture sampling. But even with recent improvements
in search efficiency, the total cost of architecture search is
still outside the reach of many groups and thus impedes the
research in this area (e.g. some of the recent work in this
area has spent more than 20k GPU-hours for each search
experiment [36, 44]).
What drives the total computational cost of running a
search? For current architectural search procedures (above),
the parameters of each sampled architecture must be trained
before its performance can be evaluated and the amount of
such training turns out to be a key driver in the total computational cost. Thus, to reduce that total cost, each architecture is typically only partially trained to a premature
state and its premature performance is used as a proxy of
15320

