Joint Syntax Representation Learning and Visual Cue Translation
for Video Captioning
Jingyi Hou1 , Xinxiao Wu1∗, Wentian Zhao1 , Jiebo Luo2 , and Yunde Jia1
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester NY 14627, USA

1

Abstract
Video captioning is a challenging task that involves not
only visual perception but also syntax representation learning. Recent progress in video captioning has been achieved
through visual perception, but syntax representation learning is still under-explored. We propose a novel video captioning approach that takes into account both visual perception and syntax representation learning to generate accurate descriptions of videos. Specifically, we use sentence
templates composed of Part-of-Speech (POS) tags to represent the syntax structure of captions, and accordingly, syntax representation learning is performed by directly inferring POS tags from videos. The visual perception is implemented by a mixture model which translates visual cues
into lexical words that are conditional on the learned syntactic structure of sentences. Thus, a video captioning task
consists of two sub-tasks: video POS tagging and visual
cue translation, which are jointly modeled and trained in an
end-to-end fashion. Evaluations on three public benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our proposed method achieves
substantially better performance than the state-of-the-art
methods, which validates the superiority of joint modeling
of syntax representation learning and visual perception for
video captioning.

1. Introduction
Automatically generating a natural language description
of a video has attracted remarkable attention for its important applications, such as semantic video search, visual intelligence in chatting robots and aid for people to perceive
the world around them. Previous works [21, 23, 16, 33]
describe videos using template-based methods which first
manually create fix-structured sentence templates and then
fill in the template with the corresponding words. Recently,
increasing studies have shown benefits of deep learning on
∗ Corresponding author: Xinxiao Wu

video captioning, owing to the great success of deep neural
networks in both computer vision and natural language processing. Many deep learning methods [11, 38, 37, 29] usually build an encoder to compress the input video into a feature representation and a decoder to generate descriptions
given the video feature. Most existing methods of video
captioning [48, 41, 13, 30, 4, 12, 8, 1] mainly focus on investigating various visual perception models by exploiting
informative semantics without considering learning of syntax representation for generating sentences.
In this paper, we propose a novel video captioning approach that takes into account both visual perception and
syntax representation learning to generate accurate sentences of videos. In an analogy to natural language understanding, the syntactic structure information is obviously
essential for a sentence to interpret the video. For example,
the sentences of “A wolf is eating a sheep” and “A wolf and
a sheep are eating” have similar semantic primitives, but
differ in their meanings with different syntactic structures.
Thus, learning syntax representation will benefit a lot to the
video captioning. Specifically, we use sentence templates
composed of Part-of-Speech (POS) tags to represent the
syntax structure of captions, and accordingly, syntax representation learning is performed by directly inferring POS
tags from videos. The visual perception is implemented by
translating visual cues into lexical words to exploit semantic primitives conditioned on the corresponding POS tags.
Therefore, the video captioning task in our method simultaneously performs two sub-tasks: video POS tagging and
visual cue translation. To this end, an end-to-end trainable
network is built to jointly model and train these two subtasks.
To automatically tag videos with POS, a sequence-tosequence (S2S) model is employed to generate POS sequences from input videos. The POS sequence can be regarded as an interpretation of syntactic structure of textual
description for the video. Since the POS tag categories are
much fewer than word categories, it is much easier to use
the S2S model for generating a POS sequence than a real

8918

