ViSiL: Fine-grained Spatio-Temporal Video Similarity Learning
Giorgos Kordopatis-Zilos1,2 , Symeon Papadopoulos1 , Ioannis Patras2 , Ioannis Kompatsiaris1
1
Information Technologies Institute, CERTH, Thessaloniki, Greece
2
Queen Mary University of London, Mile End road, E1 4NS London, UK
{georgekordopatis,papadop,ikom}@iti.gr

i.patras@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we introduce ViSiL, a Video Similarity
Learning architecture that considers fine-grained SpatioTemporal relations between pairs of videos – such relations
are typically lost in previous video retrieval approaches that
embed the whole frame or even the whole video into a vector descriptor before the similarity estimation. By contrast,
our Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-based approach
is trained to calculate video-to-video similarity from refined
frame-to-frame similarity matrices, so as to consider both
intra- and inter-frame relations. In the proposed method,
pairwise frame similarity is estimated by applying Tensor
Dot (TD) followed by Chamfer Similarity (CS) on regional
CNN frame features - this avoids feature aggregation before
the similarity calculation between frames. Subsequently,
the similarity matrix between all video frames is fed to a
four-layer CNN, and then summarized using Chamfer Similarity (CS) into a video-to-video similarity score – this
avoids feature aggregation before the similarity calculation
between videos and captures the temporal similarity patterns between matching frame sequences. We train the proposed network using a triplet loss scheme and evaluate it on
five public benchmark datasets on four different video retrieval problems where we demonstrate large improvements
in comparison to the state of the art. The implementation of
ViSiL is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Due to the popularity of Internet-based video sharing services, the volume of video content on the Web has reached
unprecedented scales. For instance, YouTube reports almost two billion users and more than one billion hours of
video viewed per day2 . As a result, content-based video
retrieval, which is an essential component in applications
such as video filtering, recommendation, copyright protec1 https://github.com/MKLab-ITI/visil
2 https://www.youtube.com/yt/about/press/, accessed 21 March 2019

Figure 1. Depiction of the frame-to-frame similarity matrix and the
CNN output of the ViSiL approach for two video pair examples:
relevant videos that contain footage from the same incident (top),
unrelated videos with spurious visual similarities (bottom).

tion and verification, becomes increasingly challenging.
In this paper, we address the problem of similarity estimation between pairs of videos, an issue that is central to
several video retrieval systems. A straightforward approach
to this is to aggregate/pool frame-level features into a single video-level representation on which subsequently one
can calculate a similarity measure. Such video-level representations include global vectors [35, 11, 21], hash codes
[30, 23, 31] and Bag-of-Words (BoW) [5, 20, 22]. However,
this disregards the spatial and the temporal structure of the
visual similarity, as aggregation of features is influenced by
clutter and irrelevant content. Other approaches attempt to
take into account the temporal sequence of frames in the
similarity computation, e.g., by using Dynamic Programming [7, 24], Temporal Networks [32, 17] and Temporal
Hough Voting [8, 16]. Another line of research considers
spatio-temporal video representation and matching based
on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [10, 14] or in the
Fourier domain [28, 26, 2]. Such approaches may achieve
high performance in certain tasks such as video alignment
or copy detection, but not in more general retrieval tasks.
A promising direction is exploiting better the spatial and

6351

