GAN-Tree: An Incrementally Learned Hierarchical Generative Framework for
Multi-Modal Data Distributions
Jogendra Nath Kundu∗
Maharshi Gor∗
Dakshit Agrawal
R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
jogendrak@iisc.ac.in, maharshigor18@gmail.com, dagrawal@cs.iitr.ac.in, venky@iisc.ac.in

Latent space distribution

Abstract
Despite the remarkable success of generative adversarial networks, their performance seems less impressive for
diverse training sets, requiring learning of discontinuous
mapping functions. Though multi-mode prior or multigenerator models have been proposed to alleviate this problem, such approaches may fail depending on the empirically chosen initial mode components. In contrast to such
bottom-up approaches, we present GAN-Tree, which follows a hierarchical divisive strategy to address such discontinuous multi-modal data. Devoid of any assumption
on the number of modes, GAN-Tree utilizes a novel modesplitting algorithm to effectively split the parent mode to
semantically cohesive children modes, facilitating unsupervised clustering. Further, it also enables incremental addition of new data modes to an already trained GAN-Tree, by
updating only a single branch of the tree structure. As compared to prior approaches, the proposed framework offers
a higher degree of flexibility in choosing a large variety of
mutually exclusive and exhaustive tree nodes called GANSet. Extensive experiments on synthetic and natural image
datasets including ImageNet demonstrate the superiority of
GAN-Tree against the prior state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Generative models have gained enormous attention in recent years as an emerging field of research to understand
and represent the vast amount of data surrounding us. The
primary objective behind such models is to effectively capture the underlying data distribution from a set of given
samples. The task becomes more challenging for complex
high-dimensional target samples such as image and text.
Well-known techniques like Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [14] and Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [23]
realize it by defining a mapping from a predefined latent
prior to the high-dimensional target distribution.
∗ equal contribution

X
Real data
distribution (X)

→

Z

Transformation function
Approx. fun. (NN)
Ideal function

Bad samples in
generated distribution

→
Z

X

Generated data
distribution

Prior distribution (Z)

Figure 1: Illustration of an ideal mapping (green plot, a non-invertible
mapping of a disconnected uniform distribution to a uni-modal Gaussian),
and its invertible
approximation (dotted plot) learned by a neural network.
Probability(Left Class)
The approximate
mapping
Probability(Right
Class) (X → Z) introduces a discontinuity in the
latent-space (top), whose inverse (Z → X) when used for generation from
a uni-modal prior (bottom) reveals implausible samples (in purple).
1.0

0.75

0.50

0.25
0.0

Despite the success of GAN, the potential of such a
framework has certain limitations. GAN is trained to look
for the best possible approximate Pg (X) of the target data
distribution Pd (X) within the boundaries restricted by the
choice of latent variable setting (i.e. the dimension of latent
embedding and the type of prior distribution) and the computational capacity of the generator network (characterized
by its architecture and parameter size). Such a limitation
is more prominent in the presence of highly diverse intraclass and inter-class variations, where the given target data
spans a highly sparse non-linear manifold. This indicates
that the underlying data distribution Pd (X) would constitute multiple, sparsely spread, low-density regions. Considering enough capacity of the generator architecture (Universal Approximation Theorem [19]), GAN guarantees convergence to the true data distribution. However, the validity of
the theorem does not hold for mapping functions involving discontinuities (Fig. 1), as exhibited by natural image or
text datasets. Furthermore, various regularizations [7, 32]
imposed in the training objective inevitably restrict the generator to exploit its full potential.
A reasonable solution to address the above limitations
could be to realize multi-modal prior in place of the singlemode distribution in the general GAN framework. Several
recent approaches explored this direction by explicitly en-

8191

