HistoSegNet: Semantic Segmentation of Histological Tissue Type
in Whole Slide Images
Lyndon Chan 1 , Mahdi S. Hosseini1,4 , Corwyn Rowsell 2,3 , Konstantinos N. Plataniotis 1
and Savvas Damaskinos 4
1
The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Toronto
2
Division of Pathology, St. Michaels Hospital, Toronto, ON, M4N 1X3, Canada
3
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto
4
Huron Digital Pathology, St. Jacobs, ON, N0B 2N0, Canada
{lyndon.chan, mahdi.hosseini}@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract
In digital pathology, tissue slides are scanned into
Whole Slide Images (WSI) and pathologists first screen for
diagnostically-relevant Regions of Interest (ROIs) before reviewing them. Screening for ROIs is a tedious and timeconsuming visual recognition task which can be exhausting.
The cognitive workload could be reduced by developing a
visual aid to narrow down the visual search area by highlighting (or segmenting) regions of diagnostic relevance,
enabling pathologists to spend more time diagnosing relevant ROIs. In this paper, we propose HistoSegNet, a method
for semantic segmentation of histological tissue type (HTT).
Using the HTT-annotated Atlas of Digital Pathology (ADP)
database, we train a Convolutional Neural Network on
the patch annotations, infer Gradient-Weighted Class Activation Maps, average overlapping predictions, and postprocess the segmentation with a fully-connected Conditional Random Field. Our method out-performs more complicated weakly-supervised semantic segmentation methods
and can generalize to other datasets without retraining.

1

Introduction

Digital pathology with Whole Slide Imaging (WSI) platforms allows pathologists to conveniently navigate tissue
slides for diagnosis. Typically, pathologists quickly screen
slides for tissue regions relevant to the disease being diagnosed, known as regions-of-interest (ROI) and then review
these regions for tissues with abnormal appearance [31].
For instance, a pathologist diagnosing a slide for adenocarcinoma will first screen for glandular tissue regions, and review those that appear abnormally disordered before assigning a diagnosis. However, histology slides are very large
images and the visual search can be exhausting. This is
further complicated when pathology departments typically

Figure 1. Our approach trains on patch-level histological tissue
type annotations and predicts morphological and functional tissue
types at the pixel level.

diagnose hundreds to thousands of slides each day [8], and
diagnostic accuracy suffers when pathologists are fatigued
[19, 26]. Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) tools to highlight (segment) regions of diagnostic relevance as a visual
aid are already widespread in radiology [40] and similar
tools can be applied to pathology, where screening slides
for relevant tissues occupies 36%-57% of productive time
[19]. With an increasing number of histopathology cases
and chronic shortage of pathologists in coming years, developing a CAD tool could decrease time to diagnosis and
improve diagnostic accuracy for patients [46].
Semantic segmentation methods have been developed
for histopathological images, but are trained on only specific tissues from specific organs for diagnosing specific diseases. If these methods were used as diagnostic aids, they
would need to be retrained for every new diagnostic case. In
this paper, we propose a semantic segmentation algorithm
that is trained on annotated patch-level of histological tissue type (HTT) drawn from healthy tissues from different
organs and predicts pixel-level labels (see Figure 1 for visu4321
10662

