Towards Interpretable Object Detection by Unfolding Latent Structures
Tianfu Wu† and Xi Song ∗
†
Department of ECE and the Visual Narrative Initiative, NC State University
tianfu wu@ncsu.edu, xsong.lhi@gmail.com

Figure 1. Why are those bound boxes detected as cats? Illustration of qualitatively interpreting model interpretability via unfolding latent
structures end-to-end without any supervision used in training. Latent structures are represented by parse trees (shown to the right of each
image) computed on-the-fly and object layouts/configurations (superposed on the bounding boxes) are collapsed from the parse trees. The
left four images are from PASCAL VOC2007 test dataset and the right four ones from the COCO val2017 dataset. For clarity, only one
detected object instance is shown. See text for details. Best viewed in color and magnification.

Abstract
This paper first proposes a method of formulating model
interpretability in visual understanding tasks based on the
idea of unfolding latent structures. It then presents a case
study in object detection using popular two-stage regionbased convolutional network (i.e., R-CNN) detection systems [19, 50, 7, 23]. The proposed method focuses on
weakly-supervised extractive rationale generation, that is
learning to unfold latent discriminative part configurations
of object instances automatically and simultaneously in detection without using any supervision for part configurations. It utilizes a top-down hierarchical and compositional
grammar model embedded in a directed acyclic AND-OR
Graph (AOG) to explore and unfold the space of latent
part configurations of regions of interest (RoIs). It presents
an AOGParsing operator that seamlessly integrates with
the RoIPooling [19]/RoIAlign [23] operator widely used in
∗ X. Song is an independent researcher.

R-CNN and is trained end-to-end. In object detection, a
bounding box is interpreted by the best parse tree derived
from the AOG on-the-fly, which is treated as the qualitatively extractive rationale generated for interpreting detection. In experiments, Faster R-CNN [50] is used to test
the proposed method on the PASCAL VOC 2007 [13] and
the COCO 2017 [40] object detection datasets. The experimental results show that the proposed method can compute promising latent structures without hurting the performance. The code and pretrained models are available at
https://github.com/iVMCL/iRCNN .

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation and Objective
Recently, deep neural networks [37, 32] have improved
prediction accuracy significantly in many vision tasks, and
even outperform humans in image classification tasks [24,
58]. In the literature of object detection, there has been a
critical shift from more explicit representation and mod16033

