Free-form Video Inpainting with 3D Gated Convolution and Temporal
PatchGAN
Ya-Liang Chang∗

Zhe Yu Liu∗

Kuan-Ying Lee

Winston Hsu

National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
{yaliangchang, zhe2325138}@cmlab.csie.ntu.edu.tw, {r03922165, whsu}@ntu.edu.tw

Input Video

Our Result

Ground Truth

Input Video

Our Result

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Our model takes incomplete videsos with free-form masks (e.g. random text on the left and curves on the right) as inputs, and
generates the completed videos as outputs. We propose using 3D gated convolutions to deal with the uncertainty of free-form masks and a
combination of designed loss functions to enhance temporal consistency. Best viewed in videos.

Abstract
Free-form video inpainting is a very challenging task
that could be widely used for video editing such as text removal (see Fig. 1). Existing patch-based methods could
not handle non-repetitive structures such as faces, while
directly applying image-based inpainting models to videos
will result in temporal inconsistency (see videos). In this
paper, we introduce a deep learning based free-form video
inpainting model, with proposed 3D gated convolutions to
tackle the uncertainty of free-form masks and a novel Temporal PatchGAN loss to enhance temporal consistency. In
addition, we collect videos and design a free-form mask
generation algorithm to build the free-form video inpainting (FVI) dataset for training and evaluation of video inpainting models. We demonstrate the benefits of these components and experiments on both the FaceForensics and our
∗ The two authors contributed equally to this paper.

FVI dataset suggest that our method is superior to existing
ones. Related source code, full-resolution result videos and
the FVI dataset could be found on Github.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting, to recover missing parts in a video,
is a very challenging task that remains unsolved. It is a
very practical and crucial problem and solving this problem
could be beneficial for movie post-production and general
video editing. Among them, free-from video inpainting is
the most difficult and unconstrained problem because the
missing area could be of arbitrary shape (see Fig. 1). In this
paper, we propose a novel model to tackle the free-form
video inpainting task, and both the quantitative and qualitative evaluations show our model can generate state-of-theart results with high video quality.
There are many methods proposed for the video inpainting problem, such as patch-based algorithms [12, 14, 23,

9066

