Deep Blind Hyperspectral Image Fusion
Wu Wang1 , Weihong Zeng1 , Yue Huang1 , Xinghao Ding1∗, John Paisley2
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
wangwu@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zengwh@stu.xmu.edu.cn
huangyue05@gmail.com, dxh@xmu.edu.cn, jpaisley@columbia.edu

Abstract
Hyperspectral image fusion (HIF) reconstructs high spatial resolution hyperspectral images from low spatial resolution hyperspectral images and high spatial resolution
multispectral images. Previous works usually assume that
the linear mapping between the point spread functions of
the hyperspectral camera and the spectral response functions of the conventional camera is known. This is unrealistic in many scenarios. We propose a method for blind
HIF problem based on deep learning, where the estimation
of the observation model and fusion process are optimized
iteratively and alternatingly during the super-resolution reconstruction. In addition, the proposed framework enforces
simultaneous spatial and spectral accuracy. Using three
public datasets, the experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed algorithm outperforms existing blind and nonblind methods.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral image (HSI) analysis has a wide range of
applications for object classification and recognition [13, 9,
33, 17], segmentation [22], tracking [23, 24] and environmental monitoring [18] in both computer vision and remote
sensing. While HSI facilitates these tasks through information across a large number of spectra, these many additional
dimensions of information means that the potential spatial
resolution of HSI systems is severely limited compared with
RGB cameras. HIF addresses this challenge by using the
jointly measured high resolution multispectral image (HRMSI)—often simply RGB—to improve the low resolution
HSI (LR-HSI) by approximating its high resolution version
(HR-HSI).
Generally, most state-of-the art methods formulate the
∗ Corresponding author

(a) gt

(b) HySure

(c) Ours

Figure 1: The 31st band of a reconstructed high resolution hyperspectral image (HR-HSI) with unknown spectral
response function. (a) ground-truth HR-HSI, (b) result of
HySure [20], (c) our result.
observation model through the linear functions [28, 7, 20]
Y = XBS,

(1)

Z = RX,

(2)

where X is the HR-HSI, Y is the LR-HSI and Z is the HRMSI. The linear operators B and S perform the appropriate
transformations to map X to the measured values; B represents a convolution between the point spread function of the
sensor and the HR-HSI bands, S is a downsampling operation, and R is the spectral response function of the multispectral imaging sensor. The spectral response functions
and point spread functions are often assumed to be at least
partly known. A common way to learn X is through optimizing an objective function of the form
2

2

min kY − XBSkF + λ1 kZ − RXkF + λ2 ϕ(X),
X

(3)

where the first and second terms enforce agreement with
the data and the third term is a regularization [12, 15, 6, 7].
However, this assumed relationship between X,Y,Z is not
always true, and because the information available about the
sensor is incomplete, it is unknowable [26]. In other words,
this non-blind fusion is often only an approximation, and
14150

