Transferable Contrastive Network for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Huajie Jiang1,2,3,4 , Ruiping Wang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, CAS, Shanghai, 200050, China
4
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 200031, China
huajie.jiang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is a challenging problem that
aims to recognize the target categories without seen data,
where semantic information is leveraged to transfer knowledge from some source classes. Although ZSL has made
great progress in recent years, most existing approaches are
easy to overfit the sources classes in generalized zero-shot
learning (GZSL) task, which indicates that they learn little
knowledge about target classes. To tackle such problem, we
propose a novel Transferable Contrastive Network (TCN)
that explicitly transfers knowledge from the source classes
to the target classes. It automatically contrasts one image
with different classes to judge whether they are consistent or
not. By exploiting the class similarities to make knowledge
transfer from source images to similar target classes, our
approach is more robust to recognize the target images. Experiments on five benchmark datasets show the superiority
of our approach for GZSL.

1. Introduction
Object recognition is one of the basic issues in computer vision. It has made great progress in recent years
with the rapid development of deep learning approaches
[18, 33, 30, 13], where large numbers of labeled images are
required, such as ImageNet [28]. However, collecting and
annotating large numbers of images are difficult, especially
for fine-grained categories in specific domains. Moreover,
such supervised learning approaches can only recognize a
fixed number of categories, which is not flexible. In contrast, humans can learn from only a few samples or even
recognize unseen objects. Therefore, learning visual classifiers with no need of human annotation is becoming a hot
topic in recent years.
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to learn classifiers for the

Class Semantic
Source Classes

Source
Image

Dog

0

Not Match

Horse

The horse is one of two extant
subspecies of Equus ferus. It is an oddtoed ungulate mammal … …

1

Match

Bird

Birds, also known as Aves, are
characterised by feathers, toothless
beaked jaws … …

0

Not Match

0.8

Similar

0.2

Dissimilar

D

Zebras are several species of African
(horse family) united by their
Zebra equids
distinctive black and white striped
coats… …

Target Classes

Contrastive Value

The domestic dog is a member of the
genus Canis (canines), which forms part
of the wolf-like canids ... ...

Lion

The lion is a species in the family Felidae;
it is a muscular, deep-chested cat with a
short, rounded head … …

T

Figure 1. Illustration diagram that shows the motivations of transferable contrastive learning. The training images should not only match their class semantics (discriminative property) but also
have relatively high contrastive values with similar target classes
(transfer property). ‘D’ represents discriminative learning and ‘T’
represents transfer learning.

target categories where no labeled images are accessible. It
is accomplished by transferring knowledge from the source
categories with the help of semantic information. Semantic information can build up the relations among different
classes thus to enable knowledge transfer from source classes to target classes. Currently the most widely used semantic information includes attributes [19, 9] and word vectors
[10, 2]. Traditional ZSL approaches usually learn universal
visual-semantic transformations among the source classes
and then apply them to the target classes. In this way, the
visual samples and class semantics can be projected into a
common space, where zero-shot recognition is conducted
by the nearest neighbor approach.
Although ZSL has made great progress in recent years,
the strong assumption that the test images only come from
the target classes is not realistic for practical applications.
Therefore, generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) [6, 39]
draws much attention recently, where test samples may
come from either source or target classes. However, most

9765

