Fast Computation of Content-Sensitive Superpixels and Supervoxels using
q-distances
Zipeng Ye1∗, Ran Yi1∗ , Minjing Yu2† , Yong-Jin Liu1†, Ying He3
1
Tsinghua University 2 Tianjin University 3 Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Many computer vision tasks benefit from superpixels/supervoxels, which can effectively reduce the complexity
of input images and videos. To compute content-sensitive
superpixels/supervoxels, the recent approaches represent
the input image or video as a low-dimensional manifold and
compute geodesic centroidal Voronoi tessellation (GCVT)
on them. Although they can produce high-quality results,
these methods are slow due to frequent query of geodesic
distances which are computationally expensive. In this
paper, we propose a novel approach that not only computes superpixels with quality better than the state-of-theart, but also runs 6-8 times faster on benchmark dataset.
Our method is based on a fast queue-based graph distance
(called q-distance) and works for both images and videos. It
has an optimal approximation ratio O(1) and a linear time
complexity O(N ) for N -pixel images or N -voxel videos. A
thorough evaluation of 31 superpixel methods on five image
datasets and 8 supervoxel methods on four video datasets
shows that our method provides an all-in-one solution and
consistently performs well under a variety of metrics. We
also demonstrate our method on the applications of optimal
image and video closure, and foreground propagation.

1. Introduction
Superpixels group similar pixels into atomic regions
that can effectively capture low-level features in an image. Similarly, supervoxels are perceptually meaningful atomic regions in a video.
Replacing the high
amount of pixels/voxels by a moderate number of superpixels/supervoxels (collectively referred to as superatoms
in this paper) can greatly reduce the complexities of many
computer vision algorithms, e.g., saliency detection [19],
foreground segmentation [22], 3D reconstruction [4] and
scene understanding [18], etc.
As a special over-segmentation in image/video, super∗ Joint ﬁrst authors
† Corresponding authors

atoms — to be perceptually meaningful — should reﬂect
“regularities of nature” [35]. Some commonly used criteria are: (1) compactness: the shape of superatoms is regular and thus the neighboring relations among superatoms
are also regular; (2) connectivity: each superatom is simply connected1 ; (3) high performance: superatoms well preserve image/video boundaries and their computation is fast,
memory efﬁcient and scalable; (4) parsimony: the high performance is achieved with as few superatoms as possible;
and (5) ease of use: users simply specify the number of superatoms and do not need to tune any other parameters.

1.1. Related work
A large body of superatom generation methods has
been proposed and they can be broadly classiﬁed into two
classes: (1) the traditional approaches with artiﬁcially designed features and (2) the deep learning based approaches.
Diverse strategies have been applied in the ﬁrst classes,
e.g., graph partitioning [14], clustering [1], contour evolution [23], lattice-based energy optimization [11], and other
hierarchical, generative and statistic methods [39, 45]. The
second class was typiﬁed by two recent works [40, 21].
However, none of the existing methods satisfy all the abovementioned criteria.
Some recent methods [6, 25, 26, 41, 46] focus on the parsimony principle and compute content-sensitive superatoms
(CSS), which are small in content-dense regions (where the
variation of intensity or color or motion is high) and large
in content-sparse regions, and thus shed some light on offering a good balance among all other criteria (see Figures
1 and 2). Among the existing CSS methods, two recent
approaches [26, 46] (summarized in Section 2) model the
input images and videos as low-dimensional manifolds embedded in high-dimensional feature space, and then generate CSS by computing a uniform tessellation — e.g.,
geodesic centroidal Voronoi tessellation (GCVT) — on
them. Although GCVT can produce high-quality CSS,
computing it is time consuming, since geodesic distances
are computationally expensive to obtain.
1 A region is simply connected if any simple closed curve/surface in it
can be continuously shrunk into a point without leaving the region.

3770

