Adaptative Inference Cost With Convolutional Neural Mixture Models
Adria Ruiz
Jakob Verbeek
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract

Convolutional Neural Mixture Model

Pruned Convolutional Neural Mixture Model

p(N3) = 0.28

Despite the outstanding performance of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) for many vision tasks, the required
computational cost during inference is problematic when
resources are limited. In this context, we propose Convolutional Neural Mixture Models (CNMMs), a probabilistic model embedding a large number of CNNs that can be
jointly trained and evaluated in an efficient manner. Within
the proposed framework, we present different mechanisms
to prune subsets of CNNs from the mixture, allowing to easily adapt the computational cost required for inference. Image classification and semantic segmentation experiments
show that our method achieve excellent accuracy-compute
trade-offs. Moreover, unlike most of previous approaches,
a single CNMM provides a large range of operating points
along this trade-off, without any re-training.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) form the basis
of many state-of-the-art computer vision models. Despite
their outstanding performance, the computational cost of inference in these CNN-based models is typically very high.
This holds back applications on mobile platforms, such as
autonomous vehicles, drones, or phones, where computational resources are limited, concurrent data-streams need
to be processed, and low-latency prediction is critical.
To accelerate CNNs we can reduce their complexity before training, e.g. by decreasing the number of filters or
network layers. This solution, however, may lead to suboptimal results given that over-parametrization plays a critical role in the optimization of deep networks [7, 9]. Fortunately, other studies have found a complementary phenomena: given a trained CNN, a large number of its filters are
redundant and do not have a significant impact on the final prediction [26]. Motivated by these two findings, much
research has focused on accelerating CNNs using network
pruning [11, 19, 22, 35, 38, 41, 47, 56]. Pruning can be
applied at multiple levels, e.g. by removing independent filters [35, 41], groups of them [11, 19], or entire layers [56].

p(N1) = 0.21
y

p(N2) = 0.05

y
y

y

y

y

y

y

p(N5) = 0.3
y

p(N4) = 0.13

y

y

y

p(N6) = 0.03

Figure 1. A Convolutional Neural Mixture Model embeds a large
number of CNNs. Weight sharing enables efficient joint training of
all networks and computation of the mixture output. The learned
mixing weights can be used to remove networks from the mixture,
and thus reduce the computational cost of inference.

Despite the encouraging results of these methods, their ability to provide a wide range of operating points along the
trade-off between accuracy and computation is limited. The
reason is that these approaches typically require to train a
separate model for each specific pruning level.
In this paper, we propose Convolutional Neural Mixture Models (CNMMs), which provide a novel perspective on network pruning. A CNMM define a distribution
over a large number of CNNs. The mixture is naturally
pruned by removing networks with low probabilities, see
Figure 1. Despite the appealing simplicity of this approach,
it presents several challenges. First, learning a large ensemble of CNNs may require a prohibitive amount of computation. Second, even if many networks in the mixture
are pruned, their independent evaluation during inference
is likely to be less efficient than computing the output of a
single large model. In order to ensure tractability, we design a parameter-sharing scheme between different CNNs.
This enables us to (i) jointly train all the networks, and (ii)
efficiently compute an approximation of the mixture output
without independently evaluating all the networks.
Image classification and semantic segmentation experiments show that CNMMs achieve an excellent trade-off
between prediction accuracy and computational cost. Unlike most previous network pruning approaches, a single
CNMM model achieves a wide range of operating points
along this trade-off without any re-training.

1872

