On Boosting Single-Frame 3D Human Pose Estimation via Monocular Videos

∗

Zhi Li1 , ∗ Xuan Wang2 , Fei Wang2 , and Peilin Jiang1

1

2

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
{maleficentlee, xwang.cv}@gmail.com, {wfx, pljiang}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The premise of training an accurate 3D human pose estimation network is the possession of huge amount of richly
annotated training data. Nonetheless, manually obtaining
rich and accurate annotations is, even not impossible, tedious and slow. In this paper, we propose to exploit monocular videos to complement the training dataset for the singleimage 3D human pose estimation tasks. At the beginning, a
baseline model is trained with a small set of annotations. By
fixing some reliable estimations produced by the resulting
model, our method automatically collects the annotations
across the entire video as solving the 3D trajectory completion problem. Then, the baseline model is further trained
with the collected annotations to learn the new poses. We
evaluate our method on the broadly-adopted Human3.6M
and MPI-INF-3DHP datasets. As illustrated in experiments, given only a small set of annotations, our method
successfully makes the model to learn new poses from unlabelled monocular videos, promoting the accuracies of the
baseline model by about 10%. By contrast with previous
approaches, our method does not rely on either multi-view
imagery or any explicit 2D keypoint annotations.

Figure 1. Two-stage 3D human pose estimation framework.
Unannotated image frames from video sequences are fed into the
initial 3D human pose estimation network which is trained by only
a few annotated data to get initial predictions. Next, a 3D trajectory optimisation operation utilising the low rank property and
temporal smoothness of video sequences is applied to these predictions to generate pseudo-annotations. These optimised predictions
are then applied to the initial network as pseudo supervision, plus
a geometry loss, to boost the performance of the network.

1. Introduction
human pose is quite time-consuming and error-prone.
Estimating the accurate 3D human pose from single image is a key foundation to massive applications in computer vision and graphics, which attracts lots of attentions
from both societies. Recently, great progress in 3D human pose estimation have been made by leveraging the deep
learning techniques. Despite the success, most of these approaches heavily rely on the availability of extensive training datasets. Nevertheless, using motion capture systems to
capture the 3D annotations is usually constrained in studio
environments. Furthermore, the manual annotation of 3D
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

In the past few years, several approaches that employ unlabelled multi-view imagery or 2D-annotated images have
been proposed to solve the problem of training data availability. The manual 2D keypoint annotation could be accurate enough, but is still tedious. In addition, employing the multi-view images requires specific multi-camera
equipment. Nevertheless, a question still remains: How to
exploit merely the unlabelled monocular videos to complement the training datasets for single-image 3D human pose
estimation tasks? To this end, we propose an automatic
method that collects accurate annotations of human motions

2192

