A Deep Cybersickness Predictor Based on Brain Signal Analysis
for Virtual Reality Contents
Jinwoo Kim1 , Woojae Kim1 , Heeseok Oh2 , Seongmin Lee1 , and Sanghoon Lee1
1

2

Yonsei University
Electronics & Telecommunications Research Institute

Abstract
What if we could interpret the cognitive state of a user
while experiencing a virtual reality (VR) and estimate the
cognitive state from a visual stimulus? In this paper, we
address the above question by developing an electroencephalography (EEG) driven VR cybersickness prediction
model. The EEG data has been widely utilized to learn the
cognitive representation of brain activity. In the first stage,
to fully exploit the advantages of the EEG data, it is transformed into the multi-channel spectrogram which enables
to account for the correlation of spectral and temporal coefficient. Then, a convolutional neural network (CNN) is
applied to encode the cognitive representation of the EEG
spectrogram. In the second stage, we train a cybersickness
prediction model on the VR video sequence by designing a
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). Here, the encoded cognitive representation is transferred to the model to train the
visual and cognitive features for cybersickness prediction.
Through the proposed framework, it is possible to predict
the cybersickness level that reflects brain activity automatically. We use 8-channels EEG data to record brain activity while more than 200 subjects experience 44 different
VR contents. After rigorous training, we demonstrate that
the proposed framework reliably estimates cognitive states
without the EEG data. Furthermore, it achieves state-ofthe-art performance comparing to existing VR cybersickness prediction models.

1. Introduction
Although Virtual Reality (VR) devices are effectively
integrated into a variety of applications, such as movies,
games and medical cares, the cybersickness that occurs
while experiencing VR is considered as an obstacle to the
VR industries. Unlike the stereoscopic 3D display, the
VR environment is accompanied by complicated cognitive-

physiological factors in the brain. For this reason, it is
difficult to determine the exact cause of the cybersickness.
In particular, the level of cybersickness distributes differently according to individual differences (e.g., prior experience, susceptibility, gender, age, etc.). In this respects, the
biosignals are treated as one of the most objective ways to
reflect individual differences (e.g., galvanic skin response
(GSR), photoplethysmogram (PPG), electroencephalography (EEG), skin temperature (SKT), etc.). However, there
is no solid publication to predict the cybersickness using a
model while reflecting the individual difference even if researchers recognize that this is the most important factor for
the prediction. Thereby, the measurement using the sensors
is regarded as a reliable way for the cybersickness prediction.
Currently, there are some major works to predict this
visual discomfort over 3D applications [22, 23]. The performance has been thresholded due to the failure of including the individual difference into their metrics which
are formulated or modeled to find common factors in general. Recently, with the breakthrough evolution of convolutional neural network (CNN) [9, 10, 18], there have been
significant applications in the image/video content analysis
field [15,16]. In this paper, we make a pioneer work to generalize individual differences of VR cybersickness by utilizing the VR video sequences only. However, the general VR
video sequences are recorded according to the user’s head
motion in the limited virtual space, in this reason, the VR
videos have similar characteristics over the spatial and temporal axes. Therefore, the CNN-based model, especially
visual feature-driven manner strongly depends on the extracted features from the viewed VR video sequence without any cue of individual differences.
To overcome this limitation, we devise a novel deep
learning framework to identifies the human cognitive feature space for cybersickness prediction by analyzing brain
activity. Furthermore, the framework interprets individual
differences by relying on VR contents rather not on brain

10580

