Beyond Cartesian Representations for Local Descriptors
Patrick Ebel1 , Anastasiia Mishchuk1 , Kwang Moo Yi2 , Pascal Fua1 , Eduard Trulls3
1
2

Computer Vision Lab, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

Visual Computing Group, University of Victoria

3

Google Switzerland

{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch, kyi@uvic.ca, trulls@google.com

Abstract
The dominant approach for learning local patch descriptors relies on small image regions whose scale must be properly estimated a priori by a keypoint detector. In other
words, if two patches are not in correspondence, their descriptors will not match. A strategy often used to alleviate
this problem is to “pool” the pixel-wise features over logpolar regions, rather than regularly spaced ones.
By contrast, we propose to extract the “support region” directly with a log-polar sampling scheme. We show
that this provides us with a better representation by simultaneously oversampling the immediate neighbourhood
of the point and undersampling regions far away from
it. We demonstrate that this representation is particularly
amenable to learning descriptors with deep networks. Our
models can match descriptors across a much wider range
of scales than was possible before, and also leverage much
larger support regions without suffering from occlusions.
We report state-of-the-art results on three different datasets.

1. Introduction
Keypoint matching has played a pivotal role in computer
vision for well over a decade. This is clearly demonstrated
by the fact that SIFT [23] remains the most cited paper in
computer vision history. While many areas of computer vision are currently dominated by dense deep networks, that
is, methods that take entire images as input, some problems
remain best approached using sparse features. For example, despite recent attempts at tackling 6DOF pose estimation using dense networks, the top-performing models for
wide-baseline stereo and large-scale Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) still rely on sparse features [49, 51, 33].
As a result, the quest for ever-improving local feature descriptors goes on [23, 5, 46, 42, 39, 12, 50, 38, 41, 28, 45,
This research was partially funded by Google’s Visual Positioning
System, the Swiss National Science Foundation, the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada, and by Compute Canada.

19, 25, 15, 24, 10, 31]. These methods all seek to achieve
invariance to small changes in location, orientation, scale,
perspective, and illumination, along with imaging artefacts
and partial occlusions. Most descriptors, however, whether
learned or hand-crafted, operate on SIFT-like keypoints and
thus rely on simple heuristics to estimate the scale. If the
scales for two keypoints do not correspond, neither will the
support regions used to extract their descriptors, which is
widely accepted as an unrecoverable situation. This is damaging because scale detection is often unreliable.
In this paper we demonstrate that this does not need to
be the case. To this end, we go beyond the current paradigm
for local descriptors, which we call the cartesian approach.
This paradigm confines local descriptors to small, regularly
sampled regions and relies on accurate scale estimates. By
contrast, we posit that extracting the support region with a
log-polar sampling scheme allows us to generate a better
local representation by oversampling the immediate neighborhood of the point. We show that this approach is conducive to learning scale-invariant descriptors with off-theshelf deep networks, enabling us to match keypoints across
mismatched scales; see Fig. 4. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this representation is far less sensitive to occlusions or background motion than its cartesian counterpart,
which allows us to exploit much larger image regions than
was possible before to further boost performance.
Note that while log-polar representations have been used
extensively by local features, this has typically involved logpolar aggregation of local statistics that are still computed
on the cartesian image grid. By contrast, we propose to
warp the patch using a log-polar sampling scheme and learn
an optimal descriptor on this data. Fig. 1 illustrates the difference between these two approaches.
In short, we propose a new approach to represent local
patches and show how to leverage it to achieve scale invariance. In the remainder of the paper, we first briefly review
how scale has been handled in the vast body of literature
pertaining to matching descriptors, whether learned or designed. We then describe our method and show that it outperforms the state of the art on several challenging datasets.
1253

