LPD-Net: 3D Point Cloud Learning for Large-Scale Place Recognition and
Environment Analysis
Zhe Liu1 , Shunbo Zhou1 , Chuanzhe Suo1 , Peng Yin3 , Wen Chen1 , Hesheng Wang2∗,
Haoang Li1 , Yun-Hui Liu1
1

2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Point cloud based place recognition is still an open issue due to the difficulty in extracting local features from the
raw 3D point cloud and generating the global descriptor,
and it’s even harder in the large-scale dynamic environments. In this paper, we develop a novel deep neural network, named LPD-Net (Large-scale Place Description Network), which can extract discriminative and generalizable
global descriptors from the raw 3D point cloud. Two modules, the adaptive local feature extraction module and the
graph-based neighborhood aggregation module, are proposed, which contribute to extract the local structures and
reveal the spatial distribution of local features in the largescale point cloud, with an end-to-end manner. We implement the proposed global descriptor in solving point cloud
based retrieval tasks to achieve the large-scale place recognition. Comparison results show that our LPD-Net is much
better than PointNetVLAD and reaches the state-of-the-art.
We also compare our LPD-Net with the vision-based solutions to show the robustness of our approach to different
weather and light conditions.

1. Introduction
Large-scale place recognition is of great importance
in robotic applications, such as helping self-driving vehicles to obtain loop-closure candidates, achieve accurate
localization and build drift-free globally consistent maps. Vision-based place recognition has been investigated for
a long time and lots of successful solutions were presented. Thanks to the feasibility of extracting visual feature
descriptors from a query image of a local scene, visionbased approaches have achieved good retrieval performance
for place recognitions with respect to the reference map
∗ Corresponding author: H. Wang. The first three authors contributed
equally. Contacts: zheliu@cuhk.edu.hk, wanghesheng@sjtu.edu.cn, yhliu@mae.cuhk.edu.hk.

Figure 1. Place recognition in large-scale environments. We use
global feature descriptors generated from the raw 3D point cloud
data to accomplish place recognition tasks. The lower side shows
two examples with different weather and light conditions.

[19, 9]. However, vision-based solutions are not robust to
season, illumination and viewpoint variations, and also suffer from performance degradations in the place recognition
task with bad weather conditions. Taking into account the
above limitations of the vision-based approach, 3D point
cloud-based approach provides an alternative option, which
is much more robust to season and illumination variations
[22]. By directly using the 3D positions of each point as the
network input, PointNet [11] provides a simple and efficient
point cloud feature learning framework, but fails to capture
fine-grained patterns of the point cloud due to the ignored
point local structure information. Inspired by PointNet, different networks have been proposed [13, 23, 17, 5] and

2831

