Data-Free Learning of Student Networks
Hanting Chen1∗, Yunhe Wang2 , Chang Xu3†, Zhaohui Yang1∗ , Chuanjian Liu2 , Boxin Shi4,5 ,
Chunjing Xu2 , Chao Xu1 , Qi Tian2
1

2

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), CMIC, School of EECS, Peking University, China
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Peking University, 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{chenhanting, zhaohuiyang, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
{yunhe.wang, liuchuanjian, xuchunjing, tian.qi1}@huawei.com, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning portable neural networks is very essential for
computer vision for the purpose that pre-trained heavy deep
models can be well applied on edge devices such as mobile
phones and micro sensors. Most existing deep neural network compression and speed-up methods are very effective
for training compact deep models, when we can directly access the training dataset. However, training data for the
given deep network are often unavailable due to some practice problems (e.g. privacy, legal issue, and transmission),
and the architecture of the given network are also unknown
except some interfaces. To this end, we propose a novel
framework for training efficient deep neural networks by
exploiting generative adversarial networks (GANs). To be
specific, the pre-trained teacher networks are regarded as a
fixed discriminator and the generator is utilized for derivating training samples which can obtain the maximum response on the discriminator. Then, an efficient network with
smaller model size and computational complexity is trained
using the generated data and the teacher network, simultaneously. Efficient student networks learned using the proposed Data-Free Learning (DAFL) method achieve 92.22%
and 74.47% accuracies using ResNet-18 without any training data on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets, respectively. Meanwhile, our student network obtains an 80.56%
accuracy on the CelebA benchmark.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
successfully used in various computer vision applications
such as image classification [24, 11], object detection [21]
and semantic segmentation [15]. However, launching most
∗ This work was done while visiting Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
† corresponding author

of the widely used CNNs requires heavy computation and
storage, which can only be used on PCs with modern GPU
cards. For example, over 500MB of memory and over
1010 × multiplications are demanded for processing one image using VGGNet [24], which is almost impossible to be
applied on edge devices such as autonomous cars and micro
robots. Although these pre-trained CNNs have a number of
parameters, Han et al. [6] showed that discarding over 85%
of weights in a given neural network would not obviously
damage its performance, which demonstrates that there is a
significant redundancy in these CNNs.
In order to compress and speed-up pre-trained heavy
deep models, various effective approaches have been proposed recently. For example, Gong et al. [5] utilized vector
quantization approach to represent similar weights as cluster centers. Denton et al. [3] exploited low-rank decomposition to process the weight matrices of fully-connected
layers. Chen et al. [1] proposed a hashing based method to
encode parameters in CNNs. Han et al. [6] employed pruning, quantization and Huffman coding to obtain a compact
deep CNN with lower computational complexity. Hinton et
al. [8] proposed the knowledge distillation approach, which
distills the information of the pre-trained teacher network
for learning a portable student network, etc.
Although the above mentioned methods have made
tremendous efforts on benchmark datasets and models, an
important issue has not been widely noticed, i.e. most existing network compression and speed-up algorithms have a
strong assumption that training samples of the original network are available. However, the training dataset is routinely unknown in real-world applications due to privacy
and transmission limitations. For instance, users do not
want to let their photos leaked to others, and some of the
training datasets are too huge to quickly upload to the cloud.
In addition, parameters and architecture of pre-trained networks are also unknown sometimes except the input and
output layers. Therefore, conventional methods cannot be
13514

