Action Assessment by Joint Relation Graphs
Jia-Hui Pan1 , Jibin Gao1 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3,∗
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
panjh7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, gaojb5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
We present a new model to assess the performance of
actions visually from videos by graph-based joint relation
modelling. Previous works mainly focused on the whole
scene including the performer’s body and background, yet
they ignored the detailed joint interactions. This is insufficient for fine-grained and accurate action assessment, because the action quality of each joint is dependent of its
neighbouring joints. Therefore, we propose to learn the detailed joint motion based on the joint relations. We build
trainable Joint Relation Graphs, and analyze joint motion
on them. We propose two novel modules, the Joint Commonality Module and the Joint Difference Module, for joint
motion learning. The Joint Commonality Module models
the general motion for certain body parts, and the Joint Difference Module models the motion differences within body
parts. We evaluate our method on six public Olympic actions for performance assessment. Our method outperforms
previous approaches (+0.0912) and the whole-scene analysis (+0.0623) in the Spearman’s Rank Correlation. We also
demonstrate our model’s ability to interpret the action assessment process.

1. Introduction
Action performance assessment is a task of assessing
how well an action is performed. Action assessment techniques are rather important in some real-world applications.
For example, in medical treatment, action assessment systems can help to monitor and evaluate the patients as they
perform daily tasks. In sports, using automatic assessment
techniques, we can build universal scoring systems for each
Olympic event, helping athletes to improve their performance.
The problem of automatically assessing the performance
of actions using has recently been explored in the computer
∗ Corresponding author

Assessing the Performance of an Action

The Commonality:
Body Part Kinetics

The Difference:
Joint Coordination

Good Performance = Excellent Movement + Good Coordination
for each body part

among joints

Figure 1. Learning joint motion on relation graphs for action
assessment. We learn motion commonalities and differences on
the joint relation graphs. The motion commonalities reflect the
general motion of a body part, while the motion differences indicate the motion coordination. A well-performed action must have
both excellent part-based motion and good coordination among
joints.

vision community. Several works attempted action performance assessment in videos [6, 7, 24, 10, 21, 20]. However,
they analyze the actions in a coarse manner. Many methods [6, 7, 21, 20] simply extract features of the whole scene
to assess the performance of actions. Although some works
[24, 10] have analyzed the motion of each joint in an attempt
to better discover the fine-grained clues for assessment, they
analyze the locations of each joint individually. Differently,
for evaluating the fine-grained performance, we consider
the interactive motion pattern of several locally connected
joints rather than looking at every joint individually. For example, in diving a bending knee is normal when the ankle
and hip are also bending (e.g. at the rolling stage), whereas
it is probably a flaw if both the ankle and hip are straight at a
stretching posture (e.g. at the water-entering stage). Therefore, it is more appropriate to focus on the locally connected
joints instead of a single joint for assessing the fine-grained
performance.

6331

