Incremental Learning Using Conditional Adversarial Networks
Ye Xiang1 Ying Fu1 Pan Ji2 Hua Huang1
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 NEC Labs America
{xiangye,fuying,huahuang}@bit.edu.cn, peterji1990@gmail.com

Abstract
Incremental learning using Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) suffers from catastrophic forgetting. Existing methods mitigate it by either storing old image examples or only
updating a few fully connected layers of DNNs, which, however, requires large memory footprints or hurts the plasticity of models. In this paper, we propose a new incremental learning strategy based on conditional adversarial networks. Our new strategy allows us to use memory-efficient
statistical information to store old knowledge, and fine-tune
both convolutional layers and fully connected layers to consolidate new knowledge. Specifically, we propose a model
consisting of three parts, i.e., a base sub-net, a generator,
and a discriminator. The base sub-net works as a feature extractor which can be pre-trained on large scale datasets and
shared across multiple image recognition tasks. The generator conditioned on labeled embeddings aims to construct
pseudo-examples with the same distribution as the old data.
The discriminator combines real-examples from new data
and pseudo-examples generated from the old data distribution to learn representation for both old and new classes.
Through adversarial training of the discriminator and generator, we accomplish the multiple continuous incremental
learning. Comparison with the state-of-the-arts on public
CIFAR-100 and CUB-200 datasets shows that our method
achieves the best accuracies on both old and new classes
while requiring relatively less memory storage.

1. Introduction
In many classification tasks, we often encounter the
cases where novel categories emerge after model training
is done. In these cases, it’s highly desirable to have a
learning method at hand that can incrementally train the
model on new classes while still maintaining the performance on old classes. One straightforward method is to
fine-tune the model on the new classes after training on
old classes. This method, however, suffers from a problem called catastrophic forgetting [24, 9], i.e., little knowledge of old classes is retained after fine-tuning the original

model on new classes. Another naive method is to retrain
the model on both old and new data. This again becomes
infeasible when quick training is demanded or when the old
data is simply not available any more.
To mitigate the catastrophic forgetting problem of
DNNs, two strategies are often employed: (i) select and
store a subset of old image data to mix with new image
data; (ii) only update the fully connected layers during incremental learning. For (i), the distance to the mean sample
of each class is usually used as the metric for sorting samples, such as in recent methods iCaRL [28] and the Endto-End incremental model [3]. This kind of operation, unfortunately, seriously weakens the performance of trained
model on old classes, since variations within each class are
lost. For (ii), only updating fully connected layers, as did
in a recent work FearNet [17], can indeed prevent drastic change in DNN models during incremental learning and
thus reduce the chance of catastrophic forgetting. However,
it lacks the representation learning of DNN’s convolutional
layers and limits the plasticity of the model, which results
in inferior performance on the new classes.
In view of these deficiencies, we aim at designing a system that stores old data in a more efficient way and allows more parameters to be fine-tuned in incremental class
learning. Specifically, instead of storing a subset of original images, we store the statistical information (i.e. mean
and covariance) of feature embeddings for old classes, and
fine-tune partial convolution layers together with fully connected layers during incremental class learning. To this
end, we propose a conditional adversarial network which
consists of three parts, i.e., a base sub-net, a generator,
and a discriminator. The base sub-net takes images as input and outputs convolutional feature maps, which we call
real-examples. The generator takes as input normalized embeddings sampled from random Gaussian distributions with
saved data statistics and also outputs convolutional feature
maps, which we call pseudo-examples. The real-examples
and pseudo-examples are mixed together to train the discriminator which performs both multi-category classification and true/false discrimination. The discriminator can
in turn participate in adversarial learning for the genera-

6619

