Perceptual Deep Depth Super-Resolution
Oleg Voynov1 , Alexey Artemov1 , Vage Egiazarian1 , Alexander Notchenko1 ,
Gleb Bobrovskikh1,2 , Evgeny Burnaev1 , Denis Zorin3,1
1
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 2 Higher School of Economics,
3
New York University
{oleg.voinov, a.artemov, vage.egiazarian, alexandr.notchenko}@skoltech.ru,
bobrovskihg@gmail.com, e.burnaev@skoltech.ru, dzorin@cs.nyu.edu

adase.group/3ddl/projects/perceptual-depth-sr

Abstract

1. Introduction
RGBD images are increasingly common as sensor technology becomes more widely available and affordable.
They can be used for reconstruction of the 3D shapes of objects and their surface appearance. The better the quality of
the depth component, the more reliable the reconstruction.
Unfortunately, for most methods of depth acquisition the
resolution and quality of the depth component is insufficient
for accurate surface reconstruction. As the resolution of the
RGB component is usually several times higher and there
is a high correlation between structural features of the color
image and the depth map (e.g., object edges) it is natural to
use the color image for depth map super-resolution, i.e. upsampling of the depth map. Convolutional neural networks

Result 2

RMSE 46 mm

RMSE 99 mm

DSSIM 0.965

DSSIM 0.094

Depth

Result 1

Surface

RGBD images, combining high-resolution color and
lower-resolution depth from various types of depth sensors,
are increasingly common. One can significantly improve
the resolution of depth maps by taking advantage of color
information; deep learning methods make combining color
and depth information particularly easy.
However, fusing these two sources of data may lead to a
variety of artifacts. If depth maps are used to reconstruct
3D shapes, e.g., for virtual reality applications, the visual
quality of upsampled images is particularly important.
The main idea of our approach is to measure the quality
of depth map upsampling using renderings of resulting 3D
surfaces. We demonstrate that a simple visual appearancebased loss, when used with either a trained CNN or simply
a deep prior, yields significantly improved 3D shapes, as
measured by a number of existing perceptual metrics. We
compare this approach with a number of existing optimization and learning-based techniques.

Ground truth

Figure 1: Visually inferior super-resolution result in the
middle gets higher score according to direct depth deviation but lower score according to perceptual deviation of the
rendered image of the 3D surface. While the surfaces differ
significantly, the corresponding depth maps do not capture
this difference and look almost identical.

are a natural fit for this problem as they can easily fuse heterogeneous information.
A critical aspect of any upsampling method is the measure of quality it optimizes (i.e., the loss function), whether
the technique is data-driven or not. In this paper we focus
on applications that require reconstruction of 3D geometry
visible to the user, like acquisition of realistic 3D scenes
for virtual or augmented reality and computer graphics. In
these applications the visual appearance of the resulting 3D
shape, i.e., how the surface looks when observed under various lighting conditions, is of particular importance.
Most existing research on depth super-resolution is dominated by simple measures based on pointwise deviation of
depth values. However, direct pointwise difference of the
depth maps do not capture the visual difference between

5653

