Weakly-supervised Action Localization with Background Modeling
Phuc Xuan Nguyen
University of California, Irvine

Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

Charless C. Fowlkes
University of California, Irvine

nguyenpx@ics.uci.edu

deva@cs.cmu.edu

fowlkes@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
We describe a latent approach that learns to detect actions in long sequences given training videos with only
whole-video class labels. Our approach makes use of
two innovations to attention-modeling in weakly-supervised
learning. First, and most notably, our framework uses
an attention model to extract both foreground and background frames whose appearance is explicitly modeled.
Most prior works ignore the background, but we show
that modeling it allows our system to learn a richer notion of actions and their temporal extents. Second, we
combine bottom-up, class-agnostic attention modules with
top-down, class-specific activation maps, using the latter
as form of self-supervision for the former. Doing so allows our model to learn a more accurate model of attention without explicit temporal supervision. These modifications lead to 10% AP @IoU =0.5 improvement over
existing systems on THUMOS14. Our proposed weaklysupervised system outperforms recent state-of-the-arts by
at least 4.3% AP @IoU =0.5. Finally, we demonstrate
that weakly-supervised learning can be used to aggressively scale-up learning to in-the-wild, uncurated Instagram videos. The addition of these videos significantly improves localization performance of our weakly-supervised
model.

1. Introduction
We explore the problem of weakly-supervised action localization, where the task is learning to detect and localize actions in long sequences given videos with only videolevel class labels. Such a formulation of action understanding is attractive because it is well-known that precisely estimating the start and end frames of actions is challenging
even for humans [3]. We build on a body of work that makes
use of attentional processing to infer frames most likely to
belong to an action. We specifically introduce the following
innovations.
Background modeling: Classic pipelines use attentional pooling to focus a model on those frames likely to

Gymnastics

background

background

Fully-supervised
Background
model

Foreground
model

?
Weakly-supervised: “This video contains Gymnastics action.”

Figure 1: With fully-supervised data where exact boundaries of
actions are provided, we can train highly discriminative detection
models that use background regions as negative examples, implicitly modeling background content. In weakly-supervised setting
where only video-level labels are known, current approaches simply train a foreground model to respond strongly at some locations
within the video, but leave the remaining background frames unmodeled. In this paper we show that a model which explicitly accounts for background frames substantially improves on weaklysupervised localization.

contain the action of interest. We show that by modeling
the remaining background frames, one can significantly improve the accuracy of such methods. Interestingly, fullysupervised systems for both objects [22] and actions [4]
tend to build explicit models (or classifiers) for background
patches and background frames, but this type of reasoning is
absent in most weakly-supervised systems. Notable exceptions in the literature include probabilistic latent-variable
models that build generative models of both foreground and
background [16]. We incorporate background modeling
into discriminative network architectures as follows: many
such networks explicitly compute an attention variable, λt ,
that specifies how much frame t should influence the final
video-level representation (by say, weighted pooling across
all frames). Simply put, we construct a pooled video-level
feature that focuses on the background by weighing frames
15502

