Skeleton-Aware 3D Human Shape Reconstruction From Point Clouds
Haiyong Jiang1∗, Jianfei Cai1,2 , Jianmin Zheng1
1 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 2 Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of 3D human shape
reconstruction from point clouds. Considering that human shapes are of high dimensions and with large articulations, we adopt the state-of-the-art parametric human body
model, SMPL, to reduce the dimension of learning space
and generate smooth and valid reconstruction. However,
SMPL parameters, especially pose parameters, are not easy
to learn because of ambiguity and locality of the pose representation. Thus, we propose to incorporate skeleton awareness into the deep learning based regression of SMPL parameters for 3D human shape reconstruction. Our basic
idea is to use the state-of-the-art technique PointNet++ to
extract point features, and then map point features to skeleton joint features and finally to SMPL parameters for the
reconstruction from point clouds. Particularly, we develop
an end-to-end framework, where we propose a graph aggregation module to augment PointNet++ by extracting better point features, an attention module to better map unordered point features into ordered skeleton joint features,
and a skeleton graph module to extract better joint features
for SMPL parameter regression. The entire framework network is first trained in an end-to-end manner on synthesized dataset, and then online fine-tuned on unseen dataset
with unsupervised loss to bridges gaps between training
and testing. The experiments on multiple datasets show that
our method is on par with the state-of-the-art solution.

1. Introduction
3D human reconstruction is of great interest in computer
graphic and computer vision due to its wide applications,
such as personalized human model in VR and AR applications, human body measurements in virtual dressing rooms,
and human modeling in video-based motion capture [48].
Though the reconstruction from images has made great
progress, it is still difficult to efficiently and reliably reconstruct accurate body models due to the ambiguity caused by
3D projection. On the other hand, the increasing popularity
of depth cameras such as Kinect and 3D scanning devices
∗ mail: hyjiang@ntu.edu.sg

makes the capturing of point clouds become easier, which
opens another door for more reliable 3D reconstruction. In
this paper, we focus on the problem of 3D human reconstruction from point clouds.
Reconstructing a high-quality human shape is challenging because of non-rigid human deformations, low-quality
input data, and joint articulations. Emerging deep learning
techniques make it possible to reconstruct human shape in
an end-to-end fashion [42, 31, 16, 13, 20]. Since 3D human
mesh is of high-dimension (e.g. with 6890 vertices in Dyna
dataset [32]), directly learning such a high-dimensional
mesh with articulations is extremely difficult. Previous
works have explored deep neural networks for 3D human
reconstruction, but the results can be either rugged [20],
blurring [42], or even twisted [13]. Fortunately, SMPL [21]
offers a nice compact representation for 3D human shape,
and it has been integrated with deep neural networks for
3D human reconstruction from RGB images in [31, 16].
The basic pipeline is to use deep neural networks to extract
powerful image features, then directly regress SMPL shape
and pose parameters, and finally use the off-the-shelf SMPL
model to generate the reconstructed mesh. However, to our
knowledge, no work has been done to use the SMPL model
in deep learning based 3D human reconstruction from point
clouds.
On a separate track, deep learning based point cloud
analysis has also made great progress. The state-of-theart techniques, PointNet and PointNet++ [34, 35], have
proven their capability in extracting powerful features from
3D point clouds for classification and segmentation tasks.
Thus, for 3D human reconstruction from point clouds, a
natural idea would be combining PointNet++ with SMPL
model, i.e. using PointNet++ to extract features from point
clouds, then directly regressing SMPL parameters from the
extracted point features, and finally using SMPL model to
get the 3D mesh.
However, there is a major issue for such a pipeline. That
is, it is hard to directly regress SMPL parameters from image features according to [31, 16] or point cloud features according to our study. This is because SMPL shape and pose
parameters interact in a highly nonlinear way. By noticing that SMPL parameters are joint-sensitive and the pose

5431

