Self-Training and Adversarial Background Regularization for Unsupervised
Domain Adaptive One-Stage Object Detection
Seunghyeon Kim
KAIST

Jaehoon Choi
KAIST

Taekyung Kim
KAIST

Changick Kim
KAIST

{seunghyeonkim, whdns44, tkkim93, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep learning-based object detectors have shown remarkable improvements. However, supervised learningbased methods perform poorly when the train data and the
test data have different distributions. To address the issue, domain adaptation transfers knowledge from the labelsufficient domain (source domain) to the label-scarce domain (target domain). Self-training is one of the powerful ways to achieve domain adaptation since it helps classwise domain adaptation. Unfortunately, a naive approach
that utilizes pseudo-labels as ground-truth degenerates the
performance due to incorrect pseudo-labels. In this paper, we introduce a weak self-training (WST) method and
adversarial background score regularization (BSR) for domain adaptive one-stage object detection. WST diminishes
the adverse effects of inaccurate pseudo-labels to stabilize
the learning procedure. BSR helps the network extract discriminative features for target backgrounds to reduce the
domain shift. Two components are complementary to each
other as BSR enhances discrimination between foregrounds
and backgrounds, whereas WST strengthen class-wise discrimination. Experimental results show that our approach
effectively improves the performance of the one-stage object
detection in unsupervised domain adaptation setting.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental and core problem in
computer vision. Recent studies [26, 21, 25] have achieved
remarkable improvements with the advances of deep neural networks and large-scale benchmarks [7, 19, 8]. Deep
learning-based object detectors can be categorized as twostage detectors or one-stage detectors. Two-stage detectors
first extract object regions and then refine them through
classification and regression [26, 6]. On the other hand,
one-stage object detectors [25, 21, 35, 20, 39] directly estimate the coordinates and classes of objects without the
Region of Interest (RoI) pooling procedure.

Figure 1. Illustration of unsupervised domain adaptive one-stage
object detection. We train an object detector with labeled source
images and unlabeled target images. Our method improves the
performance of the network for target inputs.

One limitation of these supervised learning-based methods is the assumption that test data have the same distribution as train data. However, domain shift frequently occurs
in many practical applications. For example, variances of
object appearance, viewpoints, backgrounds, illumination,
and weather condition can degenerate the performance of
the network. One possible solution is collecting labeled
data for a new domain, but it is usually expensive and timeconsuming. To address this issue, domain adaptation transfers knowledge from the train data domain (source domain)
to the test data domain (target domain). Especially, unsupervised domain adaptation assumes there are no labels available in the target domain. The goal of domain adaptation is
to train the network that performs well on the target domain
dataset.
Unfortunately, domain adaptive object detection has received less attention in contrast to classification [22, 10, 33,

6092

