Escaping Plato’s Cave: 3D Shape From Adversarial Rendering
Philipp Henzler

Niloy J. Mitra

Tobias Ritschel

p.henzler@cs.ucl.ac.uk

n.mitra@cs.ucl.ac.uk

t.ritschel@ucl.ac.uk

University College London

Abstract
We introduce P LATONIC GAN to discover the 3D structure of an object class from an unstructured collection of
2D images, i. e., where no relation between photos is known,
except that they are showing instances of the same category.
The key idea is to train a deep neural network to generate 3D
shapes which, when rendered to images, are indistinguishable from ground truth images (for a discriminator) under
various camera poses. Discriminating 2D images instead of
3D shapes allows tapping into unstructured 2D photo collections instead of relying on curated (e. g., aligned, annotated,
etc.) 3D data sets.
To establish constraints between 2D image observation
and their 3D interpretation, we suggest a family of rendering
layers that are effectively differentiable. This family includes
visual hull, absorption-only (akin to x-ray), and emissionabsorption. We can successfully reconstruct 3D shapes from
unstructured 2D images and extensively evaluate P LATON IC GAN on a range of synthetic and real data sets achieving
consistent improvements over baseline methods. We further
show that P LATONIC GAN can be combined with 3D supervision to improve on and in some cases even surpass the
quality of 3D-supervised methods.

by Plato’s Allegory of the Cave [34]: How can we hope to
understand higher dimensions from only ever seeing projections? If multiple views (maybe only two [40, 13]) of the
same object are available, multi-view analysis without 3D
supervision has been successful. Regrettably, most photo
collections do not come in this form but are now and will
remain unstructured: they show random instances under random pose, uncalibrated lighting in unknown relations, and
multiple views of the same objects are not available.
Our first main contribution (Sec. 3) is to use adversarial
training of a 3D generator with a discriminator that operates exclusively on widely available unstructured collections
of 2D images, which we call platonic discriminator. Here,
during training, the generator produces a 3D shape that is
projected (rendered) to 2D and presented to the 2D Platonic
discriminator. Making a connection between the 3D generator and the 2D discriminator, our second key contribution, is
enabled by a family of rendering layers that can account for
occlusion and color (Sec. 4). These layers do not need any
learnable parameters and allow for backpropagation [26].
From these two key blocks we construct a system that learns

1. Introduction
A key limitation to current generative models [37, 36, 12,
24, 32, 31] is the availability of suitable training data (e. g.,
3D volumes, feature point annotations, template meshes, deformation prior, structured image sets, etc.) for supervision.
While methods exist to learn the 3D structure of classes of
objects, they typically require 3D data as input. Regrettably,
such 3D data is difficult to acquire, in particular for the “long
tail” of exotic classes: ShapeNet might have chair, but it
does not have chanterelle.
Addressing this problem, we suggest a method to learn
3D structure from 2D images only (Fig. 1). Reasoning about
the 3D structure from 2D observations without assuming
anything about their relation is challenging as illustrated

Figure 1. P LATONIC GANs allow converting an unstructured
collection of 2D images of a rare class (subset shown on top) into a
generative 3D model (random samples below).

19984

