Unpaired Image Captioning via Scene Graph Alignments
Jiuxiang Gu1 , Shafiq Joty1,4 , Jianfei Cai1,2 , Handong Zhao3 , Xu Yang1 , Gang Wang5
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Monash University, Australia
3
Adobe Research, USA 4 Salesforce Research Asia, Singapore 5 Alibaba Group, China
{jgu004, srjoty, asjfcai, s170018}@ntu.edu.sg, hazhao@adobe.com, gangwang6@gmail.com

Abstract
Most of current image captioning models heavily rely
on paired image-caption datasets. However, getting large
scale image-caption paired data is labor-intensive and
time-consuming. In this paper, we present a scene graphbased approach for unpaired image captioning. Our framework comprises an image scene graph generator, a sentence
scene graph generator, a scene graph encoder, and a sentence decoder. Specifically, we first train the scene graph
encoder and the sentence decoder on the text modality.
To align the scene graphs between images and sentences,
we propose an unsupervised feature alignment method that
maps the scene graph features from the image to the sentence modality. Experimental results show that our proposed model can generate quite promising results without
using any image-caption training pairs, outperforming existing methods by a wide margin.

1. Introduction
Today’s image captioning models heavily depend on
paired image-caption datasets. Most of them employ an
encoder-decoder framework [33, 9, 13, 12, 37], which uses
a convolutional neural network (CNN) [16] to encode an
image into a feature vector and then a recurrent neural network (RNN) to decode it into a text sequence. However,
it is worthwhile noticing that the overwhelming majority of
image captioning studies are conducted in English [1]. The
bottleneck is the lack of large scale image-caption paired
datasets in other languages, and getting such paired data for
each target language requires human expertise in a timeconsuming and labor-intensive process.
Several encoder-decoder models have been proposed in
recent years for unsupervised neural machine translation
[23, 4]. The key idea of these methods mainly relies
on training denoising auto-encoders for language modeling
and on sharing latent representations across the source and
target languages for the encoder and the decoder. Despite
the promising results achieved by the unsupervised neural

Figure 1: Illustration of our graph-based learning method.
Our model consists of one visual scene graph detector (TopLeft), one fixed off-the-shelf scene graph language parser
(Bottom-Left), a scene graph encoder GSEnc , a sentence decoder GSDec , and a feature mapping module.
machine translation, unpaired image-to-sentence translation
is far from mature.
Recently, there have been few attempts at relaxing the
requirement of paired image-caption data for this task.
The first work in this direction is the pivot-based semisupervised solution proposed by Gu et al. [14], where they
take a pivot language as a bridge to connect the source
image and the target language caption. Their method requires an image-text paired data for the pivot language (Chinese), and a parallel corpus for the pivot to target translation. Feng et al. [10] move a step further, where they conduct purely unsupervised image captioning without relying
on any labeled image-caption pairs. Their method uses a
sentence discriminator along with a visual concept detector
to connect the image and the text modalities through adversarial training. Although promising, the results of the existing methods are still far below compared to their paired
counterparts.
Unlike unsupervised neural machine translation where
the encoders can be shared across the source and target languages, due to the different structures and characteristics of
image and text modalities, the encoders of image and sentence cannot be shared to connect the two modalities. The
critical challenge in unpaired image captioning is, therefore, the gap of information misalignment in images and
sentences, so as to fit the encoder-decoder framework.

10323

