Maximum-Margin Hamming Hashing
Rong Kang, Yue Cao, Mingsheng Long (B), Jianmin Wang, and Philip S. Yu
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University
Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Software
kangr15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep hashing enables computation and memory efficient
image search through end-to-end learning of feature representations and binary codes. While linear scan over binary
hash codes is more efficient than over the high-dimensional
representations, its linear-time complexity is still unacceptable for very large databases. Hamming space retrieval enables constant-time search through hash lookups, where for
each query, there is a Hamming ball centered at the query
and the data points within the ball are returned as relevant.
Since inside the Hamming ball implies retrievable while
outside irretrievable, it is crucial to explicitly characterize
the Hamming ball. The main idea of this work is to directly
embody the Hamming radius into the loss functions, leading
to Maximum-Margin Hamming Hashing (MMHH), a new
model specifically optimized for Hamming space retrieval.
We introduce a max-margin t-distribution loss, where the
t-distribution concentrates more similar data points to be
within the Hamming ball, and the margin characterizes the
Hamming radius such that less penalization is applied to
similar data points within the Hamming ball. The loss function also introduces robustness to data noise, where the similarity supervision may be inaccurate in practical problems.
The model is trained end-to-end using a new semi-batch optimization algorithm tailored to extremely imbalanced data.
Our method yields state-of-the-art results on four datasets
and shows superior performance on noisy data.

1. Introduction
Recent years we have witnessed the significant growth in
computer vision applications that generate large-scale and
high-dimensional visual data online. Thus, developing multimedia retrieval method of high efficiency and accuracy is
a popular topic in both academic and industrial communities. Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search, which
can well compromise the retrieval accuracy and computational efficiency, has attracted increasing attention. There

are two solutions to ANN search: indexing [22] and hashing
[46]. Hashing methods aim to convert high-dimensional visual data into compact binary codes while preserving their
similarity relationship in the Hamming space. This work
focuses on learning to hash [46], a data-dependent hashing
scheme for efficient image retrieval that has shown better
performance than data-independent methods. Seminal work
of learning to hash includes Local Sensitive Hash (LSH)
[11] and Spectral Hashing (SH) [47], to name a few.
A rich line of learning to hash methods have been proposed for efficient ANN search, which enables Hamming
ranking over compact binary hash codes of database points
and user queries. These methods mainly fall into unsupervised methods [20, 13, 37, 33, 51, 34] and supervised methods [30, 32, 52]. Recently, deep learning to hash methods
[49, 21, 41, 10, 7, 4, 29, 43, 16, 17, 27] have employed deep
networks for end-to-end learning of feature representations
and binary codes, through which non-linear hash functions
are readily supported. These methods have achieved stateof-the-art retrieval performance, validating the importance
of jointly learning similarity-preserving representations and
controlling quantization error of converting the continuous
representations into binary codes [53, 25, 28, 4].
Most previous deep hashing methods focus on maximizing the retrieval performance for a linear scan over the
whole database of N data points. The time complexity of
linear scan over K-bit hash codes is O(N K/8), much more
efficient than O(N D), the time complexity of linear scan
over D-dimensional continuous representations (D ≫ K).
However, the linear complexity is still unacceptable for very
large databases. In this paper, we focus on Hamming space
retrieval [37, 2] that enables constant-time search through
hash lookups, where for each query, it returns data points
within a Hamming ball of radius H. As is widely known,
a remarkable advantage of hashing is that any bucket in the
hash table can be queried in O(1) by table lookups. For binary codes of K bits, the number of distinct hash buckets
to be examined increases exponentially w.r.t. H [37]. And
empirically, we can find all H-neighbors of a given query in

8252

