Automatic and Robust Skull Registration Based on Discrete Uniformization
Junli Zhao1 , Xin Qi2 , Chengfeng Wen2 , Na Lei*3 , and Xianfeng Gu2
1

School of Data Science and Software Engineering,Qingdao University, Qingdao,China
2
Department of Computer Science,Stony Brook University, Stony Brook,USA
3
International School of Information Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology,
Dalian,China
1,2,3

zhaojl@yeah.net,xinqi@cs.stonybrook.edu,chwen@cs.stonybrook.edu,,
*Corresponding:nalei@dlut.edu.cn,gu@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Skull registration plays a fundamental role in forensic
science and is crucial for craniofacial reconstruction. The
complicated topology, lack of anatomical features, and low
quality reconstructed mesh make skull registration challenging. In this work, we propose an automatic skull registration method based on the discrete uniformization theory,
which can handle complicated topologies and is robust to
low quality meshes. We apply dynamic Yamabe flow to realize discrete uniformization, which modifies the mesh combinatorial structure during the flow and conformally maps the
multiply connected skull surface onto a planar disk with circular holes. The 3D surfaces can be registered by matching
their planar images using harmonic maps. This method is
rigorous with theoretic guarantee, automatic without user
intervention, and robust to low mesh quality. Our experimental results demonstrate the efficiency and efficacy of the
method.

1. Introduction
The skull is an intrinsic biological feature of humans.
Wilkinson [39] shows that the shape of a skull determines
the person’s facial features, therefore the face can be reconstructed from the skull, which is called craniofacial reconstruction. With the rapid development of computer technology, computer-assisted craniofacial reconstruction plays
an important role in the unknown corpse identification of
criminal investigation, skull identification in forensic science, understanding of human beings evolution in anthropology, etc. Skull registration is a key pre-processing step
of craniofacial reconstruction.
Surface registration is a fundamental problem in com-

puter vision, which seeks an optimal mapping from the target data to the reference data to achieve one-to-one correspondence between them. The three-dimensional(3D) skull
registration aims at finding a one-to-one correspondence between the dense points for different posed and sized 3D
skull models. Establishing accurate registration of craniofacial data is the foundation and premise of building craniofacial statistical models.
In general, skull registration is challenging, because
skull surfaces have very complicated topological structures,
different morphology, and non-rigid deformation. Furthermore, feature definition and extraction are difficult as well.
Hence conventional methods can hardly achieve automatic
registration. Meshes produced by 3D scanning or reconstruction from CT images are with low qualities; this makes
the numerical computation highly unstable. Although many
researchers have made great efforts, automatic and robust
skull registration still remains a fundamental challenge.
In order to handle complex topologies and improve the
robustness for the registration, we propose a novel method
based on the recent theoretic break through : discrete uniformization theory, which can handle surfaces with arbitrary topologies and poor mesh qualities. Different from
the previous method, dynamic Yamabe flow is used to realize discrete uniformization. So our method is rigorous
with theoretic guarantee to convergence on an arbitrary triangular mesh and achieves global diffeomorphism and high
registration accuracy, which outperforms other methods.
Contributions This work proposes a novel method for
skull registration. The method has some merits:
1. Rigorous: the discrete uniformization theory guarantees the existence and the uniqueness of the solution,
hence the algorithm has solid theoretic foundation;

431

