Unsupervised Neural Quantization for Compressed-Domain Similarity Search
Artem Babenko
Yandex,
National Research University
Higher School of Economics

Stanislav Morozov
Yandex,
Lomonosov Moscow State University
stanis-morozov@yandex.ru

artem.babenko@phystech.edu

Abstract
We tackle the problem of unsupervised visual descriptors compression, which is a key ingredient of large-scale
image retrieval systems. While the deep learning machinery has benefited literally all computer vision pipelines, the
existing state-of-the-art compression methods employ shallow architectures, and we aim to close this gap by our paper. In more detail, we introduce a DNN architecture for
the unsupervised compressed-domain retrieval, based on
multi-codebook quantization. The proposed architecture is
designed to incorporate both fast data encoding and efficient distances computation via lookup tables. We demonstrate the exceptional advantage of our scheme over existing quantization approaches on several datasets of visual
descriptors via outperforming the previous state-of-the-art
by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised compression of high-dimensional visual
descriptors has a long history in the computer vision
community[33, 14]. Nowadays, the development of effective compact representations becomes even more crucial for
the scalability of modern search engines, given the enormous amount of visual data in the Web.
Currently the dominant unsupervised compression
methods[14, 6, 24, 2, 37, 22, 23] belong to the multicodebook quantization (MCQ) paradigm. In this paradigm,
descriptors are effectively approximated by a sum or a concatenation of a few codeword vectors, coming from several disjoint codebooks. Such a simple form of approximation enables the efficient computation of distances from
uncompressed queries to compressed database vectors via
the usage of lookup tables. While originally appeared for
the image retrieval problem, the quantization methods are
extensively used to increase the efficiency in a wide range
of tasks, e.g. CNN compression[8, 36] or localization[19].
Indeed, the development of more advanced quantization

methods remains an important research direction as they
would benefit a whole range of large-scale computer vision
applications.
Despite the ubiquitous use of deep architectures in different areas of computer vision, the unsupervised quantization
for the compressed-domain retrieval, which we tackle in
this paper, did not benefit from their power yet. While several recent works investigate the usage of deep architectures
for the supervised MCQ scenario[35, 11, 18], the state-ofthe-art unsupervised methods[22, 25, 23] remain shallow.
Moreover, the recent work[27] has shown that even for the
supervised compression problem, the usage of unsupervised
MCQ outperforms several strong supervised baselines. To
the best of our knowledge, at the moment it is not clear if the
deep learning machinery can benefit the unsupervised quantization approaches. This is the central question we aim to
answer in our paper.
As the main novelty, we introduce a new Unsupervised Neural Quantization (UNQ) method, which learns
a nonlinear multi-codebook quantization model, trainable
via SGD. Our model is partially inspired by the ideas from
the recent works on generative modeling with discrete hidden variables[12, 21, 32], which, as we show, appear to be a
natural fit for the compressed-domain retrieval problem. In
its essence, UNQ works via embedding both codewords and
data vectors into a common learnable vector space, where
efficient nearest neighbor retrieval is possible. As we show
in the experimental section, the non-linear nature of our
model allows increasing the retrieval accuracy, compared
to the existing shallow competitors.
Overall, the main contributions of our paper can be summarized as follows:
1. We propose a new method for the unsupervised quantization of visual descriptors. To the best of our knowledge, our method is the first successful case of the usage of deep architectures for the unsupervised MCQ
for compressed-domain retrieval.
2. With the extensive experimental evaluation, we show
13036

