Hyperspectral Image Reconstruction using Deep External and Internal Learning
Tao Zhang Ying Fu Lizhi Wang Hua Huang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
{tzhang,fuying,lzwang,huahuang}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
To solve the low spatial and/or temporal resolution problem which the conventional hypelrspectral cameras often
suffer from, coded snapshot hyperspectral imaging systems
have attracted more attention recently. Recovering a hyperspectral image (HSI) from its corresponding coded image is an ill-posed inverse problem, and learning accurate
prior of HSI is essential to solve this inverse problem. In
this paper, we present an effective convolutional neural network (CNN) based method for coded HSI reconstruction,
which learns the deep prior from the external dataset as
well as the internal information of input coded image with
spatial-spectral constraint. Our method can effectively exploit spatial-spectral correlation and sufficiently represent
the variety nature of HSIs. Experimental results show our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods under both
comprehensive quantitative metrics and perceptive quality.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging systems capture the spectral signature of each spatial location in a scene with much more
than three bands. The rich spectral details in HSI can
show deterministic information about the lighting and material, which is beneficial to various fields, including remote
sensing [5, 28], computer vision [7] and medical diagnosis
[4, 27].
To obtain a full 3D HSI, the conventional hyperspectral imagers needs multiple exposures to scan the scene
[2, 30, 31], which is time-consuming and cannot capture
dynamic scenes. To improve the temporal resolution, various snapshot hyperspectral imaging systems [6, 10, 29]
have been proposed by multiplexing the 3D HSI into a
2D spatial sensor, which, however, sacrifice the spatial resolution. Recently, by leveraging the compressive sensing (CS) theory, coding-based hyperspectral imaging techniques [16, 22, 25, 26, 35, 37] have attracted increasing attention due to the potential to overcome the trade-off between temporal and spatial resolution.

External learning
Hyperspectral image dataset

CASSI

Reconstruction
network
DCD

Single internal learning
Coded image

Reconstruction
network
Spatial-spectral constraint

Reconstructed
hyperspectral image

Φ

Figure 1. Overview of our CNN-based coded HSI reconstruction
method. The reconstruction network is first learned from an external dataset, and then customized with spatial-spectral constraint in
term of the internal information of the input coded image for each
target scene.

With elaborate optical design, these coding-based techniques encode the 3D HSI into a 2D compressive measurement. Now the bottleneck lies in how to faithfully reconstruct the desirable HSI. Since the reconstruction problem
is under-determined, prior knowledge of the unknown HSI
is required to regularize the reconstruction. To this end, the
well-known model-based methods employ various handcrafted priors, such as the total variation [22, 37], sparsity
[35, 38, 39] and low-rankness [13]. However, these handcrafted priors are insufficient to represent the variety of the
real-world spectral data.
Different from the model-based methods that rely on
carefully designed priors, the learning-based methods [9,
40, 43] can implicitly learn the prior by leveraging the external dataset. However, the learning-based methods [40]
often attempt to fit a brute-force mapping between the compressive image and the desirable image, which ignores the
internal imaging model. Thus, the learned mapping function would be ineffective even if the observation model deviates very slightly from that one used to synthesize the
training data. Recently, an autoencoder-based method [9]
is proposed by pre-training an autoencoder to exploit the

8559

