Metric Learning With HORDE: High-Order Regularizer for Deep Embeddings
Pierre Jacob1 , David Picard1,2 , Aymeric Histace1 , Edouard Klein3
1
ETIS UMR 8051, Université Paris Seine, UCP, ENSEA, CNRS, F-95000, Cergy, France
2
LIGM, UMR 8049, École des Ponts, UPE, Champs-sur-Marne, France
3
C3N, Pôle Judiciaire de la Gendarmerie Nationale, 5 boulevard de l’Hautil, 95000 Cergy, France
{pierre.jacob, picard, aymeric.histace}@ensea.fr

Abstract
Learning an effective similarity measure between image
representations is key to the success of recent advances in
visual search tasks (e.g. verification or zero-shot learning). Although the metric learning part is well addressed,
this metric is usually computed over the average of the extracted deep features. This representation is then trained to
be discriminative. However, these deep features tend to be
scattered across the feature space. Consequently, the representations are not robust to outliers, object occlusions,
background variations, etc. In this paper, we tackle this
scattering problem with a distribution-aware regularization
named HORDE1 . This regularizer enforces visually-close
images to have deep features with the same distribution
which are well localized in the feature space. We provide
a theoretical analysis supporting this regularization effect.
We also show the effectiveness of our approach by obtaining state-of-the-art results on 4 well-known datasets (Cub200-2011, Cars-196, Stanford Online Products and Inshop
Clothes Retrieval).

1. Introduction
Deep Metric Learning (DML) is an important yet challenging topic in the Computer Vision community with numerous applications such as visual product search [15, 18],
multi-modal retrieval [1, 31], face verification and clustering [22], person or vehicle identification [14, 38]. To deal
with such applications, a DML method aims to learn an embedding space where all the visually-related images (e.g.,
images of the same car model) are close to each other and
dissimilar ones (e.g., images of two cars from the same
brand but from different models) are far apart.
Recent contributions in DML can be divided into three
categories. A first category includes methods that focus
1 Code is available at https://github.com/pierre-jacob/
ICCV2019-Horde

on batch construction to maximize the number of pairs or
triplets available to compute the similarity (e.g., N-pair loss
[23]). A second category involves the design of loss functions to improve the generalization (e.g., binomial deviance
[26]). The third category covers ensemble methods that
tackle the embedding space diversity (e.g., BIER [19]).
This similarity metric is trained jointly with the image
representation which is computed using deep neural network architectures such as GoogleNet [25] or BN-Inception
[8]. For all of these networks, the image representations
are obtained by the aggregation of the deep features using
a Global Average Pooling [37]. Hence, the deep features
are summarized using the sample mean, and the training
process makes sure that the sample mean is discriminative
enough for the target task.
Our insight is that ignoring the characteristics of the deep
feature distribution leads to a lack of distinctiveness in the
deep features. We illustrate this phenomenon in Figure 1. In
Figure 1a, we train a DML model on MNIST and plot both
the deep features and the image representations from a set
of images sampled from the training set. We observe that
the representations are perfectly organized while the deep
features are in contrast scattered in the entire space. As the
representations are obtained using the sample mean only,
they are sensitive to outliers or sampling problems (occlusions, illumination, background variation, etc.), which we
refer to as the scattering problem. We illustrate this problem in Figure 1b where the representations are computed
using the same architecture but by sampling only 1/6-th of
the original deep features. As we can see, the resulting representations are no longer correctly organized.
In this paper, we propose HORDE, a High-Order Regularizer for Deep Embeddings which tackles this scattering
problem. By minimizing (resp. maximizing) the distance
between high-order moments of the deep feature distributions, this DML regularizer enforces deep feature distributions from similar (resp. dissimilar) images to be nearly
identical (resp. to not overlap). As illustrated in Figure 1c,
our HORDE regularizer produces well localized features,
16539

