HarDNet: A Low Memory Traffic Network
Ping Chao1,2

Chao-Yang Kao1 Yu-Shan Ruan1
1
National Tsing Hua University

pingchao@umich.edu

Chien-Hsiang Huang1 Youn-Long Lin1
2
University of Michigan

{chaoyangkao923, esunxd, james128333}gmail.com

Abstract
State-of-the-art neural network architectures such as
ResNet, MobileNet, and DenseNet have achieved outstanding accuracy over low MACs and small model size counterparts. However, these metrics might not be accurate for
predicting the inference time. We suggest that memory traffic for accessing intermediate feature maps can be a factor
dominating the inference latency, especially in such tasks
as real-time object detection and semantic segmentation of
high-resolution video. We propose a Harmonic Densely
Connected Network to achieve high efficiency in terms of
both low MACs and memory traffic. The new network
achieves 35%, 36%, 30%, 32%, and 45% inference time reduction compared with FC-DenseNet-103, DenseNet-264,
ResNet-50, ResNet-152, and SSD-VGG, respectively. We
use tools including Nvidia profiler and ARM Scale-Sim to
measure the memory traffic and verify that the inference latency is indeed proportional to the memory traffic consumption and the proposed network consumes low memory traffic. We conclude that one should take memory traffic into
consideration when designing neural network architectures
for high-resolution applications at the edge.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have been popular for computer vision tasks, ever since the explosive
growth of computing power has made possible training
complex networks like AlexNet [22,23], VGG-net [32], and
Inception [34] in a reasonable amount of time. To bring
these fascinating research results into mass use, performing
a neural network inference on edge devices is inevitable.
However, edge computing relies on limited computation
power and battery capacity. How to increase computation
efficiency and reduce the power consumption for neural network inference at the edge has therefore become a critical
issue.
Reducing model sizes (the number of parameters or
weights of a model) is a hot research topic in improving
both computation and energy efficiency, since a reduced

ylin@cs.nthu.edu.tw

model size usually implies fewer MACs (number of
multiply-accumulate operations or floating point operations) and less dynamic random-access memory (DRAM)
traffic for read and write of model parameters and feature
maps. Several researches have steered toward maximizing the accuracy–parameters ratio. State-of-the-art
networks such as Residual Networks (ResNets) [16],
SqueezeNets [20], and Densely Connected Networks
(DenseNets) [18] have achieved high parameter efficiency
that have dramatically reduced the model size while maintaining a high accuracy. The model size can be reduced
further through compression. Han et al. [15] showed
that the large amount of floating-point weights loaded
from DRAM may consume more power than arithmetic
operations do. Their Deep Compression algorithm employs
weight pruning and quantization to reduce the model size
and power consumption significantly.
In addition to the power consumption, DRAM accesses
can also dominate system performance in terms of inference
time due to the limited DRAM bandwidth. Since we have
observed that the size summation of all the intermediate
feature maps in a CNN can be ten to hundred times larger
than its model size, especially for high resolution tasks
such as semantic segmentation using fully convolutional
networks [27], we suggest that reducing DRAM accesses
to feature maps may lead to a speedup in some cases.
Shrinking the size of feature maps is a straightforward
approach to reduce the traffic. While there are only a few
papers addressing lossless compression of feature maps,
lossy compression of feature maps has been intensively
studied in research of model precision manipulation and
approximation [8, 11, 14, 28, 29]. The quantization used in
these works for model compression can usually reduce the
feature map size automatically. However, like other lossy
compression methods such as subsampling, they usually
penalize accuracy. In this paper, we explore how to reduce
the DRAM traffic for feature maps without penalizing
accuracy simply by designing the architecture of a CNN
carefully.

3552

