Semi-Supervised Monocular 3D Face Reconstruction With End-to-End
Shape-Preserved Domain Transfer
Jingtan Piao
Chen Qian
Hongsheng Li
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Sensetime Research

1155116308@link.cuhk.edu.hk qianchen@sensetime.com hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Monocular face reconstruction is a challenging task in
computer vision, which aims to recover 3D face geometry
from a single RGB face image. Recently, deep learning
methods have achieved great improvements on monocular
face reconstruction. However, for these methods to reach
optimal performance, it is paramount to have large-scale
training images with ground-truth 3D face geometry, which
is generally difficult for human to annotate. To tackle this
problem, we propose a semi-supervised monocular reconstruction method, which jointly optimizes a shape-preserved
domain-transfer CycleGAN and a shape estimation network. The framework is semi-supervisely trained with 3D
rendered images with ground-truth shapes and in-the-wild
face images without any extra annotation. The CycleGAN
network transforms all realistic images into rendered style
and is end-to-end trained in the overall framework. This is
the key difference compared with existing CycleGAN-based
learning methods, which just used CycleGAN as a separate
training sample generator. Novel landmark consistency loss
and edge-aware shape estimation loss are proposed for our
two networks to jointly solve the challenging face reconstruction problem. Experiments on public face reconstruction datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our overall
method as well as the individual components.

1. Introduction
3D face reconstruction from monocular images aims at
recovering 3D facial geometry from 2D face images. This
is an important research topic as human faces play a key
role in visual perception and image generation. However,
it remains a challenging problem and is far from being
solved. Unlike 2D facial landmarks, which can be accurately labeled by humans and robustly estimated by computers thanks to the recent advances of Convolution Neural Networks (CNN), the ground-truth 3D geometry of human faces can only be generated by traditional optimization

Input Image

Landmark
Consistency
Loss

ShapePreserved
Domaintransfer
Generation

Rendered
Style

Face
Edge-aware
Loss

Estimated
Shape

Shape
Estimation

Semi-Supervised End-to-end Training

Figure 1. The overall framework of the proposed semi-supervised
monocular face reconstruction method.

based methods, such as Gaussian Process [4] and Parameterized Spline [11]. The fitting process of the 3D face geometry contains lots of uncertainties. As a consequence,
we cannot easily collect as abundant amount of supervised
training data as other computer vision tasks, and the reconstruction accuracy is therefore restricted by the limited
amount of training data.
For face images taken in controlled environments, it is
not difficult to use optimization-based methods to obtain
their ground-truth 3D face geometry as training data. However, those methods, even with human intervention, cannot
guarantee to obtain accurate ground-truth geometry for face
images in the wild, where there might exist non-uniform
lighting, sided viewing angles, and cluttered backgrounds.
Training with such poorly fitted ground truth geometry results in deteriorated reconstruction accuracy.
Several methods have been proposed to tackle the problem of lacking abundant ground-truth face geometry for
in-the-wild images. [18] proposed to train a face reconstruction model on only synthetic face images with accurate
ground truth, which, however, has difficulty handling realistic images because of the large synthetic-realistic domain
gap. Tewari et al. [23] proposed a semi-supervised learning
approach with photometric loss to supervise the reconstruction for in-the-wild images. But it is likely to overfit to a
specific dataset and does not show great generalization ca-

9398

