Non-local Recurrent Neural Memory for Supervised Sequence Modeling
Canmiao Fu1,2,∗, Wenjie Pei2,∗, Qiong Cao2 , Chaopeng Zhang1 ,
Yong Zhao1,†, Xiaoyong Shen2 and Yu-Wing Tai2,†
1

School of ECE, Peking University

2

Tencent

fcm@pku.edu.cn, wenjiecoder@outlook.com, freyaqcao@tencent.com, cpz@pku.edu.cn,
yongzhao@pku.edu.cn, goodshenxy@gmail.com, yuwingtai@tencent.com

Abstract
Typical methods for supervised sequence modeling are
built upon the recurrent neural networks to capture temporal dependencies. One potential limitation of these methods is that they only model explicitly information interactions between adjacent time steps in a sequence, hence
the high-order interactions between nonadjacent time steps
are not fully exploited. It greatly limits the capability of
modeling the long-range temporal dependencies since oneorder interactions cannot be maintained for a long term due
to information dilution and gradient vanishing. To tackle
this limitation, we propose the Non-local Recurrent Neural
Memory (NRNM) for supervised sequence modeling, which
performs non-local operations to learn full-order interactions within a sliding temporal block and models global
interactions between blocks in a gated recurrent manner.
Consequently, our model is able to capture the long-range
dependencies. Besides, the latent high-level features contained in high-order interactions can be distilled by our
model. We demonstrate the merits of our NRNM on two
different tasks: action recognition and sentiment analysis.

1. Introduction
Supervised sequence modeling aims to build models to
extract effective features from variety of sequence data such
as video data or text data via supervised learning. It has extensive applications ranging from computer vision [26, 35]
to natural language processing [8, 42]. The key challenge in
supervised sequence modeling is to capture the long-range
temporal dependencies, which are used to further learn the
high-level feature for the whole sequence.
Most state-of-the-art methods for supervised sequence
modeling are built upon the recurrent neural networks
(RNN) [32], which has been validated its effectiveness [33,
52]. One crucial limitation of the vanila-RNNs is the
gradient-vanishing problem along the temporal domain,
which results in the inability to model long-term dependen∗ Both authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding authors.

Non-local
operations

Memory

Memory
…

Predict

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

ࢎ்

Action:

throw

Figure 1. Given a video sample for action recognition, our proposed model (NRNM) performs non-local operations within each
memory block to learn high-order interactions between hidden
states of different time steps. Meanwhile, the global interactions
between memory blocks are modeled in a gated recurrent manner. The learned memory states are in turn leveraged to refine the
hidden states in future time steps. Thus, the long-range dependencies can be captured. The model predicts the action based on the
hidden state (hT ) in the last time step.

cies. This limitation is then substantially mitigated by gated
recurrent networks such as GRU [4] and LSTM [11], which
employ learnable gates to selectively retain information in
the memory or hidden states. The memory-based methods
for sequence modeling [34, 39, 45] are further proposed to
address the issue of limited memory of recurrent networks.
However, a potential drawback of these methods is that they
only model explicitly the information interactions between
adjacent time steps in the sequence, hence the high-order
interactions between nonadjacent time steps are not fully
exploited. This drawback gives rise to two negative consequences: 1) the high-level features contained in the interactions between nonadjacent time steps cannot be distilled;
2) it greatly limits the modeling of long-range temporal dependencies since one-order interaction information cannot
be maintained in a long term due to the information dilution
and gradient vanishing along with recurrent operations.
Inspired by non-local methods [3, 44] which aim to explore potential interactions between all pairs of feature portions, we propose to perform non-local operations to model
4321
6311

