Scale-Aware Trident Networks for Object Detection
Yanghao Li* Yuntao Chen1,3 * Naiyan Wang2 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,3,4
1
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
TuSimple
3
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{lyttonhao, winsty}@gmail.com {chenyuntao2016, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Scale variation is one of the key challenges in object detection. In this work, we first present a controlled experiment to investigate the effect of receptive fields for scale
variation in object detection. Based on the findings from the
exploration experiments, we propose a novel Trident Network (TridentNet) aiming to generate scale-specific feature
maps with a uniform representational power. We construct
a parallel multi-branch architecture in which each branch
shares the same transformation parameters but with different receptive fields. Then, we adopt a scale-aware training
scheme to specialize each branch by sampling object instances of proper scales for training. As a bonus, a fast approximation version of TridentNet could achieve significant
improvements without any additional parameters and computational cost compared with the vanilla detector. On the
COCO dataset, our TridentNet with ResNet-101 backbone
achieves state-of-the-art single-model results of 48.4 mAP.
Codes are available at https://git.io/fj5vR.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [16, 35, 29] have achieved great success in object detection. Typically, these CNN-based methods can
be roughly divided into two types: one-stage methods such
as YOLO [32] or SSD [29] which directly utilizes feedforward CNN to predict the bounding boxes of interest,
while two-stage methods such as Faster R-CNN [35] or
R-FCN [10] first generate proposals, and then exploit the
extracted region features from CNN for further refinement.
However, a central issue for both methods is the handling of
scale variation. The scales of object instances could vary in
a wide range, which impedes the detectors, especially those
very small or very large ones.
* Equal Contribution

To remedy the large scale variation, an intuitive way is
to leverage multi-scale image pyramids [1], which is popular in both hand-crafted feature based methods [12, 30] and
current deep CNN based methods (Figure 1(a)). Strong evidence [21, 28] shows that deep detectors [35, 10] could
benefit from multi-scale training and testing. To avoid
training objects with extreme scales (small/large objects in
smaller/larger scales), SNIP [38, 39] proposes a scale normalization method that selectively trains the objects of appropriate sizes in each image scale. Nevertheless, the increase of inference time makes the image pyramid methods
less favorable for practical applications.
Another line of efforts aims to employ in-network feature pyramids to approximate image pyramids with less
computation cost. The idea is first demonstrated in [13],
where a fast feature pyramid is constructed for object detection by interpolating some feature channels from nearby
scale levels. In the deep learning era, the approximation
is even easier. SSD [29] utilizes multi-scale feature maps
from different layers and detects objects of different scales
at each feature layer. To compensate for the absence of semantics in low-level features, FPN [25] (Figure 1(b)) further
augments a top-down pathway and lateral connections to
incorporate strong semantic information in high-level features. However, region features of objects with different
scales are extracted from different levels of FPN backbone,
which in turn are generated with different sets of parameters. This makes feature pyramids an unsatisfactory alternative for image pyramids.
Both the image pyramid and the feature pyramid methods share the same motivation that models should have different receptive fields for objects of different scales. Despite
the inefficiency, the image pyramid fully utilizes the representational power of the model to transform objects of all
scales equally. In contrast, the feature pyramid generates
multi-level features thus sacrificing the feature consistency
across different scales. This leads to a decrease in effective
training data and a higher risk of overfitting for each scale.
The goal of this work is to get the best of two worlds by
16054

