Few-Shot Learning with Global Class Representations
Aoxue Li1∗ Tiange Luo1∗ Tao Xiang2 Weiran Huang3 Liwei Wang1
1
School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Surrey, UK
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Beijing, China
{lax,luotg,wanglw}@pku.edu.cn, t.xiang@surrey.ac.uk,huang.inbox@outlook.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose to tackle the challenging fewshot learning (FSL) problem by learning global class representations using both base and novel class training samples. In each training episode, an episodic class mean computed from a support set is registered with the global representation via a registration module. This produces a registered global class representation for computing the classification loss using a query set. Though following a similar
episodic training pipeline as existing meta learning based
approaches, our method differs significantly in that novel
class training samples are involved in the training from the
beginning. To compensate for the lack of novel class training samples, an effective sample synthesis strategy is developed to avoid overfitting. Importantly, by joint base-novel
class training, our approach can be easily extended to a
more practical yet challenging FSL setting, i.e., generalized
FSL, where the label space of test data is extended to both
base and novel classes. Extensive experiments show that
our approach is effective for both of the two FSL settings.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in various
recognition tasks [32, 31]. However, with a large number
of parameters, deep neural networks need large amounts
of labeled data from each class for model training. This
severely limits their scalability – for many rare classes,
collecting a large number of training samples is infeasible
or even impossible. In contrast, humans can easily recognize a new object class after only seeing it once. Inspired by the few-shot learning ability of humans, there has
been increasing interest recently on few-shot learning (FSL)
[8, 12, 21, 7, 23, 19, 28, 22]. In the FSL problem, we are
provided with a set of base classes with ample training samples per class, and a set of novel classes with only a few
∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1. An illustration of our approach. The first block shows a
base class and a novel class in an embedding space. The base class
contains sufficient labeled data while the novel class has only a few
labeled data. The two classes have intersections, and we aim to
learn global representations for each class which are used for recognizing test data. The second block illustrates the two key components of the proposed model. First, we generate new samples
(orange cross) to increase intra-class variance for novel classes.
Second, a registration module is proposed to encourage sample
to ‘pull’ its global representation to itself and ‘push’ other global
representations away. Similarly, global representations would influence the sample. The last block shows the results after learning global representations jointly using both base and novel class
samples. The two classes become more separable, and the global
representations are more distinguishable.

labeled samples (shots) per class. FSL aims to learn a classifier for the novel classes with few shots by transferring
knowledge from the based classes.
Most existing FSL approaches are based on meta learning. During a meta learning phase, the base classes are
sampled to simulate the few-shot learning condition for the
novel classes. Transferable knowledge is then learned from

9715

