EM-Fusion: Dynamic Object-Level SLAM With Probabilistic Data Association
Michael Strecke and Jörg Stückler
Embodied Vision Group, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
{michael.strecke,joerg.stueckler}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
The majority of approaches for acquiring dense 3D environment maps with RGB-D cameras assumes static environments or rejects moving objects as outliers. The representation and tracking of moving objects, however, has significant potential for applications in robotics or augmented
reality. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to dynamic SLAM with dense object-level representations. We
represent rigid objects in local volumetric signed distance
function (SDF) maps, and formulate multi-object tracking
as direct alignment of RGB-D images with the SDF representations. Our main novelty is a probabilistic formulation
which naturally leads to strategies for data association and
occlusion handling. We analyze our approach in experiments and demonstrate that our approach compares favorably with the state-of-the-art methods in terms of robustness
and accuracy.

determine the unknown association of pixels to objects in
a probabilistic expectation maximization (EM [3]) formulation which estimates the soft association likelihood from
the likelihood of the measurements in our map representation. The probabilistic association provides additional geometric cues and implicitly handles occlusions for object
segmentation, tracking, and mapping (see Fig. 1). We represent the object maps by volumetric signed distance functions (SDFs). We augment the maximum likelihood integration of the SDF from depths to incorporate their association likelihood. The probabilistic data association facilitates
the direct alignment of the depth maps with the SDF object
maps. This avoids projective data association through raycasting which is needed for the ICP algorithm. In our experiments, we evaluate our approach on several datasets and
demonstrate superior performance over the state-of-the-art
methods. Our results demonstrate that proper probabilistic treatment of data associations is a key ingredient to robust object-level SLAM in dynamic scenes. In summary,
we make the following contributions in our work,

1. Introduction
RGB-D cameras are popular devices for dense visual 3D
scene acquisition. Most approaches to simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) with RGB-D cameras only
map the static part of the environment and localize the camera within this map. While some approaches filter dynamic
objects as outliers from the measurements, SLAM of multiple moving objects has attracted only little attention so
far. In many applications of robotics and augmented reality (AR), however, agents interact with the environment
and hence the environment state is dynamic. Approaches
that concurrently track multiple moving objects hence have
rich potential for robotics and AR applications.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to dynamic
SLAM that maps and tracks objects in the scene. We
detect objects through instance segmentation of the images and subsequently perform tracking and mapping of
the static background and the objects. In previous approaches [15, 16, 27], data association of measurements to
objects is either solved through image-based instance segmentation or by raycasting in the maps. We propose to

• We propose a probabilistic EM formulation for dynamic object-level SLAM that naturally leads to data
association and occlusion handling strategies.
• Based on our EM formulation, we approach multiobject tracking as direct alignment of RGB-D images with SDF object representations and evaluate this
tracking approach for dense dynamic SLAM.
• Our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on
several datasets for dynamic object-level SLAM.

2. Related work
Static SLAM: Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) with RGB-D sensors has seen tremendous
progress quickly after the sensors have become broadly
available on the market. KinectFusion [13] is a prominent
approach that incrementally tracks the camera motion and
maps the environment densely in volumetric signed distance
function (SDF) grids. Several other RGB-D SLAM approaches have been proposed that differ in tracking methods such as ICP [13], direct image alignment [10] or SDF

5865

