Indices Matter: Learning to Index for Deep Image Matting
Hao Lu†
Yutong Dai†
Chunhua Shen†∗
Songcen Xu‡
†
‡
The University of Adelaide, Australia
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
e-mail: {hao.lu, yutong.dai, chunhua.shen}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
We show that existing upsampling operators can be unified using the notion of the index function. This notion is
inspired by an observation in the decoding process of deep
image matting where indices-guided unpooling can often
recover boundary details considerably better than other upsampling operators such as bilinear interpolation. By viewing the indices as a function of the feature map, we introduce the concept of ‘learning to index’, and present a
novel index-guided encoder-decoder framework where indices are self-learned adaptively from data and are used to
guide the pooling and upsampling operators, without extra
training supervision. At the core of this framework is a flexible network module, termed IndexNet, which dynamically
generates indices conditioned on the feature map. Due to
its flexibility, IndexNet can be used as a plug-in applying
to almost all off-the-shelf convolutional networks that have
coupled downsampling and upsampling stages.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of IndexNet on the task
of natural image matting where the quality of learned indices can be visually observed from predicted alpha mattes. Results on the Composition-1k matting dataset show
that our model built on MobileNetv2 exhibits at least 16.1%
improvement over the seminal VGG-16 based deep matting baseline, with less training data and lower model capacity. Code and models have been made available at:
https://tinyurl.com/IndexNetV1.

1. Introduction
Upsampling is an essential stage for most dense prediction tasks using deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). The frequently used upsampling operators include
transposed convolution [50, 32], unpooling [2], periodic
shuffling [41] (also known as depth-to-space), and naive interpolation [30, 4] followed by convolution. These operators, however, are not general-purpose designs and often
exhibit different behaviors in different tasks.
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Alpha mattes of different models. From left to right,
Deeplabv3+ [4], RefineNet [30], Deep Matting [49] and Ours.
Bilinear upsampling fails to recover subtle details, while unpooling and our learned upsampling operator can produce much clear
mattes with good local contrast.

The widely-adopted operator in semantic segmentation
or depth estimation is bilinear interpolation, rather than unpooling. A reason might be that the feature map generated
by unpooling is very sparse, while bilinear interpolation is
likely to generate the feature map that depicts semanticallyconsistent regions. This is particularly true for semantic
segmentation and depth estimation where pixels in a region
often share the same class label or have similar depth. However, we observe that bilinear interpolation can perform significantly worse than unpooling in boundary-sensitive tasks
such as image matting. A fact is that the leading deep image matting model [49] largely borrows the design from the
SegNet [2], where unpooling was first introduced. When
adapting other state-of-the-art segmentation models, such
as DeepLabv3+ [4] and RefineNet [30], to this task, unfortunately, we observe both DeepLabv3+ and RefineNet
fail to recover boundary details (Fig. 1), compared to SegNet. This makes us to ponder over what is missing in these
encoder-decoder models. After making a thorough comparison between different architectures and conducting ablative studies (Section 5.2), the answer is finally made clear—
indices matter.
Compared to bilinear interpolation, unpooling uses maxpooling indices to guide upsampling. Since boundaries in
the shallow layers usually have the maximum responses,
indices extracted from these responses record the boundary locations. The feature map projected by the indices thus
shows improved boundary delineation. Analyses above re-

3266

