C-MIDN: Coupled Multiple Instance Detection Network With Segmentation
Guidance for Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Yan Gao1,2,* , Boxiao Liu1,2,* , Nan Guo1,2 , Xiaochun Ye1,2 , Fang Wan2 ,
Haihang You1,2 , and Dongrui Fan1,2,†
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Architecture, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

{gaoyan,liuboxiao,guonan,yexiaochun,youhaihang,fandr}@ict.ac.cn, wanfang13@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
MIDN

Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) that only
needs image-level annotations has obtained much attention recently. By combining convolutional neural network
with multiple instance learning method, Multiple Instance
Detection Network (MIDN) has become the most popular
method to address the WSOD problem and been adopted
as the initial model in many works. We argue that MIDN
inclines to converge to the most discriminative object parts,
which limits the performance of methods based on it. In this
paper, we propose a novel Coupled Multiple Instance Detection Network (C-MIDN) to address this problem. Specifically, we use a pair of MIDNs, which work in a complementary manner with proposal removal. The localization information of the MIDNs is further coupled to obtain
tighter bounding boxes and localize multiple objects. We
also introduce a Segmentation Guided Proposal Removal
(SGPR) algorithm to guarantee the MIL constraint after the
removal and ensure the robustness of C-MIDN. Through a
simple implementation of the C-MIDN with online detector
refinement, we obtain 53.6% and 50.3% mAP on the challenging PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 benchmarks respectively, which significantly outperform the previous state-ofthe-arts.

1. Introduction
Recent development of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) [18] has helped object detection to achieve superior
performance [13, 23, 22, 20]. However, to train such object
∗ Equally-contributed.
† Corresponding author.

SGPR

Coupling

MIDN

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed C-MIDN. Green rectangles
indicate the top scoring bounding boxes. Two MIDNs work in a
complementary way and generate candidates for coupling. Best
viewed in color.

detectors requires large scale datasets with accurate bounding box annotations, which cost quite a lot of human labor
to get. To address this problem, Weakly Supervised Object Detection (WSOD), which needs only image-level annotations during training, becomes increasingly attractive.
Compared with bounding box annotations, image-level annotations are much easier to collect, and can also be massively obtained through the Internet.
To localize objects in cluttered scene without bounding
box annotations, a common way is to formulate WSOD as a
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) problem. In recent years,
CNN has been introduced into MIL, which is referred as
Multiple Instance Detection Network (MIDN), to improve
the detection performance. Bilen and Vedaldi [4] propose
a concise end-to-end Weakly Supervised Deep Detection
Network (WSDDN). WSDDN is effective and convenient
to implement, thus many works choose it as a basic MIDN.
However, due to the inconsistency between the training objective and supervision, WSDDN tends to localize the most
discriminative object parts rather than the entire object.

9834

