‘Skimming-Perusal’ Tracking: A Framework for Real-Time and Robust
Long-term Tracking

1

Bin Yan1† , Haojie Zhao1† , Dong Wang1∗, Huchuan Lu1 and Xiaoyun Yang2
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
China Science IntelliCloud Technology Co., Ltd., † Equal Contribution

{yan bin, haojie zhao}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wdice, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, xiaoyun.yang@intellicloud.ai

Abstract
Compared with traditional short-term tracking, longterm tracking poses more challenges and is much closer
to realistic applications. However, few works have been
done and their performance have also been limited. In this
work, we present a novel robust and real-time long-term
tracking framework based on the proposed skimming and
perusal modules. The perusal module consists of an effective bounding box regressor to generate a series of candidate proposals and a robust target verifier to infer the optimal candidate with its confidence score. Based on this
score, our tracker determines whether the tracked object being present or absent, and then chooses the tracking
strategies of local search or global search respectively in
the next frame. To speed up the image-wide global search,
a novel skimming module is designed to efficiently choose
the most possible regions from a large number of sliding
windows. Numerous experimental results on the VOT-2018
long-term and OxUvA long-term benchmarks demonstrate
that the proposed method achieves the best performance
and runs in real-time. The source codes are available at
https://github.com/iiau-tracker/SPLT.

1. Introduction
Online visual tracking is one of most important problems in computer vision, and has many practical applications including video surveillance, behavior analysis, visual navigation, augmented reality and so on. It is a very
tough task to design a robust and efficient tracker caused by
the challenges from both foreground and background variations. These challenges include occlusion, illumination
variation, viewpoint change, rotation, motion blur, to name
a few. Due to the breakthrough of deep learning and the
construction of large-scale benchmarks, numerous trackers [5, 25, 31, 30, 18, 41, 14, 20, 6, 34, 17, 4, 8, 19, 36, 37]
∗ Corresponding Author: Dr. Dong Wang, wdice@dlut.edu.cn

have recently achieved very promising performance.
However, most of existing trackers and datasets focus on
the short-term tracking task, the setting of which is that the
tracked object is almost always in the camera filed of view
but not necessarily fully visible. There still exists a big
gap between the short-term tracking setting and the realistic
tracking applications. In recent, some researchers have focused on the long-term tracking task and attempted to create
related large-scale benchmarks (such as VOT2018LT [23]
and OxUvA [33]).
Compared with short-term tracking, the long-term tracking task additionally requires the tracker having the capability to capture the tracked object in long-term videos and
to handle the frequent target disappearance and reappearance. Thus, it poses more challenges than short-term tracking mainly from two aspects. First, the frame length in longterm datasets is much greater than that in short-term scenarios. For examples, the average numbers of frame length
in the VOT2018LT [23], OxUvA [33], OTB2015 [35] and
VOT2018 [16] benchmarks are 4196, 4235, 590 and 350,
respectively (the former two are long-term datasets and the
latter two are well-known short-term datasets). Second,
there exist a large number of absent labels in long-term
tracking datasets. Thus, it is critical for long-term trackers
to capture the tracked object in long-term sequences, determine whether the target is present or absent, and have the
capability of image-wide re-detection.
Until now, some long-term trackers have been developed based on hand-crafted features, including TLD [15],
LCT [24], FCLT [22], MUSTer [11], CMT [26] and
EBT [40]. Although these methods obtain some achievements on a small number of long-term videos, they cannot achieve satisfactory performance on recent long-term
benchmarks (see experiments in [16, 33]). Recently, some
deep-learning-based algorithms [7, 16, 38] are proposed for
long-term tracking and significantly improved the tracking
performance. But there still lacks of a robust and real-time
framework to address the long-term tracking task.
In this work, we propose a novel ‘Skimming-Perusal’

2385

