View Independent Generative Adversarial Network for Novel View Synthesis
Xiaogang Xu1 Ying-Cong Chen1 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent YouTu Lab
{xgxu, ycchen, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Synthesizing novel views from a 2D image requires to infer 3D structure and project it back to 2D from a new viewpoint. In this paper, we propose an encoder-decoder based
generative adversarial network VI-GAN to tackle this problem. Our method is to let the network, after seeing many
images of objects belonging to the same category in different views, obtain essential knowledge of intrinsic properties
of the objects. To this end, an encoder is designed to extract
view-independent feature that characterizes intrinsic properties of the input image, which includes 3D structure, color,
texture etc. We also make the decoder hallucinate the image of a novel view based on the extracted feature and an
arbitrary user-specific camera pose. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our model can synthesize high-quality images in different views with continuous camera poses, and
is general for various applications.

1. Introduction
We tackle the problem of novel view synthesis – given
a single 2D image of objects, we aim to synthesize a new
one captured from an arbitrary viewpoint. This potentially
benefits a large variety of applications in computer vision
and robotics. For instance, multiple synthesized 2D views
form an efficient 3D representation as a collection of images
[4]. In robotics, able to see objects in various viewpoints is
helpful for planing [19].
Existing methods for novel view synthesis fall into two
categories – geometry- and learning-based ones. Given a
2D image, geometry-based methods [16, 27] first estimate
its 3D representation, and project it back to 2D space based
on the target view. By directly building 3D models, these
methods allow synthesizing 2D new images from arbitrary
viewpoints. However, estimating the 3D structure from a
single 2D image is intrinsically ill-posed. If not restricted
to specific scenarios, e.g., faces [1], 3D models cannot be
accurately generated.
On the other hand, with powerful convolutional neural
networks (CNN), learning-based methods [28, 34, 29, 30]

directly produce the final image in the target view, without
explicitly estimating its 3D structure. View synthesis is thus
implemented with a mapping function between the source
and target views associated with their camera poses [34]. As
estimation of 3D models is not needed, it is applicable to a
wider range of scenarios. The limitation is that directly producing a 2D image without considering 3D structure does
not generalize well. To address this issue, method of [24]
incorporates extra 3D information, which is however not
considered in this paper since we do not think 3D information is always accessible in practice and instead propose a
more general solution for novel view synthesis.
Recently, generative adversarial networks (GAN) [8, 26]
were applied to multi-view synthesis. Current GAN-based
approaches usually discretize camera parameters into a
fixed-length vector to improve performance [29, 30]. Nevertheless, 3D-related information contained in camera poses
is inevitably damaged with such setting.
In this paper, we propose a method to benefit from both
learning- and geometry-based methods while ameliorating
their drawback. Our method is essentially learned-based,
and yet still infers 3D knowledge implicitly. The key idea
is based on the fact that any 2D image is a projection of the
3D world. If a certain feature is invariant with viewpoints,
it depicts important intrinsic property of the 3D world. By
specifying the camera pose, we reconstruct the 2D image
according to the view independent “3D” feature.
It follows a virtual camera system – that is, all intrinsic
information like shape, color, texture, and illumination, is
first estimated. Then a 2D image is rendered based on the
3D information as well as the visual camera. Our system,
which is called View Independent Generative Adversarial
Network (VI-GAN), simulates such a pipeline. We first infer
knowledge that characterizes the 3D world based on a 2D
image. Then with user specified camera pose, we project
this 3D world back to image space to synthesize a new view.
This is the first attempt to take this strategy. It is noteworthy
that this setting naturally leads to an encoder-decoder architecture where the encoder embeds the 2D image to a latent
3D feature, and the decoder renders a novel image based on
the learned 3D feature and target camera pose.

7791

