GANalyze: Toward Visual Definitions of Cognitive Image Properties
Lore Goetschalckx*
MIT, KU Leuven

Alex Andonian*
MIT

Aude Oliva
MIT

Phillip Isola
MIT

lore.goetschalckx@kuleuven.be

andonian@mit.edu

oliva@mit.edu

phillipi@mit.edu

0.58

0.73

0.77

0.79

0.92

Less memorable

0.58

0.27

More memorable

Less memorable

0.60

0.73

0.50

0.84

Less aesthetic

0.34

More memorable

Lower valence

More aesthetic

Higher valence

Figure 1. Visualizations produced by GANalyze. The middle columns represent generated images serving as the original seed. These
are then modified to be characterized more (right) or less (left) by a given property of interest, as told by the score in the top left corner.

Abstract
We introduce a framework that uses Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to study cognitive properties like
memorability. These attributes are of interest because we
do not have a concrete visual definition of what they entail. What does it look like for a dog to be more memorable? GANs allow us to generate a manifold of naturallooking images with fine-grained differences in their visual
attributes. By navigating this manifold in directions that increase memorability, we can visualize what it looks like for
a particular generated image to become more memorable.
The resulting “visual definitions” surface image properties (like “object size”) that may underlie memorability.
Through behavioral experiments, we verify that our method
indeed discovers image manipulations that causally affect
human memory performance. We further demonstrate that
the same framework can be used to analyze image aesthetics
and emotional valence. ganalyze.csail.mit.edu.

1. Introduction
Why do we remember the things we do? Decades of
work have provided numerous explanations: we remember

things that are out of context [5, 30], that are emotionally
salient [4], that involve people [14], etc. But a picture is, as
they say, worth a thousand words. What does it look like to
make an image more memorable? The same questions can
be asked for many cognitive visual properties: what visual
changes can take a bland foggy seascape and add just the
right colors and tones to make it serenely beautiful.
Attributes like memorability, aesthetics, and emotional
valence are of special interest because we do not have concrete definitions of what they entail. This contrasts with
attributes like “object size” and “smile”. We know exactly
what it means to zoom in on a photo, and it’s easy to imagine what a face looks like as it forms a smile. It’s an open
question, on the other hand, what exactly do changes in
“memorability” look like? Previous work has built powerful predictive models of image memorability [14, 19] but
these have fallen short of providing a fine-grained visual explanation of what underlies the predictions.
In this paper, we propose a new framework, GANalyze,
based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [6], to
study the visual features and properties that underlie highlevel cognitive attributes. We focus on image memorability
as a case study, but also show that the same methods can be
applied to study image aesthetics and emotional valence.

5744

