PAMTRI: Pose-Aware Multi-Task Learning for Vehicle Re-Identification
Using Highly Randomized Synthetic Data
Zheng Tang∗ Milind Naphade Stan Birchfield Jonathan Tremblay
William Hodge Ratnesh Kumar Shuo Wang Xiaodong Yang
NVIDIA

Abstract
In comparison with person re-identification (ReID),
which has been widely studied in the research community,
vehicle ReID has received less attention. Vehicle ReID is
challenging due to 1) high intra-class variability (caused
by the dependency of shape and appearance on viewpoint),
and 2) small inter-class variability (caused by the similarity
in shape and appearance between vehicles produced by different manufacturers). To address these challenges, we propose a Pose-Aware Multi-Task Re-Identification (PAMTRI)
framework. This approach includes two innovations compared with previous methods. First, it overcomes viewpointdependency by explicitly reasoning about vehicle pose and
shape via keypoints, heatmaps and segments from pose estimation. Second, it jointly classifies semantic vehicle attributes (colors and types) while performing ReID, through
multi-task learning with the embedded pose representations. Since manually labeling images with detailed pose
and attribute information is prohibitive, we create a largescale highly randomized synthetic dataset with automatically annotated vehicle attributes for training. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of each proposed component, showing that PAMTRI achieves significant improvement over state-of-the-art on two mainstream vehicle ReID
benchmarks: VeRi and CityFlow-ReID.

1. Introduction
The wide deployment of traffic cameras presents an immense opportunity for video analytics in a variety of applications such as logistics, transportation, and smart cities. A
particularly crucial problem in such analytics is the crosscamera association of targets like pedestrians and vehicles,
i.e., re-identification (ReID), which is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Although both pedestrians and vehicles are common objects in smart city applications, in recent years most attention has been paid to person ReID. This is mainly due
∗ Work done as an intern at NVIDIA. Zheng is now with Amazon.

Figure 1. The problem of vehicle ReID involves identifying the
same vehicle across different viewing perspectives and cameras,
based solely on appearance in the images. Our approach uses
multi-task learning to leverage information about the vehicle’s
pose and semantic attributes (color and type). Synthetic data play
a key role in training, enabling highly detailed annotations to be
generated automatically and inexpensively. Best viewed in color.

to the abundance of well-annotated pedestrian data, along
with the historical focus of computer vision research on human faces and bodies. Furthermore, compared to pedestrians, vehicle ReID is arguably more challenging due to
high intra-class variability caused by the variety of shapes
from different viewing angles, coupled with small interclass variability since car models produced by various manufacturers are limited in their shapes and colors. To verify
this intuition, we compared the feature distributions in both
person-based and vehicle-based ReID tasks. Specifically,
we used GoogLeNet [27] pre-trained on ImageNet [5] to
extract 1,024-dimensional features from Market1501 [42]
and CityFlow-ReID [30], respectively. For each dataset, the
ratio of the intra- to inter-class variability (based on Euclidean feature distance) was calculated. The results are
as follows: 0.921 for pedestrians (Market1501) and 0.946
for vehicles (CityFlow-ReID), which support the notion

211

