Semi-Supervised Video Salient Object Detection Using Pseudo-Labels
Pengxiang Yan1 Guanbin Li1∗ Yuan Xie1,2
Zhen Li3 Chuan Wang4 Tianshui Chen1,2 Liang Lin1,2
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 DarkMatter AI Research 4 Megvii Technology
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, the Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
yanpx@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, xiey39@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
lizhen36@connect.hku.hk, wangchuan@megvii.com, tianshuichen@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

1. Introduction
Salient object detection aims at identifying the most visually distinctive objects in an image or video that attract
human attention. In contrast to the other type of saliency
detection, i.e., eye fixation prediction [20, 41] which is designed to locate the focus of human attention, salient object
detection focuses on segmenting the most salient objects
with precise contours. This topic has drawn widespread interest as it can be applied to a wide range of vision applications, such as object segmentation [46], visual tracking [47],
video compression [14], and video summarization [32].
∗ Corresponding author is Guanbin Li.

VOS
148

Deep learning-based video salient object detection has
recently achieved great success with its performance significantly outperforming any other unsupervised methods.
However, existing data-driven approaches heavily rely on a
large quantity of pixel-wise annotated video frames to deliver such promising results. In this paper, we address the
semi-supervised video salient object detection task using
pseudo-labels. Specifically, we present an effective video
saliency detector that consists of a spatial refinement network and a spatiotemporal module. Based on the same refinement network and motion information in terms of optical flow, we further propose a novel method for generating
pixel-level pseudo-labels from sparsely annotated frames.
By utilizing the generated pseudo-labels together with a
part of manual annotations, our video saliency detector
learns spatial and temporal cues for both contrast inference and coherence enhancement, thus producing accurate
saliency maps. Experimental results demonstrate that our
proposed semi-supervised method even greatly outperforms
all the state-of-the-art fully supervised methods across three
public benchmarks of VOS, DAVIS, and FBMS.

VOS
101

Abstract

GT mask

Pseudo mask
(a)

GT mask

Pseudo mask
(b)

Figure 1. Example ground truth masks (orange mask) vs. our generated pseudo-labels (blue mask) from the VOS [27] dataset.

Recently, video salient object detection has achieved significant progress [24, 36, 44] due to the development of
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, the
performance of these deep learning-based methods comes
at the cost of a large quantity of densely annotated frames.
It is arduous and time consuming to manually annotate a
large number of pixel-level video frames since even an experienced annotator needs several minutes to label a single
frame. Moreover, a video clip usually contains hundreds of
video frames with similar content. To reduce the impact of
label noise on model training, the annotators need to spend
considerable time checking the consistency of the label before and after. Considering that visual saliency is subjective, the annotation work becomes even more difficult, and
the quality of the labeling is hard to guarantee.
Although there are many unsupervised video salient object detection methods [42, 43, 27] that are free of numerous
training samples, these methods suffer from low prediction
accuracy and efficiency. Since most of these methods exploit hand-crafted low-level features, e.g., color, gradient
or contrast, they work well in some considered cases while
failing in other challenging cases. Recent research by Li et
al. [22] noticed the weakness of unsupervised methods and
the lack of annotations for deep learning-based methods.
They attempted to use the combination of coarse activation
maps and saliency maps, which were generated by learningbased classification networks and unsupervised methods
respectively, as pixel-wise training annotations for image
salient object detection. However, this method is not suit-

7284

