DiscoNet: Shapes Learning on Disconnected Manifolds for 3D Editing
Éloi Mehr1 , Ariane Jourdan , Nicolas Thome1 , Matthieu Cord1 , and Vincent Guitteny
1

LIP6, Sorbonne Université

Abstract
Editing 3D models is a very challenging task, as it requires complex interactions with the 3D shape to reach the
targeted design, while preserving the global consistency and
plausibility of the shape. In this work, we present an intelligent and user-friendly 3D editing tool, where the edited
model is constrained to lie onto a learned manifold of realistic shapes. Due to the topological variability of real
3D models, they often lie close to a disconnected manifold,
which cannot be learned with a common learning algorithm.
Therefore, our tool is based on a new deep learning model,
DiscoNet, which extends 3D surface autoencoders in two
ways. Firstly, our deep learning model uses several autoencoders to automatically learn each connected component of
a disconnected manifold, without any supervision. Secondly,
each autoencoder infers the output 3D surface by deforming
a pre-learned 3D template specific to each connected component. Both advances translate into improved 3D synthesis,
thus enhancing the quality of our 3D editing tool.

1. Introduction
While 3D models become increasingly used as virtual
and augmented reality experiences expand, the creation of
3D contents still requires advanced skills in 3D modeling,
and remains cumbersome even for experts. Free-form deformation algorithms comprise a natural approach to broaden
the audience of 3D design softwares. The user starts from a
mesh, selected in a 3D database to be close to his intended
design. He can then deform this mesh towards his objective using high-level 3D editing tools, such as cage-based
deformations [40], positional handles [43], or sketch-based
deformations [51]. Even though these tools simplify the 3D
modeling process, they still target an experienced user to
achieve a realistic result. Indeed, a slight mistake during the
editing can make the 3D model completely implausible, as
the user is neither guided nor constrained.
The same problematic also arises in photo retouching.
Deep learning has proven to be a powerful technique for the

Figure 1: Illustration of a disconnected manifold of 3D chairs,
where a chair is optimized on the connected component it lies on
to fit a user deformation and generate the expected realistic design.

development of user-friendly and realistic 2D editing tools
[6, 52]. These algorithms leverage real datasets to learn to
generate plausible photos, and use this knowledge to retouch
a photo in a plausible way from the user’s intention. A
manifold of real photos is learned, and the original photo
is optimized in the latent space of the manifold to meet the
user’s constraints, therefore reaching the expected design
while ensuring the global plausibility of the photo.
Although significant progress has been made in 3D shapes
learning, especially with the recent introduction of autoencoders dedicated to 3D [17, 46], two issues remain to devise
an efficient learning-guided 3D editing pipeline. Firstly, 3D
shapes do not generally lie on a connected manifold, even
when they belong to the same category. For example, there
is no continuous path which interpolates a desk chair with
wheels into a chair with four legs while always generating
plausible chairs along the path. The chairs manifold is actually disconnected, each connected component corresponding
to a different typology of chairs, as illustrated in Figure 1.

3474

