Learning Joint 2D-3D Representations for Depth Completion
Yun Chen1 Bin Yang1,2 Ming Liang1 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Toronto
{yun.chen, byang10, ming.liang, urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract

Sparse Depth Input

In this paper, we tackle the problem of depth completion from RGBD data. Towards this goal, we design a simple yet effective neural network block that learns to extract
joint 2D and 3D features. Specifically, the block consists
of two domain-specific sub-networks that apply 2D convolution on image pixels and continuous convolution on 3D
points, with their output features fused in image space. We
build the depth completion network simply by stacking the
proposed block, which has the advantage of learning hierarchical representations that are fully fused between 2D
and 3D spaces at multiple levels. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on the challenging KITTI depth
completion benchmark and show that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, the use of sensors that contain both
image information as well as depth has increased significantly. They are typically used in applications such as selfdriving vehicles, robotic manipulation as well as gaming.
While passive sensors like cameras typically generate dense
data, active sensors like LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) produce sparse depth observation of the environment.
As a result, this semi-dense representation of the world can
be inaccurate at regions close to object boundaries. One solution is to use high-end depth sensors with higher data density, but they are usually very expensive. A more affordable
alternative is depth completion (shown in Figure 1), which
takes the sparse depth observation and dense image as input, and estimates the dense depth map. In practice, depth
completion is often employed as a precursor to downstream
perception tasks such as detection, semantic segmentation
or instance segmentation.
Despite many attempts to solve the problem, depth completion remains unsolved. Challenges such as the inherent
ambiguity in extracting depth from images, as well as the
noise and uncertainty in the unstructured sparse depth observation, make depth completion a non-trivial task.

RGB Image Input

Dense Depth Output

Figure 1. Illustration of the depth completion task. The model
takes a sparse depth map (projection of the LiDAR point cloud)
and a dense RGB image as input, and produces a dense depth map.

Many approaches [33, 7, 21, 26, 34] reason in the 2D
space only by projecting the 3D point cloud to 2D image
space. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are typically
used to learn multi-modality representations in 2D space.
However, as the metric space is distorted after the camera
projection, such approaches have difficulty capturing precise 3D geometric clues. As a result, auxiliary task like
surface normal estimation is added to better supervise the
feature learning [26]. Other methods [32] reason in 3D
space only by extracting 3D features (e.g. Truncated Signed
Distance Function [24]) from the sparse depth image of the
scene and applies 3D CNN to learn 3D representations and
complete the scene densely in 3D. The drawback is the lack
of exploitation of the dense image data, which can provide
discriminative appearance clues.
In contrast, in this paper, we take advantage of representations in both 2D and 3D spaces and design a simple
yet effective architecture that fuses the information between
these representations at multiple levels. Specifically, we
design a 2D-3D fuse block that takes feature map in 2D

10023

