Copy-and-Paste Networks for Deep Video Inpainting
Sungho Lee
Yonsei University

Seoung Wug Oh
Yonsei University

DaeYeun Won
Hyundai MNSOFT

Abstract
We present a novel deep learning based algorithm for
video inpainting. Video inpainting is a process of completing corrupted or missing regions in videos. Video inpainting has additional challenges compared to image inpainting due to the extra temporal information as well as the
need for maintaining the temporal coherency. We propose
a novel DNN-based framework called the Copy-and-Paste
Networks for video inpainting that takes advantage of additional information in other frames of the video. The network is trained to copy corresponding contents in reference
frames and paste them to fill the holes in the target frame.
Our network also includes an alignment network that computes affine matrices between frames for the alignment, enabling the network to take information from more distant
frames for robustness. Our method produces visually pleasing and temporally coherent results while running faster
than the state-of-the-art optimization-based method. In addition, we extend our framework for enhancing over/under
exposed frames in videos. Using this enhancement technique, we were able to significantly improve the lane detection accuracy on road videos.

1. Introduction
Inpainting is a task of completing an image that has
empty pixels by filling the empty regions with visually plausible pixels. Inpainting is very useful in image editing process, and is usually utilized to generate more satisfying images by removing unwanted objects in images. There is
a large body of literature on image inpainting and significant progress has been made recently by employing deep
learning for image inpainting. Impressive inpainting results
are reported by applying evolving deep generative models [7], synthesizing visually pleasing images even for complex scenes.
In this paper, we focus on the video inpainting problem.
Videos with additional temporal information makes the already difficult problem even more challenging. In addition to filling the holes for every frame, the algorithm has
to ensure that the completed frames are temporally con-

Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University

time

(a)
time

(b)

Figure 1: (a) We propose a DNN framework for video inpainting. Our Copy-and-Paste network learns to find corresponding pixels in other frames to fill in the holes in the
given frame. (b) Another application of our framework for
restoring an over-saturated image.

sistent. Due to these challenges, we have only seen one
work that tackles the problem using deep neural networks
(DNN) [13], compared to the image inpainting problem
where many deep learning based algorithms have been introduced.
While video inpainting is more challenging compared to
image inpainting, it inherently includes more cues for the
problem as valid pixels for missing regions in a frame may
exist in other frames. Therefore, we propose a novel DNN
based framework called the Copy-and-Paste Networks for
video inpainting that takes advantage of additional information in other frames in the video. As the name suggests, the
network is trained to copy the necessary pixels from other
frames and paste those pixels on the holes in the current
frame (Fig. 1).

4413

