AM-LFS: AutoML for Loss Function Search
Chuming Li1 ,* Xin Yuan1 ,* Chen Lin1 ,* Minghao Guo1 , Wei Wu1 , Junjie Yan1 , Wanli Ouyang2
1
SenseTime Group Limited
2
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
{lichuming,yuanxin,linchen,guominghao,wuwei,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com; wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have significantly
boosted the performance of a variety of visual analysis
tasks, such as image classification [16, 33, 10], face recognition [22, 37, 5], person re-identification [24, 38, 34, 6]
and object detection [8, 28] in recent years due to its high
capacity in learning discriminative features. Aside from
developing features from deeper networks to get better
performance, better loss functions have also been proven to
be effective on improving the performance of the computer
vision frameworks in most recent works [22, 20].
Conventional CNN-based vision frameworks usually apply a widely-used softmax loss to high level features. Lsoftmax [23] is a variant of softmax loss which added multiplicative angular to each class to improve feature discrimination in classification and verification tasks. [22] introduced A-softmax by applying L-softmax [23] to face recog* equal contribution

10

Loss

Designing an effective loss function plays an important
role in visual analysis. Most existing loss function designs
rely on hand-crafted heuristics that require domain experts
to explore the large design space, which is usually suboptimal and time-consuming. In this paper, we propose AutoML for Loss Function Search (AM-LFS) which leverages
REINFORCE to search loss functions during the training
process. The key contribution of this work is the design of
search space which can guarantee the generalization and
transferability on different vision tasks by including a bunch
of existing prevailing loss functions in a unified formulation.
We also propose an efficient optimization framework which
can dynamically optimize the parameters of loss function’s
distribution during training. Extensive experimental results
on four benchmark datasets show that, without any tricks,
our method outperforms existing hand-crafted loss functions in various computer vision tasks.

102

0

10

-2

10

-4

10

-6

ArcFace 0.5
Ours A
CosineFace 0.5
Ours B
SphereFace 0.5
Ours C
Original Softmax
Ours D
Focal Loss 0.5
Ours E

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Input

Figure 1. The motivation of the proposed loss function search
space. The figure shows that the candidate loss functions in our
search space (dotted lines) can well approximate the according existing loss functions (solid lines). The x-axis indicates the loss
input and the y-axis indicates the output loss values in log-scale.

nition task with weights normalization. [39, 37] moved the
angular margin into cosine space to overcome the optimization difficulty of [22] and achieved state-of-the-art performance. [5] can obtain more discriminative deep features
for face recognition by incorporating the additive angular
margin. In addition to the above margin-based softmax
loss functions, focal loss [20] is another variant of softmax
loss which was proposed to adopt a re-weighting scheme
to address the data imbalance problems in object detection.
While these methods improve performance over the traditional softmax loss, they still come with some limitations:
(1) Most existing methods rely on hand-crafted heuristics
that require great efforts from domain experts to explore the
large design space, which is usually sub-optimal and timeconsuming. (2) These methods are usually task-specific,
which may lack transferability when applied to other vision
tasks. By utilizing AutoML methods for exploration in a
well-designed loss function search space, a generic solution
can be proposed to further improve the performance.
In this paper, we propose AutoML for Loss Function

8410

