Joint Optimization for Cooperative Image Captioning
Gilad Vered
Bar-Ilan University

Gal Oren
Bar-Ilan University

Yuval Atzmon
Bar-Ilan University,
NVIDIA

Gal Chechik
Bar-Ilan University,
NVIDIA
gal.chechik@biu.ac.il

Abstract
When describing images with natural language, descriptions can be made more informative if tuned for downstream
tasks. This can be achieved by training two networks: a
“speaker” that generates sentences given an image and a
“listener” that uses them to perform a task. Unfortunately,
training multiple networks jointly to communicate, faces
two major challenges. First, the descriptions generated by
a speaker network are discrete and stochastic, making optimization very hard and inefficient. Second, joint training
usually causes the vocabulary used during communication
to drift and diverge from natural language.
To address these challenges, we present an effective optimization technique based on partial-sampling from a multinomial distribution combined with straight-through gradient updates, which we name PSST for Partial-Sampling
Straight-Through. We then show that the generated descriptions can be kept close to natural by constraining them to
be similar to human descriptions. Together, this approach
creates descriptions that are both more discriminative and
more natural than previous approaches. Evaluations on the
COCO benchmark show that PSST improve the recall@10
from 60% to 86% maintaining comparable language naturalness. Human evaluations show that it also increases
naturalness while keeping the discriminative power of generated captions.

1. Introduction
Describing images with natural language is a key step
for developing automated systems that communicate with
people. The complementary part of this human-machine
communication involves networks that can understand natural descriptions of images. Both of these tasks have been
studied intensively, but mostly as two separate problems,
image captioning and image retrieval. It is natural to “close
the loop” and seek to jointly train networks to cooperatively
communicate about visual content in natural language.

Figure 1: Challenges in training agents to communicate
about an image. (a) When a speaker network is trained
jointly with a listener network, the communicated language
may drift away from natural language, unless constrained,
yielding language that no longer maps to standard English
terms. (b): When the two network agents are trained separately, descriptions become less specific, because agents
cannot expect the other side to “understand” subtleties. (c):
Training both networks jointly while keeping communication close to natural language can yield descriptions that are
more discriminative while maintaining intelligibility.

Training multiple networks to communicate has been
studied in the context of visual dialogues [11, 12]. There,
a sequence of sentences is passed back-and-forth between
learning agents. Here, we take a step back and focus on a
single transmission between a “speaker network” and a “listener network”. We seek to develop the building blocks of
trainable communication by training both speaker and listener to communicate effectively with natural language.
What should be the properties of such natural communication? Good visual descriptions should obey two competing objectives. First, a description should be natural
and fluent, using well-formed and meaningful sentences, so
they can be communicated to people. Second, a description
should be image-specific and informative, capturing the rel-

8898

