Learning Spatial Awareness to Improve Crowd Counting
Zhi-Qi Cheng1,2∗, Jun-Xiu Li1,3∗, Qi Dai3 , Xiao Wu1 , Alexander G. Hauptmann2
1
Southwest Jiaotong University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Microsoft Research
{zhiqic, alex}@cs.cmu.edu, {lijunxiu@my, wuxiaohk@home}.swjtu.edu.cn, qid@microsoft.com

Abstract
The aim of crowd counting is to estimate the number
of people in images by leveraging the annotation of center positions for pedestrians’ heads. Promising progresses
have been made with the prevalence of deep Convolutional
Neural Networks. Existing methods widely employ the Euclidean distance (i.e., L2 loss) to optimize the model, which,
however, has two main drawbacks: (1) the loss has difficulty in learning the spatial awareness (i.e., the position of
head) since it struggles to retain the high-frequency variation in the density map, and (2) the loss is highly sensitive to various noises in crowd counting, such as the zeromean noise, head size changes, and occlusions. Although
the Maximum Excess over SubArrays (MESA) loss has been
previously proposed by [16] to address the above issues by
finding the rectangular subregion whose predicted density
map has the maximum difference from the ground truth, it
cannot be solved by gradient descent, thus can hardly be
integrated into the deep learning framework. In this paper, we present a novel architecture called SPatial Awareness Network (SPANet) to incorporate spatial context for
crowd counting. The Maximum Excess over Pixels (MEP)
loss is proposed to achieve this by finding the pixel-level
subregion with high discrepancy to the ground truth. To
this end, we devise a weakly supervised learning scheme to
generate such region with a multi-branch architecture. The
proposed framework can be integrated into existing deep
crowd counting methods and is end-to-end trainable. Extensive experiments on four challenging benchmarks show
that our method can significantly improve the performance
of baselines. More remarkably, our approach outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on all benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
The problem of crowd counting is described in [16]. Different from visual object detection, it is impossible to provide bounding boxes for all pedestrians due to the extremely
dense crowds. On the other side, when only the total crowd
∗ indicates equal contribution. This work was done when Zhi-Qi Cheng
and Jun-Xiu Li were visiting at Microsoft Research. Xiao Wu is the corresponding author.

Figure 1: The L2 loss function has difficulty in learning the spatial
awareness and is sensitive to various noises in crowd counting, which will
lead to a lower estimation in high-density regions (the first row of each example), and a higher estimation in low-density regions (the second row of
each example). Note that the corresponding improvements of our method
are shown in Figure 5.

counts of the images are provided, the training process will
become notably difficult since the spatial awareness is completely ignored. Therefore, to preserve as many spatial constraints as possible and reduce annotation cost, the previous
work [16] started to only provide center points of heads and
utilizes Gaussian distribution to generate ground truth density maps. It is worth noting that this annotation scheme is
widely adopted by subsequent studies.
Existing crowd counting approaches mainly focus on improving the scale invariance of feature representation, including the multi-column networks [13, 38, 39, 42, 52, 6],
scale aggregation modules [3, 47], and scale-invariant networks [9, 17, 20, 39, 45]. Despite the architectures of these
methods are different, the L2 loss function is employed by
most of them. As a result, the spatial awareness in crowd
image is largely ignored, though more scale information is
embedded into their features.
We have examined three state-of-the-art approaches
(i.e., MCNN [52], CSRNet [17], and SANet [3]) on
four crowd counting datasets (i.e., ShanghaiTech [52],
UCF CC 50 [11], WorldExpo’10 [48], and UCSD [4]).
Two examples are shown in Figure 1. Similar to [3, 19, 20],
we observe that dense-crowd regions are usually underestimated, while sparse-crowd regions are overestimated. Such
phenomenon is due to two main factors. First, the pixelwise L2 loss struggles to retain the high-frequency variation

6152

