VideoMem: Constructing, Analyzing, Predicting Short-Term and Long-Term
Video Memorability
Romain Cohendet
Technicolor, Rennes, France

Claire-Hélène Demarty
InterDigital, Rennes, France

romain.cohendet@laposte.net

claire-helene.demarty@interdigital.com

Ngoc Q. K. Duong
InterDigital, Rennes, France

Martin Engilberge
InterDigital, Rennes, France

quang-khanh-ngoc.duong@interdigital.com

martin.engilberge@interdigital.com

Abstract

any other perceptual concept, we can observe individual differences while memorizing content, in this paper we target
the capture and prediction of the part of the memorability
that is shared by humans, as it can be assessed by averaging individual memory performances. This shared-acrossobservers part of the memorability, and especially longterm memorability, has a very broad application range in
various areas including education and learning, content retrieval, search, filtering and summarizing, storytelling, etc.

Humans share a strong tendency to memorize/forget
some of the visual information they encounter. This paper focuses on understanding the intrinsic memorability of
visual content. To address this challenge, we introduce a
large scale dataset (VideoMem) composed of 10,000 videos
with memorability scores. In contrast to previous work on
image memorability – where memorability was measured a
few minutes after memorization – memory performance is
measured twice: a few minutes and again 24-72 hours after
memorization. Hence, the dataset comes with short-term
and long-term memorability annotations. After an in-depth
analysis of the dataset, we investigate various deep neural network-based models for the prediction of video memorability. Our best model using a ranking loss achieves a
Spearman’s rank correlation of 0.494 (respectively 0.256)
for short-term (resp. long-term) memorability prediction,
while our model with attention mechanism provides insights
of what makes a content memorable. The VideoMem dataset
with pre-extracted features is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
While some contents have the power to burn themselves
into our memories for a long time, others are quickly forgotten [17]. Evolution made our brain efficient to remember only the information relevant for our survival, reproduction, happiness, etc. This explains why, as humans, we
share a strong tendency to memorize/forget the same images, which translates into a high human consistency in image memorability (IM) [20], and probably also a high consistency for video memorability (VM). Although, like for
1 https://www.technicolor.com/dream/
research-innovation/video-memorability-dataset

The study of VM from a computer vision point of view
is a new field of research, encouraged by the success of IM
since the seminal work of Isola et al. [17]. In contrast to
other cues of video importance, such as aesthetics, interestingness or emotions, memorability has the advantage of
being clearly definable and objectively measurable (i.e., using a measure that is not influenced by the observer’s personal judgement). This certainly participates to the growing interest for its study. IM has initially been defined as
the probability for an image to be recognized a few minutes after a single view, when presented amidst a stream
of images [17]. This definition has been widely accepted
within subsequent work [24, 21, 3, 20, 23]). The introduction of deep learning to address the challenge of IM prediction causes models to achieve results close to human consistency [20, 1, 34, 18, 31, 12]. As a result of this success, researchers have recently extended this challenge to
videos [14, 30, 7, 5]. However, this new research field is
nascent. As argued in [7], releasing a large-scale dataset for
VM would highly contribute to launch this research field,
as it was the case for the two important dataset releases
in IM [17, 20]. Such a dataset should try to overcome the
weaknesses of the previously released datasets. In particular, previous research on IM focused on the measurement of
memory performances only a few minutes after memorization. However, passage of time is a factor well-studied in
psychology for its influence on memory, while having been

2531

