Probabilistic Deep Ordinal Regression Based on Gaussian Processes
Yanzhu Liu, Fan Wang, Adams Wai Kin Kong
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798
yzliu@ntu.edu.sg, fan005@e.ntu.edu.sg, adamskong@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
With excellent representation power for complex data,
deep neural networks (DNNs) based approaches are stateof-the-art for ordinal regression problem which aims to
classify instances into ordinal categories. However, DNNs
are not able to capture uncertainties and produce probabilistic interpretations. As a probabilistic model, Gaussian Processes (GPs) on the other hand offers uncertainty
information, which is nonetheless lack of scalability for
large datasets. This paper adapts traditional GPs for ordinal regression problem by using both conjugate and nonconjugate ordinal likelihood. Based on that, it proposes a
deep neural network with a GPs layer on the top, which
is trained end-to-end by the stochastic gradient descent
method for both neural network parameters and GPs parameters. The parameters in the ordinal likelihood function
are learned as neural network parameters so that the proposed framework is able to produce fitted likelihood functions for training sets and make probabilistic predictions for
test points. Experimental results on three real-world benchmarks – image aesthetics rating, historical image grading
and age group estimation – demonstrate that in terms of
mean absolute error, the proposed approach outperforms
state-of-the-art ordinal regression approaches and provides
the confidence for predictions.

1. Introduction
Ordinal regression is a supervised learning problem aiming to predict discrete labels with a natural order. An example is apparent age group estimation, which grades face
images based on an ordinal scale such as “Infants”, “Children”, “Teenagers”, “Youth”, “Young adults”, “Adults”,
“Middle aged ” and “Aged”. Ordinal regression can be
viewed as a special case of metric regression, where the regression targets are discrete and finite, and the differences
between adjacent labels are not necessary to be equal. If the
ordinal relationship of labels is ignored, the problem becomes to multi-class classification.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have attracted great attention in these several years and performed well on many
classification problems. There are a few works [16] [12]
[1] [13] employing DNNs to ordinal regression problems.
All of them transformed ordinal regression problems to certain classification problems by taking ordinal relationship
between categories into consideration. If ordinal regression is viewed as a bridge between multi-class classification
and metric regression, existing DNNs based ordinal regression approaches look it from the classification side. Therefore, they focused more on whether an instance belongs to
a category or not rather than how close to its ground truth
category. Taking advantages of representation power and
scalability of deep learning, DNNs based ordinal regression
approaches are state-of-the-art. However, they also inherit
standard DNNs’ limitations: being not able to tell whether
a model is certain about its output like probabilistic models.
Gaussian Process, as a probabilistic model, learns the
distributions over functions and is able to offer confidence
bounds for prediction. To benefit from both representative power and calibrated probabilistic modelling, efforts
have been invested to combine DNNs and GPs recently
([5][6][3]). However, most of existing attempts worked
as a separated fashion: DNNs are used to extract features
and then traditional GPs are trained on the deep features
[24]. An end-to-end model was proposed by Hinton &
Salakhutdinov[8], but they used a large set of unlabelled
data to pretrain deep belief networks (DBN) unsupervisedly, then fine-tuned the DBN + GP model with the limited labelled data. The main barrier blocking the combined model to be trained end-to-end for large dataset is
that the performance of GPs cannot be guaranteed if it is
optimized in stochastic mini-batch manner, especially for
non-Gaussian likelihood. Hensman et al. [7] proposed a
variational approach to allow stochastic optimization to GPs
classification, [23] and [2] integrated DNNs to GPs for
multi-class classification. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no existing work to model ordinal data by DNNs
and GPs hybrid networks.
This paper adapts GPs regression to ordinal regression

5301

