Better and Faster: Exponential Loss for Image Patch Matching
Shuang Wang1

Yanfeng Li1
Xuefeng Liang1,2
Dou Quan1
Bowu Yang1
Shaowei Wei1
Licheng Jiao1
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University,Shaanxi,China 2 Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
xliang@xidian.edu.cn

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Comparison of clustering results using varied loss functions on the MNIST dataset. (a) and (b) use Siamese losses,
(c) and (d) use triplet losses. (a) and (c) use linear losses, and the average standard deviations (STD) of intra-class distances
are 0.71 and 0.81, respectively. (b) and (d) use our proposed exponential losses, and the average STDs of intra-class distances
are 0.57 and 0.65. Clearly, the networks with exponential losses result in a smaller intra-class distance which alleviates the
difficulty of classification, especially with hard samples.

Abstract
Recent studies on image patch matching are paying more
attention on hard sample learning, because easy samples do
not contribute much to the network optimization. They have
proposed various hard negative sample mining strategies,
but very few addressed this problem from the perspective of
loss functions. Our research shows that the conventional
Siamese and triplet losses treat all samples linearly, thus
make the training time consuming. Instead, we propose the
exponential Siamese and triplet losses, which can naturally
focus more on hard samples and put less emphasis on easy
ones, meanwhile, speed up the optimization. To assist the
exponential losses, we introduce the hard positive sample
mining to further enhance the effectiveness. The extensive
experiments demonstrate our proposal improves both metric and descriptor learning on several well accepted benchmarks, and outperforms the state-of-the-arts on the UBC
dataset. Moreover, it also shows a better generalizability on
cross-spectral image matching and image retrieval tasks.

1. Introduction
Patch-based matching technology has been widely applied in structure from motion [41], stereo matching [10]
and image retrieval [31]. Early methods, such as SIFT

[23] and SURF [6], mainly focus on the design of handcrafted feature descriptors. However, they lack an ability of
capturing the higher-level structural information, and only
work well in some specific scenarios. Recently, the deeplearning based methods [2, 3, 13, 19, 24] have been showing
a promising performance on this task, especially on effectiveness and generalizability [13, 21, 36]. According to the
objective functions, these methods can be divided into two
categories: metric learning and descriptor learning. The
former gives the pairwise matching probabilities directly
[13, 21, 39], while the latter outputs the features of image patches, whose similarities are measured in the feature
space [19, 27, 36, 40].
Both methods mostly use Siamese or triplet losses to optimize the network. However, they cannot deal with the
problem of data redundancy because the training data are
patch pairs/triplets. When the number of patches grows,
the possible non-matching patch pairs/triplets are exponentially increasing. In addition, the majority of training data
are the easy negative samples. Usually, they contribute little to network optimization after a few training epochs, then
make the training time consuming. To address this problem, Zhang et al. [40] proposed a regularization term to
fully utilize the descriptor space. Tian et al. [36] introduced
a progressive sampling strategy to generate samples more
effectively. Later, a hardest-in-batch strategy proposed in

4812

