Not All Parts Are Created Equal:
3D Pose Estimation by Modeling Bi-directional Dependencies of Body Parts
Jue Wang1,2
1

Shaoli Huang∗1

Xinchao Wang3

Dacheng Tao1

UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
2

University of Technology Sydney 3 Stevens Institute of Technology

jue.wang.0911@gmail.com, {shaoli.huang, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au, xinchao.wang@stevens.edu

Abstract

2D joint locations

Pose attributes
On-plane

Not all the human body parts have the same degree of
freedom (DOF) due to the physiological structure. For example, the limbs may move more flexibly and freely than the
torso does. Most of the existing 3D pose estimation methods, despite the very promising results achieved, treat the
body joints equally and consequently often lead to larger
reconstruction errors on the limbs. In this paper, we propose a progressive approach that explicitly accounts for the
distinct DOFs among the body parts. We model parts with
higher DOFs like the elbows, as dependent components of
the corresponding parts with lower DOFs like the torso,
of which the 3D locations can be more reliably estimated.
Meanwhile, the high-DOF parts may in turn impose a constraint on where the low-DOF ones lie. As a result, parts
with different DOFs supervise one another, yielding physically constrained and plausible pose-estimation results. To
further facilitate the prediction of the high-DOF parts, we
introduce a pose-attribute estimation, where the relative location of a limb joint with respect to the torso, which has
the least DOF of a human body, is explicitly estimated and
further fed to the joint-estimation module. The proposed approach achieves very promising results, outperforming the
state of the art on several benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The unique physiological structure of a human body results in that different body parts may have different degrees
of freedom (DOFs). For example, the motion range of a
human wrist is significantly broader than that of a shoulder. Such distinct DOFs further lead to the varying levels of
difficulties when it comes to 3D pose estimation, for which
the goal is to predict the 3D locations of human body joints
from one or multiple images.
Most of the existing 3D pose estimation methods [48,
∗ Corresponding author

Back

Front

On-plane
Back

y

y

z

o

3D torso
Low-DOF

y

z

x

o

z

x

3D proximal limb joints

o

x

3D distal limb joints
High-DOF

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed approach. The 2D joint
locations along with the pose attributes are first estimated using a
multi-task network, and then fed as input to the 3D pose estimation network that explicitly models the bi-directional dependencies
among body parts of different DOFs. Specifically, the high-DOF
body parts are treated as dependent components of low-DOF ones,
and in turn, provide a constraint on where the low-DOF ones lie.

47, 49, 14, 17, 7, 22, 33, 45, 21, 5, 31], despite the impressive state-of-the-art performances achieved, have overlooked such DOF distinctions among the body parts and
have treated them equally during the learning process. This
consequently leads to the often larger reconstruction errors
on the more flexible and thus more challenging body parts,
such as the limbs.
In this paper, we propose a dedicated approach that explicitly utilize the DOF differences among body parts to facilitate 3D pose estimation (see Fig. 1). We categorize the
body parts into three groups based on the increasing levels
of DOFs: the torso, the proximal limb joints including the
head, the elbows and the knees, and the distal limb joints
including the wrists and ankles. By such categorization, we

7771

