CAMEL: A Weakly Supervised Learning Framework for Histopathology Image
Segmentation
Gang Xu1 , Zhigang Song2 , Zhuo Sun3 , Calvin Ku3 , Zhe Yang1 , Cancheng Liu3 , Shuhao Wang1,3 ,
Jianpeng Ma4∗ , Wei Xu1∗
1

Tsinghua University 2 The Chinese PLA General Hospital 3 Thorough Images 4 Fudan University
xug14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, songzhg301@139.com,
{zhuo.sun,calvin.j.ku,liucancheng,eric.wang}@thorough.ai, jpma@fudan.edu.cn,
{yangzhe2017,weixu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Histopathology image analysis plays a critical role in
cancer diagnosis and treatment. To automatically segment
the cancerous regions, fully supervised segmentation algorithms require labor-intensive and time-consuming labeling
at the pixel level. In this research, we propose CAMEL, a
weakly supervised learning framework for histopathology
image segmentation using only image-level labels. Using
multiple instance learning (MIL)-based label enrichment,
CAMEL splits the image into latticed instances and automatically generates instance-level labels. After label enrichment, the instance-level labels are further assigned to
the corresponding pixels, producing the approximate pixellevel labels and making fully supervised training of segmentation models possible. CAMEL achieves comparable
performance with the fully supervised approaches in both
instance-level classification and pixel-level segmentation on
CAMELYON16 and a colorectal adenoma dataset. Moreover, the generality of the automatic labeling methodology
may benefit future weakly supervised learning studies for
histopathology image analysis.

1. Introduction
Histopathology image analysis is the gold standard for
cancer detection and diagnosis. In recent years, the development of deep neural network has achieved many breakthroughs in automatic histopathology image classification
and segmentation [15, 18, 19]. These methods highly depend on the availability of a large number of pixel-level labels, which are labor-intensive and time-consuming to ob∗ Corresponding author.

tain.
To relieve the demand for theses fine-grained labels, people have proposed many weakly supervised learning algorithms only requiring coarse-grained labels at the imagelevel [13, 25, 26]. However, due to the lack of sufficient
supervision information, the accuracy is much lower than
their fully supervised counterparts. One way to improve
the performance of weakly supervised learning algorithms
is to add more supervision constraints. For natural images, some studies [8, 14, 16] have proven the effectiveness of adding bounding boxes or scribble information artificially in their weakly supervised learning process. CDWSMIL [13] has also shown the advantage of artificial area
constraints for weakly supervised histopathological segmentation. However, it still takes much effort to obtain artificial constraints, especially in histopathology, where only
well-trained pathologists can distinguish the cancerous regions from the normal ones. Therefore, automatically enriching labeling information instead of introducing artificial
constraints before building the segmentation model is crucial for weakly supervised learning.
In this paper, we propose a weakly supervised learning
framework, CAMEL, for histopathology image segmentation using only image-level labels. CAMEL consists of
two steps: label enrichment and segmentation (Fig. 1). Instead of introducing more supervision constraints, CAMEL
splits the image into latticed instances and automatically
generates their instance-level labels in the label enrichment
step, which can be regarded as a solution for a weakly supervised classification problem. In the label enrichment
step, we use a combined multiple instance learning (cMIL)
approach to construct a high-quality instance-level dataset
with instance-level labels from the original image-level
dataset. Then, we train a fully supervised classification

10682

