HiPPI: Higher-Order Projected Power Iterations for Scalable Multi-Matching
Florian Bernard1,2
1

MPI Informatics

Johan Thunberg3
2

Paul Swoboda1,2

Saarland Informatics Campus

3

Christian Theobalt1,2
Halmstad University

scalability

100

Yan et al. '15
Yan et al. '16
Wang et al.
Spectral
QuickMatch
Ours

runtime [s]

80
60
40
20
0
10

Ours (with geometric consistency)

QuickMatch (no geometric consistency)

20

30

40

50

#objects

Figure 1. We propose a novel multi-matching method that is both scalable and able to account for geometric consistency. Left: the centaurs
(in different poses) are consistently matched by our approach, as indicated by the coloured dots. Centre: methods that ignore geometric
relations (Q UICK M ATCH [48], S PECTRAL [38]) lead to wrong matchings, as evidenced by mismatching colours in the magnifications.
Right: existing methods that account for geometric consistency (Yan et al. ’15 [56], Yan et al. ’16 [53], Wang et al. [51]) do not scale to
large problems (shown are runtimes when matching 5–50 objects, each having 20 points, so that a total of 100–1000 points are matched).

Abstract
The matching of multiple objects (e.g. shapes or images)
is a fundamental problem in vision and graphics. In order
to robustly handle ambiguities, noise and repetitive patterns
in challenging real-world settings, it is essential to take geometric consistency between points into account. Computationally, the multi-matching problem is difficult. It can
be phrased as simultaneously solving multiple (NP-hard)
quadratic assignment problems (QAPs) that are coupled via
cycle-consistency constraints. The main limitations of existing multi-matching methods are that they either ignore
geometric consistency and thus have limited robustness, or
they are restricted to small-scale problems due to their (relatively) high computational cost. We address these shortcomings by introducing a Higher-order Projected Power
Iteration method, which is (i) efficient and scales to tens
of thousands of points, (ii) straightforward to implement,
(iii) able to incorporate geometric consistency, (iv) guarantees cycle-consistent multi-matchings, and (iv) comes with
theoretical convergence guarantees. Experimentally we
show that our approach is superior to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Establishing correspondences is a fundamental problem
in vision and graphics that is relevant in a wide range of ap-

plications, including reconstruction, tracking, recognition,
or matching. The goal of correspondence problems is to
identify points in objects (e.g. images, meshes, or graphs)
that are semantically similar. While matching points independently of their neighbourhood context is computationally tractable (e.g. via the linear assignment problem (LAP)
[12]), such approaches are limited to simple cases without
ambiguities or repetitive patterns. In order to resolve ambiguities and avoid mismatches in challenging real-world scenarios, it is crucial to additionally incorporate the geometric
context of the points, so that spatial distances between pairs
of points are (approximately) preserved by the matching. To
this end, higher-order information is commonly integrated
into the matching problem formulation, e.g. via the NP-hard
quadratic assignment problem (QAP) [28].
Multi-matching, i.e. finding matchings between more
than two objects (e.g. an image sequence, a multi-view
scene, or a shape collection) plays an important role in various applications, such as video-based tracking, multi-view
reconstruction (e.g. for AR/VR content generation) or shape
modelling (e.g. for statistical shape models in biomedicine
[23]). Computationally, finding valid matchings between
more than two objects simultaneously is more difficult compared to matching only a pair of objects. This is because one
additionally needs to account for cycle-consistency, which
means that compositions of matchings over cycles must be
the identity matching—even when ignoring higher-order

10284

