Meta-Learning to Detect Rare Objects
Yu-Xiong Wang
Deva Ramanan
Martial Hebert
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{yuxiongw,deva,hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Novel Classes

Base Classes
…

Few-shot learning, i.e., learning novel concepts from few
examples, is fundamental to practical visual recognition
systems. While most of existing work has focused on fewshot classification, we make a step towards few-shot object
detection, a more challenging yet under-explored task. We
develop a conceptually simple but powerful meta-learning
based framework that simultaneously tackles few-shot classification and few-shot localization in a unified, coherent way. This framework leverages meta-level knowledge
about “model parameter generation” from base classes
with abundant data to facilitate the generation of a detector for novel classes. Our key insight is to disentangle the learning of category-agnostic and category-specific
components in a CNN based detection model. In particular, we introduce a weight prediction meta-model that enables predicting the parameters of category-specific components from few examples. We systematically benchmark the
performance of modern detectors in the small-sample size
regime. Experiments in a variety of realistic scenarios, including within-domain, cross-domain, and long-tailed settings, demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of our
approach under different notions of novel classes.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have revolutionized the landscape of large-scale visual recognition [31, 26]. A key driving factor is human supervision in
the form of large amounts of annotated images. However,
in many practical applications such as self-driving vehicles,
recognition systems need to rapidly recognize some neverbefore-seen objects from a very limited number of examples [16, 49, 3]. Simply collecting more data does not scale
and quickly becomes expensive [74, 66, 71, 21, 38].
This challenge of learning novel concepts from few labeled examples is commonly addressed in few-shot or lowshot learning. Much of its recent progress comes from
framing few-shot learning as a meta-learning problem [62].
By simulating and solving a variety of few-shot learning

…
…

Meta-Knowledge
Transfer

…
…

Figure 1: Few-shot object detection: learning an object detector
for novel classes when only a few examples with annotated bounding boxes are available. Our meta-learning based framework leverages meta-level knowledge about “model parameter generation”
from base classes with a large amount of annotated bounding box
examples. Such knowledge is then transferred to guide the detector learning for novel classes in a sample-efficient way.

tasks from base categories with abundant labeled examples,
meta-learning approaches acquire meta-level knowledge
about learning to learn and then transfer such knowledge
to tackle few-shot learning of novel categories. Despite notable successes, most of existing work has focused on simple image classification tasks with artificial settings, such as
evaluating on small-scale datasets like mini-ImageNet and
for contrived tasks like 5-way classification [67, 58].
In this paper, we make a step towards few-shot object
detection, a more challenging task of practical importance
that learns an object detector when only a few examples
with annotated bounding boxes are available. Unlike image classification, detection requires not only classifying
but also localizing (multiple) objects within an image, as
well as dealing with distracting background regions [19].
Hence, prior few-shot learning approaches, developed with
image classification in mind, are not readily applicable to
our task. While there is some initial attempt in this direction
as in [69, 6, 12, 29, 54], they simply introduce a few-shot
classifier into a detection model without truly addressing
few-shot localization, leading to suboptimal performance.
To address this limitation, we propose a meta-learning
based framework that simultaneously tackles few-shot clas-

9925

