Orientation-Aware Semantic Segmentation on Icosahedron Spheres
Chao Zhang∗1

Stephan Liwicki∗1

William Smith2

Roberto Cipolla1,3

1

2

Toshiba Research Europe Limited, Cambridge, United Kingdom
University of York, United Kingdom 3 University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

Abstract
We address semantic segmentation on omnidirectional
images, to leverage a holistic understanding of the surrounding scene for applications like autonomous driving
systems. For the spherical domain, several methods recently
adopt an icosahedron mesh, but systems are typically rotation invariant or require significant memory and parameters, thus enabling execution only at very low resolutions.
In our work, we propose an orientation-aware CNN framework for the icosahedron mesh. Our representation allows
for fast network operations, as our design simplifies to standard network operations of classical CNNs, but under consideration of north-aligned kernel convolutions for features
on the sphere. We implement our representation and demonstrate its memory efficiency up-to a level-8 resolution mesh
(equivalent to 640×1024 equirectangular images). Finally,
since our kernels operate on the tangent of the sphere, standard feature weights, pretrained on perspective data, can
be directly transferred with only small need for weight refinement. In our evaluation our orientation-aware CNN becomes a new state of the art for the recent 2D3DS dataset,
and our Omni-SYNTHIA version of SYNTHIA. Rotation invariant classification and segmentation tasks are additionally presented for comparison to prior art.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of spherical semantic segmentation on omnidirectional images. Accurate semantic segmentation is useful for many applications including scene
understanding, robotics, and medical image processing. It
is also a key component for autonomous driving technology.
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have pushed
the performance on a wide array of high-level tasks, including image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation. In particular, most research on CNNs for seman∗ Equal contribution: {chao.zhang, stephan.liwicki}@crl.toshiba.co.uk

beam
bookcase
chair
column
floor
table
window

board
ceiling
clutter
door
sofa
wall
unknown

Figure 1. Given spherical input, we convert it to an unfolded icosahedron mesh. Hexagonal filters are then applied under consideration of north alignment, as we efficiently interpolate vertices. Our
approach is suited to most classical CNN architectures, e.g. U-Net
[22]. Since we work with spherical data, final segmentation results
provide a holistic labeling of the environment.

tic segmentation [18, 22, 30, 4] thus far has focused on perspective images. In our work, we focus on omnidirectional
images, as such data provides a holistic understanding of
the surrounding scene with a large field of view. The complete receptive field is especially important for autonomous
driving systems. Furthermore, recent popularity in omnidirectional capturing devices and the increasing number of
datasets with omnidirectional signals make omnidirectional
processing very relevant for modern technology.
While spherical input could be represented as planar
equirectangular images where standard CNNs are directly
applied, such choice is inferior due to latitude dependent
distortions and boundaries. In [25] a perspective network is
distilled to work on equirectangular input. The main drawback is that weight sharing is only enabled on longitudes.
Therefore, the model requires more parameters than a per-

3533

