Towards High-Resolution Salient Object Detection
Yi Zeng1 , Pingping Zhang1 , Jianming Zhang2 , Zhe Lin2 , Huchuan Lu1∗
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Adobe Research, USA
{dllgzy, jssxzhpp}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {jianmzha, zlin}@adobe.com, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

Ours

Abstract
Deep neural network based methods have made a significant breakthrough in salient object detection. However, they are typically limited to input images with low resolutions (400 × 400 pixels or less). Little effort has been
made to train neural networks to directly handle salient object segmentation in high-resolution images. This paper pushes forward high-resolution saliency detection, and
contributes a new dataset, High-Resolution Salient Object Detection (HRSOD). To our best knowledge, HRSOD is
the first high-resolution saliency detection dataset to date.
As another contribution, we also propose a novel approach,
which incorporates both global semantic information and
local high-resolution details, to address this challenging
task. More specifically, our approach consists of a Global Semantic Network (GSN), a Local Refinement Network
(LRN) and a Global-Local Fusion Network (GLFN). GSN
extracts the global semantic information based on downsampled entire image. Guided by the results of GSN, LRN
focuses on some local regions and progressively produces
high-resolution predictions. GLFN is further proposed to
enforce spatial consistency and boost performance. Experiments illustrate that our method outperforms existing stateof-the-art methods on high-resolution saliency datasets by a
large margin, and achieves comparable or even better performance than them on some widely used saliency benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection, aiming at accurately detecting
and segmenting the most distinctive object regions in a
scene, has drawn increasing attention in recent years [8, 46,
47, 51, 48]. It is regarded as a very important task that can
facilitate a wide range of applications, such as image understanding [20, 53, 44], object segmentation [18], image
captioning [10, 7, 40] and light field 3D display [35].
∗ Corresponding author.

LRN

GLFN

(a)

GSN

(c)

Existing methods

DNNs

(b)

(d)

Figure 1. Pipeline comparison with state-of-the-art methods. (a)
Input image. (b) Ground truth mask. (c) Our method. (d) Amulet
[49]. Best viewed by zooming in.

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), e.g., VGG [30],
ResNet [13], have achieved remarkable success in computer
vision tasks using the typical input size such as 224 × 224,
384 × 384, etc. For most applications, such as image classification, object detection and visual tracking, the typical
input size is enough to obtain satisfied results. For dense
prediction tasks, e.g., image segmentation and saliency detection, deep learning based approaches also show impressive performance. But the inherited defect is very apparent,
i.e., blurry boundary. Many research efforts have been made
to remedy this problem. For example, Zhang et al. [49]
employ deep recursive supervision and integrate multi-level
features for accurate boundary prediction. However, the improvement is not significant, as illustrated in Figure 1 (d).
Furthermore, the resolution of the images taken by electronic products (e.g., smartphones) becomes very high, e.g.,
720p, 1080p and 4K. When processing high-resolution images, the above defect becomes more severe. The stateof-the-art saliency detection methods generally down-scale
the inputs to extract semantic information. In this process,
many details are inevitably lost. Thus, they are not suitable

7234

