Weakly Supervised Object Detection With Segmentation Collaboration
Xiaoyan Li1,2
Meina Kan1,2
Shiguang Shan1,2,3
Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
xiaoyan.li@vipl.ict.ac.cn

{kanmeina, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Weakly supervised object detection aims at learning precise object detectors, given image category labels. In recent
prevailing works, this problem is generally formulated as a
multiple instance learning module guided by an image classification loss. The object bounding box is assumed to be the
one contributing most to the classification among all proposals. However, the region contributing most is also likely
to be a crucial part or the supporting context of an object.
To obtain a more accurate detector, in this work we propose
a novel end-to-end weakly supervised detection approach,
where a newly introduced generative adversarial segmentation module interacts with the conventional detection module in a collaborative loop. The collaboration mechanism
takes full advantages of the complementary interpretations
of the weakly supervised localization task, namely detection and segmentation tasks, forming a more comprehensive
solution. Consequently, our method obtains more precise
object bounding boxes, rather than parts or irrelevant surroundings. Expectedly, the proposed method achieves an
accuracy of 53.7% on the PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset, outperforming the state-of-the-arts and demonstrating its superiority for weakly supervised object detection.

1. Introduction
As the data-driven approaches prevail on object detection
task in both academia and industry, the amount of data in
an object detection benchmark is expected to be larger and
larger. However, annotating object bounding boxes is both
costly and time-consuming. In order to reduce the labeling
workload, researchers hope to make object detectors work
in a weakly-supervised fashion, e.g. learning a detector with
only category labels rather than bounding boxes.
Recently, the most high-profile works on weakly supervised object detection all exploit the multiple instance learn-

Backbone

Backbone

Backbone

Stage1

Stage 2

Heatmap

Detection

Proposal
Filtering

Segmentation
Detection
Proposal
Reweighting

(a) Previous works

(b) Ours

Segmentation

Figure 1: The schematic diagram of the previous works with
segmentation utilization [7, 32] and our proposed collaboration approach. In [7, 32], a two-stage paradigm is used, in
which proposals are first filtered and then detection is performed on these remaining boxes ([7] shares the backbone
between two modules). In our approach, detection and segmentation modules instruct each other in a dynamic collaboration loop in the training process.
ing (MIL) paradigm [3, 5, 22, 21, 18, 14, 1, 23, 24, 2, 7].
Based on the assumption that the object bounding box
should be the one contributing most to image classification among all proposals, the MIL based approaches work
in an attention-like mechanism: automatically assign larger
weights to the proposals consistent with the classification
labels. Several promising works combining MIL with deep
learning [2, 25, 32] have greatly pushed the boundaries of
weakly supervised object detection. However, as noted in
[25, 32], these methods are easy to over-fit on object parts,
because the most discriminative classification evidence may
derive from the entire object region, but may also from the
crucial parts. The attention mechanism is effective in selecting the discriminative boxes, but does not guarantee the
completeness of a detected object. For a more reasonable
inference, a further elaborative mechanism is necessary.
Meanwhile, the completeness of a detected region is easier to ensure in weakly supervised segmentation. One common way to outline whole class-related segmentation re-

9735

