SynDeMo: Synergistic Deep Feature Alignment for
Joint Learning of Depth and Ego-Motion
Behzad Bozorgtabar1

Mohammad Saeed Rad1
Dwarikanath Mahapatra
Jean-Philippe Thiran1
1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)

behzad.bozorgtabar@epfl.ch saeed.rad@epfl.ch dmahapatra@gmail.com jean-philippe.thiran@epfl.ch

Abstract
Despite well-established baselines, learning of scene
depth and ego-motion from monocular video remains an ongoing challenge, specifically when handling scaling ambiguity issues and depth inconsistencies in image sequences.
Much prior work uses either a supervised mode of learning
or stereo images. The former is limited by the amount of
labeled data, as it requires expensive sensors, while the latter is not always readily available as monocular sequences.
In this work, we demonstrate the benefit of using geometric information from synthetic images, coupled with scene
depth information, to recover the scale in depth and egomotion estimation from monocular videos. We developed
our framework using synthetic image-depth pairs and unlabeled real monocular images. We had three training objectives: first, to use deep feature alignment to reduce the domain gap between synthetic and monocular images to yield
more accurate depth estimation when presented with only
real monocular images at test time. Second, we learn scene
specific representation by exploiting self-supervision coming from multi-view synthetic images without the need for
depth labels. Third, our method uses single-view depth and
pose networks, which are capable of jointly training and
supervising one another mutually, yielding consistent depth
and ego-motion estimates. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our depth and ego-motion models surpass the
state-of-the-art, unsupervised methods and compare favorably to early supervised deep models for geometric understanding. We validate the effectiveness of our training objectives against standard benchmarks thorough an ablation
study.

1. Introduction
Depth sensing and ego-motion estimation from image
and videos play an important role in 3D scene geometry understanding and are widely applicable to many real-world

Figure 1. System overview of the proposed SynDeMo. It consists
of two data streams, the upper stream takes multi-view synthetic
image-depth pairs as input, while the lower stream takes unlabeled
monocular frames as input during training. At test time, we use
only the lower stream within the dashed line. SynDeMo can simultaneously estimate ego-motion and depth using only monocular video by resolving the scale ambiguity.

domains, such as navigation systems [9, 7], video analysis
[39] and autonomous driving platforms [4]. Although deep
models using a supervised mode of learning [38, 29, 8, 30]
have been widely used for understanding a scene geometry,
it is typically difficult and expensive to obtain geometryrelated labels in practice. Due to this limitation, unsupervised methods [13, 49, 16, 25] have been focused on estimating scene depth and camera motion, which have been
formulated as self-supervised learning using photometric
warp error. However, learning the entangled information
of the depth and ego-motion for a monocular video suffers from the per frame scale confusion. This limitation is
compounded by the fact that these methods do not generalize well to new datasets and scenes. Some recent methods
[46, 32, 49, 27] have incorporated stereo image pairs in the
training stage to address this issue. Nonetheless, stereo im-

4210

