Embodied Amodal Recognition:
Learning to Move to Perceive Objects
Jianwei Yang1‹ Zhile Ren1‹ Mingze Xu2
Xinlei Chen
David J. Crandall2 Devi Parikh1,3 Dhruv Batra1,3
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Indiana University 3 Facebook AI Research
3

Abstract
Passive visual systems typically fail to recognize objects
in the amodal setting where they are heavily occluded. In
contrast, humans and other embodied agents have the ability to move in the environment and actively control the viewing angle to better understand object shapes and semantics.
In this work, we introduce the task of Embodied Amodel
Recognition (EAR): an agent is instantiated in a 3D environment close to an occluded target object, and is free to
move in the environment to perform object classification,
amodal object localization, and amodal object segmentation. To address this problem, we develop a new model
called Embodied Mask R-CNN for agents to learn to move
strategically to improve their visual recognition abilities.
We conduct experiments using a simulator for indoor environments. Experimental results show that: 1) agents with
embodiment (movement) achieve better visual recognition
performance than passive ones and 2) in order to improve
visual recognition abilities, agents can learn strategic paths
that are different from shortest paths.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition tasks such as image classification [29,
31, 39, 57], object detection [23, 24, 47–49] and semantic
segmentation [42, 66, 67] have been widely studied. In addition to recognizing the object’s semantics and shape for its
visible part, the ability to perceive the whole of an occluded
object, known as amodal perception [18, 35, 60], is also important. Take the desk (red bounding box) in the top-left
of Fig. 1 as an example. The amodal predictions (top-right
of Fig. 1) can tell us about the depth ordering (i.e., desk is
behind the wall), the extent and boundaries of occlusions,
and even estimaties of physical dimensions [36]. More fundamentally, they help agents understand object permanence
that objects have extents and do not cease to exist when they
are occluded [6].
‹ The first two authors contributed equally.

Figure 1: The task of Embodied Amodal Recognition: An
agent is spawned close to an occluded target object in a
3D environment, and performs amodal recognition, i.e.,
predicting the category, amodal bounding box and amodal
mask of the target object. The agent is free to move around
to aggregate information for better amodal recognition.

Recently, the dominant paradigm for object recognition
and amodal perception has been based on single images.
Despite leveraging the advances of deep learning, visual
systems fail to recognize objects and their shapes from single 2D images in the presence of heavy occlusion. For example in amodal perception, existing work asks the model
to implicitly learn the 3D shape of the object and the projection of that shape back into the image [19,40,70]. This is
an entangled task, and deep models are thus prone to overfit to subtle biases in the dataset [22] (e.g. learning that beds
always extend leftwards into the frame).
Humans have the remarkable recognition ability to infer both semantics and shape for an occluded object from
a single image. But humans also have the ability to derive
strategic moves to gather information from new viewpoints
to help visual recognition. A recent study in [9] shows that
toddlers are capable of actively diverting viewpoints to learn
about objects, even when they are only 4 – 7 months old.
Inspired by human vision, the key thesis of our work is
that in addition to learning to hallucinate, agents should
learn to move. As shown in Fig. 1, to recognize the category and whole shape of a target object indicated by the red
bounding box, agents should learn to actively move toward

2040

