Cascaded Parallel Filtering for Memory-Efficient Image-Based Localization
Wentao Cheng1,2 , Weisi Lin1 , Kan Chen2 and Xinfeng Zhang3
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Fraunhofer Singapore, Singapore
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

wcheng005@e.ntu.edu.sg, wslin@ntu.edu.sg, chen.kan@fraunhofer.sg, zhangxinf07@gmail.com

Abstract
Image-based localization (IBL) aims to estimate the
6DOF camera pose for a given query image. The camera pose can be computed from 2D-3D matches between
a query image and Structure-from-Motion (SfM) models.
Despite recent advances in IBL, it remains difficult to simultaneously resolve the memory consumption and match
ambiguity problems of large SfM models. In this work,
we propose a cascaded parallel filtering method that leverages the feature, visibility and geometry information to filter wrong matches under binary feature representation. The
core idea is that we divide the challenging filtering task into
two parallel tasks before deriving an auxiliary camera pose
for final filtering. One task focuses on preserving potentially correct matches, while another focuses on obtaining
high quality matches to facilitate subsequent more powerful filtering. Moreover, our proposed method improves the
localization accuracy by introducing a quality-aware spatial reconfiguration method and a principal focal length enhanced pose estimation method. Experimental results on
real-world datasets demonstrate that our method achieves
very competitive localization performances in a memoryefficient manner.

1. Introduction
Image-based localization (IBL), i.e. computing the
6DOF camera pose for a query image, is a fundamental problem in many computer vision tasks. For example,
IBL plays a key role in incremental Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) reconstruction [13,36], visual place recognition [29],
and visual navigation for autonomous vehicles [33]. IBL
has witnessed tremendous advancement by means of deep
learning [18, 19] and image retrieval techniques [1, 2, 34].
However, structure-based IBL [6,21,23,31,37,38,41] by directly establishing 2D-3D matches between a query image

and SfM models is still the most prevailing strategy. Recent
state-of-the-art methods handle the match ambiguity under
high-dimensional feature representation with semantic consistency [38]. However, it remains challenging and crucial
to solve this problem under compact feature representation.
A large SfM model requires prohibitive memory consumption to store tens of millions of descriptors. Meanwhile, match filtering becomes difficult, as it may contain
many nearly identical descriptors. Particularly, the feature
(e.g. visual similarity), visibility (e.g. point-image relationship), and geometry (e.g. camera pose) information in IBL
leads to three interesting questions: Is it possible to improve
the discriminative power of each information? How to unify
them so that each can play its proper role, i.e. use its discriminative power to a tee? When is the appropriate phase to
engage one specific information in an IBL pipeline? The accuracy is also a key issue for IBL especially in autonomous
driving applications. The camera pose can be estimated
by using a minimal pose solver [5] in RANSAC [12]. To
achieve high accuracy, degenerate pose hypotheses should
be prevented from being sampled or selected.
In this paper, we propose a cascaded parallel filtering
method with respect to a binary feature representation via
Hamming Embedding [15]. Using this binary feature representation, we can largely reduce the memory consumption.
Meanwhile, it will introduce more ambiguities than highdimensional feature representation, making match filtering
notoriously harder. To break this dilemma, our proposed
method filters wrong matches in a cascaded manner by sequentially leveraging the intrinsic feature, visibility, and geometry information. When engaging one type of information, we use a relaxed criterion to reject matches and retain
a match pool that focuses on preserving correct matches.
In parallel, we use a strict criterion to obtain high confident matches, which facilitate subsequent filtering steps. In
feature-wise filtering, we reformulate a traditional match
scoring function [16] with a bilateral Hamming ratio test to
better evaluate the distinctiveness of matches. In visibility-

1032

