PARN: Position-Aware Relation Networks for Few-Shot Learning
Ziyang Wu1 , Yuwei Li2 , Lihua Guo3 and Kui Jia4
School of Electronic and Information Engineering,
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
{eezywu1 , 2018210108242 }@mail.scut.edu.cn, {guolihua3 , kuijia4 }@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot learning presents a challenge that a classifier
must quickly adapt to new classes that do not appear in the
training set, given only a few labeled examples of each new
class. This paper proposes a position-aware relation network (PARN) to learn a more flexible and robust metric ability for few-shot learning. Relation networks (RNs), a kind
of architectures for relational reasoning, can acquire a deep
metric ability for images by just being designed as a simple
convolutional neural network (CNN) [23]. However, due to
the inherent local connectivity of CNN, the CNN-based relation network (RN) can be sensitive to the spatial position relationship of semantic objects in two compared images. To
address this problem, we introduce a deformable feature extractor (DFE) to extract more efficient features, and design
a dual correlation attention mechanism (DCA) to deal with
its inherent local connectivity. Successfully, our proposed
approach extents the potential of RN to be position-aware
of semantic objects by introducing only a small number
of parameters. We evaluate our approach on two major
benchmark datasets, i.e., Omniglot and Mini-Imagenet, and
on both of the datasets our approach achieves state-of-theart performance. It’s worth noting that our 5-way 1-shot
result on Omniglot even outperforms the previous 5-way 5shot results.

1. Introduction
Humans can effectively utilize prior knowledge to easily learn new concepts given just a few examples. Fewshot learning [11, 20, 15] aims to acquire some transferable knowledge like humans, where a classifier is able to
generalize to new classes when given only one or a few
labeled examples of each class, i.e., one- or few-shot. In
this paper, we focus on the ability of learning how to compare, namely metric-based methods. Metric-based methods [2, 11, 22, 23, 25] often consist of a feature extractor and a

Figure 1: Two situations where the comparison ability of RN will
be limited. The top row shows the two compared images, and
the bottom row shows their extracted features, where blue areas
represent the response of corresponding semantic objects. (a) The
convolutional kernel fails to involve the two objects. (b) The convolutional kernel fails to involve the same fine-grained features.

metric module. Given an unlabeled query image and a few
labeled sample images, the feature extractor first generates
embeddings for all input images, and then the metric module measures distances between the query embedding and
sample embeddings to give a recognition result.
Most existing metric-based methods for few-shot learning focused on constructing a learned embedding space to
better adapt to some pre-specified distance metric functions, e.g., cosine similarity [25] or Euclidean distance [22].
These studies expected to learn a distance metric for images, but actually only the feature embedding is learnable.
As a result, the fixed but sub-optimal metric functions
would limit the feature extractor to produce discriminative
representations. Based on this problem, recently Sung et
al. [23] introduced a relation network, which was designed
as a simple CNN, to make the metric learnable and flexible
in a data-driven way (in this paper we denote the simply

6659

