Pix2Pose: Pixel-Wise Coordinate Regression of Objects for 6D Pose Estimation
Kiru Park, Timothy Patten and Markus Vincze
Vision for Robotics Laboratory, Automation and Control Institute, TU Wien, Austria
{park, patten, vincze}@acin.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
Estimating the 6D pose of objects using only RGB images remains challenging because of problems such as occlusion and symmetries. It is also difficult to construct 3D
models with precise texture without expert knowledge or
specialized scanning devices. To address these problems,
we propose a novel pose estimation method, Pix2Pose, that
predicts the 3D coordinates of each object pixel without
textured models. An auto-encoder architecture is designed
to estimate the 3D coordinates and expected errors per
pixel. These pixel-wise predictions are then used in multiple
stages to form 2D-3D correspondences to directly compute
poses with the PnP algorithm with RANSAC iterations. Our
method is robust to occlusion by leveraging recent achievements in generative adversarial training to precisely recover occluded parts. Furthermore, a novel loss function,
the transformer loss, is proposed to handle symmetric objects by guiding predictions to the closest symmetric pose.
Evaluations on three different benchmark datasets containing symmetric and occluded objects show our method outperforms the state of the art using only RGB images.

1. Introduction
Pose estimation of objects is an important task to understand the given scene and operate objects properly in robotic
or augmented reality applications. The inclusion of depth
images has induced significant improvements by providing
precise 3D pixel coordinates [10, 30]. However, depth images are not always easily available, e.g., mobile phones
and tablets, typical for augmented reality applications, offer
no depth data. As such, substantial research is dedicated to
estimating poses of known objects using RGB images only.
A large body of work relies on the textured 3D model of
an object, which is made by a 3D scanning device, e.g., BigBIRD Object Scanning Rig [35], and provided by a dataset
to render synthetic images for training [14, 28] or refinement [18, 21]. Thus, the quality of texture in the 3D model
should be sufficient to render visually correct images. Unfortunately, this is not applicable to domains that do not

Figure 1. An example of converting a 3D model to a colored coordinate model. Normalized coordinates of each vertex are directly
mapped to red, green and blue values in the color space. Pix2Pose
predicts these colored images to build a 2D-3D correspondence
per pixel directly without any feature matching operation.

have textured 3D models such as industry that commonly
use texture-less CAD models. Since the texture quality of a
reconstructed 3D model varies with method, camera, and
camera trajectory during the reconstruction process, it is
difficult to guarantee sufficient quality for training. Therefore, it is beneficial to predict poses without textures on 3D
models to achieve more robust estimation regardless of the
texture quality.
Even though recent studies have shown great potential to
estimate pose without textured 3D models using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [2, 3, 24, 29], a significant
challenge is to estimate correct poses when objects are occluded or symmetric. Training CNNs is often distracted by
symmetric poses that have similar appearance inducing very
large errors in a naı̈ve loss function. In previous work, a
strategy to deal with symmetric objects is to limit the range
of poses while rendering images for training [14, 22] or simply to apply a transformation from the pose outside of the
limited range to a symmetric pose within the range [24] for
real images with pose annotations. This approach is sufficient for objects that have infinite and continuous symmetric
poses on a single axis, such as cylinders, by simply ignoring the rotation about the axis. However, as pointed in [24],
when an object has a finite number of symmetric poses, it is
difficult to determine poses around the boundaries of view
limits. For example, if a box has an angle of symmetry, π,

7668

