Gated2Depth: Real-Time Dense Lidar From Gated Images
Tobias Gruber1,3
1

Daimler AG

Frank Julca-Aguilar2
2

Algolux

3

Mario Bijelic1,3

Ulm University

Abstract
We present an imaging framework which converts three
images from a gated camera into high-resolution depth
maps with depth accuracy comparable to pulsed lidar measurements. Existing scanning lidar systems achieve low
spatial resolution at large ranges due to mechanicallylimited angular sampling rates, restricting scene understanding tasks to close-range clusters with dense sampling.
Moreover, today’s pulsed lidar scanners suffer from high
cost, power consumption, large form-factors, and they fail
in the presence of strong backscatter. We depart from
point scanning and demonstrate that it is possible to turn
a low-cost CMOS gated imager into a dense depth camera with at least 80 m range – by learning depth from three
gated images. The proposed architecture exploits semantic context across gated slices, and is trained on a synthetic discriminator loss without the need of dense depth
labels. The proposed replacement for scanning lidar systems is real-time, handles back-scatter and provides dense
depth at long ranges. We validate our approach in simulation and on real-world data acquired over 4,000 km driving in northern Europe. Data and code are available at
https://github.com/gruberto/Gated2Depth.

1. Introduction
Active depth cameras, such as scanning lidar systems,
have not only become a cornerstone imaging modality for
autonomous driving and robotics, but are emerging in applications across disciplines, including autonomous drones,
remote sensing, human-computer interaction, and augmented or virtual reality. Depth cameras that provide dense
range allow for dense scene reconstructions [26] when combined with color cameras, including correlation time-offlight cameras (C-ToF) [19, 30, 33] such as Microsoft’s
Kinect One, or structured light cameras [1, 42, 43, 49].
These acquisition systems facilitate the collection of largescale RGB-D data sets that fuel research on core computer
vision problems, including scene understanding [23, 53]
and action recognition [40]. However, while existing depth
cameras provide high-fidelity depth for close ranges indoors [26, 39], dense depth imaging at long ranges and in
dynamic outdoor scenes is an open challenge.

4

Felix Heide2,4

Princeton University

Active imaging at long ranges is challenging because diffuse scene points only return a small fraction of the emitted
photons back to the sensor. For perfect Lambertian surfaces,
this fraction decreases quadratically with distance, posing a
fundamental limitation as illumination power can only be
increased up to the critical eye-safety level [51, 54, 60]. To
tackle this constraint, existing pulsed lidar systems employ
sensitive silicon avalanche photo-diodes (APDs) with high
photon detection efficiency in the NIR band [60]. The custom semiconductor process for these sensitive detectors restricts current lidar systems to a single (or few) APDs instead of monolithic sensor arrays, which requires point-bypoint scanning. Although scanning lidar approaches facilitate depth imaging at large ranges, scanning reduces their
spatial resolution quadratically with distance, prohibiting
semantic tasks for far objects, as shown in Figure 1. Recently, single-photon avalance diodes (SPADs) [4, 5, 41, 46]
are emerging as a promising technology that may enable
sensor arrays in the CMOS process [59] in the future. Although SPADs are sensitive to individual photons, existing
designs are highly photon-inefficient due to very low fill
factors around 1% [58] and pile-up distortions at higher
pulse powers [12]. Moreover, passive depth estimation
techniques do not offer a solution, including stereo cameras [20, 49] and depth from monocular imagery [13, 16,
48]. These approaches perform poorly at large ranges for
small disparities, and they fail in critical outdoor scenarios,
when ambient light is not sufficient, e.g. at night, and in
the presence of strong back-scatter, e.g. in fog or snow, see
Figure 2.
Gated imaging is an emerging sensing technology that
tackles these challenges by sending out pulsed illumination
and integrating a scene response between temporal gates.
Coarse temporal slicing allows for the removal of backscatter due to fog, rain and snow, and can be realized in
readily available CMOS technology. In contrast to pulsed
lidar, gated imaging offers high signal measurements at long
distances by integrating incoming photons over a large temporal slice, instead of time-tagging the first returns of individual pulses. However, although gated cameras offer an elegant, low-cost solution to outdoor imaging challenges, the
sequential acquisition of the individual slices prohibits their
use as depth cameras today, restricting depth information to

1506

