Equivariant Multi-View Networks
Carlos Esteves* , Yinshuang Xu* , Christine Allen-Blanchette, Kostas Daniilidis
GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania
{machc,xuyin,allec,kostas}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Several popular approaches to 3D vision tasks process
multiple views of the input independently with deep neural
networks pre-trained on natural images, achieving view permutation invariance through a single round of pooling over
all views. We argue that this operation discards important
information and leads to subpar global descriptors. In this
paper, we propose a group convolutional approach to multiple view aggregation where convolutions are performed over
a discrete subgroup of the rotation group, enabling, thus,
joint reasoning over all views in an equivariant (instead of
invariant) fashion, up to the very last layer. We further develop this idea to operate on smaller discrete homogeneous
spaces of the rotation group, where a polar view representation is used to maintain equivariance with only a fraction
of the number of input views. We set the new state of the art
in several large scale 3D shape retrieval tasks, and show
additional applications to panoramic scene classification.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of large scale 3D datasets for objects
[39, 3] and whole scenes [2, 8] enables training of deep
learning models producing global descriptors that can be
applied to classification and retrieval tasks.
The first challenge that arises is how to represent the inputs. Despite numerous attempts with volumetric [39, 24],
point-cloud [27, 32] and mesh-based [23, 26] representations, using multiple views of the 3D input allows switching
to the 2D domain where all the recent image based deep
learning breakthroughs (e.g. [15]) can be directly applied,
facilitating state of the art performance [33, 20].
Multi-view (MV) based methods require some form of
view-pooling, which can be (1) pixel-wise pooling over some
intermediate convolutional layer [33], (2) pooling over the
final 1D view descriptors [34], or (3) combining the final

logits [20], which can be seen as independent voting. These
operations are usually invariant to view permutations.
Our key observation is that conventional view pooling is
performed before any joint processing of the set of views
and will inevitably discard useful features, leading to subpar
descriptors. We solve the problem by first realizing that each
view can be associated with an element of the rotation group
SO(3), so the natural way to combine multiple views is as a
function on the group. A traditional CNN is applied to obtain
view descriptors that compose this function. We design a
group-convolutional network (G-CNN, inspired by [5]) to
learn representations that are equivariant to transformations
from the group. This differs from the invariant representations obtained through usual view-pooling that discards
information. We obtain invariant descriptors useful for classification and retrieval by pooling over the last G-CNN layer.
Our G-CNN has filters with localized support on the group
and learns hierarchically more complex representations as
we stack more layers and increase the receptive field.
We take advantage of the finite nature of multiple views
and consider finite rotation groups like the icosahedral, in
contrast with [6, 10] which operate on the continuous group.
To reduce the computational cost of processing one view per
group element, we show that by considering views in canonical coordinates with respect to the group of in-plane dilated
rotations (log-polar coordinates), we can greatly reduce the
number of views and obtain an initial representation on a homogeneous space (H-space) that can be lifted via correlation,
while maintaining equivariance.
We focus on 3D shapes but our model is applicable to
any task where multiple views can represent the input, as
demonstrated by an experiment on panoramic scenes.
Figure 1 illustrates our model. Our contributions are:
• We introduce a novel method of aggregating multiple
views whether “outside-in” for 3D shapes or “insideout” for panoramic views. Our model exploits the underlying group structure, resulting in equivariant features that are functions on the rotation group.
• We introduce a way to reduce the number of views
while maintaining equivariance, via a transformation to

* Equal contribution.

http://github.com/daniilidis-group/emvn

1568

