AutoDispNet: Improving Disparity Estimation With AutoML
Tonmoy Saikia

Yassine Marrakchi

Arber Zela

Frank Hutter

Thomas Brox

University of Freiburg
Germany
{saikiat, marrakch, zelaa, fh, brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Much research work in computer vision is being spent
on optimizing existing network architectures to obtain a few
more percentage points on benchmarks. Recent AutoML
approaches promise to relieve us from this effort. However, they are mainly designed for comparatively smallscale classification tasks. In this work, we show how to use
and extend existing AutoML techniques to efficiently optimize large-scale U-Net-like encoder-decoder architectures.
In particular, we leverage gradient-based neural architecture search and Bayesian optimization for hyperparameter
search. The resulting optimization does not require a largescale compute cluster. We show results on disparity estimation that clearly outperform the manually optimized baseline and reach state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Compared to the state of computer vision 20 years ago,
machine learning has enabled more generic methodologies
that can be applied to various tasks rather than a single toy
problem. A convolutional neural network can be trained
on all sorts of classification problems, and a convolutional
encoder-decoder network with skip connections can be set
up for a large selection of high-resolution computer vision
tasks, such as semantic segmentation, optical flow, superresolution, and depth estimation, to name just a few. With
this generic methodology in place, why are there more
than 5000 submissions to each computer vision conference?
What do they contribute?
In practice, the methodology is not as generic as it looks
at first glance. While a standard encoder-decoder network
may give a reasonable solution for all these problems, results can be improved significantly by tweaking the details of this design: both the detailed architecture and several training hyperparameters, such as the learning rate and
weight decay. For example, in the context of disparity estimation, manually optimizing the architecture of the original

imageL

DispNet-CSS

imageR

AutoDispNet-CSS

Figure 1: We present AutoDispNet-CSS, a disparity estimation network built using state-of-the-art AutoML techniques which significantly improves over the manually
tuned DispNet-CSS architecture.

DispNet [51] halved the error [36]. Other works on disparity estimation found other tweaks that also improved the accuracy [43, 16, 65]. While effective, this common practice
of manual architecture and parameter search contradicts the
paradigm of machine learning, namely to replace manual
optimization by numeric optimization.
AutoML [34] in general and automated neural architecture search (NAS [24]) in particular promise to relieve us
from the manual tweaking effort. In principle, an independent validation set is enough to optimize the architecture
and the hyperparameters of the learning method. Unfortunately, many of these AutoML methods have extreme computational demands. For this reason, they have been mostly
applied to rather small-scale classification tasks, preferably
on CIFAR, where a single network can be fully trained
within a few hours. Even on such small tasks, some approaches report hundreds of GPU days to finish optimization. For large-scale encoder-decoder networks, such as
DispNet, this is prohibitive.
However, there are also more efficient AutoML approaches. Although they have not yet been applied to
encoder-decoder architectures, they have the potential to do
so. One of them, on which we will build in this paper, is
DARTS [46]. Its main idea is to have a large network that

1812

