Bayesian Relational Memory for Semantic Visual Navigation
Yi Wu† ¶
†

Yuxin Wu‡ Aviv Tamar§
Stuart Russell†
†
‡
UC Berkeley
Facebook AI Research

{jxwuyi,russell}@cs.berkeley.edu

‡

§

Georgia Gkioxari‡
Yuandong Tian‡
¶
Technion
OpenAI

{yuxinwu,gkioxari,yuandong}@fb.com

Abstract
We introduce a new memory architecture, Bayesian Relational Memory (BRM), to improve the generalization ability for semantic visual navigation agents in unseen environments, where an agent is given a semantic target to navigate towards. BRM takes the form of a probabilistic relation graph over semantic entities (e.g., room types), which
allows (1) capturing the layout prior from training environments, i.e., prior knowledge, (2) estimating posterior layout
at test time, i.e., memory update, and (3) efficient planning
for navigation, altogether. We develop a BRM agent consisting of a BRM module for producing sub-goals and a goalconditioned locomotion module for control. When testing
in unseen environments, the BRM agent outperforms baselines that do not explicitly utilize the probabilistic relational
memory structure.

1. Introduction
Memory is a crucial component for intelligent agents
to gain extensive reasoning abilities over a long horizon.
One such challenge is visual navigation, where an agent is
placed to an environment with unknown layouts and room
connectivity, acts on visual signal perceived from its surrounding, explores and reaches a goal position efficiently.
Due to partial observability, the agent must memorize its
past experiences and react accordingly. Hence, deep learning (DL) models for visual navigation often encodes memory structures in its design. LSTM is initially used to as
general-purpose implicit memory [36, 35, 10]. Recently, to
improve the performance, explicit and navigation-specific
structural memory are used [42, 24, 46, 25].
Two categories exist for navigation-specific memory:
the spatial memory [42, 24] and topological memory [25,
46]. The core idea of spatial memory is to extend the
1-dimensional memory in LSTM to a 2-dimensional matrix that represents the spatial structure of the environment,
where a particular entry in the matrix corresponds to a 2D
location/region in the environment. Due to its regular structure, value iteration [50] can be applied directly for effective
planning over the memory matrix.

§

avivt@technion.ac.il

However, planning on such spatial memory can be computationally expensive for environments with large rooms.
To navigate, precise localization of an agent is often not
unnecessary. Extensive psychological evidences [46] also
show that animals do not rely strongly on metric representations [54, 22]. Instead, humans primarily depend on
a landmark-based navigation strategy, which can be supported by qualitative topological knowledge of the environment [22]. Therefore, it is reasonable to represent the memory as a topological graph where the vertices are landmarks
in the environment and edges denote short-term reachability between landmarks. During navigation, a localization
network is trained to identify the position of the agent and
the goal w.r.t. the landmarks in the memory and an efficient
graph search can be used for long-term planning.
However, still human navigation shows superior generalization performance which cannot be explained by either spatial or topological memory. For example, first-time
home visitors naturally move towards the kitchen (rather
than outdoor or toilet) to get a plate; from kitchen to bedroom, they know that living room may be an intermediate waypoint. Although visually different, such semantic
knowledge, i.e., the “close-by” relations over semantic entities, are naturally shared across environments and can be
learned from previous experience to guide future navigation. In comparison, existing approaches of topological
memory assume pre-exploration experiences of the environment before navigation starts [25, 46], provide no memory updating operations, and cannot incorporate the prior
knowledge of scene layouts and configurations from previously seen environments.
In this work, we propose a new memory design for visual
navigation, Bayesian Relational Memory (BRM), which (1)
captures the prior knowledge of scene layouts from training
environments and (2) allows both efficient planning and updating during test-time exploration. BRM can be viewed
as a probabilistic version of a topological memory with semantic abstractions: each node in BRM denotes a semantic
concept (e.g., object category, room type, etc), which can
be detected via a neural detector, and each edge denotes the
relation between two concepts. In each environment, a single relation may be present or not. For each relation (edge),
we can average its existences over all training environments

2769

