Universal Perturbation Attack Against Image Retrieval
Jie Li1 , Rongrong Ji1,2∗, Hong Liu1 , Xiaopeng Hong3,2,4 , Yue Gao5 , Qi Tian6
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University,
2
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China,
3
MOE Key Lab. for Intelligent Networks and Network Security/Faculty
of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, PRC
4
University of Oulu, Finland, 5 Tsinghua University, 6 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
lijie32@stu.xmu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, lynnliu.xmu@gmail.com,
hongxiaopeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, kevin.gaoy@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com,

Abstract
Universal adversarial perturbations (UAPs), a.k.a.
input-agnostic perturbations, has been proved to exist and
be able to fool cutting-edge deep learning models on most
of the data samples. Existing UAP methods mainly focus
on attacking image classification models. Nevertheless, little attention has been paid to attacking image retrieval systems. In this paper, we make the first attempt in attacking image retrieval systems. Concretely, image retrieval attack is to make the retrieval system return irrelevant images
to the query at the top ranking list. It plays an important
role to corrupt the neighbourhood relationships among features in image retrieval attack. To this end, we propose a
novel method to generate retrieval-against UAP to break the
neighbourhood relationships of image features via degrading the corresponding ranking metric. To expand the attack
method to scenarios with varying input sizes or untouchable
network parameters, a multi-scale random resizing scheme
and a ranking distillation strategy are proposed. We evaluate the proposed method on four widely-used image retrieval datasets, and report a significant performance drop
in terms of different metrics, such as mAP and mP@10. Finally, we test our attack methods on the real-world visual
search engine, i.e., Google Images, which demonstrates the
practical potentials of our methods.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been the
state-of-the-art solution for a wide range of computer vision tasks, such as image classification, image segmentation and objective detection. Despite the remarkable success, deep learning models have shown to be vulnerable to
∗ Corresponding author.

Attacking

Feature shift

Retrieval

Figure 1. When added to natural images, a single universal perturbation that is invisible to human eyes causes most images to
shift significantly in the feature space without preserving original
neighbourhood relationships. The top is the perturbation and dots
represent the features of images. (Best viewed in color.)

small perturbations to the input image. Various attack techniques have been proposed, like model distillation [30, 42],
transfer learning [24, 45], and gradient updating [1]. In
contrast to previous methods called image-specific perturbations having to perform computation every time to generate a particular perturbation for any given image, MoosaviDezfooli et al. [25] proposed an image-agnostic perturbation termed universal adversarial perturbation (UAP), which
can fool most images from a data distribution. Being universal, UAPs can be conveniently exploited to perturb unseen
datapoints on-the-fly without extra computation. Therefore,
UAPs are particularly useful in a wide range of applications.
However, existing methods regardless of whether imageagnostic or not, mainly focus on image classification while
14899

