QUARCH: A New Quasi-Affine Reconstruction Stratum From Vague
Relative Camera Orientation Knowledge
Devesh Adlakha1,3 , Adlane Habed1 , Fabio Morbidi2 , Cédric Demonceaux3 , Michel de Mathelin1
1

ICube laboratory, CNRS, University of Strasbourg
MIS laboratory, University of Picardie Jules Verne
3
ImViA laboratory, VIBOT ERL CNRS, University of Burgundy - Franche-Comté
2

adlakha@unistra.fr

Abstract
We present a new quasi-affine reconstruction of a scene
and its application to camera self-calibration. We refer to
this reconstruction as QUARCH (QUasi-Affine Reconstruction with respect to Camera centers and the Hodographs
of horopters). A QUARCH can be obtained by solving
a semidefinite programming problem when, (i) the images
have been captured by a moving camera with constant
intrinsic parameters, and (ii) a vague knowledge of the
relative orientation (under or over 120◦ ) between camera pairs is available. The resulting reconstruction comes
close enough to an affine one allowing thus an easy upgrade of the QUARCH to its affine and metric counterparts. We also present a constrained Levenberg-Marquardt
method for nonlinear optimization subject to Linear Matrix Inequality (LMI) constraints so as to ensure that the
QUARCH LMIs are satisfied during optimization. Experiments with synthetic and real data show the benefits of
QUARCH in reliably obtaining a metric reconstruction.

1. Introduction
In multi-view computer vision, accurately locating the
plane at infinity (Π∞ ) is considered crucial for successfully lifting a projective structure and cameras to a metric
frame [20, 5]. Locating Π∞ reliably has proved challenging in camera self-calibration due to the nonlinearity of the
problem [11, 12]. Once it is located, the calibration parameters may be obtained by solving linear equations for the
(dual) image of the absolute conic. When camera parameters are constant, a necessary condition on Π∞ is that the
eigenvalues of its inter-image homography matrices have
equal moduli. This so-called modulus constraint [20] leads
to quartic polynomial equations in the coordinates of Π∞

Affine

QU

AR

C

Metric

+S

QUARCH

ce

ne

po

int

s
QUARC
Projective

Figure 1: QUARCH is a specialization of the QUARC stratum and is therefore one step closer to the affine stratum.

for which several solutions have been proposed [20, 8, 5].
Other methods [11, 9] locate Π∞ by first upgrading
a projective reconstruction to a quasi-affine one based
on Hartley’s cheirality theory [10]. In [11], the cheirality inequalities are used to obtain bounds on the coordinates of Π∞ , which is then located through an exhaustive
search within these bounds. The quasi-affine reconstruction
in [11, 9] is with respect to the set of camera centers and
that of scene points: the sets whose respective convex hulls
are preserved. Nistér [17] pointed out that scene points may
not be reliable and therefore sought a quasi-affine reconstruction with respect to camera centers (QUARC) alone.
A QUARC is upgraded to a metric reconstruction through
nonlinear optimization of a geometrically meaningful cost
function derived from priors on the calibration parameters.
In this paper, we show the existence of a new quasiaffine reconstruction stratum that we refer to as QUARCH:
QUasi-Affine Reconstruction with respect to Camera centers and the Hodographs of horopters. A QUARCH is a
specialization of a QUARC (see Figure 1) that additionally satisfies a new set of relative camera orientation-based
convex constraints on Π∞ . These constraints are formulated as Linear Matrix Inequalities (LMIs) and they describe

1082

