EGNet: Edge Guidance Network for Salient Object Detection
Jia-Xing Zhao, Jiang-Jiang Liu, Deng-Ping Fan, Yang Cao, Ju-Feng Yang, Ming-Ming Cheng*
TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University
http://mmcheng.net/egnet/

Abstract
Fully convolutional neural networks (FCNs) have shown
their advantages in the salient object detection task. However, most existing FCNs-based methods still suffer from
coarse object boundaries. In this paper, to solve this problem, we focus on the complementarity between salient edge
information and salient object information. Accordingly,
we present an edge guidance network (EGNet) for salient
object detection with three steps to simultaneously model
these two kinds of complementary information in a single
network. In the first step, we extract the salient object
features by a progressive fusion way. In the second step,
we integrate the local edge information and global location information to obtain the salient edge features. Finally, to sufficiently leverage these complementary features,
we couple the same salient edge features with salient object features at various resolutions. Benefiting from the
rich edge information and location information in salient
edge features, the fused features can help locate salient
objects, especially their boundaries more accurately. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method
performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods on
six widely used datasets without any pre-processing and
post-processing. The source code is available at http:
//mmcheng.net/egnet/.

1. Introduction
The goal of salient object detection (SOD) is to find the
most visually distinctive objects in an image. It has received
widespread attention recently and been widely used in many
vision and image processing related areas, such as contentaware image editing [6], object recognition [42], photosynth [4], non-photo-realist rendering [41], weakly supervised semantic segmentation [19] and image retrieval [15].
Besides, there are many works focusing on video salient
object detection [12, 54] and RGB-D salient object detection [11, 66].
Inspired by cognitive studies of visual attention [7, 21,
* M.M. Cheng (cmm@nankai.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

Source

Baseline

Ours

GT

Figure 1. Visual examples of our method. After we model and fuse
the salient edge information, the salient object boundaries become
clearer.

39], early works are mainly based on the fact that contrast
plays the most important role in saliency detection. These
methods benefit mostly from either global or local contrast
cues and their learned fusion weights. Unfortunately, these
hand-crafted features though can locate the most salient
objects sometimes, the produced saliency maps are with
irregular shapes because of the undesirable segmentation
methods and unreliable when the contrast between the foreground and the background is inadequate.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [25]
have successfully broken the limits of traditional handcrafted features, especially after the emerging of Fully Convolutional Neural Networks (FCNs) [34]. These CNNbased methods have greatly refreshed the leaderboards on
almost all the widely used benchmarks and are gradually
replacing conventional salient object detection methods because of the efficiency as well as high performance. In SOD
approaches based on CNNs architecture, the majority of
them which regard the image patches [64, 65] as input use
the multi-scale or multi-context information to obtain the
final saliency map. Since the fully convolutional network
is proposed for pixel labeling problems, several end-to-end
deep architectures [17, 18, 23, 28, 31, 50, 60, 67] for salient
object detection appear. The basic unit of output saliency
map becomes per pixel from the image region. On the one
hand, the result highlights the details because each pixel has
its saliency value. However, on the other hand, it ignores the
structure information which is important for SOD.

8779

