A Weakly Supervised Fine Label Classifier Enhanced by Coarse Supervision
Fariborz Taherkhani, Hadi Kazemi, Ali Dabouei, Jeremy Dawson, Nasser M. Nasrabadi
Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
West Virginia University
{ft0009, hakazemi, ad0046}@mix.wvu.edu, {jeremy.dawson, nasser.nasrabadi}@mail.wvu.edu

Abstract
Objects are usually organized in a hierarchical structure
in which each coarse category (e.g., big cat) corresponds to
a superclass of several fine categories (e.g., cheetah, leopard). The objects grouped within the same coarse category,
but in different fine categories, usually share a set of global
features; however, these objects have distinctive local properties that characterize them at a fine level. This paper addresses the challenge of fine image classification in a weakly
supervised fashion, whereby a subset of images is tagged
by fine labels (i.e., fine images), while the remaining are
tagged by coarse labels (i.e., coarse images). We propose a
new deep model that leverages coarse images to improve the
classification performance of fine images within the coarse
category. Our model is an end-to-end framework consisting
of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) which uses fine
and coarse images to tune its parameters. The CNN outputs
are then fanned out into two separate branches such that
the first branch uses a supervised low rank self-expressive
layer to project the CNN outputs to the low rank subspaces
to capture the global structures for the coarse classification, while the other branch uses a supervised sparse selfexpressive layer to project them to the sparse subspaces to
capture the local structures for the fine classification. Our
deep model uses coarse images in conjunction with fine images to jointly explore the low rank and sparse subspaces by
sharing the network parameters during the training which
causes the data obtained by the CNN to be well-projected
to both sparse and low rank subspaces for classification.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, CNNs have provided promising
results in object recognition and other visual classification
tasks [15, 20, 30]. Along with these developments, image
sub-categorization has been used to increase performance
of a wide variety of applications in computer vision, such
as face recognition [39] and object detection [10]. However,
training a CNN requires a vast amount of accurately anno-

Figure 1. Hierarchical structure for weakly supervised learning.

tated images [20]. Moreover, providing a sufficient amount
of labeled images to train a CNN is labor intensive, time
consuming, and usually requires expert knowledge to annotate them accurately, especially where the class of objects is
too fine-grained [28, 6].
Objects in the fine classes which are grouped in the same
coarse category usually share a set of common visual features. These shared visual properties are typically the global
structure underlying the objects which allow them to be categorized at a coarse level. However, these objects have distinctive local properties that are used to characterize them
at a fine level. For example, consider the images in Fig. 1.
These images are different species of big cats (e.g., cheetah, jaguar, leopard). We can see that all these animals
have spots; this is a global feature that is common among
them (i.e., commonalities). However, these animals have
distinctive feline features (e.g., cheetahs have a ”tear line”
on their faces that leopards do not) which are specific to
each species. These are the local features that are disjoint
from the common features among these animals which are
used for fine image classification.
The low rank and sparse representation of the high dimensional data is based on the fact that a correlation often
exists among the data which belong to the same class such
that a low rank subspace captures the global and smooth
structures, while a sparse subspace captures the local structures and fine details underlying the data [3, 24, 8, 38].
In this work, we make a structural assumption about all
the data points which are extracted from the CNN in our

6459

