Robust Multi-Modality Multi-Object Tracking
Wenwei Zhang1 , Hui Zhou2 , Shuyang Sun3 , Zhe Wang2 , Jianping Shi2 , Chen Change Loy1
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 University of Oxford
{wenwei001, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg, {zhouhui, wangzhe, shijianping}@sensetime.com,
shuyang.sun@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

Overexposure

LiDAR

Image

False Negative

False Negative

LiDAR

(a)

Multi-sensor perception is crucial to ensure the reliability and accuracy in autonomous driving system, while multiobject tracking (MOT) improves that by tracing sequential
movement of dynamic objects. Most current approaches for
multi-sensor multi-object tracking are either lack of reliability by tightly relying on a single input source (e.g., center camera), or not accurate enough by fusing the results
from multiple sensors in post processing without fully exploiting the inherent information. In this study, we design
a generic sensor-agnostic multi-modality MOT framework
(mmMOT), where each modality (i.e., sensors) is capable
of performing its role independently to preserve reliability,
and could further improving its accuracy through a novel
multi-modality fusion module. Our mmMOT can be trained
in an end-to-end manner, enables joint optimization for the
base feature extractor of each modality and an adjacency
estimator for cross modality. Our mmMOT also makes the
first attempt to encode deep representation of point cloud
in data association process in MOT. We conduct extensive
experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed
framework on the challenging KITTI benchmark and report
state-of-the-art performance. Code and models are available at https://github.com/ZwwWayne/mmMOT.

1. Introduction
Reliability and accuracy are the two fundamental requirements for autonomous driving system. Dynamic object perception is vital for autonomous driving. To improve
its reliability, multi-modality sensors can be employed to
provide loosely coupled independent clues to prevent failure showed in Figure 1 (a). To improve accuracy, sequential information from multiple object tracking can be incorporated, and better multi-sensor information can reinforce
the final score as in Figure 1 (b). In this paper, we propose the multi-modality Multi-Object Tracking (mmMOT)
framework, which preserves reliability by a novel fusion

(b)

Figure 1. Figure (a) For reliability: camera is disabled when overexposure or crashed in transmission. Figure (b) For accuracy:
multi-sensor information could reinforce the perception ability.
The image is cropped and best viewed in color and zoomed in.

module for multiple sensors and improves accuracy with attention guided multi-modality fusion mechanism.
It is non-trivial for traditional methods to design a multimodality (i.e., multi-sensor) MOT framework and preserve
both reliability and accuracy. A majority of traditional
methods [1, 9, 12, 25] use camera, LiDAR or radar with
hand-crafted features fused by Kalman Filter or Bayesian
framework. Their accuracy is bounded by the expression
ability of hand-crafted features. Another stream of methods
uses deep feature extractors [11], which significantly improve the accuracy. Nevertheless, they focus on image level
deep representation to associate object trajectories and use
LiDAR only in detection stage. Such a binding method cannot preserve reliability if the camera is down.
In this work, we design a multi-modality MOT (mmMOT) framework that is extendable to camera, LiDAR and
radar. Firstly, it obeys a loose coupling scheme to allow
high reliability during the extraction and fusion of multisensor information. Specifically, multi-modality features
are extracted from each sensor independently, then a fusion
module is applied to fuse these features, and pass them to an
adjacency estimator, which is capable of performing inference based on each modality. Second, to enable the network
to learn to infer from different modalities simultaneously,
our mmMOT is trained in an end-to-end manner, so that

2365

