Improving Adversarial Robustness via Guided Complement Entropy

Hao-Yun Chen* 1 , Jhao-Hong Liang* 1 , Shih-Chieh Chang1, 2 , Jia-Yu Pan3 , Yu-Ting Chen3 , Wei Wei3 ,
and Da-Cheng Juan3
1

Department of Computer Science, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan

2 Electronic and Optoelectronic System Research Laboratories, ITRI, Hsinchu, Taiwan
3 Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA

{haoyunchen,jayveeliang}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw
scchang@cs.nthu.edu.tw
{jypan, yutingchen, wewei, dacheng}@google.com

Abstract
Adversarial robustness has emerged as an important
topic in deep learning as carefully crafted attack samples can significantly disturb the performance of a model.
Many recent methods have proposed to improve adversarial robustness by utilizing adversarial training or model
distillation, which adds additional procedures to model
training. In this paper, we propose a new training
paradigm called Guided Complement Entropy (GCE) that
is capable of achieving “adversarial defense for free,” which
involves no additional procedures in the process of improving adversarial robustness. In addition to maximizing
model probabilities on the ground-truth class like crossentropy, we neutralize its probabilities on the incorrect
classes along with a “guided” term to balance between
these two terms. We show in the experiments that our
method achieves better model robustness with even better performance compared to the commonly used crossentropy training objective. We also show that our method
can be used orthogonal to adversarial training across wellknown methods with noticeable robustness gain. To the
best of our knowledge, our approach is the first one that
improves model robustness without compromising performance.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been adopted to improve
the performance of state-of-the-arts on a wide variety
of tasks in computer vision, including image classification [9], segmentation [13], and image generations [6]. Albeit triumphing on predictive performance, recent liter* The authors contribute equally to this paper.

ature [1, 5, 16] has shown that deep neural models are
vulnerable to adversarial attacks. In an adversarial attack, undetectable but targeted perturbations are added
to input samples which can drastically degrade the performance of a model. Such attacks have imposed serious
threats to the safety and robustness of technologies enabled by deep neural models. Taking deep learning based
self-driving cars, for example, models might mistakenly
recognize a “stop sign” as a “green light” when adversarial
examples are present. Needless to say, improving adversarial robustness is critical as it saves not only the model
performance but the lives of people in many cases.

Figure 1. Latent space of the models trained by different objective functions on CIFAR10. Visualization is done using t-SNE.
Left: the latent space of model trained with cross-entropy (XE).
Right: the latent space of model trained with GCE. Compared
to XE, more distinct clusters (less overlap) are formed for each
class from the training with GCE.

A wide range of work has been proposed to address the
issue of adversarial robustness. One method to improve
the model robustness is “adversarial training” [11, 14, 20]
where the model is trained with either adversarial examples [14] or a combination of both natural examples1
1 The “natural examples” mentioned in this paper are the normal
samples in the original dataset, which contrasts to the “adversarial examples.”

4881

