Seeing Motion in the Dark
Chen Chen
UIUC

Qifeng Chen
HKUST

Abstract
Deep learning has recently been applied with impressive
results to extreme low-light imaging. Despite the success of
single-image processing, extreme low-light video processing is still intractable due to the difficulty of collecting raw
video data with corresponding ground truth. Collecting
long-exposure ground truth, as was done for single-image
processing, is not feasible for dynamic scenes. In this paper, we present deep processing of very dark raw videos: on
the order of one lux of illuminance. To support this line of
work, we collect a new dataset of raw low-light videos, in
which high-resolution raw data is captured at video rate.
At this level of darkness, the signal-to-noise ratio is extremely low (negative if measured in dB) and the traditional
image processing pipeline generally breaks down. A new
method is presented to address this challenging problem.
By carefully designing a learning-based pipeline and introducing a new loss function to encourage temporal stability,
we train a siamese network on static raw videos, for which
ground truth is available, such that the network generalizes
to videos of dynamic scenes at test time. Experimental results demonstrate that the presented approach outperforms
state-of-the-art models for burst processing, per-frame processing, and blind temporal consistency.

1. Introduction
We are interested in capturing videos of dynamic scenes
in the dark: people dancing in the moonlight, an intimate
conversation by candlelight, a nocturnal animal foraging.
Can such scenes ever be captured effectively, in motion, by
widely accessible consumer-grade cameras?
Extreme low-light videography is challenging due to low
photon counts. Using high ISO can increase brightness but
also amplifies noise. Aperture size is limited in consumergrade cameras and mobile devices. Flash changes the character of the scene and is problematic for videography. And
long exposure times (seconds or tens of seconds) are not
feasible for videos of dynamic scenes. This leaves us with
computational techniques for low-light video processing.
Researchers have developed many techniques to reduce
noise for low-light imaging [40, 38, 13, 33, 16, 11, 20, 45,

Minh N. Do
UIUC

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

46, 3, 8, 29, 22, 47]. These techniques generally assume
that images are captured in somewhat dim environments
with moderate levels of noise. In addition, these methods
are often trained and evaluated using synthetic noise models, which do not reflect the severe quantization, bias, and
clipping that arise in extreme low-light conditions.
Recent work proposed end-to-end learning for low-light
image processing [9, 41]. The idea is to train a deep network on a dataset of short-exposure raw and long-exposure
reference images, such that the network learns the image
processing pipeline to maximize low-light imaging performance. However, these datasets contain images of static
scenes and do not address video, and the trained networks
exhibit temporal instability that is not easily remedied with
post-hoc temporal consistency enhancement. Another approach to low-light photography that has seen significant recent progress is burst processing [18, 28, 35, 15]. However,
these methods are generally not designed for video capture
(e.g., due to the use of ‘lucky imaging’) and require dense
correspondence estimation across the input frames, which
can fail due to the massive noise conditions we consider.
In this paper, we tackle deep processing of extreme lowlight video, from raw sensor data to sRGB output. This
brings challenges beyond those presented by individual
low-light images. For example, long-exposure videos of
dynamic scenes cannot be obtained, since videos must be
acquired at video rate. Thus ‘ground-truth’ long-exposure
video of dark dynamic scenes is not available. It is thus not
clear how to train models that produce temporally consistent output in this regime.
To study this problem, we collect a new low-light video
dataset and present a systematic approach for this problem. We captured 202 static raw videos for training and
evaluation, each of which has corresponding long-exposure
ground truth. We also capture real-world low-light videos
with hand shake and subject motion. For these videos, longexposure ground truth is not available, and they are used for
perceptual experiments. Using the collected data, we develop a new learning-based pipeline for extreme low-light
video processing. The proposed method involves training a deep siamese network [6] with a specially designed
loss that encourages temporal stability. We show that the
network can be trained on static videos but generalizes
13185

