NLNL: Negative Learning for Noisy Labels
Youngdong Kim
Junho Yim
Juseung Yun
Junmo Kim
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{ydkim1293, junho.yim, st24hour, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) provide excellent performance when used for image classification. The
classical method of training CNNs is by labeling images in
a supervised manner as in “input image belongs to this label” (Positive Learning; PL), which is a fast and accurate
method if the labels are assigned correctly to all images.
However, if inaccurate labels, or noisy labels, exist, training with PL will provide wrong information, thus severely
degrading performance. To address this issue, we start with
an indirect learning method called Negative Learning (NL),
in which the CNNs are trained using a complementary label as in “input image does not belong to this complementary label.” Because the chances of selecting a true label
as a complementary label are low, NL decreases the risk of
providing incorrect information. Furthermore, to improve
convergence, we extend our method by adopting PL selectively, termed as Selective Negative Learning and Positive
Learning (SelNLPL). PL is used selectively to train upon
expected-to-be-clean data, whose choices become possible
as NL progresses, thus resulting in superior performance of
filtering out noisy data. With simple semi-supervised training technique, our method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy for noisy data classification, proving the superiority of
SelNLPL’s noisy data filtering ability.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have improved
the performance of image classification significantly [17,
8, 29, 11, 7, 38]. For this supervised task, huge dataset
composed of images and their corresponding labels is required for training CNNs. CNNs are powerful tools for
classifying images if the corresponding labels are correct.
However, accurately labeling a large number of images is
daunting and time-consuming, occasionally yielding mismatched labeling. When the CNNs are trained with noisy
data, it can overfit to such a dataset, resulting in poor classification performance. Therefore, training CNNs properly
with noisy data is of great practical importance. Many

Figure 1: Conceptual comparison between Positive Learning (PL) and Negative Learning (NL). Regarding noisy
data, while PL provides CNN the wrong information (red
balloon), with a higher chance, NL can provide CNN the
correct information (blue balloon) because a dog is clearly
not a bird.
approaches address this problem by applying a number
of techniques and regularization terms along with Positive Learning (PL), a typical supervised learning method
for training CNNs that “input image belongs to this label” [6, 2, 34, 20, 3, 39, 26, 30, 22, 33, 21]. However,
when the CNN is trained with images and mismatched labels, wrong information is being provided to the CNN.
To overcome this issue, we suggest Negative Learning
(NL), an indirect learning method for training CNN that
“input image does not belong to this complementary label.” NL does not provide wrong information as frequently
as PL (Figure 1). For example, when training CNN with
noisy CIFAR10 using PL, if the CNN receives an image of
a dog and the label “car”, the CNN will be trained to acknowledge that this image is a car. In this case, the CNN
is trained with wrong information. However, with NL, the
CNN will be randomly provided with a complementary label other than “car,” for example, “bird.” Training CNN to
acknowledge that this image is not a bird is in some way
an act of providing CNN the right information because a
dog is clearly not a bird. In this manner, noisy data can
contribute to training CNN by providing the “right” information with a high chance of not selecting a true label as
a complementary label, whereas zero chance is provided in

101

