Computational Hyperspectral Imaging Based on
Dimension-discriminative Low-rank Tensor Recovery
Shipeng Zhang1 Lizhi Wang2∗ Ying Fu2 Xiaoming Zhong3 Hua Huang2
1
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Beijing Institute of Space Mechanics and Electricity

Abstract
Exploiting the prior information is fundamental for the
image reconstruction in computational hyperspectral imaging. Existing methods usually unfold the 3D signal as a 1D
vector and treat the prior information within different dimensions in an indiscriminative manner, which ignores the
high-dimensionality nature of hyperspectral image (HSI)
and thus results in poor quality reconstruction. In this paper, we propose to make full use of the high-dimensionality
structure of the desired HSI to boost the reconstruction
quality. We first build a high-order tensor by exploiting the
nonlocal similarity in HSI. Then, we propose a dimensiondiscriminative low-rank tensor recovery (DLTR) model to
characterize the structure prior adaptively in each dimension. By integrating the structure prior in DLTR with the
system imaging process, we develop an optimization framework for HSI reconstruction, which is finally solved via the
alternating minimization algorithm. Extensive experiments
implemented with both synthetic and real data demonstrate
that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging techniques capture reflectance of
a real scene across tens to hundreds of discrete bands. Compared with the traditional RGB image, the hyperspectral image (HSI) can provide more details and features with the additional spectral dimension. Such characteristics have been
applied to various computer vision tasks, such as classification [1], recognition [2], and tracking [3].
HSIs are 3D in nature, including one spectral dimension and two spatial dimensions. To obtain a HSI, the conventional spectrometers [4, 5, 6, 7], which are equipped
with 1D or 2D detectors, need to scan the scene along
the spatial or spectral dimensions. Thus, the scanningbased hyperspectral imaging methods suffer from low temporal resolution and cannot be used to capture dynamic
∗ Corresponding author: lzwang@bit.edu.cn

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Illustration of the spectral-spatial correlation in a
local patch. (a) A local spectral-spatial patch of size 31×36.
(b) The 3D smooth surface of (a). (c) The vectoriezd 1D
signal of (a). It shows that the vectorization process breaks
the intrinsic structure information.
scenes. Thanks to the flourish of computational photography, computational hyperspectral imaging has been developed to overcome this problem [8, 9, 10]. Among numerous
imaging systems, coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging
(CASSI) [11, 12] and its dual camera design (DCD) [13, 14]
have attracted increasing attention in recent years due to the
advantage of snapshot. With elaborate optical designs, they
encode the 3D HSI into the 2D compressive measurement.
Consequently, the bottleneck in computational hyperspectral imaging is how to faithfully reconstruct the 3D HSI
from the compressive measurement.
Since the reconstruction is severely under-determined,
image prior information must be characterized to regularize the reconstruction. So far considerable research efforts
in this field have been devoted to exploiting the prior information [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. However, existing
methods usually unfold the 3D signal as a 1D vector and
treat the prior information within different dimensions in an
indiscriminative manner. The vectorization process ignores
the high-dimensionality nature of HSI and breaks the original structure information in HSI. As an intuitive example,
Fig. 1 shows a comparison of pixel value distributions of
one spatial-spectral patch with and without vectorization. It
is clear that the structure information gets lost after vectorization.
Our key observation is that compared with the 1D-vector
based signal description, high-order tensors can provide a

10183

