Canonical Surface Mapping via Geometric Cycle Consistency
Nilesh Kulkarni
Abhinav Gupta*
Shubham Tulsiani*
Carnegie Mellon University
Facebook AI Research
{nileshk, abhinavg}@cs.cmu.edu

shubhtuls@fb.com

https://nileshkulkarni.github.io/csm/

Figure 1: We study the task of Canonical Surface Mapping (CSM). This task is a generalization of keypoint estimation and involves mapping pixels to canonical 3D models. We learn CSM prediction without requiring correspondence annotations, by instead using geometric
cycle consistency as supervision. This allows us to train CSM prediction for diverse classes, including rigid and non-rigid objects.

Abstract
We explore the task of Canonical Surface Mapping (CSM).
Specifically, given an image, we learn to map pixels on the
object to their corresponding locations on an abstract 3D
model of the category. But how do we learn such a mapping? A supervised approach would require extensive manual labeling which is not scalable beyond a few hand-picked
categories. Our key insight is that the CSM task (pixel to
3D), when combined with 3D projection (3D to pixel), completes a cycle. Hence, we can exploit a geometric cycle consistency loss, thereby allowing us to forgo the dense manual
supervision. Our approach allows us to train a CSM model
for a diverse set of classes, without sparse or dense keypoint
annotation, by leveraging only foreground mask labels for
training. We show that our predictions also allow us to infer
dense correspondence between two images, and compare
the performance of our approach against several methods
that predict correspondence by leveraging varying amount
of supervision.

1. Introduction
Plato famously remarked that while there are many cups in
the world, there is only one ‘idea’ of a cup. Any particular instance of a category can thus be understood via its
relationship to this platonic ideal. As an illustration, consider an image of a bird in Figure 1. When we humans see
this image, we can not only identify and segment the bird
but also go further and even map pixels to an abstract 3D
representation of the category. This task of mapping pixels
in an image to locations on an abstract 3D model (which
we henceforth call canonical surface mapping) is generalization and densification of keypoint estimation and is key
towards rich understanding of objects. But how do we learn
to do this task? What is the right data, supervision or models to achieve dense rich understanding of objects?
One way to learn the canonical surface mapping task is to
collect large-scale labeled data. Specifically, we can label
hundreds or thousands of keypoints per image for thousands
* the last two authors were equally uninvolved.

2202

