End-to-end Learning for Graph Decomposition
Jie Song1
1

Bjoern Andres3,4

ETH Zurich

2

Michael J. Black2

MPI for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
Deep neural networks provide powerful tools for pattern
recognition, while classical graph algorithms are widely
used to solve combinatorial problems. In computer vision,
many tasks combine elements of both pattern recognition
and graph reasoning. In this paper, we study how to connect
deep networks with graph decomposition into an end-to-end
trainable framework. More specifically, the minimum cost
multicut problem is first converted to an unconstrained binary cubic formulation where cycle consistency constraints
are incorporated into the objective function. The new optimization problem can be viewed as a Conditional Random
Field (CRF) in which the random variables are associated
with the binary edge labels. Cycle constraints are introduced into the CRF as high-order potentials. A standard
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) provides the front-end
features for the fully differentiable CRF. The parameters of
both parts are optimized in an end-to-end manner. The efficacy of the proposed learning algorithm is demonstrated
via experiments on clustering MNIST images and on the
challenging task of real-world multi-people pose estimation.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision problems such as multi-person
pose estimation [35], instance segmentation [21], and multitarget tracking [42] can be viewed as optimization problems, where the decompositions of a graph are feasible solutions. For example, in multi-person pose estimation, a
graph G = (V, E) can be constructed where the nodes V
correspond to body joint detections and the edges E connect a person’s joints [35]. A partitioning of the graph G
into connected components that correspond to the joints of a
single individual can be found, for example, via solving the
Minimum Cost Multicut Problem [4, 8].
This formulation has several appealing properties: First,
it does not favor one decomposition over another and the
number of graph components is determined by the solution
in an unbiased fashion. Contrary to this, some balanced cut
problems [39] rely on a fixed number of graph components

3

Otmar Hilliges1

Bosch Center for AI

4

Siyu Tang1,2,4

University of Tübingen

or introduction of biases into the problem definition. Second,
it is straightforward to utilize this optimization problem in
practice: for many vision tasks, an input graph can be easily
constructed and the cost of the incident nodes belonging to
distinct components can be obtained robustly using Deep
Neural Networks, e.g. [14, 21].
By far the most common way of applying the minimum
cost multicut problem to vision tasks is to employ a multistage pipeline [15, 21, 35, 43]. First, the task dependent
detections and the affinity measures between the detections
are obtained by two separately trained networks. Second, the
coefficients of the objective function are constructed based
on the output of the networks and third, the optimization
is performed independently on top of the detection graph
by either branch and bound algorithms [35, 42] or heuristic
greedy search algorithms [6].
While straightforward, a notable downside of this multistage approach is that the deep networks are learned locally.
That is, the dependencies among the optimization variables
are not considered during the training of the deep feature representations. However, it has been shown that graphical models such as Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) can increase
the performance of deep feature learning approaches [44, 50].
In this work we then ask the question whether the global dependencies defined by a general graph decomposition problem, such as the minimum cost multicut problem, can lead
to learning of better feature representations.
Motivated by this question, we propose an end-to-end
trainable framework to learn feature representations globally in a graph decomposition problem. We first convert
the minimum cost multicut problem into an unconstrained
binary cubic problem to incorporate the hard consistency
constraints into the objective function. The appealing property of this new optimization problem is that it can be viewed
as a conditional random field (CRF). The random variables
of the CRF are associated with the binary edge labels of
the initial graph, and the hard constraints can be introduced
as high-order potentials in the CRF. We further propose an
end-to-end learnable framework that consists of a standard
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) as the front-end and
a fully differentiable CRF with the high-order potentials.
The advantages of the proposed framework are: (i) The
110093

