Selective Sparse Sampling for Fine-grained Image Recognition
Yao Ding†§∗ ,Yanzhao Zhou†∗ ,Yi Zhu† ,Qixiang Ye†§‡ and Jianbin Jiao†‡
†
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
§
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{dingyao16,zhouyanzhao215,zhuyi215}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {jiaojb,qxye}@ucas.ac.cn

Class Peak Responses

Abstract
Fine-grained recognition poses the unique challenge of
capturing subtle inter-class differences under considerable
intra-class variances (e.g., beaks for bird species). Conventional approaches crop local regions and learn detailed
representation from those regions, but suffer from the fixed
number of parts and missing of surrounding context. In
this paper, we propose a simple yet effective framework,
called Selective Sparse Sampling, to capture diverse and
fine-grained details. The framework is implemented using Convolutional Neural Networks, referred to as Selective
Sparse Sampling Networks (S3Ns). With image-level supervision, S3Ns collect peaks, i.e., local maximums, from class
response maps to estimate informative receptive fields and
learn a set of sparse attention for capturing fine-detailed visual evidence as well as preserving context. The evidence
is selectively sampled to extract discriminative and complementary features, which significantly enrich the learned
representation and guide the network to discover more
subtle cues. Extensive experiments and ablation studies
show that the proposed method consistently outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods on challenging benchmarks including CUB-200-2011, FGVC-Aircraft, and Stanford Cars1 .

1. Introduction
Fine-grained recognition refers to identifying subordinate classes under a basic-level category in images, e.g.,
bird species [24], flower breeds[19], car models [10], and
aircraft types [15]. Compared with general image classification, fine-grain recognition is more challenging due to the
subtle differences between inter-class images.
The study of cognitive neuroscience [8, 16] discovers
that when understanding a scene, the human visual system
will experience three stages. These stages include visual
‡ Corresponding authors.

Class Response Map

“Baltimore Oriole”

Context-preserved
Fine-grained Features

Input Image
Discriminative
Branch

Sparse Attention

Complementary
Branch

Selective Sampling

Figure 1. Selective Sparse Sampling Networks (S3Ns) learn
sparse attention from class peak responses, which typically corresponds to informative object parts. The sparse attention selectively samples image to two branches in a probabilistic manner
to produce a rich representation of both discriminative and complementary visual evidence. The white grids covered on images
indicate sparse attention sampling for visualization purpose. Best
viewed in color.

saccadic activating salient regions, visual foraging selecting regions of interest, and visual fixation gazing on local
regions to make the final decision.
Inspired by this, a significant line of previous works
[31, 7, 13, 6, 30, 20] tackles the fine-grained image recognition problem by two principal components, i.e., discriminative parts localization and ROI2 feature extraction. However, the main drawbacks are threefold: 1) Accurate estimation for part bounding boxes under the image-level supervision remains an open problem and often resorts to complicated and time-consuming pipelines, e.g., weakly supervised detection model [33, 29], recurrent mining [3], or reinforcement learning [12]. 2) The number of localized parts
is often a predefined hyper-parameter, which is fixed (e.g.,
four parts [29]) and does not adapt to the image content.
3) Last but not least, the “hard” crop operation neglects the

* Equal contribution.
1 Source code is released at https://github.com/Yao-DD/S3N.git

2 The region of interest which is typically defined by a bounding box.

6599

