Unsupervised Person Re-Identification by
Camera-Aware Similarity Consistency Learning
Ancong Wu1 , Wei-Shi Zheng2,3,4∗ , and Jian-Huang Lai2,5
1

School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
5
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security, China
wuancong@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Cam 1

Cam 2

Cam 1

Cam 1

Matching results
Query

For matching pedestrians across disjoint camera views
in surveillance, person re-identification (Re-ID) has made
great progress in supervised learning. However, it is infeasible to label data in a number of new scenes when extending a Re-ID system. Thus, studying unsupervised learning for Re-ID is important for saving labelling cost. Yet,
cross-camera scene variation is a key challenge for unsupervised Re-ID, such as illumination, background and viewpoint variations, which cause domain shift in the feature
space and result in inconsistent pairwise similarity distributions that degrade matching performance. To alleviate
the effect of cross-camera scene variation, we propose a
Camera-Aware Similarity Consistency Loss to learn consistent pairwise similarity distributions for intra-camera
matching and cross-camera matching. To avoid learning
ineffective knowledge in consistency learning, we preserve
the prior common knowledge of intra-camera matching in
the pretrained model as reliable guiding information, which
does not suffer from cross-camera scene variation as crosscamera matching. To learn similarity consistency more effectively, we further develop a coarse-to-fine consistency
learning scheme to learn consistency globally and locally in
two steps. Experiments show that our method outperformed
the state-of-the-art unsupervised Re-ID methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, person re-identification (Re-ID) has
drawn much attention in surveillance applications. Many
works focus on supervised learning [14, 45, 18, 6, 16, 1, 29]
and have made great progress. However, in practise, manually labelling data for training is costly when developing
Re-ID system for a large number of new scenes. To reduce labelling amount and exploit unlabelled data in a new
∗ Corresponding author

Cross-camera matching
(with scene variation)

Gallery ranking list

Cam 1

1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1

Cam 2

2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1

Intra-camera matching
(without scene variation)

inconsistent

Figure 1. Illustration of the camera-aware similarity inconsistency problem. We match samples in two cameras (denoted by cam
1 and cam 2) on the DukeMTMC dataset [48] using a ResNet-50
model [12] pretrained on the MSMT17 dataset [34]. The pairwise
similarities are computed between each pair of samples in intracamera matching or cross-camera matching and the distributions
are shown on the left. Top-8 matchings retrieved by cosine similarity are shown on the right with the correct matchings indicated
by green bounding boxes. The cross-camera scene variation leads
to domain shift in the feature space and results in inconsistent pairwise similarity distributions that degrade matching performance.

scene, some previous works attempt to study unsupervised
and transfer learning for Re-ID [26, 13, 40, 32, 8, 34, 7, 49],
in which some recent advanced methods [40, 34, 7, 49]
focus on scene variation between cameras. Cross-camera
scene variation is a key challenge for unsupervised Re-ID
1
, since illumination, background and viewpoint vary from
camera to camera and cause domain shift in feature space.
To show the effect of cross-camera scene variation, we
visualize pairwise similarity distributions and some matching examples in Figure 1. We match samples in two cameras
on the DukeMTMC dataset [48]. The pairwise similarities
are computed between each pair of samples in intra-camera
matching or cross-camera matching by a ResNet-50 model
1 In this paper, unsupervised person re-identification is studied in the
unsupervised domain adaptation setting, which learns a model for the target domain given labelled source data and unlabelled target data.

6922

