GLAMpoints: Greedily Learned Accurate Match points
Prune Truong1,2∗ Stefanos Apostolopoulos1 Agata Mosinska1
Sandro De Zanet1
1

RetinAI Medical AG, Switzerland

truongp@student.ethz.ch

2

Samuel Stucky1

Carlos Ciller1

ETH Zurich, Switzerland

{stefanos, agata, samuel, carlos, sandro}@retinai.com

Abstract
We introduce a novel CNN-based feature point detector
- Greedily Learned Accurate Match Points (GLAMpoints) learned in a semi-supervised manner. Our detector extracts
repeatable, stable interest points with a dense coverage,
specifically designed to maximize the correct matching in
a specific domain, which is in contrast to conventional techniques that optimize indirect metrics. In this paper, we apply our method on challenging retinal slitlamp images, for
which classical detectors yield unsatisfactory results due to
low image quality and insufficient amount of low-level features. We show that GLAMpoints significantly outperforms
classical detectors as well as state-of-the-art CNN-based
methods in matching and registration quality for retinal images.

1. Introduction
Digital fundus images of the human retina are widely
used to diagnose variety of eye diseases, such as Diabetic
Retinopathy (DR), glaucoma, and Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD) [42, 52]. For retinal images acquired
during the same session and presenting small overlaps, image registration can be used to create mosaics depicting
larger areas of the retina. Through image mosaicking, ophthalmologists can display the retina in one large picture,
which is helpful during diagnosis and treatment planning.
Besides, mosaicking of retinal images taken at different
time points has been shown to be important for monitoring the progression or identification of eye diseases. More
importantly, fundus image registration has been explored in
eye laser treatment for DR. It allows real-time tracking of
the vessels during surgical operations to ensure accurate application of the laser on the retina and minimal damage to
the healthy tissues.
∗ Work produced during an internship at RetinAI Medical AG

a) SIFT

b) GLAMpoints

Figure 1: Keypoints detected by SIFT and GLAMpoints
and resulting matches for a pair of preprocessed (top) and
raw (bottom) slitlamp images. Detected points are in white,
green matches are true positive, red represents false positive. Our GLAMpoints detector produces more reliable
keypoints even without additional pre-processing.
Mosaicking usually relies on extracting repeatable interest points from the images, matching the correspondences
and searching for transformations relating them. As a result, the keypoint detection is the first and the most crucial
stage of this pipeline, as it conditions all further steps and
therefore the success of the registration.
At the same time, classical feature detectors are generalpurpose and manually optimized for outdoor, in-focus, lownoise images with sharp edges and corners. They usually
fail to work with medical images, which can be distorted,

10732

