Uncertainty Modeling of Contextual-Connections between Tracklets for
Unconstrained Video-based Face Recognition
Jingxiao Zheng1
1

Ruichi Yu1∗

Jun-Cheng Chen2

Boyu Lu1

Carlos D. Castillo1

Rama Chellappa1
UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park 2 CITI, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

{jxzheng, yrcbsg}@umiacs.umd.edu, pullpull@citi.sinica.edu.tw, {bylu, carlos, rama}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract

Still Face Galleries
G1

Unconstrained video-based face recognition is a challenging problem due to significant within-video variations
caused by pose, occlusion and blur. To tackle this problem, an effective idea is to propagate the identity from highquality faces to low-quality ones through contextual connections, which are constructed based on context such as
body appearance. However, previous methods have often
propagated erroneous information due to lack of uncertainty modeling of the noisy contextual connections. In this
paper, we propose the Uncertainty-Gated Graph (UGG),
which conducts graph-based identity propagation between
tracklets, which are represented by nodes in a graph. UGG
explicitly models the uncertainty of the contextual connections by adaptively updating the weights of the edge gates
according to the identity distributions of the nodes during
inference. UGG is a generic graphical model that can be
applied at only inference time or with end-to-end training.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of UGG with state-of-theart results in the recently released challenging Cast Search
in Movies and IARPA Janus Surveillance Video Benchmark
dataset.

1. Introduction
Unconstrained video-based face recognition has been an
active research topic for decades in computer vision and
biometrics. In a wide range of its applications, such as
visual surveillance, video content analysis and access control, the task is to match the subjects in unconstrained probe
videos to pre-enrolled gallery subjects, which are represented by still face images. Although recent advances of
deep convolutional neural network (DCNN)-based methods
have achieved comparable or superior performance to human in still-image based face recognition [28, 20, 23, 1, 21,
26, 27, 6, 5], unconstrained video-based face recognition
still remains a challenging problem due to significant facial
∗ Currently working in Waymo.

G3

G2

S1

S4

Frame 2

Frame 1
S2

S3

Samples from Video

Figure 1: An example of video-based face recognition problem
consisting of three still face gallery subjects and four samples from
the videos. Orange arrows show positive connections from body
appearance similarity. Black arrows indicate negative connections constructed from co-occurrence information. Blue arrows
represent the facial similarities to the ground truth galleries. The
thicker the arrows, the stronger the connections. The red cross
indicates an misleading connection. A graph with fixed connections may propagate erroneous information through these misleading connections. (The figure is best viewed in color.)

appearance variations caused by pose, motion blur, and occlusion.
To fill the performance gap between face recognition in
still-images and unconstrained videos, one possible solution is to train a video-specific model with large amount of
training data, which is difficult and costly to collect. Another effective idea is to leverage the well-studied imagebased face recognition methods to first identify video faces
with limited variations, then utilize some video contextual
information, such as body appearance and spatial-temporal
correlation between person instances, to propagate the identity information from high-quality faces to low-quality ones.
For instance, in Figure 1, by utilizing the body appearance,
we may propagate the identity information obtained from
frontal face S4 to the profile face S1 , which is very difficult
to recognize individually.
The above idea has been explored using graph-based ap-

703

