TexturePose: Supervising Human Mesh Estimation with Texture Consistency
Georgios Pavlakos* , Nikos Kolotouros* , Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of model-based human
pose estimation. Recent approaches have made significant
progress towards regressing the parameters of parametric
human body models directly from images. Because of the
absence of images with 3D shape ground truth, relevant
approaches rely on 2D annotations or sophisticated architecture designs. In this work, we advocate that there are
more cues we can leverage, which are available for free in
natural images, i.e., without getting more annotations, or
modifying the network architecture. We propose a natural
form of supervision, that capitalizes on the appearance constancy of a person among different frames (or viewpoints).
This seemingly insignificant and often overlooked cue goes
a long way for model-based pose estimation. The parametric model we employ allows us to compute a texture map for
each frame. Assuming that the texture of the person does not
change dramatically between frames, we can apply a novel
texture consistency loss, which enforces that each point in
the texture map has the same texture value across all frames.
Since the texture is transferred in this common texture map
space, no camera motion computation is necessary, or even
an assumption of smoothness among frames. This makes
our proposed supervision applicable in a variety of settings,
ranging from monocular video, to multi-view images. We
benchmark our approach against strong baselines that require the same or even more annotations that we do and we
consistently outperform them. Simultaneously, we achieve
state-of-the-art results among model-based pose estimation approaches in different benchmarks. The project website with videos, results, and code can be found at https:
//seas.upenn.edu/˜pavlakos/projects/texturepose.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the area of human pose estimation has
experienced significant successes for tasks with an increasing level of difficulty; 2D joint detection [30, 50], dense
∗ equal contribution

Figure 1: For a short video, or multi-view images of a person,
a specific patch on the body surface has constant texture. This
consistency can be formulated as an auxiliary loss in the training
of a network for model-based pose estimation, and allows us to
leverage information directly from raw pixels of natural images.
Images and texture come from the People-Snapshot dataset [3].

correspondence estimation [4] or even 3D skeleton reconstruction [26, 45]. Typically, as we ascend the pyramid
of human understanding, we target more and more challenging tasks. As expected, the emergence of sophisticated
parametric models of the human body, like SCAPE [6],
SMPL(-X) [25, 32, 40], and Adam [17, 51], has really paved
the way for full 3D pose and shape estimation from image
data. And while this step has been well explored for video
or multi-view data [13, 17], the ultimate goal is to reach the
same level of analysis from a single image.
Traditional optimization-based approaches, e.g., [8, 10,
23], have performed very reliably for model-based pose estimation. However, more recently, the interest has moved
towards data-driven approaches regressing the parameters
of the human body model, directly from images. Considering the lack of images with 3D shape ground truth for training, the main challenge is to identify reliable sources of supervision. Proposed methods [18, 31, 35, 46, 47, 53] have
focused on leveraging all the available sources of 2D an1803

