Domain-Adaptive Single-View 3D Reconstruction
Pedro O. Pinheiro
Element AI

Negar Rostamzadeh
Element AI

Sungjin Ahn
Rutgers University

Abstract

Domain Confusion

Single-view 3D shape reconstruction is an important but
challenging problem, mainly for two reasons. First, as
shape annotation is very expensive to acquire, current methods rely on synthetic data, in which ground-truth 3D annotation is easy to obtain. However, this results in domain
adaptation problem when applied to natural images. The
second challenge is that there are multiple shapes that can
explain a given 2D image. In this paper, we propose a
framework to improve over these challenges using adversarial training. On one hand, we impose domain confusion
between natural and synthetic image representations to reduce the distribution gap. On the other hand, we impose
the reconstruction to be ‘realistic’ by forcing it to lie on a
(learned) manifold of realistic object shapes. Our experiments show that these constraints improve performance by
a large margin over baseline reconstruction models. We
achieve results competitive with the state of the art with a
much simpler architecture.

?

1. Introduction
Humans can easily understand the underlying 3D structure of scenes and objects from single images. This is a
hallmark of a human visual system and it is an essential
step towards higher level visual understanding. This is an
extremely ill-posed problem because a single image does
not contain enough information to allow 3D reconstruction.
Therefore, a machine vision system needs to rely on priors
over the shape to infer 3D structure.
Efficient and effective 3D prototyping plays an important role in many different fields, such as virtual/augmented
reality, architecture, robotics and 3D printing to name a
few. Perhaps more importantly, studying 3D object representations could bring insights on how this information
is encoded in intermediate and higher-level visual cortices [53, 26].
Traditional reconstruction methods rely on multiple images of same object instance [28, 4, 6, 39, 14]. These methods possess two strong limitations due to some key assumptions [8]: (i) it requires a large number of views to achieve

Model

Shape prior

Figure 1: We propose a framework for (natural) singleview 3D reconstruction exploiting adversarial training in
two ways. These constraints are achieved with additional
loss terms. We impose domain confusion between natural
and rendered images (top) and exploit shape priors to force
reconstructions to look realistic (bottom).

reconstruction, (ii) the objects’ appearance are expected to
be Lambertian (i.e., non-reflective) and their albedos are
supposed to be non-uniform (i.e., rich of non-homogeneous
textures).
Another way to achieve 3D reconstruction is to leverage
knowledge from object’s appearance and shape. The main
advantages of relying on shape priors is that we do not need
to rely on accurate feature correspondences across different
views. In this case 3D reconstruction can, in principle, be
done from a single-view 2D image (assuming the priors are
rich enough).
Recently, there has been a growing interest in learningbased approaches to tackle the problem of predicting the
canonical shape of an object from a single image [24, 8,
16, 41, 54, 22, 48, 33, 44, 47, 49, 55]. Two technical advances were responsible for this surge: (i) the easy access
to large-scale 3D Computer-Aided Design (CAD) repositories, such as ShapeNet [7], Pascal3D+ [52], ObjectNet3D [51], Pix3D [40] and (ii) advances in deep learning
techniques [17].
Most of these methods contain a similar high-level archi-

7638

