GLoSH: Global-Local Spherical Harmonics for Intrinsic Image Decomposition
Hao Zhou1 ∗
Xiang Yu2
David W. Jacobs1
1
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
2
NEC Laboratories America
1

2

{hzhou, djacobs}@cs.umd.edu

xiangyu@nec-labs.com

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

Figure 1: Top row: result of [2]. [2] takes an RGB-D image as input and predicts: (b) reflectance, (c) shading, (d) normal,
(e) lighting. Bottom row: result of our method. It takes an RGB image as input and predicts: (g) reflectance, (h) shading,
(i) normal and (j) lighting. The red boxes show that our algorithm correctly attributes cast shadows and highlights to shading
while [2] incorrectly attributes them to reflectance. Our lighting (j) captures local lighting variation better than (e) from [2].

Abstract
Traditional intrinsic image decomposition focuses on decomposing images into reflectance and shading, leaving
surfaces normals and lighting entangled in shading. In
this work, we propose a Global-Local Spherical Harmonics (GLoSH) lighting model to improve the lighting component, and jointly predict reflectance and surface normals.
The global SH models the holistic lighting while local SH
account for the spatial variation of lighting. Also, a novel
non-negative lighting constraint is proposed to encourage
the estimated SH to be physically meaningful. To seamlessly reflect the GLoSH model, we design a coarse-to-fine
network structure. The coarse network predicts global SH,
reflectance and normals, and the fine network predicts their
local residuals. Lacking labels for reflectance and lighting,
we apply synthetic data for model pre-training and fine-tune
the model with real data in a self-supervised way. Compared to the state-of-the-art methods only targeting normals
or reflectance and shading, our method recovers all components and achieves consistently better results on three real
∗ Hao Zhou is currently at Amazon AWS.

datasets, IIW, SAW and NYUv2.

1. Introduction
Understanding the physical world that produces an image is a core problem in computer vision. [4] first proposed
to estimate the intrinsic scene characteristics from images,
including range, orientation, reflectance and incident lighting. This is a notoriously difficult inverse problem as it is
highly under-constrained. Moreover, we lack models of the
physical components of the problem, such as lighting, that
are both accurate and easy to use. Early works start with
investigating the reflectance, shape and illumination of a
single object [1, 3], as the lighting for a single object is
easier to model, for instance, by using a single set of low
dimensional Spherical Harmonics [5, 31]. The lighting of
a natural scene, however, is much more complicated due to
its spatial variation caused by shadow, inter-reflection and
the presence of light sources in the scene. As a result, most
works that address scenes have lumped normal and lighting together as shading, and try to recover that, known as
intrinsic image decomposition.

7820

