Photorealistic Style Transfer via Wavelet Transforms
Jaejun Yoo∗

Youngjung Uh∗
Sanghyuk Chun∗
Byeongkyu Kang
Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp.

Jung-Woo Ha

{jaejun.yoo,youngjung.uh,sanghyuk.c,bk.kang,jungwoo.ha}@navercorp.com

(a) Inputs

(b) WCT

(c) PhotoWCT

(d) Ours (WCT2)

Figure 1: Photorealistic stylization results. Given (a) an input pair (top: content, bottom: style), the results of (b) WCT [18],
(c) PhotoWCT [19], and (d) our model are shown. Every result is produced without any post-processing. While WCT and
PhotoWCT suffer from spatial distortions, our model successfully transfers the style and preserves the fine details.

Abstract
Recent style transfer models have provided promising
artistic results. However, given a photograph as a reference
style, existing methods are limited by spatial distortions or
unrealistic artifacts, which should not happen in real photographs. We introduce a theoretically sound correction to
the network architecture that remarkably enhances photorealism and faithfully transfers the style. The key ingredient of
our method is wavelet transforms that naturally fits in deep
networks. We propose a wavelet corrected transfer based
on whitening and coloring transforms (WCT2 ) that allows
features to preserve their structural information and statistical properties of VGG feature space during stylization.
This is the first and the only end-to-end model that can
stylize a 1024×1024 resolution image in 4.7 seconds, giving a pleasing and photorealistic quality without any postprocessing. Last but not least, our model provides a stable
video stylization without temporal constraints. Our code,
generated images, pre-trained models and supplementary
documents are all available at ClovaAI/WCT2.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic style transfer has to satisfy contradictory
objectives. To be photorealistic, a model should apply the
reference style on the scene without hurting the details of an
image. In figure 1, for example, the general style (color and
tone) of sky and sea should change, while the fine structures
of the ship and the bridge remain intact. However, artistic
style transfer methods (e.g., whitening and coloring transforms, WCT [18]) generally suffer from severe distortions
due to their strong abstraction ability, which is not favored
in the photorealistic stylization (figure 1b). (Please refer to
our supplementary materials for more failure cases.)
Luan et al. [22] introduced a regularizer for photorealism
on the traditional optimization-based method [8]. However,
solving the optimization problem requires heavy computational costs, which limits their use in practice. To overcome
this issue, Li et al. [19] recently proposed a photorealistic variant of WCT (PhotoWCT) that replaced the upsampling components of the VGG decoder with unpooling. By
* indicates equal contribution

9036

