Relation Parsing Neural Network for Human-Object Interaction Detection
Penghao Zhou and Mingmin Chi
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, Fudan Univeristy, Shanghai, China
{17210240267,mmchi}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
person
Human-Object Interaction Detection devotes to infer a
triplet hhuman, verb, objecti between human and objects.
In this paper, we propose a novel model, i.e., Relation Parsing Neural Network (RPNN), to detect human-object interactions. Specifically, the network is represented by two
graphs, i.e., Object-Bodypart Graph and Human-Bodypart
Graph. Here, the Object-Bodypart Graph dynamically captures the relationship between body parts and the surrounding objects. The Human-Bodypart Graph infers the relationship between human and body parts, and assembles
body part contexts to predict actions. These two graphs are
associated through an action passing mechanism. The proposed RPNN model is able to implicitly parse a pairwise
relation in two graphs without supervised labels. Experiments conducted on V-COCO and HICO-DET datasets confirm the effectiveness of the proposed RPNN network which
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

(a)

(b)

1. Introduction

(c)

(d)

Deep convolutional neural networks [1, 2, 3] have led
a rapid improvement for visual recognition tasks, including object detection [4, 5, 6] and human keypoint estimation [7, 8, 9]. Individual object detection is the basis of
understanding images. To comprehend the content of the
images, visual relationship recognition between individual
instances is important and challenging. Human-Object Interaction (HOI) Detection [10, 11, 12, 13] is the related
task which aims to detect human and objects, and meanwhile to reason the complex interactions between them.
We present an HOI detection instance in Fig. 1(a), where
a triplet hhuman, verb, objecti is respectively detected by
our method.
Most existing methods [14, 15, 16, 17] obtain great detection results by considering the pair of human feature and
object feature as shown in Fig. 1(b), and combining the
spatial relationship to detect HOIs. However, directly using the whole human feature with uniform attention might
lose a detailed information. Since human interact with ob-

surf
surfboard

Figure 1. Human-object interaction detection. (a) Given an
image, hhumani, hverbi, and hobjecti are respectively detected
to show that the person (human) surfs (verb) on the surfboard
(object), where the person box is marked in blue, and the object
box is marked in red. (b) Recent methods [14, 15, 16, 17] directly use the pairs of the human and the object features to detect
human-object interactions, where the blue line connects the human
box and the object box to denote a pair of human and object. (c)
the correlation between different body parts is exploited for HOI
recognition in [18], where the body parts are marked in yellow,
and the green lines denote the body-part pairs. (d) In contrast,
our method exploits relations between object-bodypart (denoted
with yellow lines) as well as human-bodypart (blue lines) for HOI
detection. In this example, the strong relation between leg (body
part) and surfboard (object) indicates that the person surfs on the
surfboard.

jects only through body parts, the region of the body parts
are of the most important for HOI detection. Therefore,
the contents of body parts should be further considered for

843

