CCNet: Criss-Cross Attention for Semantic Segmentation
Zilong Huang1∗, Xinggang Wang1†, Lichao Huang2 , Chang Huang2 , Yunchao Wei3,4 , Wenyu Liu1
1
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Horizon Robotics 3 ReLER, UTS
4
Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Full-image dependencies provide useful contextual information to benefit visual understanding problems. In this
work, we propose a Criss-Cross Network (CCNet) for obtaining such contextual information in a more effective and
efficient way. Concretely, for each pixel, a novel criss-cross
attention module in CCNet harvests the contextual information of all the pixels on its criss-cross path. By taking a
further recurrent operation, each pixel can finally capture
the full-image dependencies from all pixels. Overall, CCNet is with the following merits: 1) GPU memory friendly.
Compared with the non-local block, the proposed recurrent
criss-cross attention module requires 11× less GPU memory usage. 2) High computational efficiency. The recurrent
criss-cross attention significantly reduces FLOPs by about
85% of the non-local block in computing full-image dependencies. 3) The state-of-the-art performance. We conduct
extensive experiments on popular semantic segmentation
benchmarks including Cityscapes, ADE20K, and instance
segmentation benchmark COCO. In particular, our CCNet
achieves the mIoU score of 81.4 and 45.22 on Cityscapes
test set and ADE20K validation set, respectively, which
are the new state-of-the-art results. The source code is
available at https://github.com/speedinghzl/
CCNet.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which is a fundamental problem
in the computer vision community, aims at assigning semantic class labels to each pixel in the given image. It has
been extensively and actively studied in many recent works
and is also critical for various challenging and meaningful
applications such as autonomous driving [14], augmented
reality [1], and image editing [13]. Specifically, current
state-of-the-art semantic segmentation approaches based on
∗ The work was mainly done during an internship at Horizon Robotics
† Corresponding author.

HxW

(a) Non-local block
H+W-1

H+W-1

(b) Criss-Cross Attention block

Few context

Rich context

Figure 1. Diagrams of two attention-based context aggregation
methods. (a) For each position (e.g. blue), the Non-local module
[31] generates a dense attention map which has H × W weights
(in green). (b) For each position (e.g. blue), the criss-cross attention module generates a sparse attention map which only has
H + W − 1 weights. After the recurrent operation, each position
(e.g. red) in the final output feature maps can collect information
from all pixels. For clear display, residual connections are ignored.

the fully convolutional network (FCN) [26] have made remarkable progress. However, due to the fixed geometric structures, they are inherently limited to local receptive
fields and short-range contextual information. These limitations impose a great adverse effect on FCN-based methods
due to insufficient contextual information.
To make up for the above deficiency of FCN, some works
have been proposed to introduce useful contextual information to benefit the semantic segmentation task. Specifically, Chen et al. [5] proposed atrous spatial pyramid pool-

603

