CFSNet: Toward a Controllable Feature Space for Image Restoration
Wei Wang * 1 , Ruiming Guo * 2 , Yapeng Tian3 and Wenming Yang †1
1

Tsinghua University, 2 Chinese University of Hong Kong, 3 University of Rochester

Figure 1. The perception-distortion trade-off of image super-resolution (1st row) and the trade-off between noise reduction and detail
preservation (2nd row). At test-time, when using CFSNet, users can easily adjust an input control variable αin to attain the most satisfactory
result according to personal preferences. In contrast, the fixed methods (e.g., EDSR, DnCNN-B) can not always guarantee the optimal
visual quality.

Abstract
Deep learning methods have witnessed the great
progress in image restoration with specific metrics (e.g.,
PSNR, SSIM). However, the perceptual quality of the restored image is relatively subjective, and it is necessary for
users to control the reconstruction result according to personal preferences or image characteristics, which cannot
be done using existing deterministic networks. This motivates us to exquisitely design a unified interactive framework for general image restoration tasks. Under this framework, users can control continuous transition of different
objectives, e.g., the perception-distortion trade-off of image super-resolution, the trade-off between noise reduction
and detail preservation. We achieve this goal by controlling the latent features of the designed network. To be specific, our proposed framework, named Controllable Feature Space Network (CFSNet), is entangled by two branches
based on different objectives. Our framework can adaptively learn the coupling coefficients of different layers and
channels, which provides finer control of the restored im* Denotes equal contribution.
† Denotes corresponding author.

age quality. Experiments on several typical image restoration tasks fully validate the effective benefits of the proposed
method. Code is available at https://github.com/
qibao77/CFSNet.

1. Introduction
Image restoration is a classic ill-posed inverse problem
that aims to recover high-quality images from damaged images affected by various kinds of degradations. According
to the types of degradation, it can be categorized into different subtasks such as image super-resolution, image denoising, JPEG image deblocking, etc.
The rise of deep learning has greatly facilitated the development of these subtasks. But these methods are often
goal-specific, and we need to retrain the network when we
deal with images different from the training dataset. Furthermore, most methods usually aim to pursue high reconstruction accuracy in terms of PSNR or SSIM. However, image quality assessment from personal opinion is relatively
subjective, and low reconstruction distortion is not always
consistent with high visual quality [4]. In addition, in many

4140

