HowTo100M: Learning a Text-Video Embedding by
Watching Hundred Million Narrated Video Clips
Antoine Miech1,2∗
Dimitri Zhukov1,2∗
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac2+
2
1,2
Makarand Tapaswi
Ivan Laptev
Josef Sivic1,2,3
2
3
1
École Normale Supérieure
Inria
CIIRC, CTU
https://www.di.ens.fr/willow/research/howto100m

Abstract
Learning text-video embeddings usually requires a
dataset of video clips with manually provided captions.
However, such datasets are expensive and time consuming to create and therefore difficult to obtain on a large
scale. In this work, we propose instead to learn such embeddings from video data with readily available natural language annotations in the form of automatically transcribed
narrations. The contributions of this work are three-fold.
First, we introduce HowTo100M: a large-scale dataset of
136 million video clips sourced from 1.22M narrated instructional web videos depicting humans performing and
describing over 23k different visual tasks. Our data collection procedure is fast, scalable and does not require any additional manual annotation. Second, we demonstrate that a
text-video embedding trained on this data leads to state-ofthe-art results for text-to-video retrieval and action localization on instructional video datasets such as YouCook2
or CrossTask. Finally, we show that this embedding transfers well to other domains: fine-tuning on generic Youtube
videos (MSR-VTT dataset) and movies (LSMDC dataset)
outperforms models trained on these datasets alone. Our
dataset, code and models are publicly available [1].

1. Introduction
Communicating about the visual world using language
is a key ability of humans as intelligent beings. A three
year old child can manipulate objects, observe its own actions and describe them to others using language; while
adults can learn new skills by reading books or watching
videos. This interplay between video and language ex∗ Equal contribution.
+ Now at DeepMind.
1 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, École normale supérieure,

CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
3 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the
Czech Technical University in Prague.

Figure 1: We learn a joint text-video embedding by watching millions of narrated video clips of people performing diverse visual
tasks. The learned embedding transfers well to other instructional
and non-instructional text-video datasets.

tends naturally to artificial agents that need to understand
the visual world and communicate about it with people.
Examples of tasks that still represent a significant challenge for current artificial systems include text-to-video retrieval [25, 32, 54, 55, 63], text-based action or event localization [15], video captioning [36, 61], and video question answering [51, 63]. Yet, progress on these problems
is important for a host of applications from searching video
archives to human-robot communication.
A common approach to model visual concepts described
with language is to learn a mapping of text and video into a
shared embedding space, where related text fragments and
video clips are close to each other [15, 32, 37, 38, 59].
Learning a good representation often requires a large set
of paired video clips and text captions. In fact, given the
huge variability of video scenes and their textual descriptions, learning a generic embedding space may require millions of paired video clips and text captions. However, existing datasets (e.g. MSR-VTT [58], DiDeMo [15], EPIC-

2630

