Neural Inverse Rendering of an Indoor Scene From a Single Image
Soumyadip Sengupta1,2,3,† , Jinwei Gu1,4,† , Kihwan Kim1 , Guilin Liu1 , David W. Jacobs2 , and Jan Kautz1
1

NVIDIA, 2 University of Maryland, College Park, 3 University of Washington, 4 SenseTime

Abstract

Inverse rendering aims to estimate physical attributes
(e.g., geometry, reflectance, and illumination) of a scene
from images. It is one of the core problems in computer vision, with a wide range of applications in gaming, AR/VR,
and robotics [12, 14, 40, 43]. In this paper, we propose
a holistic, data-driven approach for inverse rendering of
an indoor scene from a single image. Inverse rendering
has two main challenges. First, it is inherently ill-posed,
especially if only a single image is given. Previous approaches [1, 15, 23, 25] that aim to solve this problem from
a single image focus only on a single object. Second, inverse rendering of a scene is particularly challenging, compared to single objects, due to complex appearance effects
(e.g., inter-reflection, cast shadows, near-field illumination,
and realistic shading). Some existing works [8, 21, 46, 19]
are limited to estimating only one of the scene attributes.
We focus on jointly estimating all scene attributes from
a single image, which outperforms previous approaches

Inverse
Rendering
Network
(IRN)

Training set

x

Albedo

Normal

Lighting

Li [19]

PBRS [46]

Gardner [8]

Previous Works

1. Introduction

Self-Supervised
Training on real data

Ours

Inverse rendering aims to estimate physical attributes of
a scene, e.g., reflectance, geometry, and lighting, from image(s). Inverse rendering has been studied primarily for
single objects or with methods that solve for only one of the
scene attributes. We propose the first learning based approach that jointly estimates albedo, normals, and lighting
of an indoor scene from a single image. Our key contribution is the Residual Appearance Renderer (RAR), which
can be trained to synthesize complex appearance effects
(e.g., inter-reflection, cast shadows, near-field illumination,
and realistic shading), which would be neglected otherwise.
This enables us to perform self-supervised learning on real
data using a reconstruction loss, based on re-synthesizing
the input image from the estimated components. We finetune
with real data after pretraining with synthetic data. To this
end we use physically-based rendering to create a largescale synthetic dataset, which is a significant improvement
over prior datasets. Experimental results show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods that estimate
one or more scene attributes.

Input Image

Figure 1: We propose a self-supervised approach for inverse rendering. We jointly decompose an indoor scene image into albedo,
surface normal and environment map lighting (top). Our method
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches (bottom) that solve for
only one of the scene attributes, i.e. albedo (Li [19]), normal
(PBRS [46]) and lighting (Gardner [8]).

that estimate a single attribute and generalizes better across
datasets (see Figure 1 and more in Section 5).
A major challenge in solving this problem is the lack
of ground-truth labels for real images. Although we have
ground-truth labels for geometry, collected by depth sensors, it is extremely difficult to measure reflectance and
lighting at the large scale needed for training a neural network. Networks trained on synthetic images often fail to
generalize well on real images. In this paper, we propose two key innovations aimed to tackle the domain gap
between synthetic and real images. First, we propose
the Residual Appearance Renderer (RAR), which aims to
model complex appearance effects by predicting the resid†The authors contributed to this work when they were at NVIDIA.

8598

