3D Scene Reconstruction with Multi-layer Depth and Epipolar Transformers
Daeyun Shin1
Zhile Ren2
Erik B. Sudderth1
Charless C. Fowlkes1
1
University of California, Irvine 2 Georgia Institute of Technology
https://research.dshin.org/iccv19/multi-layer-depth

Abstract
We tackle the problem of automatically reconstructing
a complete 3D model of a scene from a single RGB image. This challenging task requires inferring the shape of
both visible and occluded surfaces. Our approach utilizes
viewer-centered, multi-layer representation of scene geometry adapted from recent methods for single object shape
completion. To improve the accuracy of view-centered
representations for complex scenes, we introduce a novel
“Epipolar Feature Transformer” that transfers convolutional network features from an input view to other virtual
camera viewpoints, and thus better covers the 3D scene geometry. Unlike existing approaches that first detect and
localize objects in 3D, and then infer object shape using category-specific models, our approach is fully convolutional, end-to-end differentiable, and avoids the resolution and memory limitations of voxel representations. We
demonstrate the advantages of multi-layer depth representations and epipolar feature transformers on the reconstruction of a large database of indoor scenes.

1. Introduction
When we examine a photograph of a scene, we not only
perceive the 3D shape of visible surfaces, but effortlessly
infer the existence of many invisible surfaces. We can make
strong predictions about the complete shapes of familiar objects despite viewing only a single, partially occluded aspect, and can infer information about the overall volumetric
occupancy with sufficient accuracy to plan navigation and
interactions with complex scenes. This remains a daunting
visual task for machines despite much recent progress in
detecting individual objects and making predictions about
their shape. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
proven incredibly successful as tools for learning rich representations of object identity which are invariant to intracategory variations in appearance. Predicting 3D shape
rather than object category has proven more challenging
since the output space is higher dimensional and carries
more structure than simple regression or classification tasks.

Figure 1: Given a single input view of a scene (top left), we
would like to predict a complete geometric model. Depth
maps (top right) provide an efficient representation of scene
geometry but are incomplete, leaving large holes (e.g., the
wardrobe). We propose multi-layer depth predictions (bottom left) that provide complete view-based representations
of shape, and introduce an epipolar transformer network
that allows view-based inference and prediction from virtual viewpoints (like overhead views, bottom right).
Early successes at using CNNs for shape prediction
leveraged direct correspondences between the input and
output domain, regressing depth and surface normals at every input pixel [8]. However, these so-called 2.5D representations are incomplete: they don’t make predictions about
the back side of objects or other occluded surfaces. Several recent methods instead manipulate voxel-based representations [40] and use convolutions to perform translationcovariant computations in 3D. This provides a more complete representation than 2.5D models, but suffers from substantial storage and computation expense that scales cubically with resolution of the volume being modeled (without specialized representations like octrees [31]). Other
12172

