Cross-Domain Adaptation for Animal Pose Estimation
Jinkun Cao1∗ Hongyang Tang1∗ Hao-Shu Fang1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Xiaoyong Shen2 Cewu Lu1† ‡ Yu-Wing Tai2
2
Tencent

{caojinkun, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
{thutanghy, fhaoshu, goodshenxy}@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we are interested in pose estimation of animals. Animals usually exhibit a wide range of variations
on poses and there is no available animal pose dataset for
training and testing. To address this problem, we build an
animal pose dataset to facilitate training and evaluation.
Considering the heavy labor needed to label dataset and it
is impossible to label data for all concerned animal species,
we, therefore, proposed a novel cross-domain adaptation
method to transform the animal pose knowledge from labeled animal classes to unlabeled animal classes. We use
the modest animal pose dataset to adapt learned knowledge to multiple animals species. Moreover, humans also
share skeleton similarities with some animals (especially
four-footed mammals). Therefore, the easily available human pose dataset, which is of a much larger scale than our
labeled animal dataset, provides important prior knowledge
to boost up the performance on animal pose estimation. Experiments show that our proposed method leverages these
pieces of prior knowledge well and achieves convincing results on animal pose estimation.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we aim to tackle the animal pose estimation problem, which has a wide range of applications
in zoology, ecology, biology, and entertainment. Previous
works [14, 6, 8, 48] only focused on human pose estimation
and achieved promising results. The success of human pose
estimation is based on large-scale datasets [35, 1]. The lack
of a well-labeled animal pose dataset makes it extremely
difficult for existing methods to achieve competitive performance on animal pose estimation.
In practice, it is impossible to label all types of animals
∗ Part of this work was done when Jinkun Cao and Hongyang Tang were
research interns in Tencent. They contribute equally.
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author: lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn
‡ Cewu Lu is a member of MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI
Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

yuwingtai@tencent.com

considering there are more than million species of animals
and they have different appearances. Thus, we need to exploit some useful prior that can help us to solve this problem, and we have identified three major priors. First, pose
similarity between humans and animals or among animals
is important supplementary information if we are targeting
for four-legged mammals. Second, we already have largescale datasets (e.g. [35]) of animals with other kinds of annotation which will help to understand animal appearance.
Third, considering the anatomical similarities between animals, pose information of a certain class of animals is helpful to estimate animals’ pose of other classes if they share a
certain degree of similarity.
With the priors above, we propose a novel method to
leverage two large-scale datasets, namely pose-labeled human dataset and box-labeled animal dataset, and a small
pose-labeled animal dataset to facilitate animal pose estimation. In our method, we begin from a model pretrained
on human data, then design a “weakly- and semi-supervised
cross-domain adaptation”(WS-CDA) scheme to better extract cross-domain common features. It consists of three
parts: feature extractor, domain discriminator and the keypoint estimator. The feature extractor extracts features
from input data, based on which the domain discriminator tries to distinguish which domain they come from and
the keypoint estimator predicts keypoints. With keypoint estimator and domain discriminator optimized adversarially,
the discriminator encourages the network to be adaptive to
training data from different domains. This improves pose
estimation with cross-domain shared information.
After WS-CDA, the model already has the pose knowledge for some animals. But it still does not perform well on
a specific unseen animal class because no supervised knowledge is obtained from this class. Targeting to improve it, we
propose a model optimization mechanism called “Progressive Pseudo-label-based Optimization”(PPLO). The keypoints prediction on animals of new species is optimized
using the pseudo-labels which is generated based on selected prediction output by the current model. The insight
is that animals of different kinds often share many simi-

9498

