How Do Neural Networks See Depth in Single Images?
Tom van Dijk
Technische Universiteit Delft
Delft, The Netherlands

Guido de Croon
Technische Universiteit Delft
Delft, The Netherlands

J.C.vanDijk-1@tudelft.nl

G.C.H.E.deCroon@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Deep neural networks have lead to a breakthrough in
depth estimation from single images. Recent work shows
that the quality of these estimations is rapidly increasing. It
is clear that neural networks can see depth in single images.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no work currently
exists that analyzes what these networks have learned.
In this work we take four previously published networks
and investigate what depth cues they exploit. We find that
all networks ignore the apparent size of known obstacles
in favor of their vertical position in the image. The use of
the vertical position requires the camera pose to be known;
however, we find that these networks only partially recognize changes in camera pitch and roll angles. Small changes
in camera pitch are shown to disturb the estimated distance
towards obstacles. The use of the vertical image position
allows the networks to estimate depth towards arbitrary obstacles – even those not appearing in the training set – but
may depend on features that are not universally present.

1. Introduction
Stereo vision allows absolute depth to be estimated using multiple cameras. When only a single camera can be
used, optical flow can provide a measure of depth; or if images can be combined over longer time spans then SLAM or
Structure-from-Motion can be used to estimate the geometry of the scene. These methods tend to treat depth estimation as a purely geometrical problem, ignoring the content
of the images.
When only a single image is available, it is not possible to use epipolar geometry. Instead, algorithms have to
rely on pictorial cues: cues that indicate depth within a single image, such as texture gradients or the apparent size of
known objects. Shape-from-X methods (e.g. [18, 1], [14],
[7]) use some of these cues to infer shape, but often make
strong assumptions that make them difficult to use in unstructured environments such as those seen in autonomous
driving. Other cues such as the apparent size of objects may

require knowledge about the environment that is difficult to
program by hand. As a result, pictorial cues have seen relatively little use in these scenarios until recently.
With the arrival of stronger hardware and better
machine-learning techniques – most notably Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) – it is now possible to learn pictorial cues rather than program them by hand. One of the
earliest examples of monocular depth estimation using machine learning was published in 2006 by Saxena et al. [19].
In 2014, Eigen et al. [4] were the first to use a CNN for
monocular depth estimation. Where [4] still required a true
depth map for training, in 2016 Garg et al. proposed a new
scheme that allows the network to learn directly from stereo
pairs instead [9]; this work was further improved upon
by Godard et al. in [11]. In parallel, methods have been
developed that use monocular image sequences to learn
single-frame depth estimation in an unsupervised manner,
of which the works by Zhou et al. [25] and Wang et al. [23]
are examples. Recent work focuses primarily on the accuracy of monocular depth estimation, where evaluations on
publicly available datasets such as KITTI [15] and NYUv2
[20] show that neural networks can indeed generate accurate depth maps from single images. However, to the best
of our knowledge, no work exists that investigates how they
do this.
Why is it important to know what these neural networks
have learned? Firstly, it is difficult to guarantee correct behavior without knowing what the network does. Evaluation
on a test set shows that it works correctly in those cases, but
it does not guarantee correct behavior in other scenarios.
Secondly, knowing what the network has learned provides
insight into training. Additional guidelines for the training
set and data augmentation may be derived from the learned
behavior. Thirdly, it provides insight into transfer to other
setups. With an understanding of the network, it is for instance easier to predict what the impact of a change in camera height will be and whether this will work out-of-thebox, require data augmentation or even a new training set.
In this work, we take four previously published neural
networks (MonoDepth by Godard et al. [11], SfMLearner
12183

