Self-Critical Attention Learning for Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Guangyi Chen1,2,3 , Chunze Lin1,2,3 , Liangliang Ren1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{chen-gy16,lcz16,renll16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a self-critical attention learning method for person re-identification. Unlike most existing methods which train the attention mechanism in a
weakly-supervised manner and ignore the attention confidence level, we learn the attention with a critic which
measures the attention quality and provides a powerful supervisory signal to guide the learning process. Moreover,
the critic model facilitates the interpretation of the effectiveness of the attention mechanism during the learning
process, by estimating the quality of the attention maps.
Specifically, we jointly train our attention agent and critic
in a reinforcement learning manner, where the agent produces the visual attention while the critic analyzes the gain
from the attention and guides the agent to maximize this
gain. We design spatial- and channel-wise attention models with our critic module and evaluate them on three popular benchmarks including Market-1501, DukeMTMC-ReID,
and CUHK03. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our method, which outperforms the state-of-theart methods by a large margin of 5.9%/2.1%, 6.3%/3.0%,
and 10.5%/9.5% on mAP/Rank-1, respectively.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) aims to identify an individual across multiple non-overlapping camera views deployed at different locations, considering a large set of candidates. It plays an important role in various video surveillance applications such as suspect tracking and missing elderly or children retrieval, and has attracted much attention
over the past few years [20, 46, 53, 38, 39, 19].
Despite the recent progress, ReID is still a challenging
problem due to the difﬁculty of visual features matching
with the illumination changes, pose variations, occlusions, and cluttered backgrounds. Recently, several attention∗ Corresponding author

CNN

CNN ...

Attention
model

Loss

Feature

Critic:

Attention

Value

Image

Whether the attention leads to a correct classification?
Whether the attention ameliorates the representation?

Gradient from critic

...

Gradient from loss

Prediction

Forward

Figure 1. The insight of the self-critical attention learning. Convolutional attention learning is guided by the weak supervisory
signal from the loss function. However, this learning manner is
not always ”transparent” and suffers from the problem of “vanishing” gradients. Differently, our SCAL method exploits a critic
module to evaluate the quality of the attention model and provide
the strong supervisory information by the predicted critic value.

based deep learning models for ReID have been proposed to
address these issues [48, 19, 41]. With the attention mechanism, the model learns to focus on discriminative features of
the pedestrians and reduce the negative effects of different
variations and background interference. However, the attention mechanism is generally trained in a weakly-supervised
manner without a powerful supervisory signal to guide the
attention module during the training process. As shown in
Figure 1, the gradients from this weak supervisory signal
might be vanishing in the back propagation process [15].
The attention maps learned in such manner are not always
”transparent” in their meaning, and lack discrimination ability and robustness. The redundant and misleading attention
maps are hardly corrected without direct and appropriate
supervisory signal. Moreover, the quality of the attention
during training process can only be evaluated qualitatively
by the human end-users, examining the attention map one
by one, which is labor-intensive and inefﬁcient.
To overcome the above issues, in this paper, we propose
a self-critical attention learning (SCAL) method for person
ReID. We simultaneously train an attention agent and a critic module to provide the self-critic and self-correctness ca-

9637

