Memorizing Normality to Detect Anomaly: Memory-augmented Deep
Autoencoder for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Dong Gong1 , Lingqiao Liu1 , Vuong Le2 , Budhaditya Saha2 ,
Moussa Reda Mansour3 , Svetha Venkatesh2 , Anton van den Hengel1
1
The University of Adelaide, Australia 2 A2I2, Deakin University 3 University of Western Australia
https://donggong1.github.io/anomdec-memae

Abnormal
input

Deep autoencoder has been extensively used for
anomaly detection. Training on the normal data, the autoencoder is expected to produce higher reconstruction error for the abnormal inputs than the normal ones, which
is adopted as a criterion for identifying anomalies. However, this assumption does not always hold in practice. It
has been observed that sometimes the autoencoder “generalizes” so well that it can also reconstruct anomalies
well, leading to the miss detection of anomalies. To mitigate this drawback for autoencoder based anomaly detector, we propose to augment the autoencoder with a memory module and develop an improved autoencoder called
memory-augmented autoencoder, i.e. MemAE. Given an input, MemAE firstly obtains the encoding from the encoder
and then uses it as a query to retrieve the most relevant
memory items for reconstruction. At the training stage, the
memory contents are updated and are encouraged to represent the prototypical elements of the normal data. At the test
stage, the learned memory will be fixed, and the reconstruction is obtained from a few selected memory records of the
normal data. The reconstruction will thus tend to be close to
a normal sample. Thus the reconstructed errors on anomalies will be strengthened for anomaly detection. MemAE is
free of assumptions on the data type and thus general to be
applied to different tasks. Experiments on various datasets
prove the excellent generalization and high effectiveness of
the proposed MemAE.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection is an essential task with critical applications in various areas, such as video surveillance [26].
The unsupervised anomaly detection [47, 43, 48, 32, 7] is
to learn a normal profile given only the normal data examples and then identify the samples not conforming to the
normal profile as anomalies, which is challenging due to

Normal
input

Decoder

Abnormal
input

Encoder

Abstract

Recon. of
anomaly

Anomaly?
Recon. of
the normal
Normal
input

Recon.
error

Encodeding of normal input

Prototypical normal patterns
in memory slots

Signiﬁcant recon. error
on abnormal sample

Encoding of abnormal input

Addressing memory

Small recon. error
on normal sample

Figure 1. Anomaly detection via the proposed MemAE. After
training on the dataset only with normal samples, the memory in
MemAE records the prototypical normal patterns. Given an abnormal input, MemAE retrieves the most relevant normal patterns
in memory for reconstruction, resulting in an output significantly
different to the abnormal input. To simplify the visualization, we
assume only one memory item is addressed here.

the lack of human supervision. Notably, the problem becomes even more difficult when the data points lay in a
high-dimensional space (i.e. videos), since modeling the
high-dimensional data is notoriously challenging [47].
Deep autoencoder (AE) [2, 18] is a powerful tool to
model the high-dimensional data in the unsupervised setting. It consists of an encoder to obtain a compressed encoding from the input and a decoder that can reconstruct the
data from the encoding. The encoding essentially acts as an
information bottleneck which forces the network to extract
the typical patterns of high-dimensional data. In the context
of anomaly detection, the AE is usually trained by minimizing the reconstruction error on the normal data and then
uses the reconstruction error as an indicator of anomalies.
It is generally assumed [48, 11, 45] that the reconstruction
error will be lower for the normal input since they are close
to the training data, while the reconstruction error becomes
higher for the abnormal input.
However, this assumption may not always hold, and
sometimes the AE can “generalize” so well that it can also
reconstruct the abnormal inputs well. This observation has

1705

