Understanding Human Gaze Communication by
Spatio-Temporal Graph Reasoning
Lifeng Fan1 *, Wenguan Wang2,1∗ , Siyuan Huang1 , Xinyu Tang3 , Song-Chun Zhu1
1

2

Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning and Autonomy, UCLA, USA
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 3 University of Science and Technology of China, China
lfan@ucla.edu, wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu
https://github.com/LifengFan/Human-Gaze-Communication

Figure 1: We study human gaze communication dynamics in two hierarchical levels: atomic-level and event-level. Atomic-level gaze
communication describes the fine-grained structures in human gaze interactions, i.e., single, mutual, avert, refer, follow and share (as shown
in the left part). Event-level gaze communication refers to high-level, complex social communication events, including Non-communicative,
Mutual Gaze, Gaze Aversion, Gaze Following and Joint Attention. Each gaze communication event is a temporal composition of some
atomic-level gaze communications (as shown in the right part).

Abstract
This paper addresses a new problem of understanding human gaze communication in social videos from both
atomic-level and event-level, which is significant for studying human social interactions. To tackle this novel and challenging problem, we contribute a large-scale video dataset,
VACATION, which covers diverse daily social scenes and
gaze communication behaviors with complete annotations
of objects and human faces, human attention, and communication structures and labels in both atomic-level and
event-level. Together with VACATION, we propose a spatiotemporal graph neural network to explicitly represent the
diverse gaze interactions in the social scenes and to infer atomic-level gaze communication by message passing. We further propose an event network with encoderdecoder structure to predict the event-level gaze communication. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed
model improves various baselines significantly in predicting the atomic-level and event-level gaze communications.
* Lifeng Fan and Wenguan Wang contributed equally.

1. Introduction
In this work, we introduce the task of understanding
human gaze communication in social interactions. Evidence from psychology suggests that eyes are a cognitively special stimulus, with unique “hard-wired” pathways
in the brain dedicated to their interpretation and humans
have the unique ability to infer others’ intentions from eye
gazes [15]. Gaze communication is a primitive form of
human communication, whose underlying social-cognitive
and social-motivational infrastructure acted as a psychological platform on which various linguistic systems could be
built [59]. Though verbal communication has become the
primary form in social interaction, gaze communication still
plays an important role in conveying hidden mental state
and augmenting verbal communication [2]. To better understand human communication, we not only need natural
language processing (NLP), but also require a systematical
study of human gaze communication mechanism.
The study of human gaze communication in social interaction is essential for the following several reasons: 1) it
helps to better understand multi-agent gaze communication

5724

