Generating Easy-to-Understand Referring Expressions for Target Identifications
Mikihiro Tanaka1 , Takayuki Itamochi2 , Kenichi Narioka2 , Ikuro Sato3 ,
Yoshitaka Ushiku1 and Tatsuya Harada1,4
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 DENSO CORPORATION, 3 DENSO IT Laboratory, Inc., 4 RIKEN

Abstract
This paper addresses the generation of referring expressions that not only refer to objects correctly but also let
humans find them quickly. As a target becomes relatively
less salient, identifying referred objects itself becomes more
difficult. However, the existing studies regarded all sentences that refer to objects correctly as equally good, ignoring whether they are easily understood by humans. If the
target is not salient, humans utilize relationships with the
salient contexts around it to help listeners to comprehend it
better. To derive this information from human annotations,
our model is designed to extract information from the target
and from the environment. Moreover, we regard that sentences that are easily understood are those that are comprehended correctly and quickly by humans. We optimized this
by using the time required to locate the referred objects by
humans and their accuracies. To evaluate our system, we
created a new referring expression dataset whose images
were acquired from Grand Theft Auto V (GTA V), limiting
targets to persons. Experimental results show the effectiveness of our approach. Our code and dataset are available
at https://github.com/mikittt/easy-to-understand-REG.

1. Introduction
With the popularization of intelligent agents such as
robots, symbiosis with them becomes more important.
Sharing what humans and agents see naturally is a particularly essential component for smooth communication in the
symbiosis environment. In daily life, people often use referring expressions to indicate specific targets such as “a man
wearing a red shirt.” Further, communicating with agents
with natural language is an intuitive method of interaction.
When referring to a object with natural language, many expressions can be used that are equally correct from a semantic standpoint such that one can locate the target. However,
they are not always equally easy for target identifications.
As shown in Fig. 1, it is important for the expression to be
comprehended easily by humans. The comprehension is divided into two processes: understanding the text and finding
an referred object in an image. These can be uniformly eval-

✔ A man wearing jeans.
× A man walking near a
woman wearing a white shirt.

✔ A person wearing a brown shirt
leaning on a white building
alone.
× A woman wearing a brown
shirt using a phone.

Figure 1. Examples of referring expressions to be generated in this
study. In the top image, the target in the red bounding box is sufficiently salient; therefore, a brief description suffices. In the bottom
image, referring to other salient objects is required to single out the
target because the target itself is not sufficiently salient.

uated by the comprehension time by humans. Thus, we regard that easy-to-understand referring expressions are those
that are comprehended correctly and quickly by humans.
Recently, correct referring expression generation has
demonstrated significant progress. Considering agents’
views that are automatically captured such as in-vehicle images, the compositions of the images are often complex and
contain more objects with low saliency than images from
MSCOCO [44], which are typically used in the existing
works of referring expression generation [15, 17, 24, 23,
37]. The existing studies regarded expressions that refer to
objects correctly as equally good. However, if the targets
become relatively less salient, identifying the referred objects can become difficult even if the sentences are correct.
For the agents to refer to objects in natural language,
they should be described clearly for an easier comprehension. Expressions utilizing relationships between the targets
and other salient contexts such as “a woman by the red car”
would help listeners to identify the referred objects when
the targets are not sufficiently salient. Thus, expressions to
be generated demand the following properties:
• If the target is salient, a brief description suffices.
• If the target is less salient, utilizing relationships with
salient contexts around it helps to tell its location.
If these sentences can be generated, drivers can be navigated
by utilizing in-vehicle images such as, “please turn right at
the intersection by which a man with a red cap stands.”

5794

