Convex Relaxations for Consensus and Non-Minimal Problems in 3D Vision

Thomas Probst, Danda Pani Paudel, Ajad Chhatkuli, Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
In this paper, we formulate a generic non-minimal
solver using the existing tools of Polynomials Optimization
Problems (POP) from computational algebraic geometry.
The proposed method exploits the well known Shor’s or
Lasserre’s relaxations, whose theoretical aspects are also
discussed. Notably, we further exploit the POP formulation
of non-minimal solver also for the generic consensus maximization problems in 3D vision. Our framework is simple
and straightforward to implement, which is also supported
by three diverse applications in 3D vision, namely rigid
body transformation estimation, Non-Rigid Structure-fromMotion (NRSfM), and camera autocalibration. In all three
cases, both non-minimal and consensus maximization are
tested, which are also compared against the state-of-the-art
methods. Our results are competitive to the compared methods, and are also coherent with our theoretical analysis.
The main contribution of this paper is the claim that a
good approximate solution for many polynomial problems
involved in 3D vision can be obtained using the existing theory of numerical computational algebra. This claim leads
us to reason about why many relaxed methods in 3D vision
behave so well? And also allows us to offer a generic relaxed solver in a rather straightforward way. We further
show that the convex relaxation of these polynomials can
easily be used for maximizing consensus in a deterministic
manner. We support our claim using several experiments
for aforementioned three diverse problems in 3D vision.

1. Introduction
Robust model estimation in 3D vision usually involves
two sub-problems: inlier detection and model computation. Faithful methods, already existing in many cases, have
offered an unparalleled success of 3D vision applications
from 3D scene reconstruction to 6DoF camera localization.
In general, the task of inlier detection is performed by maximizing the consensus among measurements. Measurements
that agree with some parameter of the known model are

treated as inliers. Customarily, model parameters are estimated from randomly selected minimal number of measurements – using the so-called minimal solver methods.
These parameters then seek for the maximum consensus,
within the framework of Random Sampling and Consensus
(RANSAC). Parameters that maximize the consensus are
further refined with respect to all the inlier measurements
– using the so-called non-minimal solver methods.
Global methods for consensus maximization have gathered significant attention [27, 5, 16, 10, 37, 46, 33], mainly
because RANSAC is non-deterministic and provides no
guarantee for optimality. Although the consensus maximization problem has proven to be NP-hard [14], global
methods with convex model representations have shown
promising results both in terms of speed and optimality [42,
16]. Therefore, existing methods offer satisfactory solutions
only for convex models. In the case of non-convex models,
some methods introduce linearized auxiliary model parameters with additional convex constraints [43, 42]. There do
exist methods for non-convex models which explore the exact parameters [46, 37, 33]. However, all methods designed
for non-convex problems are specific to the problems at
hand. These methods therefore do not generalize for other
non-convex models. Consequently, a generic framework for
deterministic consensus maximization of non-convex models, beyond simple linearization, is highly desirable.
Unlike consensus maximization, non-minimal solvers
have gathered comparatively little attention. In practice,
the need of optimal non-minimal solvers is usually overlooked. Instead, a local refinement on some geometric cost
derived for all inliers is performed as a surrogate method,
starting from the model parameters obtained by maximizing consensus. This however entails the risk of falling
into local minima traps of the global cost function resulting in inadequate solutions, which has been demonstrated
for various problems [8, 32, 22, 9, 39, 18, 23]. More
specifically, non-minimal solvers have been devised separately for 3D rotations [18], 3D rigid body transformation
in [8, 32, 39, 23], perspective-n-point in [22], and two-view
relative pose in [9]. On the one hand, these solvers are very

10233

