WSOD2 : Learning Bottom-up and Top-down Objectness Distillation for
Weakly-supervised Object Detection
Zhaoyang Zeng1,2∗, Bei Liu3 , Jianlong Fu3 , Hongyang Chao1,2 , Lei Zhang3
1 School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
2 The Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education
3 Microsoft Research

zengzhy5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; {bei.liu, jianf, leizhang}@microsoft.com; isschhy@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
We study on weakly-supervised object detection (WSOD)
which plays a vital role in relieving human involvement from
object-level annotations. Predominant works integrate region proposal mechanisms with convolutional neural networks (CNN). Although CNN is proﬁcient in extracting discriminative local features, grand challenges still exist to
measure the likelihood of a bounding box containing a complete object (i.e., “objectness”). In this paper, we propose a novel WSOD framework with Objectness Distillation
(i.e., WSOD2 ) by designing a tailored training mechanism
for weakly-supervised object detection. Multiple regression
targets are speciﬁcally determined by jointly considering
bottom-up (BU) and top-down (TD) objectness from lowlevel measurement and CNN conﬁdences with an adaptive
linear combination. As bounding box regression can facilitate a region proposal learning to approach its regression target with high objectness during training, deep objectness representation learned from bottom-up evidences
can be gradually distilled into CNN by optimization. We
explore different adaptive training curves for BU/TD objectness, and show that the proposed WSOD2 can achieve
state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
The capability of recognizing and localizing objects in
an image reveals a deep understanding of visual information, and has attracted many attentions in recent years.
Signiﬁcant progresses have been achieved with the development of convolutional neural network (CNN) [5, 14,
19, 27]. However, current state-of-the-art object detectors
mostly rely on a large scale of training data which requires
manually annotated bounding boxes (e.g., PASCAL VOC
2007/2012 [7], MS COCO [22], Open Images [20]). To
∗ This work was performed when Zhaoyang Zeng was visiting Microsoft Research as a research intern.

Figure 1: Typical weakly-supervised object detection results produced by
OICR [30]. We can observe the partial, correct, and oversized detection
results for an object instance in the ﬁrst, second, and third row, respectively.

relieve the heavy labeling effort and reduce cost, weaklysupervised object detection paradigm has been proposed by
leveraging only image-level annotations [2, 30, 37, 38].
To address weakly-supervised object detection (WSOD)
task, most previous works adopt multiple instance learning
method to transform WSOD into multi-label classiﬁcation
problems [2, 18]. Later on, online instance classiﬁer reﬁnement (OICR) [29] and proposal cluster learning (PCL) [28]
are proposed to learn more discriminative instance classiﬁers by explicitly assigning instance labels. Both OICR and
PCL adopt the idea of utilizing the outputs of initial object
detector as pseudo ground truths, which has been shown
beneﬁts in improving the classiﬁcation ability of WSOD.
However, a classiﬁcation model often targets at detecting
the existence of objects for a category, while it is not able
to predict the location, size and the number of objects in
images. This weakness usually results in the detection of
partial or oversized bounding boxes, as shown in the ﬁrst
and third rows in Figure 1. The performances of OICR and
PCL heavily rely on the accuracy of the initial object detection results, which limit further improvement with large
margins. Also, they neglect learning bounding box regression, which plays an important role in the design of mod18292

