SROBB: Targeted Perceptual Loss for Single Image Super-Resolution
Mohammad Saeed Rad1
Behzad Bozorgtabar1
Urs-Viktor Marti2
Max Basler2
Hazım Kemal Ekenel1, 3
Jean-Philippe Thiran1
2
3
1
LTS5, EPFL, Switzerland
AI Lab, Swisscom AG, Switzerland
SiMiT Lab, ITU, Turkey
{saeed.rad, firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract

Segmentation Label

OBB Label

Texture loss
(Mid-level features)

OBB Label
Generator

SR
Generator
LR Image
SR Image

Original Image

Pixel-wise loss

Perceptual loss

Boundary loss
(Low-level features)

No perceptual loss

By benefiting from perceptual losses, recent studies
have improved significantly the performance of the superresolution task, where a high-resolution image is resolved
from its low-resolution counterpart. Although such objective functions generate near-photorealistic results, their capability is limited, since they estimate the reconstruction
error for an entire image in the same way, without considering any semantic information. In this paper, we propose a novel method to benefit from perceptual loss in a
more objective way. We optimize a deep network-based decoder with a targeted objective function that penalizes images at different semantic levels using the corresponding
terms. In particular, the proposed method leverages our
proposed OBB (Object, Background and Boundary) labels,
generated from segmentation labels, to estimate a suitable
perceptual loss for boundaries, while considering texture
similarity for backgrounds. We show that our proposed approach results in more realistic textures and sharper edges,
and outperforms other state-of-the-art algorithms in terms
of both qualitative results on standard benchmarks and results of extensive user studies.

{firstname.lastname}@swisscom.com

Targeted Perceptual
loss (ours)

Figure 1. We propose a method for exploiting the segmentation labels during training to resolve a high resolution image at different
semantic levels considering their characteristics; we optimize our
SISR model by minimizing perceptual errors that correspond to
edges only at object boundaries and the texture on the background
area, respectively. Results from left to right: original image, superresolved images using only pixel-wise loss function, pixel-wise
loss + perceptual loss function and pixel-wise loss + targeted perceptual loss function (ours), respectively.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims at solving the
problem of recovering a high-resolution (HR) image from
its low-resolution (LR) counterpart. SISR is a classic illposed problem that has been one of the most active research
areas since the work of Tsai and Huang [33] in 1984. In recent years, this problem has been revolutionized by the significant advances in convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and has resulted in better reconstructions of high-resolution
pictures than classical approaches [6, 5, 17]. More recently,
another breakthrough has been made in SISR by employing perceptual loss functions for training feed-forward networks, instead of using per-pixel loss functions, e.g., mean
squared error (MSE) [15, 27, 20]. It tackled the problem of blurred textures caused by optimization of MSE,

and alongside with adversarial loss [11], it resulted in nearphotorealistic reconstruction in terms of perceived image
quality.
[27] and [20] benefit from the idea of using perceptual
similarity as a loss function; they optimize their models
by comparing the ground-truth and the predicted superresolved image (SR) in a deep feature domain by mapping both HR and SR images into a feature space using a
pre-trained classification network. Although this similarity
measure in feature space, namely the perceptual loss, has
shown a great success in SISR, applying it as it is on a whole
image, without considering the semantic information, limits
its capability.
To better understand this limitation, let us have a brief

2710

