Co-Evolutionary Compression for Unpaired Image Translation
Han Shu1 , Yunhe Wang1 , Xu Jia1 , Kai Han1 , Hanting Chen2 , Chunjing Xu1 , Qi Tian1∗, Chang Xu3
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
2
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), CMIC, School of EECS, Peking University, China
3
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
{han.shu, yunhe.wang, jiaxu1, kai.han, xuchunjing, tian.qi1}@huawei.com,
htchen@pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have been successfully used for considerable computer vision tasks, especially the image-to-image translation. However, generators
in these networks are of complicated architectures with large
number of parameters and huge computational complexities.
Existing methods are mainly designed for compressing and
speeding-up deep neural networks in the classification task,
and cannot be directly applied on GANs for image translation, due to their different objectives and training procedures.
To this end, we develop a novel co-evolutionary approach for
reducing their memory usage and FLOPs simultaneously. In
practice, generators for two image domains are encoded as
two populations and synergistically optimized for investigating the most important convolution filters iteratively. Fitness
of each individual is calculated using the number of parameters, a discriminator-aware regularization, and the cycle
consistency. Extensive experiments conducted on benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method for obtaining compact and effective generators.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs [7]) have
achieved impressive results in a wide variety of computer
vision tasks, such as super-resolution [18] and image editing [35], which are popular applications on mobile devices.
Many of these tasks can be considered as an image-to-image
translation problem [14, 30], where an image from one domain is mapped to a corresponding paired image in the other
domain. This task is further extended to the unsupervised
learning setting by [36, 15, 33], where no paired data are
required during training. However, launching such image-toimage translation models on mobile devices requires considerable memory and computation cost, which could challenge
∗ corresponding author

the hardware performance and would influence users’ experience. For instance, it takes about 43MB and 1 × 1010 FLOPs
(floating-number operations) to process one image of size
224 × 224 using a generator network in the CycleGAN [36],
which requires more resources than some modern CNNs
for large-scale image classification (e.g. ResNet [10] and
MobileNet [12]).
Recently, a number of algorithms have been proposed
for compressing and speeding-up deep neural networks. For
instance, Han et al. [8] proposed to remove subtle weighs in
pre-trained neural networks and rely on some encoding techniques to obtain the compressed models. Wang et al. [32]
further tackled this problem from the perspective of DCT frequency domain to achieve higher compression ratios. Luo et
al. [22] pruned filters based on statistics information from
the next layer. Hu et al. [13] iteratively pruned the network by removing less important neurons according to the
magnitude of feature maps. In addition, there are also several methods proposed for learning portable deep neural
networks with different techniques, e.g. matrix/tensor decomposition [5], quantization and binarization [3, 23, 29],
knowledge distillation [11, 26, 27] and efficient convolution
blocks design [12, 34].
Although the aforementioned methods have made tremendous progress in reducing redundancy in deep neural networks, most of them are designed for recognition tasks such
as image classification or object detection. For recognition
tasks, neurons with large activation contribute more to the
final classification accuracy. Therefore, neurons with weak
activation are often eliminated or approximately represented
using low-bit data through low-rank decomposition or clustering without obviously degrading the original performance.
In contrast, the generative adversarial networks for image
translation tasks are usually composed of a generator and a
discriminator, which are updated alternatively with a twoplayer competition strategy. The training of GANs is thus,
more difficult than those of conventional neural networks.
It is therefore meaningful to investigate the redundancy in

3235

