Unconstrained Foreground Object Search
Yinan Zhao∗ , Brian Price+ , Scott Cohen+ , Danna Gurari∗
∗

University of Texas at Austin, + Adobe Research

yinanzhao@utexas.edu, {bprice,scohen}@adobe.com, danna.gurari@ischool.utexas.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image-based search, the task of retrieving images based
on an image query, is a popular research problem with many
applications [16, 23, 1, 28, 7]. While it is often used to
find visually or semantically similar images to the query
image, a less explored subproblem in this domain is searching for content to edit the query image. Yet the importance
of this subproblem is evidenced by the existence of many
stock image websites, for example shutterstock.com,
www.istockphoto.com, and stock.adobe.com to
name a few, which contain tens of millions of images of
objects on a white or plain background to make it easy to
cut out just the foreground object to use it in another image.
Whether a user is placing an object on top of a complete image (compositing) or using an object to partially fill a hole
(created, for example, by removing another object or area),
an important part of the creative process is to find a large
variety of content that is compatible with the surrounding
background in order to explore multiple possible outcomes.
The most relevant related work to this subproblem are
compositing-aware methods which require a user to specify
the desired object type to be pasted into a query image, and

Background
Latent Vector

Many people search for foreground objects to use when
editing images. While existing methods can retrieve candidates to aid in this, they are constrained to returning objects
that belong to a pre-specified semantic class. We instead
propose a novel problem of unconstrained foreground object (UFO) search and introduce a solution that supports
efficient search by encoding the background image in the
same latent space as the candidate foreground objects. A
key contribution of our work is a cost-free, scalable approach for creating a large-scale training dataset with a variety of foreground objects of differing semantic categories
per image location. Quantitative and human-perception experiments with two diverse datasets demonstrate the advantage of our UFO search solution over related baselines.

Compatible
Objects

Latent Space for
Foreground Objects

UFO Search

Search

……

Retrieval

…
Post-processing

…
Hole Filling

Compositing

Figure 1. We propose a method to search for foreground objects
that are semantically compatible with a background image. In this
example, our approach takes the background image with a hole on
the table, searches in a large object database consisting of multiple
semantic classes, and returns compatible foreground objects. This
example illustrates how UFO search can be used for hole filling
(using [4] to fill in the gaps around the object) and compositing.

then search for suitable objects [11, 30].1 While specifying
the object type to be inserted can guide the search process,
it also introduces a limitation that creatives cannot explore
many possible image modifications representing a variety of
objects that can be inserted into a query image believably.
In this paper, we propose the problem of unconstrained
foreground object search (UFO search). Specifically, the
goal is to search for foreground objects that are semantically compatible with a background image without any constraint on what objects to retrieve. An object is compatible
with a background image if it can be realistically composited into the image or used to aid hole filling, as illustrated
in Figure 1. Here, we focus on semantic compatibility as
other methods address correcting geometrical errors [12, 2]
and low-level color and appearance differences [24, 31].
1 Of note, search is a valuable approach since deep learning based methods that synthesize realistic-looking content are unable to do so for large
holes with complex surrounding structures [15, 27, 8, 29].

2030

