ShellNet: Efficient Point Cloud Convolutional Neural Networks using
Concentric Shells Statistics
Zhiyuan Zhang1
1

Binh-Son Hua2

Sai-Kit Yeung3

Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 The University of Tokyo
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Deep learning with 3D data has progressed significantly
since the introduction of convolutional neural networks that
can handle point order ambiguity in point cloud data. While
being able to achieve good accuracies in various scene understanding tasks, previous methods often have low training speed and complex network architecture. In this paper,
we address these problems by proposing an efficient endto-end permutation invariant convolution for point cloud
deep learning. Our simple yet effective convolution operator named ShellConv uses statistics from concentric spherical shells to define representative features and resolve the
point order ambiguity, allowing traditional convolution to
perform on such features. Based on ShellConv we further build an efficient neural network named ShellNet to directly consume the point clouds with larger receptive fields
while maintaining less layers. We demonstrate the efficacy
of ShellNet by producing state-of-the-art results on object
classification, object part segmentation, and semantic scene
segmentation while keeping the network very fast to train.
Our code is publicly available in our project page 1 .

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown significant success in image and pattern recognition, video
analysis, and natural language processing [18]. Extending
this success from 2D to 3D domain has been receiving great
interests. Promising results have been demonstrated for the
long-standing problem of scene understanding. Previously
a 3D scene is often represented using structured representations such as volumes [26, 21], multiple images [32, 26],
hierarchical data structures [28, 14, 35]. However, such
representations usually face great challenges from memory
consumption, imprecise representation, or lack of scalability for tasks such as classification and segmentation.
1 https://hkust-vgd.github.io/shellnet/

Figure 1. The accuracy of point cloud classification of different
methods over time and epochs. While being accurate, some methods are quite costly to train. We address this problem by ShellConv, a simple yet effective convolutional operator based on concentric shell statistics. In both equal-time and equal-epoch comparisons, our method performs the best. It can achieve over 80%
accuracy within two minutes, and reach 90% on the test dataset
after only 15 minutes of training.

Recently, directly consuming point clouds using neural
networks has shown great promises [25, 27, 42, 20]. PointNet [25] pioneers this direction by learning with a symmetric function to make the network robust to point order ambiguity. Many subsequent works extend this direction by
designing convolution that better captures local features of
a point cloud. While such efforts lead to improved scene understanding performance, there is often a trade-off between
network complexity, training speed, and accuracy. For example, the follow-up work PointNet++ [27] segments point
cloud into smaller clusters and applies PointNet locally in a
hierarchical manner. While achieving better result, the network is more complicated with reduced speed. Pointwise
convolution [12] is simple to implement but inaccurate. SpiderCNN [42] extends traditional convolution on 2D images
to 3D point clouds by parameterizing a family of convolution filters. Although high accuracy is achieved, more time
is taken for training. PointCNN [20] achieves the state-ofthe-art accuracy via learning a local convolution order but
its training is slow to converge. In general, designing a convolution for point cloud that can strike a good balance between such performance factors is a challenging problem.

1607

