Relation Distillation Networks for Video Object Detection∗
Jiajun Deng† , Yingwei Pan‡ , Ting Yao‡ , Wengang Zhou† , Houqiang Li† , and Tao Mei‡
†

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
‡

JD AI Research, Beijing, China

1. Introduction
The advances in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
have successfully pushed the limits and improved the stateof-the-art technologies of image and video understanding
[16, 18, 19, 22, 24, 25, 35, 34, 37, 42, 43, 44]. As one of the
most fundamental tasks, object detection in still images has
attracted a surge of research interests and the recent meth∗ This work was performed at JD AI Research.

Reference frame

Reference proposals

FC

(b)

FC

Relation

Region proposals

Relation

Image

Support frames

Supportive proposals

FC

Sampling

Relation

FC

It has been well recognized that modeling object-toobject relations would be helpful for object detection. Nevertheless, the problem is not trivial especially when exploring the interactions between objects to boost video object
detectors. The difficulty originates from the aspect that reliable object relations in a video should depend on not only
the objects in the present frame but also all the supportive
objects extracted over a long range span of the video. In this
paper, we introduce a new design to capture the interactions
across the objects in spatio-temporal context. Specifically,
we present Relation Distillation Networks (RDN) — a new
architecture that novelly aggregates and propagates object
relation to augment object features for detection. Technically, object proposals are first generated via Region Proposal Networks (RPN). RDN then, on one hand, models object relation via multi-stage reasoning, and on the other,
progressively distills relation through refining supportive
object proposals with high objectness scores in a cascaded
manner. The learnt relation verifies the efficacy on both
improving object detection in each frame and box linking
across frames. Extensive experiments are conducted on ImageNet VID dataset, and superior results are reported when
comparing to state-of-the-art methods. More remarkably,
our RDN achieves 81.8% and 83.2% mAP with ResNet-101
and ResNeXt-101, respectively. When further equipped with
linking and rescoring, we obtain to-date the best reported
mAP of 83.8% and 84.7%.

Relation

FC

Relation

(a)

FC

Abstract

Relation

{djiajun1206, panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, {zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn, tmei@jd.com

Advanced
supportive proposals

Figure 1. Modeling object relations by employing (a) stacked relation within an image and (b) distillation in an cascade manner
across video frames.

ods [3, 5, 10, 14, 39] mostly proceed along the region-based
detection paradigm which is derived from the work of RCNN [11]. In a further step to localize and recognize objects
in videos, video object detection explores spatio-temporal
coherence to boost detectors generally through two directions of box-level association [8, 13, 20, 21] and feature aggregation [46, 49, 53, 54]. The former delves into the association across bounding boxes from consecutive frames to
generate tubelets. The latter improves per-frame features by
aggregation of nearby features. Regardless of these different recipes for enhancing video object detection, a common
issue not fully studied is the exploitation of object relation,
which is well believed to be helpful for detection.
Object relations characterize the interactions or geometric positions between objects. In the literature, there has
been strong evidences on the use of object relation to support various vision tasks, e.g., recognition [48], object detection [17], cross-domain detection [2], and image captioning [52]. One representative work that employs object relation is [17] for object detection in images. The basic idea
is to measure relation features of one object as the weighted
sum of appearance features from other objects in the image and the weights reflect object dependency in terms of
both appearance and geometry information. A stacked relation module as shown in Figure 1(a) aggregates relation
features and augments the object features in a multi-step
fashion. The method verifies the merit on modeling object

7023

