Neural 3D Morphable Models: Spiral Convolutional Networks for 3D Shape
Representation Learning and Generation
Giorgos Bouritsas ∗1
Sergiy Bokhnyak * 2
Stylianos Ploumpis1,3
1,2,4
Michael Bronstein
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,3
Imperial College London, UK1 Universita Svizzera Italiana, Switzerland2 FaceSoft.io3
1

{g.bouritsas18, s.ploumpis, m.bronstein, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Generative models for 3D geometric data arise in many
important applications in 3D computer vision and graphics. In this paper, we focus on 3D deformable shapes that
share a common topological structure, such as human faces
and bodies. Morphable Models and their variants, despite
their linear formulation, have been widely used for shape
representation, while most of the recently proposed nonlinear approaches resort to intermediate representations,
such as 3D voxel grids or 2D views. In this work, we introduce a novel graph convolutional operator, acting directly
on the 3D mesh, that explicitly models the inductive bias
of the fixed underlying graph. This is achieved by enforcing consistent local orderings of the vertices of the graph,
through the spiral operator, thus breaking the permutation
invariance property that is adopted by all the prior work
on Graph Neural Networks. Our operator comes by construction with desirable properties (anisotropic, topologyaware, lightweight, easy-to-optimise), and by using it as a
building block for traditional deep generative architectures,
we demonstrate state-of-the-art results on a variety of 3D
shape datasets compared to the linear Morphable Model
and other graph convolutional operators.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning in computer vision and image analysis, speech recognition, and natural language processing, has driven the recent interest in developing similar models for 3D geometric data. Generalisations of successful architectures such as convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) to data with non-Euclidean structure (e.g. manifolds and graphs) is known under the umbrella term Geometric deep learning [10]. In applications dealing with
3D data, the key challenge of geometric deep learning is
a meaningful definition of intrinsic operations analogous to
∗ Equal Contribution

2

Twitter4

bokhns@usi.ch

convolution and pooling on meshes or point clouds. Among
numerous advantages of working directly on mesh or point
cloud data is the fact that it is possible to build invariance
to shape transformations (both rigid and nonrigid) into the
architecture, as a result allowing to use significantly simpler models and much less training data. So far, the main
focus of research in the field of geometric deep learning has
been on analysis tasks, encompassing shape classification
and segmentation [35, 37], local descriptor learning, correspondence, and retrieval [31, 9, 27].
On the other hand, there has been limited progress in
representation learning and generation of geometric data
(shape synthesis). Obtaining descriptive and compact representations of meshes and point clouds is essential for downstream tasks such as classification and 3D reconstruction,
when dealing with limited labelled training data. Additionally, geometric data synthesis is pivotal in applications such
as 3D printing, computer graphics and animation, virtual
reality, and game design, and can heavily assist graphics
designers and speed-up production. Furthermore, given the
high cost and time of acquiring quality 3D data, geometric generative models can be used as a cheap alternative for
producing training data for geometric ML algorithms.
Most of the previous approaches in this direction rely
on intermediate representations of 3D shapes, such as point
clouds [1], voxels [44] or mappings to a flat domain [32, 4]
instead of direct surface representations, such as meshes.
Despite the success of such techniques, they either suffer
from high computational complexity (e.g. voxels) or absence of smoothness of the data representation (e.g. point
clouds), while usually pre- and post-processing steps are
needed in order to obtain the output surface model. Learning directly on the mesh was only recently explored in
[25, 38, 43, 22] for shape completion, non-linear facial morphable model construction and 3D reconstruction from single images, respectively.
In this paper, we propose a novel representation learning
and generative framework for fixed topology meshes. For
this purpose, we formulate an ordering-based graph convo-

7213

