K-Best Transformation Synchronization
Yifan Sun ∗ Jiacheng Zhuo∗
UT Austin
Austin, TX 78712

Arnav Mohan
Liberal Arts and Science Academy
Austin, TX 78745

Qixing Huang
UT Austin
Austin, TX 78712

{yifansun12,jzhuo}@utexas.edu

arnavmohan@gmail.com

huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the problem of K-best transformation synchronization for the purpose of multiple scan
matching. Given noisy pair-wise transformations computed
between a subset of depth scan pairs, K-best transformation
synchronization seeks to output multiple consistent relative
transformations. This problem naturally arises in many geometry reconstruction applications, where the underlying
object possesses self-symmetry. For approximately symmetric or even non-symmetric objects, K-best solutions offer
an intermediate presentation for recovering the underlying
single-best solution. We introduce a simple yet robust iterative algorithm for K-best transformation synchronization,
which alternates between transformation propagation and
transformation clustering. We present theoretical guarantees on the robust and exact recoveries of our algorithm.
Experimental results demonstrate the advantage of our approach against state-of-the-art transformation synchronization techniques on both synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Computing consistent relative transformations across
multiple RGB or RGBD images (or transformation synchronization), is a fundamental problem that enjoys
rich computer vision applications, including multi-view
structure-from-motion [20, 36, 18], scan registration for 3D
reconstruction [26], and assembly of fractured objects [23],
to name just a few. However, almost all existing approaches
stand on the assumption that there is a single plausible solution. This assumption becomes inappropriate if there exist
multiple potential solutions, e.g., when the underlying object is symmetric.
In this paper, we introduce the problem of K-best transformation synchronization. The same as the standard setting of transformation synchronization (e.g.[41, 6, 13, 2, 33,
9]), K-best transformation synchronization takes as input a
collection of partial objects (e.g., an RGB image collection
or an RGBD image collection) and their relative transfor∗ Both authors contributed equally

mations computed using an off-the-shelf algorithm. The
difference in K-best transformation synchronization is that
besides noise and outliers, there are multiple modes in the
input relative transformations due to the underlying symmetries. In light of this, the output of K-best transformation
consists of, for each partial object, K transformations between its local coordinate system and a world coordinate
system. We expect that these transformations can describe
the different modes in the input relative transformations.
Note that we do not specify the value of K, and it is automatically inferred from the input relative transformations.
K-best transformation synchronization appears to be a
lot harder than single-best transformation synchronization
due to computational challenges in separating multiplemodal correct input transformations and the incorrect input
transformations. For example, recent state-of-the-art transformation synchronization techniques (e.g.[41, 4, 33]) assume that when representing pairwise transformations using data matrices, the spectral-gap of the data matrix that
encodes correct input transformations shall be much bigger
than the spectral norm of the data matrix that encodes incorrect input transformations (c.f.[41]). However, this assumption may not hold anymore when applying existing transformation synchronization techniques to the K-best setting,
where the spectral behavior of the correct data matrix may
be close to a random matrix, and the desired spectral separation is not available anymore.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for Kbest transformation synchronization. Our approach alternates between transformation propagation and transformation clustering. Transformation propagation is motivated
from the success of using the power method for spectral
transformation synchronization [35, 32, 31, 34, 3]. In contrast to the averaging operator used in the standard power
method, we perform transformation clustering to find dominant modes of the propagated transformations, which reflect the underlying symmetry. We describe a simple procedure to determine the optimal value for K by analyzing
the transformation synchronization results under different
K. From the theoretical point of view, we establish strong
exact recovery conditions of our approach on the underlying symmetry and relative transformations. For transforma110252

