Learning Object-Specific Distance From a Monocular Image
Jing Zhu

Yi Fang∗

NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab, USA
New York University, USA
New York University Abu Dhabi, UAE
{jingzhu, yfang}@nyu.edu

Input: RGB Image + Bounding boxes (object image location)

Abstract
Environment perception, including object detection and
distance estimation, is one of the most crucial tasks for autonomous driving. Many attentions have been paid on the
object detection task, but distance estimation only arouse
few interests in the computer vision community. Observing
that the traditional inverse perspective mapping algorithm
performs poorly for objects far away from the camera or on
the curved road, in this paper, we address the challenging
distance estimation problem by developing the first end-toend learning-based model to directly predict distances for
given objects in the images. Besides the introduction of a
learning-based base model, we further design an enhanced
model with a keypoint regressor, where a projection loss is
defined to enforce a better distance estimation, especially
for objects close to the camera. To facilitate the research
on this task, we construct the extented KITTI and nuScenes
(mini) object detection datasets with a distance for each object. Our experiments demonstrate that our proposed methods outperform alternative approaches (e.g., the traditional
IPM, SVR) on object-specific distance estimation, particularly for the challenging cases that objects are on a curved
road. Moreover, the performance margin implies the effectiveness of our enhanced method.

1. Introduction
With the advances in the field of computer vision, visual environment perception, which includes object classification, detection, segmentation and distance estimation,
has become a key component in the development of autonomous driving cars. Although researchers have paid a
lot of efforts on improving the accuracy of visual perception, they mainly focus on more popular tasks, such as object classification, detection and segmentation [29, 27, 17].
Besides recognizing the objects on the road, it is also im∗ indicates corresponding author.

Output: Object category + Distance (in meters)

Figure 1: Given a RGB image and the bounding boxes (image location) for objects as inputs, our model directly predicts a distance (in meters) and a category label for each
object in the image. Our model can be easily generalized
on any visual environment reception system by appending
to mature 2D detectors.
portant to estimate the distances between camera sensors
and the recognized objects (e.g. cars, pedestrians, cyclists),
which can provide crucial information for cars to avoid collisions, adjust its speed for safety driving and more importantly, as hints for sensor fusion and path planning. However, the object-specific distance estimation task attracts
very few attentions from the computer vision community.
With the emergence of the convolutional neural networks,
researchers have achieved remarkable progress on traditional 2D computer vision tasks using deep learning techniques, such as object detection, semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, scene reconstruction [4, 30, 31, 16],
but we have failed to find any deep learning application on
object-specific distance estimation. One of the main reasons could be the lack of datasets that provides distance for
each of the object in the images captured from the outdoor
road scene.
In this paper, we focus on addressing the interesting but
challenging object-specific distance estimation problem for
autonomous driving (as shown in Fig. 1). We have ob-

3839

