Asymmetric Cross-Guided Attention Network for Actor and Action Video
Segmentation From Natural Language Query
Hao Wang1 , Cheng Deng1,2∗, Junchi Yan3 , Dacheng Tao4
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of CSE, and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
1

{haowang.xidian, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com, yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Actor and action video segmentation from natural language query aims to selectively segment the actor and its
action in a video based on an input textual description. Previous works mostly focus on learning simple correlation between two heterogeneous features of vision and language
via dynamic convolution or fully convolutional classification. However, they ignore the linguistic variation of natural language query and have difficulty in modeling global
visual context, which leads to unsatisfactory segmentation
performance. To address these issues, we propose an asymmetric cross-guided attention network for actor and action
video segmentation from natural language query. Specifically, we frame an asymmetric cross-guided attention network, which consists of vision guided language attention to
reduce the linguistic variation of input query and language
guided vision attention to incorporate query-focused global
visual context simultaneously. Moreover, we adopt multiresolution fusion scheme and weighted loss for foreground
and background pixels to obtain further performance improvement. Extensive experiments on Actor-Action Dataset
Sentences and J-HMDB Sentences show that our proposed
approach notably outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the explosive growth of video data in recent years,
video understanding has attracted ever-increasing attention
in computer vision community. However, traditional studies emphasize on video classification [23, 27, 29], action
recognition and localization [35, 36, 37, 38, 40]. Both of
them lack fine-grained analysis of video contents, such as
pixel-level joint understanding of actors and their actions,
∗ Corresponding author

woman somersaulting
a man in dark is standing near the camera

Figure 1. Based on the input natural language query, actor and action video segmentation aims at generating pixel-wise segmentation masks in a given video. The colored masks are corresponding
to the sentences with the same color on the top of the video.

which plays crucial role in human-robot interaction and autonomous driving. Attempting to understand actors and
actions present in videos, Gavrilyuk et al. [6] introduced
a challenging task of actor and action video segmentation
from natural language query, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Recently, many approaches [7, 8, 16, 22, 39] have been
exploited for semantic segmentation or object localization
from natural language query. These approaches can be
roughly divided into two categories. In the first category,
dynamic convolution is utilized to adaptively segment or
localize an object, where the generated dynamic convolutional filters vary with the input natural language query.
However, the linguistic variation of input textual description
would seriously impact sentence representation and subsequently make dynamic convolutional filters unstable, leading to inaccurate segmentation or localization. For example,
“car in blue is parked on the grass” and “blue car standing
on the grass” have the same meaning but different generated
filters, resulting in unsatisfactory performance. In the second one, heterogeneous features from vision and language

3939

