Revisiting Point Cloud Classification: A New Benchmark Dataset and
Classification Model on Real-World Data
Mikaela Angelina Uy1 Quang-Hieu Pham2 Binh-Son Hua3 Duc Thanh Nguyen4 Sai-Kit Yeung1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design
3
The University of Tokyo 4 Deakin University
Abstract

Deep learning techniques for point cloud data have
demonstrated great potentials in solving classical problems
in 3D computer vision such as 3D object classification and
segmentation. Several recent 3D object classification methods have reported state-of-the-art performance on CAD
model datasets such as ModelNet40 with high accuracy
(∼92%). Despite such impressive results, in this paper, we argue that object classification is still a challenging task when
objects are framed with real-world settings. To prove this,
we introduce ScanObjectNN, a new real-world point cloud
object dataset based on scanned indoor scene data. From
our comprehensive benchmark, we show that our dataset
poses great challenges to existing point cloud classification
techniques as objects from real-world scans are often cluttered with background and/or are partial due to occlusions.
We identify three key open problems for point cloud object
classification, and propose new point cloud classification
neural networks that achieve state-of-the-art performance on
classifying objects with cluttered background. Our dataset
and code are publicly available in our project page 1 .

1. Introduction
The task of understanding our real world has achieved
a great leap in recent years. The rise of powerful computational resources such as GPUs and the availability of 3D
data from depth sensors have accelerated the fast-growing
field of 3D deep learning. Among various 3D data representations, point clouds are widely used in computer graphics
and computer vision thanks to their simplicity. Recent works
have shown great promises in solving classical scene understanding problems with point clouds such as 3D object
classification and segmentation.
However, the current progress on classification with 3D
point clouds has witnessed a trend of performance saturation. For example, many recent object classification methods
have reported very high accuracies in 2018, and the trend
of bringing the accuracy towards perfection is still ongoing.
1 https://hkust-vgd.github.io/scanobjectnn/

This phenomenon inspires us to raise a question on whether
problems such as 3D object classification have been totally
solved, and to think about how to move forward.
To answer this question, we perform a benchmark of existing point cloud object classification techniques with both
synthetic and real-world data. For synthetic objects, we use
ModelNet40 [43], the most popular dataset in point cloud
object classification that contains about 10,000 CAD models.
To support the investigation of object classification methods on real-world data, we introduce ScanObjectNN, a new
point cloud object dataset from the state-of-the-art scene
mesh datasets SceneNN [19] and ScanNet [9]. Based on
the initial instance segmentation from the scene datasets, we
manually filter and select objects for 15 common categories,
and further enrich the dataset by considering additional object perturbations.
Our study shows that while the accuracy with CAD data
is reaching perfection, learning to classify a real-world object dataset is still a very challenging task. By analyzing
the benchmark results, we identify three open issues that
are worth to further explore for future researches. First,
classification models trained on synthetic data often do not
generalize well to real-world data such as point clouds reconstructed from RGB-D scans [19, 9], and vice versa. Second,
challenging in-context and partial observations of real-world
objects are common due to occlusions and reconstruction
errors; for example, they can be found in window-based object detectors [38] in many robotics or autonomous vehicle
applications. Finally, how to handle background effectively
when they appear together with objects due to clutter in the
real-world scenes.
As our dataset opens up opportunities to tackle such open
problems in real-world object classification, we also present
a new method for point cloud object classification that can
improve upon the state-of-the-art results on our dataset by
jointly learning the classification and segmentation tasks in
a single neural network.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• A new object dataset from meshes of scanned real-world
scene for training and testing point cloud classification,
11588

