Face Alignment with Kernel Density Deep Neural Network
Lisha Chen1 , Hui Su1,2 , Qiang Ji1
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 IBM Research
chenl21@rpi.edu, huisuibmres@us.ibm.com, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks achieve good performance in many
computer vision problems such as face alignment. However,
when the testing image is challenging due to low resolution,
occlusion or adversarial attacks, the accuracy of a deep
neural network suffers greatly. Therefore, it is important to
quantify the uncertainty in its predictions. A probabilistic
neural network with Gaussian distribution over the target
is typically used to quantify uncertainty for regression problems. However, in real-world problems especially computer
vision tasks, the Gaussian assumption is too strong. To
model more general distributions, such as multimodal or
asymmetric distributions, we propose to develop a kernel
density deep neural network. Specifically, for face alignment, we adapt state-of-the-art hourglass neural network
into a probabilistic neural network framework with landmark probability map as its output. The model is trained
by maximizing the conditional log likelihood. To exploit
the output probability map, we extend the model to multistage so that the logits map from the previous stage can feed
into the next stage to progressively improve the landmark
detection accuracy. Extensive experiments on benchmark
datasets against state-of-the-art unconstrained deep learning method demonstrate that the proposed kernel density
network achieves comparable or superior performance in
terms of prediction accuracy. It further provides aleatoric
uncertainty estimation in predictions.

1. Introduction
Face alignment, or facial landmark localization, is a fundamental step for facial behavior analysis such as face recognition, facial expression estimation, and head pose estimation. Classical work on face alignment mainly adopts a
cascade regression framework based on local image features [50, 49, 48, 47], which is sensitive to initialization and
achieves limited performance on challenging dataset. With
the introduction of deep learning based methods for regression and feature representation learning, the state-of-the-art
accuracy in face alignment is achieved [41, 52, 43, 3, 11, 46].

However, the performance of face alignment remains
sensitive to face image quality. Challenges such as large head
pose, object occlusion or low resolution may lead to poor
landmark detection results. Moreover, existing deep learning
based methods are susceptible to small image perturbations
such as an adversarial attack, which may result in a large
difference in the prediction. More importantly, existing deep
learning methods cannot predict their output uncertainty.
Therefore, it is important to develop a probabilistic deep
neural network to quantify the prediction uncertainty and to
avoid making over-confident wrong decisions.
To these goals, we propose a Kernel Density Deep Neural
Network (KDN). Different from the deterministic approach
that gives a point estimation for each input, our model outputs target probability distribution for each input. Moreover, rather than assuming the output follows a Gaussian
distribution, the proposed method can capture more general
probability distribution, such as multimodal or asymmetric
distribution. With the target probability distribution, we can
quantify the prediction confidence to distinguish challenging
input image caused by large head pose, object occlusion or
low resolution and to identify landmarks under occlusion.
To further exploit the output probability map, we further
extend our model to multi-stage cascade framework so that
the probability map produced in the last stage can serve as
input to guide the detection in the next stage to progressively
improve the landmark detection accuracy.
The contributions of work are summarized as follows:
1) We introduce the Kernel Density Deep Neural Network
that produces target probability map, without assuming a
specific parametric distribution. The probability map can
be used to quantify the uncertainty of the output and to
identify the challenging landmarks. And we further extend
our model to multiple stages to use the output probability
map to progressively improve the landmark detection.
2) We show that the estimated uncertainty in our method
can be used to detect occluded landmarks without occlusion
supervision.
3) We show the proposed method can be generally extended
to other regression tasks such as action unit intensity
estimation.

6992

