ThunderNet: Towards Real-time Generic Object Detection on Mobile Devices
Zheng Qin∗†1 , Zeming Li∗2 , Zhaoning Zhang1 , Yiping Bao2 , Gang Yu‡2 , Yuxing Peng1 , Jian Sun2
1
2
National University of Defense Technology
Megvii Inc. (Face++)
{qinzheng12, zhangzhaoning, pengyuxing}@nudt.edu.cn

{lizeming, baoyiping, yugang, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Real-time generic object detection on mobile devices is a
crucial but challenging task in computer vision. Compared
with server-class GPUs, mobile devices are computationconstrained and raise more strict restrictions on the computational cost of detectors. However, modern CNN-based
detectors are resource-hungry and require massive computation to achieve ideal detection accuracy, which hinders
them from real-time inference in mobile scenarios.
From the perspective of network structure, CNN-based
detectors can be divided into the backbone part which ex∗ Equal contribution.
† This work was done when Zheng Qin was an intern at Megvii Inc.
‡ Corresponding Author.

26
24
COCO AP0.5 : 0.95

Real-time generic object detection on mobile platforms
is a crucial but challenging computer vision task. Prior
lightweight CNN-based detectors are inclined to use onestage pipeline. In this paper, we investigate the effectiveness of two-stage detectors in real-time generic detection
and propose a lightweight two-stage detector named ThunderNet. In the backbone part, we analyze the drawbacks in
previous lightweight backbones and present a lightweight
backbone designed for object detection. In the detection
part, we exploit an extremely efficient RPN and detection
head design. To generate more discriminative feature representation, we design two efficient architecture blocks, Context Enhancement Module and Spatial Attention Module. At
last, we investigate the balance between the input resolution, the backbone, and the detection head. Benefit from the
highly efficient backbone and detection part design, ThunderNet surpasses previous lightweight one-stage detectors
with only 40% of the computational cost on PASCAL VOC
and COCO benchmarks. Without bells and whistles, ThunderNet runs at 24.1 fps on an ARM-based device with 19.2
AP on COCO. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
real-time detector reported on ARM platforms. Code will
be released for paper reproduction.

28

22
20
ThunderNet
MobileNetV1-SSD
MobileNetV1-SSDLite
MobileNetV2-SSDLite
Pelee
Tiny-DSOD

18
16
14
200

400

600

800
MFLOPs

1000

1200

Figure 1. Comparison of ThunderNet and previous lightweight
detectors on COCO test-dev. ThunderNet achieves improvements
in both accuracy and efficiency.

tracts features for the image and the detection part which
detects object instances in the image. In the backbone part,
state-of-the-art detectors are inclined to exploit huge classification networks (e.g., ResNet-101 [10, 4, 16, 17]) and
large input images (e.g., 800×1200 pixels), which requires
massive computational cost. Recent progress in lightweight
image classification networks [3, 33, 20, 11, 28] has facilitated real-time object detection [11, 28, 14, 20] on GPU.
However, there are several differences between image classification and object detection, e.g., object detection needs
large receptive field and low-level features to improve the
localization ability, which is less crucial for image classification. The gap between the two tasks restricts the performance of these backbones on object detection and obstructs
further compression without harming detection accuracy.
In the detection part, CNN-based detectors can be categorized into two-stage detectors [27, 4, 16, 14] and onestage detectors [24, 19, 25, 17]. For two-stage detectors, the
detection part usually consists of Region Proposal Network
(RPN) [27] and the detection head (including RoI warping
and R-CNN subnet). RPN first generates RoIs, and then the
RoIs are further refined through the detection head. State-

6718

