AdaptIS: Adaptive Instance Selection Network
Konstantin Sofiiuk
Samsung AI Center

Olga Barinova
Samsung AI Center

Anton Konushin
Samsung AI Center

k.sofiiuk@samsung.com

o.barinova@samsung.com

a.konushin@samsung.com

Abstract
We present Adaptive Instance Selection network architecture for class-agnostic instance segmentation. Given an
input image and a point (x, y), it generates a mask for the
object located at (x, y). The network adapts to the input
point with a help of AdaIN layers [13], thus producing different masks for different objects on the same image. AdaptIS generates pixel-accurate object masks, therefore it accurately segments objects of complex shape or severely occluded ones. AdaptIS can be easily combined with standard semantic segmentation pipeline to perform panoptic
segmentation. To illustrate the idea, we perform experiments on a challenging toy problem with difficult occlusions. Then we extensively evaluate the method on panoptic segmentation benchmarks. We obtain state-of-the-art results on Cityscapes and Mapillary even without pretraining on COCO, and show competitive results on a challenging COCO dataset. The source code of the method and
the trained models are available at https://github.com/saicvul/adaptis.

1. Introduction
While humans can easily segment objects in images, this
task is quite difficult to formalize. One of the formulations
is semantic segmentation which aims at assigning a class
label to each image pixel. Another formulation is instance
segmentation, which aims to detect and segment each object
instance in the image. While semantic segmentation does
not imply separating objects of the same class, instance segmentation focuses only on segmenting things (i.e. countable
objects such as people, animals, tools) and does not account
for so-called stuff (i.e. amorphous regions of similar texture
or material such as grass, sky, road). Recently, panoptic
segmentation task that combines semantic and instance segmentation together, has been introduced [15]. The goal of
panoptic segmentation is to map each pixel of an image to a
pair (li , zi ) ∈ L × N , where li represents the semantic class
of pixel i and zi represents its instance id.
In this work we focus on instance and panoptic segmen-

Figure 1. AdaptIS takes an image and a point proposal (x, y) as
input and generates a mask for an object located at position (x, y).
AdaptIS can be easily combined with standard semantic segmentation pipeline to perform panoptic segmentation. The picture shows
sampled point proposals, corresponding generated masks, and the
final result of panoptic segmentation.

tation. We introduce AdaptIS, a fully differentiable end-toend network for class-agnostic instance segmentation. The
network takes an image and a point proposal (x, y) as input and generates a mask of an object located at position
(x, y). Figure 1 shows examples of the masks produced by
AdaptIS for different input point proposals.
We cast the problem of generating an object mask as binary segmentation. For a given image I and a fixed point
proposal (x, y) we simply optimize just one target loss function. We use a pixel-wise loss comparing AdaptIS prediction to the mask of the target object located at position (x, y)
on the image I. At train time for each object we sample different point proposals. Thus, the network learns to generate
the same object mask given different points on the same
object (see Figure 2). Interestingly, AdaptIS does not use
semantic labels during training, which allows it to segment
objects of any class.
In contrast to the mainstream detection-first methods for
instance segmentation [11, 23] AdaptIS does not rely on
bounding box proposals. Instead, it directly optimizes target
segmentation accuracy. In contrast to instance embedding17355

