Progressive Fusion Video Super-Resolution Network via Exploiting Non-Local
Spatio-Temporal Correlations
Peng Yi1 , Zhongyuan Wang∗1 , Kui Jiang1 , Junjun Jiang2,3 , and Jiayi Ma1
1

Wuhan University, Wuhan, China 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

{yipeng, kuijiang}@whu.edu.cn, {wzy hope, junjun0595}@163.com, jyma2010@gmail.com

Abstract
Most previous fusion strategies either fail to fully utilize
temporal information or cost too much time, and how to effectively fuse temporal information from consecutive frames
plays an important role in video super-resolution (SR). In
this study, we propose a novel progressive fusion network
for video SR, which is designed to make better use of spatiotemporal information and is proved to be more efficient and
effective than the existing direct fusion, slow fusion or 3D
convolution strategies. Under this progressive fusion framework, we further introduce an improved non-local operation to avoid the complex motion estimation and motion
compensation (ME&MC) procedures as in previous video
SR approaches. Extensive experiments on public datasets
demonstrate that our method surpasses state-of-the-art with
0.96 dB in average, and runs about 3 times faster, while requires only about half of the parameters.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution refers to the problem of reconstructing
a high-resolution (HR) output from a given low-resolution
(LR) input. For single image super-resolution (SISR), as the
input consists of only one single image, it is concentrated
on extracting spatial information. For video SR, where the
input is composed of several consecutive frames, it emphasizes exploiting the inter-frame temporal correlations. Thus,
it remains to be a non-trivial problem on making full use of
temporal correlations among multiple frames.
In general, most video SR methods adopt a time-based
way or space-based way for utilizing temporal information.
Time-based methods [11, 26, 31] consider frames as timeseries data, and send frames through the network one by
∗ Corresponding author.
Code will be available at https://github.com/psychopa4/PFNL.

Figure 1: Differences of non-local operation and ME&MC.
Non-local operation tries to obtain the response at position
xi by computing the weighted average of relationships of
all possible positions xj [36]. ME&MC tries to compensate
neighboring frames to the reference frame.

one. However, this kind of approach may run slower as it
cannot process multiple frames in parallel.
Space-based methods [3, 13, 14] take multiple frames as
supplementary materials to help reconstruct the reference
frame. Compared to time-based methods, this kind of approach is able to retain full inter-frame temporal correlations and enjoy the advantages of parallel computing. Most
existing space-based approaches adopt direct fusion, slow
fusion or 3D convolution [25, 29] for temporal information
fusion [3], which are shown in Figure 2.
Most traditional video SR methods [2, 7, 20, 22] conduct pixel-level motion and blur kernel estimation based on
image priors, trying to solve a complex optimization problem [23]. With recent development of deep learning, a lot of
video SR methods [3, 14, 23, 26, 31] based on convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have emerged. They try to conduct

3106

