A Deep Step Pattern Representation for Multimodal Retinal Image Registration
Jimmy Addison Lee1∗, Peng Liu2∗ , Jun Cheng1,3†, Huazhu Fu4
1
Cixi Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
Big Data Research Center at University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
3
UBTech Research, China
4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

Abstract
This paper presents a novel feature-based method that is
built upon a convolutional neural network (CNN) to learn
the deep representation for multimodal retinal image registration. We coined the algorithm deep step patterns, in
short DeepSPa. Most existing deep learning based methods
require a set of manually labeled training data with known
corresponding spatial transformations, which limits the size
of training datasets. By contrast, our method is fully automatic and scale well to different image modalities with no
human intervention. We generate feature classes from simple step patterns within patches of connecting edges formed
by vascular junctions in multiple retinal imaging modalities. We leverage CNN to learn and optimize the input
patches to be used for image registration. Spatial transformations are estimated based on the output possibility of
the fully connected layer of CNN for a pair of images. One
of the key advantages of the proposed algorithm is its robustness to non-linear intensity changes, which widely exist on retinal images due to the difference of acquisition
modalities. We validate our algorithm on extensive challenging datasets comprising poor quality multimodal retinal images which are adversely affected by pathologies (diseases), speckle noise and low resolutions. The experimental
results demonstrate the robustness and accuracy over stateof-the-art multimodal image registration algorithms.

1. Introduction
Image registration has been an important element in the
fields of computer vision, pattern recognition, and medical
image analysis. It aims to align two or more images into
the same coordinate system to receive a comprehensive understanding. In the field of ophthalmology, it is used for
assisting ophthalmologists to diagnose diseases and make
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author: chengjun@nimte.ac.cn

treatment planning. There are three main retinal registration groups [9, 29, 36], which are monomodal registration,
temporal registration, and multimodal registration. The first
group aligns monomodal retinal images captured by the
same sensor (e.g. fundus camera) at different viewpoints
during a single session with a patient to form a single mosaic view of the retina. The second group aligns temporal
retinal images taken weeks, months or years apart to reveal
disease progression. The third group aligns multimodal retinal images captured by different sensors (e.g. fundus camera and fluorescein angiography) to obtain a more complete
detail of the subject. In this paper, we focus on multimodal
registration in the third group.
While medical image registration has been an active research area for more than two decades [23], fully automatic
and robust multimodal image registration remains a challenging task. Among different imaging modalities, the intensity differences are non-linear, and a lot of times the images obtained from the clinics and hospitals are adversely
affected by pathologies and/or noise. Fig. 1 shows some
examples for retinal images. The fluorescein angiographic
(FA) images in Fig. 1(b), 1(d) and 1(f) are acquired after
injecting of fluorescein dye into the bloodstream. The dye
highlights the blood vessels in the back of the eye causing
the intensity of the angiograms to vary substantially and appear different from the color fundus images in Fig. 1(a), 1(c)
and 1(e). The blood vessels are generally brighter than the
background tissues in the FA images but darker in the color
fundus images, and are sometimes being obscured due to
the effects of diseases. The optical coherence tomography
(OCT) fundus image in Fig. 1(h) is constructed by integration of the 3D tomogram along depth to provide a view
similar to traditional en-face imaging modalities such as
color fundus images. Due to the nature of imaging with
coherent light, OCT is susceptible to coherent noise or also
called speckle noise [28], which effectively causes significant degradation in spatial resolution and quality.
Inspired by its success in computer vision, we propose
to learn pattern patches among different retinal imaging

5077

