Visual Deprojection: Probabilistic Recovery of Collapsed Dimensions
Guha Balakrishnan
MIT

Adrian V. Dalca
MIT and MGH

Amy Zhao
MIT

John V. Guttag
MIT

balakg@mit.edu

adalca@mit.edu

xamyzhao@mit.edu

guttag@mit.edu

Frédo Durand
MIT

William T. Freeman
MIT

fredo@mit.edu

freeman@mit.edu

a. Spatial Deprojection of Images

Abstract

1. Introduction
Captured visual data is often a projection of a higherdimensional signal “collapsed” along some dimension. For
example, long-exposure, motion-blurred photographs are
produced by projecting motion trajectories along the time
dimension [11, 25]. Recent “corner cameras” leverage the
fact that a corner-like edge occluder vertically projects light
rays of hidden scenes to produce a 1D video [4]. Medical x-ray machines use spatial projectional radiography,
where x-rays are distributed by a generator, and the imaged
anatomy affects the signal captured by the detector [26].
Given projected data, is it possible to synthesize the orig-

Predicted
sample 1

Predicted
sample 2

b. Spatial Deprojection of Videos
Vertical
projection

Predicted sample

Time

We introduce visual deprojection: the task of recovering
an image or video that has been collapsed along a dimension. Projections arise in various contexts, such as longexposure photography, where a dynamic scene is collapsed
in time to produce a motion-blurred image, and corner cameras, where reflected light from a scene is collapsed along
a spatial dimension because of an edge occluder to yield a
1D video. Deprojection is ill-posed– often there are many
plausible solutions for a given input. We first propose a
probabilistic model capturing the ambiguity of the task. We
then present a variational inference strategy using convolutional neural networks as functional approximators. Sampling from the inference network at test time yields plausible candidates from the distribution of original signals that
are consistent with a given input projection. We evaluate
the method on several datasets for both spatial and temporal deprojection tasks. We first demonstrate the method
can recover human gait videos and face images from spatial projections, and then show that it can recover videos
of moving digits from dramatically motion-blurred images
obtained via temporal projection.

Horizontal
projection

!
c. Temporal Deprojection of Videos
Temporal
projection

Predicted
sample 1

Predicted
sample 2

Figure 1: Our method takes a spatial projection of an image or video (a, b) or a temporal projection of a video (c),
and outputs a distribution over possible original signals. A
projection here is an average of pixel values along a dimension of the original signal. The original signal is only one of
multiple possible signals that may have plausibly generated
that particular projection.

inal signal? In this work, we present an algorithm that enables this synthesis. We focus on recovering images and
video from spatial projections, and recovering a video from
a long-exposure image obtained via temporal projection.
The task of inverting projected, high-dimensional signals
is ill-posed, making the task infeasible without some priors
or constraints on the true signal. This ambiguity includes
1171

