Optimizing the F-measure for Threshold-free Salient Object Detection
Kai Zhao1 , Shanghua Gao1 , Wenguan Wang2 , Ming-Ming Cheng1∗
1
TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University 2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
{kaiz.xyz,shanghuagao,wenguanwang.ai}@gmail.com,cmm@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Current CNN-based solutions to salient object detection
(SOD) mainly rely on the optimization of cross-entropy loss
(CELoss). Then the quality of detected saliency maps is
often evaluated in terms of F-measure. In this paper, we
investigate an interesting issue: can we consistently use
the F-measure formulation in both training and evaluation for SOD? By reformulating the standard F-measure,
we propose the relaxed F-measure which is differentiable
w.r.t the posterior and can be easily appended to the back
of CNNs as the loss function. Compared to the conventional cross-entropy loss of which the gradients decrease
dramatically in the saturated area, our loss function, named
FLoss, holds considerable gradients even when the activation approaches the target. Consequently, the FLoss can
continuously force the network to produce polarized activations. Comprehensive benchmarks on several popular
datasets show that FLoss outperforms the state-of-the-art
with a considerable margin. More specifically, due to the
polarized predictions, our method is able to obtain highquality saliency maps without carefully tuning the optimal
threshold, showing significant advantages in real-world applications. Code and pretrained models are available at
http://kaizhao.net/fmeasure.

1. Introduction
We consider the task of salient object detection (SOD),
where each pixel of a given image has to be classified as
salient (outstanding) or not. The human visual system is
able to perceive and process visual signals distinctively: interested regions are conceived and analyzed with high priority while other regions draw less attention. This capacity
has been long studied in the computer vision community
in the name of ‘salient object detection’, since it can ease
the procedure of scene understanding [4]. The performance
of modern salient object detection methods is often evaluated in terms of F-measure. Rooted from information re∗ M.M. Cheng is the corresponding author.

trieval [29], the F-measure is widely used as an evaluation
metric in tasks where elements of a specified class have
to be retrieved, especially when the relevant class is rare.
Given the per-pixel prediction Ŷ (ŷi ∈ [0, 1], i = 1, ..., |Y |)
and the ground-truth saliency map Y (yi ∈ {0, 1}, i =
1, ..., |Y |), a threshold t is applied to obtain the binarized
prediction Ẏ t (ẏit ∈ {0, 1}, i = 1, ..., |Y |). The F-measure is
then defined as the harmonic mean of precision and recall:
F (Y, Ẏ t ) = (1+β 2 )

precision(Y, Ẏ t ) · recall(Y, Ẏ t )
,
β 2 precision(Y, Ẏ t )+recall(Y, Ẏ t )

(1)

where β 2 > 0 is a balance factor between precision and recall. When β 2 > 1, the F-measure is biased in favour of
recall and otherwise in favour of precision.
Most CNN-based solutions for SOD [11, 16, 30, 9, 31,
39, 33] mainly rely on the optimization of cross-entropy loss
(CELoss) in an FCN [22] architecture, and the quality of
saliency maps is often assessed by the F-measure. Optimizing the pixel-independent CELoss can be regarded
PN as minimizing the mean absolute error (MAE= N1 i |ŷi − yi |),
because in both circumstances each prediction/ground-truth
pair works independently and contributes to the final score
equally. If the data labels have biased distribution, models trained with CELoss would make biased predictions towards the majority class. Therefore, SOD models trained
with CELoss hold biased prior and tend to predict unknown
pixels as the background, consequently leading to lowrecall detections. The F-measure [29] is a more sophisticated and comprehensive evaluation metric which combines
precision and recall into a single score and automatically
offsets the unbalance between positive/negative samples.
In this paper, we provide a uniform formulation in both
training and evaluation for SOD. By directly taking the evaluation metric, i.e. the F-measure, as the optimization target,
we perform F-measure maximizing in an end-to-end manner. To perform end-to-end learning, we propose the relaxed F-measure to overcome the in-differentiability in the
standard F-measure formulation. The proposed loss function, named FLoss, is decomposable w.r.t the posterior Ŷ
and thus can be appended to the back of a CNN as supervision without effort. We test the FLoss on several state-ofthe-art SOD architectures and witness a visible performance

8849

