Better to Follow, Follow to Be Better: Towards Precise Supervision of Feature
Super-Resolution for Small Object Detection
Junhyug Noh1 Wonho Bae2 Wonhee Lee1 Jinhwan Seo1 Gunhee Kim1
1
Seoul National University 2 University of Massachusetts Amherst
1

2

{jh.noh, wonhee, jinhwanseo}@vision.snu.ac.kr, gunhee@snu.ac.kr

wbae@umass.edu

http://vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/better-to-follow

Abstract

Better SR target to follow?

SR Feature
Generator
SR feature

In spite of recent success of proposal-based CNN models for object detection, it is still difficult to detect small
objects due to the limited and distorted information that
small region of interests (RoI) contain. One way to alleviate this issue is to enhance the features of small RoIs using a super-resolution (SR) technique. We investigate how to
improve feature-level super-resolution especially for small
object detection, and discover its performance can be significantly improved by (i) utilizing proper high-resolution
target features as supervision signals for training of a SR
model and (ii) matching the relative receptive fields of training pairs of input low-resolution features and target highresolution features. We propose a novel feature-level superresolution approach that not only correctly addresses these
two desiderata but also is integrable with any proposalbased detectors with feature pooling. In our experiments,
our approach significantly improves the performance of
Faster R-CNN on three benchmarks of Tsinghua-Tencent
100K, PASCAL VOC and MS COCO. The improvement for
small objects is remarkably large, and encouragingly, those
for medium and large objects are nontrivial too. As a result,
we achieve new state-of-the-art performance on TsinghuaTencent 100K and highly competitive results on both PASCAL VOC and MS COCO.

1. Introduction
Since the emergence of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN), the performance of object detection methods
has rapidly improved. There have been two dominant approaches: two-stage proposal-based models [11, 10, 31, 5]
with an advantage of accuracy and single-stage proposalfree models [29, 27, 30, 9] with an edge of speed. Despite
of the recent dramatic advances in object detection, however, it is still difficult to detect objects in certain conditions,
such as small, occluded or truncated. In this work, we focus

LR
feature

Feature
Extractor
!".$

①

Naïve
SR target

Feature
Extractor
!%."

②

Our
SR target

SR Target
Extractor
!%."

Receptive field

Figure 1: For feature-level super-resolution (SR), it is crucial to have direct supervision from high-resolution target features. However, if we extract them from the same
feature extractor as low-resolution (LR) features, the relative receptive fields of two features are mismatched ( 1 ),
which can significantly misguide the SR feature generator. We introduce SR target extractor that provides proper
high-resolution features while keeping the relative receptive
fields the same ( 2 ).
on improving small object detection in the proposal-based
detection framework such as Faster R-CNN [31].
The proposal-based detectors fundamentally suffer from
the issue that the region proposals for small objects are too
small to identify. For instance, Huang et al. [21] show that
mean Average Precision (mAP) scores of small objects are
roughly 10 times lower than those of large objects. For small
proposals, the region of interest (RoI) pooling layer often
extracts replicated feature vectors as inputs to a box predictor, which eventually makes a prediction without enough
detail information for small objects. Moreover, it is likely
that the position of a RoI pooled feature and its actual position in the image are mismatched [20]. Such distortion
of RoI pooling can be partly alleviated by some advanced

9725

