Bayes-Factor-VAE: Hierarchical Bayesian Deep Auto-Encoder Models for
Factor Disentanglement
Minyoung Kim1 , Yuting Wang1,2 , Pritish Sahu2 , and Vladimir Pavlovic1,2
1

2

Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK
Dept. of Computer Science, Rutgers University, NJ, USA

mikim21@gmail.com, {yw632,ps851,vladimir}@cs.rutgers.edu, v.pavlovic@samsung.com

Abstract
We propose a family of novel hierarchical Bayesian deep
auto-encoder models capable of identifying disentangled factors of variability in data. While many recent attempts at factor disentanglement have focused on sophisticated learning
objectives within the VAE framework, their choice of a standard normal as the latent factor prior is both suboptimal and
detrimental to performance. Our key observation is that the
disentangled latent variables responsible for major sources
of variability, the relevant factors, can be more appropriately
modeled using long-tail distributions. The typical Gaussian
priors are, on the other hand, better suited for modeling of
nuisance factors. Motivated by this, we extend the VAE to a
hierarchical Bayesian model by introducing hyper-priors on
the variances of Gaussian latent priors, mimicking an infinite
mixture, while maintaining tractable learning and inference
of the traditional VAEs. This analysis signifies the importance of partitioning and treating in a different manner the
latent dimensions corresponding to relevant factors and nuisances. Our proposed models, dubbed Bayes-Factor-VAEs,
are shown to outperform existing methods both quantitatively and qualitatively in terms of latent disentanglement
across several challenging benchmark tasks.

1. Introduction
Data, such as images or videos, are inherently highdimensional, a result of interactions of many complex factors such as lighting, illumination, geometry, etc. Identifying those factors and their intricate interplay is the key not
only to explaining the source of variability in the data but
also to efficiently representing the same data for subsequent
analysis, classification, or even re-synthesis. To tackle this
problem, deep factor models such as the VAE [17] have
been proposed to principally, mathematically concisely, and
computationally efficiently model the nonlinear generative
relationship between the ambient data and the latent factors.
However, solely identifying some factors beyond the

sources of variability is not sufficient; it is ultimately desirable that the identified factors also be disentangled. Although there are several different, sometimes opposing,
views of disentanglement [3, 12], the most commonly accepted definition aligns with the notion of apriori independence, where each aspect of independent variability in data
is exclusively sourced in one latent factor. Identifying these
disentangled factors will then naturally lead to an effective,
succinct representation of the data. In this paper we aim to
solve this disentangled representation learning task in the
most challenging, unsupervised setting, with no auxiliary
information, such as labels, provided during the learning
process.
While there have been considerable recent efforts to solve
the latent disentanglement problem [7, 21, 13, 5, 18, 15, 6],
most prior approaches have failed to produce satisfactory solutions. One fundamental reason for this is their inadequate
treatment of the key factors supporting the disentanglement,
which have in prior works been almost universally tied to
i.i.d. Gaussian priors. In contrast, to accomplish high-quality
disentanglement one needs to distinguish, and treat separately, the relevant latent variables, responsible for principal
variability in the data, from the nuisance sources of minor
variation. Specifically, the relevant factors may exhibit nonGaussian, long-tail behavior, which discerns them from statistically independent Gaussian nuisances. We will detail
and justify this requirement in Sec. 2.
Our goal in this paper is to develop principled factor
disentanglement algorithms that meet this requirement. In
particular, we propose three different hierarchical Bayesian
models that place hyper-priors on the parameters of the latent
prior. This effectively mimics employing infinite mixtures
while maintaining tractable learning and inference of traditional VAEs. We begin with a brief background on VAEs,
describe our motivation and requirement to achieve the disentanglement in a principled way (Sec. 2), followed by the
definition of specific models (Sec. 3).
Background. We denote by x ∈ RD the observation
(e.g., image) and by z ∈ Rd the underlying latent vector. The
12979

