Entangled Transformer for Image Captioning

Guang Li Linchao Zhu Ping Liu Yi Yang
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
lguang@live.cn, linchao.zhu@uts.edu.au, pino.pingliu@gmail.com, yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
In image captioning, the typical attention mechanisms
are arduous to identify the equivalent visual signals especially when predicting highly abstract words. This phenomenon is known as the semantic gap between vision and
language. This problem can be overcome by providing semantic attributes that are homologous to language. Thanks
to the inherent recurrent nature and gated operating mechanism, Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and its variants
are the dominating architectures in image captioning. However, when designing elaborate attention mechanisms to
integrate visual inputs and semantic attributes, RNN-like
variants become unflexible due to their complexities. In this
paper, we investigate a Transformer-based sequence modeling framework, built only with attention layers and feedforward layers. To bridge the semantic gap, we introduce
EnTangled Attention (ETA) that enables the Transformer
to exploit semantic and visual information simultaneously.
Furthermore, Gated Bilateral Controller (GBC) is proposed
to guide the interactions between the multimodal information. We name our model as ETA-Transformer. Remarkably,
ETA-Transformer achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the MSCOCO image captioning dataset. The ablation studies validate the improvements of our proposed modules.

1. Introduction
Image captioning [39, 18] is one of the essential tasks [4,
39, 47] that attempts to break the semantic gap between vision and language. To generate good captions for images, it
involves not only the understanding of many concepts, such
as objects, actions, scenes, human-objects interactions but
also expressing these factors and their relations in a natural
language. Recently, the attention mechanism [41, 44, 12]
was introduced to dynamically recap the salient information
of the input image for every word.
In previous image captioning works [41, 44, 12], the attention mechanism mainly lies in two fields based on the

in, ski,
snow,
child,
woman,
…

(a). A person is standing in
the snow.

(b). Two children are
standing in the snow.

(c). A woman and a child
are skiing in the snow.

Figure 1: The image captioning results when given different modality information. (a) provides an unsatisfactory
caption result only using low-level visual features. When
provided with high-level visual information guided from region proposals, (b) can make some improvement, e.g., predict “two children” in the picture. However, it still fails to
grab abstract concepts in the image, e.g., “skiing”. (c) is
the result when utilizing information from complementary
modalities: visual and semantic. It is the most accurate result among the three descriptions.

modality of the information they employed: Visual Attention and Semantic Attention. On the one hand, visual attention exploits the low-level feature maps [41] or high-level
object ROI-pooled features [29, 2] to identify the most relevant regions for the words. However, due to the semantic
gap, not every word in the caption has corresponding visual
signals [25], especially for the tokens associated with abstract concepts and complex relationships. Figure 1 shows
an example of this obstacle. On the other hand, researchers
develop the semantic attentions [44, 12] which can leverage the high-level semantic information directly. Nevertheless, because of the recurrent nature, RNNs [11, 27, 34]
have difficulties in memorizing the inputs many steps ago,
especially the initial visual input. Consequently, such approaches tend to collapse into high-frequency phrase fragments without regard to the visual cues.
As shown in Figure 1(c), the combination of the two
18928

