Discriminative Feature Learning with Consistent Attention Regularization
for Person Re-identification

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) is a critical technology
in video surveillance, which aims to associate the same
pedestrian across the non-overlapping camera views. With
the blooming of convolutional neural network, the current
deep feature learning based methods [5, 8, 53, 61] have
signiﬁcantly outperformed a variety of traditional feature
learning based approaches [33, 43]. In practice, it is critical to learn a discriminative feature representation in solving the person Re-ID problem. However, the learned features are very easily degenerated by target misalignment
and background clutter, because most of the deep feature
∗ Jinjun Wang is the corresponding author.

+OCIG

+OCIG

DPSOLWXGH

*KIJ.GXGN

$

#



+OCIG

+OCIG

GLPHQVLRQ

D )HDWXUH/HDUQLQJZLWKRXW2XU&RQVLVWHQW$WWHQWLRQ5HJXODUL]HU

+OCIG

DPSOLWXGH

$

*KIJ.GXGN

#

/KF.GXGN

FRQVLVWHQWDWWHQWLRQ
UHJXODUL]HU

.QY.GXGN

Person re-identification (Re-ID) has undergone a rapid
development with the blooming of deep neural network.
Most methods are very easily affected by target misalignment and background clutter in the training process. In
this paper, we propose a simple yet effective feedforward
attention network to address the two mentioned problems,
in which a novel consistent attention regularizer and an improved triplet loss are designed to learn foreground attentive features for person Re-ID. Specifically, the consistent
attention regularizer aims to keep the deduced foreground
masks similar from the low-level, mid-level and high-level
feature maps. As a result, the network will focus on the
foreground regions at the lower layers, which is benefit to
learn discriminative features from the foreground regions at
the higher layers. Last but not least, the improved triplet
loss is introduced to enhance the feature learning capability, which can jointly minimize the intra-class distance
and maximize the inter-class distance in each triplet unit.
Experimental results on the Market1501, DukeMTMC-reID
and CUHK03 datasets have shown that our method outperforms most of the state-of-the-art approaches.

/KF.GXGN

Abstract

.QY.GXGN

Sanping Zhou 1 , Fei Wang 2 , Zeyi Huang 3 , Jinjun Wang 1 ∗
1. The Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotic, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2. School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3. Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

+OCIG

+OCIG

+OCIG

GLPHQVLRQ

E )HDWXUH/HDUQLQJZLWK2XU&RQVLVWHQW$WWHQWLRQ5HJXODUL]HU

Figure 1. Motivation of our consistent attention regularizer, which
aims to drive the network focus on foreground regions at the lower
layers. Therefore the network will learn a discriminative feature
representation to enhance the useful signals from point A and suppress the noise signals from point B, at the higher layers. From the
ﬁnal features learned in (a) and (b), we can ﬁnd that the consistent
attention regularizer is critical to associate two samples with target
misalignment and background clutter.

learning based methods usually try to learn discriminative
features from the whole input images.
As a data-driven approach, the deep feature learning
based methods [22, 46, 50] can autonomously focus most
of their attentions on the foreground regions of input images. However, the networks are very easily misguided if
we haven’t an explicit regularizer to drive its attention in
the feature learning process [58]. To solve this problem,
two mainstream approaches have been widely studied in the
past few years. The ﬁrst line of methods are based on the
part-based networks [5, 38, 62], in which they try to learn
discriminative features from the predeﬁned body parts. The
second line of methods are based on the foreground attentions [20, 29, 34, 39, 54, 59], in which person masks are
used to drive the attention in a supervised manner or attention mechanisms are applied to deduce the attention in an
unsupervised manner. In general, it is much easier to learn
a discriminative feature representation with the annotated
person masks, because it can help the network to precisely
focus on the foreground regions at the lower layers.

8040

