Invariant Information Clustering for
Unsupervised Image Classification and Segmentation
Xu Ji
University of Oxford

João F. Henriques
University of Oxford

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford

xuji@robots.ox.ac.uk

joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a novel clustering objective that learns a neural network classifier from scratch, given only unlabelled
data samples. The model discovers clusters that accurately
match semantic classes, achieving state-of-the-art results
in eight unsupervised clustering benchmarks spanning image classification and segmentation. These include STL10,
an unsupervised variant of ImageNet, and CIFAR10, where
we significantly beat the accuracy of our closest competitors by 6.6 and 9.5 absolute percentage points respectively.
The method is not specialised to computer vision and operates on any paired dataset samples; in our experiments
we use random transforms to obtain a pair from each image. The trained network directly outputs semantic labels,
rather than high dimensional representations that need external processing to be usable for semantic clustering. The
objective is simply to maximise mutual information between
the class assignments of each pair. It is easy to implement
and rigorously grounded in information theory, meaning we
effortlessly avoid degenerate solutions that other clustering
methods are susceptible to. In addition to the fully unsupervised mode, we also test two semi-supervised settings.
The first achieves 88.8% accuracy on STL10 classification,
setting a new global state-of-the-art over all existing methods (whether supervised, semi-supervised or unsupervised).
The second shows robustness to 90% reductions in label
coverage, of relevance to applications that wish to make use
of small amounts of labels. github.com/xu-ji/IIC

Figure 1: Models trained with IIC on entirely unlabelled data learn to
cluster images (top, STL10) and patches (bottom, Potsdam-3). The raw
clusters found directly correspond to semantic classes (dogs, cats, trucks,
roads, vegetation etc.) with state-of-the-art accuracy. Training is end-toend and randomly initialised, with no heuristics used at any stage.

without labels [25]. Many authors have sought to combine mature clustering algorithms with deep learning, for
example by bootstrapping network training with k-means
style objectives [51, 24, 7]. However, trivially combining clustering and representation learning methods often
leads to degenerate solutions [7, 51]. It is precisely to
prevent such degeneracy that cumbersome pipelines — involving pre-training, feature post-processing (whitening or
PCA), clustering mechanisms external to the network —
have evolved [7, 17, 18, 51].

1. Introduction
Most supervised deep learning methods require large
quantities of manually labelled data, limiting their applicability in many scenarios. This is true for large-scale image classification and even more for segmentation (pixelwise classification) where the annotation cost per image
is very high [38, 21]. Unsupervised clustering, on the
other hand, aims to group data points into classes entirely

In this paper, we introduce Invariant Information Clustering (IIC), a method that addresses this issue in a more
principled manner. IIC is a generic clustering algorithm that
1
9865

