Variational Adversarial Active Learning
*
Samarth Sinha
University of Toronto

*
Sayna Ebrahimi
UC Berkeley

Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley

samarth.sinha@mail.utoronto.ca

sayna@eecs.berkeley.edu

trevor@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Active learning aims to develop label-efficient algorithms by sampling the most representative queries to be
labeled by an oracle. We describe a pool-based semisupervised active learning algorithm that implicitly learns
this sampling mechanism in an adversarial manner. Our
method learns a latent space using a variational autoencoder (VAE) and an adversarial network trained to discriminate between unlabeled and labeled data. The minimax game between the VAE and the adversarial network is
played such that while the VAE tries to trick the adversarial
network into predicting that all data points are from the labeled pool, the adversarial network learns how to discriminate between dissimilarities in the latent space. We extensively evaluate our method on various image classification
and semantic segmentation benchmark datasets and establish a new state of the art on CIFAR10/100, Caltech-256,
ImageNet, Cityscapes, and BDD100K. Our results demonstrate that our adversarial approach learns an effective low
dimensional latent space in large-scale settings and provides for a computationally efficient sampling method. 1

1. Introduction
The recent success of learning-based computer vision
methods relies heavily on abundant annotated training examples, which may be prohibitively costly to label or impossible to obtain at large scale [10]. In order to mitigate
this drawback, active learning [4] algorithms aim to incrementally select samples for annotation that result in high
classification performance with low labeling cost. Active
learning has been shown to require relatively fewer training
instances when applied to computer vision tasks such as image classification [43, 31, 16, 1] and semantic segmentation
[55, 30, 21].
This paper introduces a pool-based active learning strat* Authors contributed equally, listed alphabetically.
1 Our

vaal.

code is available at https://github.com/sinhasam/

Budget

Task learner

xU

Oracle

(xL ,yL )

labeled set

unlabeled?

Discriminator

(xU ,y)

labeled?

LADV

xL
Enc

xU

LVAE

Dec

latent space

unlabeled set

Figure 1. Our model learns the distribution of labeled data in a
latent space using a VAE optimized using both reconstruction and
adversarial losses. A binary classifier predicts unlabeled examples
and sends them to an oracle for annotations. The VAE is trained
to fool the adversarial network to believe that all the examples are
from the labeled data while the adversarial classifier is trained to
differentiate labeled from unlabeled samples.

egy which learns a low dimensional latent space from labeled and unlabeled data using Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs). VAEs have been well-studied and valued for both
their generative properties as well as their ability to learn
rich latent spaces. Our method, Variational Adversarial Active Learning (VAAL), selects instances for labeling from
the unlabeled pool that are sufficiently different in the latent
space learned by the VAE to maximize the performance of
the representation learned on the newly labeled data. Sample selection in our method is performed by an adversarial
network which classifies which pool the instances belong to
(labeled or unlabeled).
Our VAE learns a latent representation in which the sets
of labeled and unlabeled data are mapped into a common
embedding. We use an adversarial network in this space
to correctly classify one from another. The VAE and the
discriminator are framed as a two-player mini-max game,
similar to GANs [20] such that the VAE is trained to learn a
feature space to trick the adversarial network into predicting
that all datapoints, from both the labeled and unlabeled sets,
are from the labeled pool while the discriminator network

5972

