Attention-based Autism Spectrum Disorder Screening with Privileged Modality
Shi Chen
Qi Zhao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Minnesota
chen4595@umn.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a novel framework for automatic and
quantitative screening of autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
It is motivated to address two issues in the current clinical settings: 1) short of clinical resources with the prevalence of ASD (1.7% in the United States), and 2) subjectivity of ASD screening. This work differentiates itself with
three unique features: first, it proposes an ASD screening with privileged modality framework that integrates information from two behavioral modalities during training
and improves the performance on each single modality at
testing. The proposed framework does not require overlap in subjects between the modalities. Second, it develops the first computational model to classify people with
ASD using a photo-taking task where subjects freely explore their environment in a more ecological setting. Phototaking reveals attentional preference of subjects, differentiating people with ASD from healthy people, and is also
easy to implement in real-world clinical settings without requiring advanced diagnostic instruments. Third, this study
for the first time takes advantage of the temporal information in eye movements while viewing images, encoding more
detailed behavioral differences between ASD people and
healthy controls. Experiments show that our ASD screening models can achieve superior performance, outperforming the previous state-of-the-art methods by a considerable
margin. Moreover, our framework using diverse modalities demonstrates performance improvement on both the
photo-taking and image-viewing tasks, providing a general
paradigm that takes in multiple sources of behavioral data
for a more accurate ASD screening. The framework is also
applicable to various scenarios where one-to-one pairwise
relationship is difficult to obtain across different modalities.

1. Introduction
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heritable and lifelong neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) with complicated

qzhao@cs.umn.edu

aetiology and causes. It is globally prevalent, and affects
one in 59 children in the United States [2]. Though currently recognized as the most effective clinical route to ASD
treatment [3], early diagnoses and interventions rely on a
team of medical expertise with diagnostic instruments that
are both time-consuming and clinically demanding. Due to
the prevalence of ASD and limited clinical resource, they
are not widely applicable. In addition, human assessment is
subjective and tends to be inconsistent, and is also episodic.
As a result, automatic and objective tools that assist ASD
screening have been of significant clinical and societal need.
The visual attention network is pervasive in the brain that
many NDDs are associated with atypical attention towards
visual stimuli. For example, people with ASD have been
long known to have atypical attention to faces or other social stimuli [6, 7, 27, 28, 29]. Recent studies with natural
scene stimuli show more complicated or finer differences
between people with ASD and healthy people [36]. This
paper develops novel computer vision techniques to address
existing challenges in ASD screening. It proposes a new
approach that allows to record and model attentional preference with greater ecologically validity and practical feasibility. In addition, with the complexity of the problem,
e.g. considerable heterogeneity within ASD or across multiple NDDs [24]), and the scarcity of clinical data, it highlights the importance and proposes methods to make use of
multiple behavioral modalities as well as temporal information to encode more detailed and comprehensive information needed for accurate ASD screening.
Specifically, we propose to incorporate two distinct
modalities related to human visual attention, i.e. attentional
preference recorded from a photo-taking task and an imageviewing task, for ASD screening. In the photo-taking task,
subjects freely move in the environment and identify their
preferred regions of interest by taking photos, while in the
image-viewing task, subjects view different images with
their eye movements recorded by an eye-tracking device.
Instead of screening ASDs independently on each modality,
we present a novel ASD screening with privileged modality
framework that integrates diverse modalities during training

1181

