Shapeglot: Learning Language for Shape Differentiation
Panos Achlioptas*
Judy Fan
Robert Hawkins
Noah Goodman
Leonidas Guibas
Stanford University
distractors

target

distractors

target

distractors

target

Pragmatic
Neural Speaking

five bars on back, skinny top

wide seat with solid back

thin legs, no holes in back

(novel images)

(real-world images)

(novel 3D point-clouds)

Attentive
Neural Listening

the chair has lines all up the back
listener scores:

0.00

0.10

0.90

irregular cube on two legs
0.01

(novel images)

0.00

(unseen classes)

0.99

rounded seat
0.04

0.18

0.78

(unseen object parts)

Figure 1: We introduce a novel corpus of utterances that refer to the shape of objects and use it to develop multimodal neural
speakers and listeners with broad generalization capacity. Top row: Our neural speaker generates utterances to distinguish
a ‘target’ shape from two ‘distractor’ shapes in unseen: images of synthetic data (left), out-of-distribution (OOD) real-world
images (center), and 3D point-clouds of CAD models (right). Bottom row: Our neural listener interprets human-generated
utterances in unseen (left-to-right): images of synthetic data, OOD object classes (here, lamps), and OOD isolated object
parts. Listener scores indicate the model’s confidence about which object the utterance refers to. The words are color-coded
according to their importance, as judged by the attention module of this listener (warmer color indicates higher attention).

Abstract
In this work we explore how fine-grained differences between the shapes of common objects are expressed in language, grounded on 2D and/or 3D object representations.
We first build a large scale, carefully controlled dataset of
human utterances each of which refers to a 2D rendering of
a 3D CAD model so as to distinguish it from a set of shapewise similar alternatives. Using this dataset, we develop
neural language understanding (listening) and production
(speaking) models that vary in their grounding (pure 3D
forms via point-clouds vs. rendered 2D images), the degree of pragmatic reasoning captured (e.g. speakers that
reason about a listener or not), and the neural architecture

(e.g. with or without attention). We find models that perform
well with both synthetic and human partners, and with held
out utterances and objects. We also find that these models
are capable of zero-shot transfer learning to novel object
classes (e.g. transfer from training on chairs to testing on
lamps), as well as to real-world images drawn from furniture catalogs. Lesion studies indicate that the neural listeners depend heavily on part-related words and associate
these words correctly with visual parts of objects (without
any explicit supervision on such parts), and that transfer to
novel classes is most successful when known part-related
words are available. This work illustrates a practical approach to language grounding, and provides a novel case
study in the relationship between object shape and linguistic structure when it comes to object differentiation.

* Corresponding author: optas@cs.stanford.edu
Webpage: https://ai.stanford.edu/˜optas/shapeglot

18938

