Surface Normals and Shape From Water
Satoshi Murai*
Meng-Yu Jennifer Kuo∗
Ryo Kawahara
Shohei Nobuhara
Ko Nishino
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
http://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/

Figure 1: Our method enables video-rate, per-pixel surface normal and depth recovery of dynamic underwater objects
without any artificial constraints on one another such as smoothness. The recovered oriented points retain intricate surface
details including sharp geometric features that would otherwise be hard to capture with conventional methods.

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel method for reconstructing surface normals and depth of dynamic objects in
water. Past shape recovery methods have leveraged various visual cues for estimating shape (e.g., depth) or surface
normals. Methods that estimate both compute one from the
other. We show that these two geometric surface properties can be simultaneously recovered for each pixel when
the object is observed underwater. Our key idea is to leverage multi-wavelength near-infrared light absorption along
different underwater light paths in conjunction with surface
shading. We derive a principled theory for this surface normals and shape from water method and a practical calibration method for determining its imaging parameters values.
By construction, the method can be implemented as a oneshot imaging system. We prototype both an off-line and a
video-rate imaging system and demonstrate the effectiveness of the method on a number of real-world static and dynamic objects. The results show that the method can recover
intricate surface features that are otherwise inaccessible.

* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Computer vision research has produced a variety of successful methods for 3D geometry reconstruction that exploit
different visual cues ranging from focus to texture. Most
of these shape-from-X approaches, however, recover either
the 3D coordinates (i.e., shape) or the surface normals, but
not both. Surface normals are computed from the estimated
shape or the shape is integrated from the surface normals.
Although a number of methods have demonstrated combinations of these contrasting recovery approaches, they
require multiple views or active depth sensors and fundamentally cannot be used in a single exposure setup, which
precludes the possibility of dynamic surface reconstruction. Estimating both surface normals and 3D coordinates at
each and every observable pixel simultaneously, but not as
byproducts of each other, is crucial for 3D reconstruction of
general surfaces that can have arbitrary intricate geometric
features. Avoiding the use of multi-view appearance matching is also essential to handle textureless surfaces.
In this paper, we show that per-pixel surface normals
and shape can be simultaneously but separately recovered
for an object immersed in water. In other words, as shown
in Fig. 1, we introduce a novel 3D sensing method to di-

7830

