CIIDefence: Defeating Adversarial Attacks by Fusing Class-specific Image
Inpainting and Image Denoising
Puneet Gupta
IIT Indore
Indore, India

Esa Rahtu
Tampere University
Finland

puneet@iiti.ac.in

esa.rahtu@tuni.fi

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach for protecting deep
neural networks from adversarial attacks, i.e., methods that
add well-crafted imperceptible modifications to the original inputs such that they are incorrectly classified with high
confidence. The proposed defence mechanism is inspired by
the recent works mitigating the adversarial disturbances by
the means of image reconstruction and denoising. However,
unlike the previous works, we apply the reconstruction only
for small and carefully selected image areas that are most
influential to the current classification outcome. The selection process is guided by the class activation map responses
obtained for multiple top-ranking class labels. The same
regions are also the most prominent for the adversarial perturbations and hence most important to purify. The resulting inpainting task is substantially more tractable than the
full image reconstruction, while still being able to prevent
the adversarial attacks.
Furthermore, we combine the selective image inpainting with wavelet based image denoising to produce a nondifferentiable layer that prevents attacker from using gradient backpropagation. Moreover, the proposed nonlinearity cannot be easily approximated with simple differentiable
alternative as demonstrated in the experiments with Backward Pass Differentiable Approximation (BPDA) attack. Finally, we experimentally show that the proposed Classspecific Image Inpainting Defence (CIIDefence) is able to
withstand several powerful adversarial attacks including
the BPDA. The obtained results are consistently better compared to the other recent defence approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNN) have recently made
tremendous impact in many fields, including audio analysis and computer vision. For instance, many state-of-the-art
methods in speech recognition, face detection, fraud detec-

tion and autonomous driving nowadays rely on deep neural
network architectures. In some of these applications, the
system performance may have crucial financial and security impacts. In such cases, it becomes important that the
system is resilient against engineered attacks targeting to
influence the system behaviour.
Unfortunately, many modern DNN architectures are surprisingly vulnerable to well crafted attacks that utilise adversarial examples [30]. The adversarial example is created
by perturbing the input image in such a way that it remains
virtually indistinguishable from the original image, but unlike the original input, it will be misclassified by the system
with high confidence. Such weakness could lead to severe
consequences in many important applications [8]. These
challenges have motivated researchers to propose defences
that protect the networks against adversarial attacks [16].
One group of defence methods modify the network architecture [22] or the training set [31]. The key idea in
these approaches is to minimize the original loss function
while increasing the perturbation space around the clean inputs. The main drawback is that the network needs to be
re-trained. Moreover, these defences are usually effective
only against the attacks considered during the training. Another group of defence methods circumvents the need for
network re-training by modifying only the input image to
mitigate the possible adversarial perturbations. These methods are usually referred as transformation based defences.
Our approach is also built according to this paradigm.
The transformation based defences are typically relying
on gradient masking techniques [21], which aim at preventing the attacker from using the gradient descend optimisation for constructing the adversarial examples. However,
recent works have introduced approaches that make such
defences vulnerable [2]. Furthermore, the transformation
based defences reduce the quality of the original input image, which may lead to reduced performance.
In this paper, we propose a novel defence called Classspecific Image Inpainting Defence (CIIDefence). The main
contributions of our work include: i) introduction of class16708

