Shape Reconstruction using Differentiable Projections and Deep Priors
Matheus Gadelha Rui Wang Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
{mgadelha, ruiwang, smaji}@cs.umass.edu

...

Abstract
We investigate the problem of reconstructing shapes from
noisy and incomplete projections in the presence of viewpoint uncertainties. The problem is cast as an optimization
over the shape given measurements obtained by a projection
operator and a prior. We present differentiable projection
operators for a number of reconstruction problems which
when combined with the deep image prior or shape prior allows efficient inference through gradient descent. We apply
our method on a variety of reconstruction problems, such
as tomographic reconstruction from a few samples, visual
hull reconstruction incorporating view uncertainties, and
3D shape reconstruction from noisy depth maps. Experimental results show that our approach is effective for such
shape reconstruction problems, without requiring any taskspecific training.

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of reconstructing a 3D shape from
silhouettes. The classic visual hull algorithm that intersects the visible volumes from each viewpoint is easy to
implement but is sensitive to errors in viewpoint estimation
and silhouette noise. A Bayesian approach for this problem would be to add appropriate priors over the shape and
viewpoint estimates and perform posterior inference. This
is challenging for two reasons. First, the search space of
3D shape is large since there is no compact shape basis to
search over for general shapes. Second, Bayesian inference
is typically expensive for high-dimensional data.
To this end we present differentiable projection operators T and deep shape priors for which Bayesian inference
can be performed via stochastic gradient descent and their
variants [23]. While many priors exist, of interest is the
“deep shape prior” of Ulyanov et al. [21] which showed that
the space of natural images x can represented as a parametric family fθ (η) where f is a convolutional network, θ its
parameters, and η is a fixed input. Their work showed that
search over natural images can be replaced by a search over
the parameters of the network θ, which can be efficiently

...
reconstructed
shape

Figure 1: Shape reconstruction from binary images with uncertain viewpoints. We propose to use deep networks together
with differentiable projection operators for shape reconstruction.
Our approach leverages the shape prior induced by neural networks to reconstruct shapes from projections without any learning
procedure. Additionally, our approach can use differentiable operators to reconstruct shapes under noisy projection measurements,
like perturbed viewpoint information.

done via gradient descent.
Our work takes this idea further. First, we endow the
deep image prior with 3D convolutions resulting in a deep
shape prior. Second, we incorporate differentiable projection operators T that model projection measurements, such
as silhouettes, given projection parameters φ such as viewpoints. Thus inferring a shape x given noisy projection
measurements y reduces to the following optimization over
network parameters θ and projection parameters φ:
min E (y, T (fθ (η), φ)) + P (φ),

φ,θ∈RD

(1)

where P (φ) is a prior over projection parameters, which
is often a simple function. We show that for a number of
shape construction problems such as tomographic reconstruction, shape from silhouettes or depth maps, it is possible to construct projection operators using existing neural
network building blocks that are differentiable with respect
to both the input and projection parameters. Thus the objective can be minimized using “backpropagation” machinery,
which is generally much faster than Bayesian inference using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques.
1 22

