DF2 Net: A Dense-Fine-Finer Network for Detailed 3D Face Reconstruction
Xiaoxing Zeng∗ 1,2
1

Xiaojiang Peng∗ 1

Yu Qiao† 1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint
Lab,Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Figure 1: 3D face reconstruction results of the proposed method. Reconstructed geometries are shown next to the corresponding input images.

Abstract
Reconstructing detailed geometric structure from a single face image is a challenging problem due to its ill-posed
nature and the fine 3D structures to be recovered. This paper proposes a deep Dense-Fine-Finer Network (DF2 Net)
to address this challenging problem. DF2 Net decomposes
the reconstruction process into three stages, each of which
is processed by an elaborately-designed network, namely
D-Net, F-Net, and Fr-Net. D-Net exploits a U-net architecture to map the input image to a dense depth image. FNet refines the output of D-Net by integrating features from
both depth and RGB domains, whose output is further enhanced by Fr-Net with a novel multi-resolution hypercolumn architecture. In addition, we introduce three types of data
to train these networks, including 3D model synthetic data,
2D image reconstructed data, and fine facial images. Qualitative evaluation indicates that our DF2 Net can effectively
reconstruct subtle facial details such as small crow’s feet
and wrinkles. Our DF2 Net achieves performance superior
or comparable to state-of-the-art algorithms in qualitative
and quantitative analyses on real-world images and the BU3DFE dataset. Codes and the collected 70K image-depth
∗ Equally-contributed first authors ({xx.zeng,xj.peng}@siat.ac.cn)

dataset are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
This paper considers the problem of high-fidelity 3D
face reconstruction from a single image. Image-based 3D
face reconstruction is a fundamental yet important problem in computer vision, with wide applications in face
animation[16, 34] ,human-machine interaction[1], medical
applications [2, 29], etc. The challenge of this problem
comes from its ill-posed nature and the fine facial details
to be recovered. The projection from a 3D face to a 2D image depends on its material properties, lighting conditions,
viewing directions and other factors. Given an input image, there usually exist multiple choices of 3D structures to
generate this image. Moreover, faces always include subtle
structures like wrinkles, eye grains, which are difficult to
recover accurately.
Early approaches toward this problem can be roughly
divided in two categories, namely 3D Morphable Model
(3DMM) [4] based methods and Shape-from-Shading (SFS) [41] based ones. 3DMM-based methods represent a textured 3D face as a low-dimensional representation in terms

† Corresponding author (yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn)

1 https://github.com/xiaoxingzeng/DF2Net/

2315

