Pushing the Frontiers of Unconstrained Crowd Counting: New Dataset and
Benchmark Method
Vishwanath A. Sindagi
Rajeev Yasarla
Vishal M. Patel
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles St, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
{vishwanathsindagi,rajeevyasarla,vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel crowd counting network
that progressively generates crowd density maps via residual error estimation. The proposed method uses VGG16 as
the backbone network and employs density map generated
by the final layer as a coarse prediction to refine and generate finer density maps in a progressive fashion using residual learning. Additionally, the residual learning is guided
by an uncertainty-based confidence weighting mechanism
that permits the flow of only high-confidence residuals in
the refinement path. The proposed Confidence Guided Deep
Residual Counting Network (CG-DRCN) is evaluated on recent complex datasets, and it achieves significant improvements in errors.
Furthermore, we introduce a new large scale unconstrained crowd counting dataset (JHU-CROWD) that is
∼2.8 × larger than the most recent crowd counting datasets
in terms of the number of images. It contains 4,250 images
with 1.11 million annotations. In comparison to existing
datasets, the proposed dataset is collected under a variety
of diverse scenarios and environmental conditions. Specifically, the dataset includes several images with weatherbased degradations and illumination variations in addition
to many distractor images, making it a very challenging
dataset. Additionally, the dataset consists of rich annotations at both image-level and head-level. Several recent
methods are evaluated and compared on this dataset.

1. Introduction
With burgeoning population and rapid urbanization,
crowd gatherings have become more prominent in the recent years. Consequently, computer vision-based crowd analytics and surveillance [5, 10, 18, 19, 27, 28, 34, 37, 38, 44,
46, 57, 59, 61, 63] have received increased interest. Furthermore, algorithms developed for the purpose of crowd analytics have found applications in other fields such as agri-

culture monitoring [26], microscopic biology [16], urban
planning and environmental survey [8, 57]. Current stateof-the-art counting networks achieve impressive error rates
on a variety of datasets that contain numerous challenges.
Their success can be broadly attributed to two major factors:
(i) design of novel convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures specifically for improving count performance
[4, 29, 33, 36, 38, 43, 50, 59], and (ii) development and
publication of challenging datasets [10, 11, 59, 61]. In this
paper, we consider both of the above factors in an attempt
to further improve the crowd counting performance.
Design of novel networks specifically for the task of
counting has improved the counting error by leaps and
bounds. Architectures have evolved from the simple ones
like [59] which consisted of a set of convolutional and fully
connected layers, to the most recent complex architectures
like SA-Net [4] which consists of a set of scale aggregation
modules. Typically, most existing works ([2, 4, 4, 29, 33,
38, 43, 44, 47, 50, 59, 61]) have designed their networks by
laying a strong emphasis on addressing large variations of
scale in crowd images. While this strategy of developing
robustness towards scale changes has resulted in significant
performance gains, it is nevertheless important to exploit
other properties like in [33, 39, 41] to further the improvements.
In a similar attempt, we exploit residual learning mechanism for the purpose of improving crowd counting. Specifically, we present a novel design based on the VGG16 network [42], which employs residual learning to progressively
generate better quality crowd density maps. This use of
residual learning is inspired by its success in several other
tasks like super-resolution [13, 15, 15, 21, 49]. Although
this technique results in improvements in performance, it
is important to ensure that only highly confident residuals are used in order to ensure the effectiveness of residual learning. To address this issue, we draw inspiration
from the success of uncertainty-based learning mechanism
[7, 14, 65]. We propose an uncertainty-based confidence
weighting module that captures high-confidence regions in

1221

