Fooling Network Interpretation in Image Classification
Akshayvarun Subramanya*
Vipin Pillai*
Hamed Pirsiavash
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
{akshayv1, vp7, hpirsiav}@umbc.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been shown to be fooled
rather easily using adversarial attack algorithms. Practical methods such as adversarial patches have been shown
to be extremely effective in causing misclassification. However, these patches are highlighted using standard network
interpretation algorithms, thus revealing the identity of the
adversary. We show that it is possible to create adversarial
patches which not only fool the prediction, but also change
what we interpret regarding the cause of the prediction.
Moreover, we introduce our attack as a controlled setting
to measure the accuracy of interpretation algorithms. We
show this using extensive experiments for Grad-CAM interpretation that transfers to occluding patch interpretation as
well. We believe our algorithms can facilitate developing
more robust network interpretation tools that truly explain
the network’s underlying decision making process.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great results in many domains including computer vision. However, it is still far
from being deployed in many real-world applications due
to reasons including:
(1) Explainable AI (XAI): Explaining the prediction of
deep neural networks is a challenging task because they
are complex models with large number of parameters. Recently, XAI has become a trending research area in which
the goal is to develop reliable interpretation algorithms that
explain the underlying decision making process. Designing
such algorithms is a challenging task and considerable work
[28, 35, 26] has been done to describe local explanations explaining the model’s output for a given input [4].
(2) Adversarial examples: It has been shown that deep
neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples.
These carefully constructed samples are created by adding
imperceptible perturbations to the original input for changing the final decision of the network. This is important for
* Equal contribution

two reasons: (a) Such vulnerabilities could be used by adversaries to fool AI algorithms when they are deployed in
real-world applications such as Internet of Things (IoT) [24]
or self-driving cars [29] (b) Studying these attacks can lead
to better understanding of how deep neural networks work
and also possibly better generalization.
In this paper, we design adversarial attack algorithms
that not only fool the network prediction but also fool the
network interpretation. Our main goal is to utilize such
attacks as a tool to investigate the reliability of network
interpretation algorithms. Moreover, since our attacks fool
the network interpretation, they can be seen as a potential
vulnerability in the applications that utilize network interpretation to understand the cause of the prediction (e.g., in
health-care applications [8].)
Reliability of network interpretation: We are interested
in studying the reliability of the interpretation in highlighting true cause of the prediction. To this end, we use the adversarial patch method [5] to design a controlled adversarial attack setting where the adversary changes the network
prediction by manipulating only a small region of the image. Hence, we know that the cause of the wrong prediction
should be inside the patch. We show that it is possible to
optimize for an adversarial patch that attacks the prediction
without being highlighted by the interpretation algorithm as
the cause of the wrong prediction.
Grad-CAM [26] is one of the most well-known network interpretation algorithms that performs well on sanity check among state-of-the-art interpretation algorithms
recently studied in [1]. Hence, we choose to study the correctness of Grad-CAM as a case study. Also, we show that
our results even though tuned for Grad-CAM, can transfer
directly to Occluding Patch [34] as another interpretation
algorithm.
As an example, in Figure 1, the original image (left) is
correctly classified as “French Bulldog”. On the top row,
a targeted adversarial patch has successfully changed the
prediction to “Soccer Ball”. Since the adversary is able to
manipulate only the pixels inside the patch, it is expected
that the interpretation algorithm (e.g, Grad-CAM) for
“Soccer Ball” category should highlight some patch pixels
12020

