Pix2Vox: Context-aware 3D Reconstruction from Single and Multi-view Images
Haozhe Xie† Hongxun Yao† Xiaoshuai Sun† Shangchen Zhou‡ Shengping Zhang†§
†
Harbin Institute of Technology ‡ SenseTime Research § Peng Cheng Laboratory
†

{hzxie, h.yao, xiaoshuaisun, s.zhang}@hit.edu.cn ‡ zhoushangchen@sensetime.com
https://haozhexie.com/project/pix2vox

Recovering the 3D representation of an object from
single-view or multi-view RGB images by deep neural networks has attracted increasing attention in the past few
years. Several mainstream works (e.g., 3D-R2N2) use recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to fuse multiple feature
maps extracted from input images sequentially. However,
when given the same set of input images with different orders, RNN-based approaches are unable to produce consistent reconstruction results. Moreover, due to long-term
memory loss, RNNs cannot fully exploit input images to refine reconstruction results. To solve these problems, we propose a novel framework for single-view and multi-view 3D
reconstruction, named Pix2Vox. By using a well-designed
encoder-decoder, it generates a coarse 3D volume from
each input image. Then, a context-aware fusion module is
introduced to adaptively select high-quality reconstructions
for each part (e.g., table legs) from different coarse 3D volumes to obtain a fused 3D volume. Finally, a refiner further
refines the fused 3D volume to generate the final output. Experimental results on the ShapeNet and Pix3D benchmarks
indicate that the proposed Pix2Vox outperforms state-ofthe-arts by a large margin. Furthermore, the proposed
method is 24 times faster than 3D-R2N2 in terms of backward inference time. The experiments on ShapeNet unseen
3D categories have shown the superior generalization abilities of our method.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction is an important problem in robotics,
CAD, virtual reality and augmented reality. Traditional
methods, such as Structure from Motion (SfM) [14] and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [6], match
image features across views. However, establishing feature
correspondences becomes extremely difficult when multiple viewpoints are separated by a large margin due to local
appearance changes or self-occlusions [12]. To overcome
these limitations, several deep learning based approaches,
including 3D-R2N2 [2], LSM [9], and 3DensiNet [27], have

Intersection over Union (IoU)

Abstract
Pix2Vox-A

0.66
0.64

0.62 Pix2Vox-F
0.60

PSGN

OGN

0.58
3D-R2N2

0.56
0.54

100 M

50 M 10 M 5 M
# Parameters

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Forward Inference Time (ms)

Figure 1: Forward inference time, model size, and IoU of
state-of-the-arts and our methods for single-view 3D reconstruction on the ShapeNet testing set. The radius of each circle represents the size of the corresponding model. Pix2Vox
outperforms state-of-the-arts in forward inference time and
reaches the best balance between accuracy and model size.
been proposed to recover the 3D shape of an object and obtained promising results.
To generate 3D volumes, 3D-R2N2 [2] and LSM [9] formulate multi-view 3D reconstruction as a sequence learning problem and use recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to
fuse multiple feature maps extracted by a shared encoder
from input images. The feature maps are incrementally refined when more views of an object are available. However,
RNN-based methods suffer from three limitations. First,
when given the same set of images with different orders,
RNNs are unable to estimate the 3D shape of an object
consistently results due to permutation variance [26]. Second, due to long-term memory loss of RNNs, the input images cannot be fully exploited to refine reconstruction results [15]. Last but not least, RNN-based methods are timeconsuming since input images are processed sequentially

2690

