Miss Detection vs. False Alarm: Adversarial Learning for Small Object
Segmentation in Infrared Images
Huan Wang
Nanjing University of Science &
Technology, Nanjing, P.R.China

Luping Zhou
University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia

Lei Wang∗
University of Wollongong
Wollongong, Australia

Abstract
A key challenge of infrared small object segmentation
(ISOS) is to balance miss detection (MD) and false alarm
(FA). This usually needs “opposite” strategies to suppress
the two terms and has not been well resolved in the literature. In this paper, we propose a deep adversarial learning
framework to improve this situation. Departing from the
tradition of relying on a single objective to jointly reduce
both MD and FA, we decompose this difficult task into two
sub-tasks handled by two models trained adversarially, with
each focusing on reducing either MD or FA. Such a new design brings forth at least three advantages. First, as each
model focuses on a relatively simpler sub-task, the overall
difficulty of ISOS is somehow decreased. Second, the adversarial training of the two models naturally produces a delicate balance of MD and FA, and low rates for both MD and
FA could be achieved at Nash equilibrium. Third, this MDFA detachment gives us more flexibility to develop specific
models dedicated to each sub-task. To realize the above design, we propose a conditional Generative Adversarial Network comprising of two generators and one discriminator.
Each generator strives for one sub-task, while the discriminator differentiates the three segmentation results from the
two generators and the ground truth. Moreover, in order to
better serve the sub-tasks, the two generators, based on context aggregation networks, utilize different size of receptive
fields, providing both local and global views of objects for
segmentation. As verified on multiple infrared image data
sets, our method consistently achieves better segmentation
than many state-of-the-art ISOS methods.

1. Introduction
Segmenting small objects or targets in infrared images
is an important computer vision task. It plays a fundamental role in many practical applications such as defect
inspection [22, 26], organ segmentation [24], cell count∗ Lei Wang is the corresponding author.(leiw@uow.edu.au)

Figure 1. Illustration of ISOS examples with the objects or targets
indicated by the red bounding boxes. A close-up is displayed at the
bottom right corner of each example. Left: a cat whose silhouette
is recognizable in a backyard background; Middle: a car which is
hard to tell in a mountain scene; Right: a dim target in the size of
three pixels submerged in a cloud background.

ing [1], maritime surveillance [25] and early warning systems [9, 13], to name but a few. With respect to commonplace object segmentation, infrared small object segmentation (ISOS) has its special characteristics (see some examples in Fig. 1). First, due to either their sizes or the long
distances from infrared sensors, the objects usually appear
to be very small in infrared images, with the extreme case
of one pixel only. Second, the infrared radiation energy decays markedly over distances, making the objects appear to
be extremely dim. Consequently, they are easily submerged
in background clutters and sensor noises. Third, different
from dense small object instance segmentation [18, 15, 2],
the objects in ISOS are usually very sparse, e.g., containing
a single instance only. This leads to a severe imbalance between the object area and the background area. These three
factors significantly complicate ISOS.
For many infrared image related applications, high quality segmentation is essential for the precise measurement,
localization and recognition tasks in the sequel. The segmentation errors in ISOS boil down to miss detection (MD
in short, i.e., the pixels of an object are wrongly segmented
into the background) and false alarm (FA in short, i.e., the
pixels of the background are wrongly segmented into the
object). An optimal segmentation should minimize both
MD and FA. However, reducing MD and FA usually involves “opposite” strategies, e.g., the former prefers a low
threshold while the latter prefers a high one on the confidence maps used in many ISOS methods [12, 29, 4] and
18509

