Structured Prediction Helps 3D Human Motion Modelling
Emre Aksan*
Manuel Kaufmann*
Otmar Hilliges
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
{firstname.lastname}@inf.ethz.ch

Figure 1: We introduce a structured prediction layer (SPL) to the task of 3D human motion modelling. The SP-layer explicitly
decomposes the pose into individual joints and can be interfaced with a variety of baseline architectures. We show that on
H3.6M and a recent, much larger dataset, AMASS, a variety of baseline models benefit when augmented with an SP-layer.

Abstract
Human motion prediction is a challenging and important task in many computer vision application domains. Existing work only implicitly models the spatial structure of
the human skeleton. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that decomposes the prediction into individual joints
by means of a structured prediction layer that explicitly
models the joint dependencies. This is implemented via a
hierarchy of small-sized neural networks connected analogously to the kinematic chains in the human body as well
as a joint-wise decomposition in the loss function. The proposed layer is agnostic to the underlying network and can
be used with existing architectures for motion modelling.
Prior work typically leverages the H3.6M dataset. We show
that some state-of-the-art techniques do not perform well
when trained and tested on AMASS, a recently released
dataset 14 times the size of H3.6M. Our experiments indicate that the proposed layer increases the performance of
motion forecasting irrespective of the base network, jointangle representation, and prediction horizon. We furthermore show that the layer also improves motion predictions
qualitatively. We make code and models publicly available
at https://ait.ethz.ch/projects/2019/spl.

1. Introduction
Modelling of human motion over time has a number of
applications in activity recognition, human computer interaction, human detection and tracking, and image-based pose
estimation in the context of robotics or self-driving vehicles. Humans have the ability to forecast the sequence of
poses over short-term horizons with high accuracy and can
imagine probable motion over arbitrary time scales. Despite
recent progress in data-driven modelling of human motion
[7, 8, 14, 20, 25, 33], this task remains difficult for machines.
* The first two authors contributed equally.

The difficulty of the task is manifold. First, human motion is highly dynamic, non-linear and over time becomes a
stochastic sequential process with a high degree of inherent
uncertainty. Humans leverage strong structural and temporal priors about continuity and regularity in natural motion.
However, these are hard to model algorithmically due to
i) the inter-dependencies between joints and ii) the influence of high-level activities on the motion sequences (e.g.,
transition from walking to jumping). In fact many recent
approaches forgo explicit modelling of human motion [14]
in favor of pure data-driven models [8, 20, 25].
Initial Deep Learning-based motion modelling approaches have focused on recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
[8, 7, 14], using curriculum learning schemes to increase
robustness to temporal drift. Martinez et al. [20] have shown
that a simple running-average provides a surprisingly difficult to beat baseline in terms of Euler angle error. Following this, sequence-to-sequence models trained in an autoregressive fashion have been proposed [20], sometimes using
adversarial training to address the drift problem in long-term
predictions [33]. Pavllo et al. [25] study the impact of joint
angle representation and show that a quaternion-based parameterization improves short-term predictions.
However, it has been observed that quantitative performance does not always translate to qualitatively meaningful
predictions [20, 25]. Furthermore, the H3.6M benchmark is
becoming saturated, limiting progress. This leads to the two
main research questions studied in this work: i) How to measure accuracy of pose predictions in a meaningful way such
that low errors corresponds to good qualitative results and
how to improve this performance? ii) How to exploit spatial
structure of the human skeleton for better predictions?
With respect to i) we note that much of the literature relies
on the H3.6M [12] dataset and an Euler angle based metric
as performance measure, evaluated on a limited number of

7144

