Composite Shape Modeling via Latent Space Factorization
Anastasia Dubrovina1
Fei Xia1
Raphaël Groscot2
1

Stanford University

Panos Achlioptas1
Leonidas Guibas1
2

Mira Shalah1

PSL Research University

Abstract
We present a novel neural network architecture, termed
Decomposer-Composer, for semantic structure-aware 3D
shape modeling. Our method utilizes an auto-encoderbased pipeline, and produces a novel factorized shape latent space, where the semantic structure of the shape collection translates into a data-dependent sub-space factorization, and where shape composition and decomposition
become simple linear operations on the embedding coordinates. We further propose to model shape assembly using an explicit learned part deformation module, which utilizes a 3D spatial transformer network to perform an innetwork volumetric grid deformation, and which allows us
to train the whole system end-to-end. The resulting network allows us to perform part-level shape manipulation,
unattainable by existing approaches. Our extensive ablation study, comparison to baseline methods and qualitative
analysis demonstrate the improved performance of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Understanding, modeling and manipulating 3D objects
are areas of great interest to the vision and graphics communities, and have been gaining increasing popularity in
recent years. Examples of related applications include semantic segmentation [47], shape synthesis [41, 2], 3D reconstruction [8, 9], view synthesis [45], and fine-grained
shape categorization [3], to name a few. The advancement
of deep learning techniques, and the creation of large-scale
3D shape datasets [6] enabled researchers to learn taskspecific representations directly from the existing data, and
led to significant progress in all the aforementioned areas.
There is a growing interest in learning shape modeling
and synthesis in a structure-aware manner, for instance, at
the level of semantic shape parts. This poses several challenges compared to approaches considering the shapes as
a whole. Semantic shape structure and shape part geometry are usually interdependent, and relations between the

RECONSTRUCTION

Semantic-part-aware
embedding space

Unlabeled
shapes

Decomposer

Composer

Part-aware
shape
embedding

Part-based
shape
synthesis

LEG EXCHANGE

full shapes
seats
backs
legs
armrests
etc

Figure 1: Given unlabeled shapes, the Decomposer maps
them into a factorized latent space. The Composer can either reconstruct the shapes with semantic part labels, or create new shapes , for instance, by exchanging chair legs.
two must be implicitly or explicitly modeled and learned
by the system. Examples of such structure-aware shape
representation-learning are [24, 20, 39, 43].
However, the existing approaches for shape modeling,
while being part aware at the intermediate stages of the system, still ultimately operate on the low-dimensional representations of the whole shape. For example, [24, 39]
use a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [16] to learn generative part-aware models of man-made shapes, but the latent
spaces of the VAEs correspond to complete shapes, with
entangled latent factors corresponding to different semantic parts. Therefore, these and other existing approaches
cannot perform part-level shape manipulation, such as single part replacement, part interpolation, or part-level shape
synthesis.
Inspired by the recent efforts in image modeling to separate different image formation factors, to gain better control over image generation process and simplify editing
tasks [29, 35, 36], we propose a new semantic structure18140

