GradNet: Gradient-Guided Network for Visual Object Tracking
Peixia Li† , Boyu Chen† , Wanli Ouyang§ , Dong Wang†∗, Xiaoyun Yang‡ , Huchuan Lu†
† Dalian University of Technology, China, § The University of Sydney, Australia,
‡ China Science IntelliCloud Technology Co., Ltd
{pxli, bychen}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, {wdice,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, xiaoyun.yang@intellicloud.ai

Abstract
The fully-convolutional siamese network based on template matching has shown great potentials in visual tracking. During testing, the template is fixed with the initial
target feature and the performance totally relies on the
general matching ability of the siamese network. However, this manner cannot capture the temporal variations
of targets or background clutter. In this work, we propose
a novel gradient-guided network to exploit the discriminative information in gradients and update the template
in the siamese network through feed-forward and backward operations. To be specific, the algorithm can utilize the information from the gradient to update the template in the current frame. In addition, a template generalization training method is proposed to better use gradient information and avoid overfitting. To our knowledge,
this work is the first attempt to exploit the information in
the gradient for template update in siamese-based trackers.
Extensive experiments on recent benchmarks demonstrate
that our method achieves better performance than other
state-of-the-art trackers. The source codes are available at
https://github.com/LPXTT/GradNet-Tensorflow.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is an important topic in computer
vision, where the target object is identified in the initial
video frame and successively tracked in subsequent frames.
In recent years, deep networks [37, 3, 19, 44, 23, 39] have
significantly improved the tracking performance due to their
representation prowess.
There are two groups of deep-learning-based trackers.
The first group [36, 28, 32, 4] improves the discriminative
ability of deep networks by frequent online update. They
utilize the first frame to initialize the model and update it
∗ Corresponding Author: Dr. Dong Wang

Figure 1. The motivation of our algorithm. Images in the first and
third column are target patches in SiameseFC. The other images
show absolute values of their gradients, where the red regions have
large gradient. As we can see, the gradient values can reflect the
target variations and background clutter.

every few frames. Timely online update enables trackers
to capture target variations but also requires more computational time. Therefore, the speed of these trackers generally
cannot meet the real-time requirements.
Siamese-based trackers are representative in the second
group [3, 44, 22] which is totally based on offline training.
They learn the similarity between objects in different frames
through massive offline training. During online testing, the
initial target feature is regarded as template and used to
search the target in the following frames. These methods
need no online updating, thus, they usually run at real-time
speeds. However, these methods cannot adapt to appearance variations of target without important online adaptability, thereby increasing the risk of tracking drift. To solve
this problem, many researches [16, 45, 40] present different mechanisms to update template features. However,
these methods only focus on combining the previous target
features, ignoring the discriminative information in background clutter. This results in a big accuracy gap between
the siamese-based trackers and those with online update.
Generally, gradients are calculated through the final
loss which considers both positive and negative candidates.

6162

