Monocular Neural Image Based Rendering with Continuous View Control
Xu Chen∗

Jie Song∗
Otmar Hilliges
AIT Lab, ETH Zurich

{xuchen, jsong, otmar.hilliges}@inf.ethz.ch

...

...

Figure 1: Interactive novel view synthesis: Given a single source view our approach can generate a continuous sequence of
geometrically accurate novel views under fine-grained control. Top: Given a single street-view like input, a user may specify a
continuous camera trajectory and our system generates the corresponding views in real-time. Bottom: An unseen hi-res internet
image is used to synthesize novel views, while the camera is controlled interactively. Please refer to our project homepage† .

Abstract
We propose a method to produce a continuous stream
of novel views under fine-grained (e.g., 1◦ step-size) camera control at interactive rates. A novel learning pipeline
determines the output pixels directly from the source color.
Injecting geometric transformations, including perspective
projection, 3D rotation and translation into the network
forces implicit reasoning about the underlying geometry.
The latent 3D geometry representation is compact and meaningful under 3D transformation, being able to produce geometrically accurate views for both single objects and natural
scenes. Our experiments show that both proposed components, the transforming encoder-decoder and depth-guided
appearance mapping, lead to significantly improved generalization beyond the training views and in consequence to
more accurate view synthesis under continuous 6-DoF camera control. Finally, we show that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art baseline methods on public datasets.

1. Introduction
3D immersive experiences can benefit many application
scenarios. For example, in an online store one would often

like to view products interactively in 3D rather than from
discrete view angles. Likewise in map applications it is
desirable to explore the vicinity of street-view like images
beyond the position at which the photograph was taken. This
is often not possible because either only 2D imagery exists,
or because storing and rendering of full 3D information does
not scale. To overcome this limitation we study the problem
of interactive view synthesis with 6-DoF view control, taking
only a single image as input. We propose a method that
can produce a continuous stream of novel views under finegrained (e.g., 1◦ step-size) camera control (see Fig. 1).
Producing a continuous stream of novel views in real-time
is a challenging task. To be able to synthesize high-quality
images one needs to reason about the underlying geometry.
However, with only a monocular image as input the task of
3D reconstruction is severely ill-posed. Traditional imagebased rendering techniques do not apply to the real-time
monocular setting since they rely on multiple input views
and also can be computationally expensive.
Recent work has demonstrated the potential of learning
to predict novel views from monocular inputs by leveraging a training set of viewpoint pairs [52, 62, 40, 8]. This

∗ Equal contribution.

† https://ait.ethz.ch/projects/2019/cont-view-synth/

14090

