Prior Guided Dropout for Robust Visual Localization in Dynamic Environments
Zhaoyang Huang1,2 Yan Xu2 Jianping Shi2 Xiaowei Zhou1
1

Hujun Bao1∗ Guofeng Zhang1∗

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University†
2
SenseTime Research
Training Image

Abstract
Camera localization from monocular images has been a
long-standing problem, but its robustness in dynamic environments is still not adequately addressed. Compared with
classic geometric approaches, modern CNN-based methods
(e.g. PoseNet) have manifested the reliability against illumination or viewpoint variations, but they still have the following limitations. First, foreground moving objects are not
explicitly handled, which results in poor performance and
instability in dynamic environments. Second, the output for
each image is a point estimate without uncertainty quantification. In this paper, we propose a framework which
can be generally applied to existing CNN-based pose regressors to improve their robustness in dynamic environments. The key idea is a prior guided dropout module coupled with a self-attention module which can guide CNNs
to ignore foreground objects during both training and inference. Additionally, the dropout module enables the pose
regressor to output multiple hypotheses from which the uncertainty of pose estimates can be quantified and leveraged
in the following uncertainty-aware pose graph optimization
to improve the robustness further. We achieve an average
accuracy of 9.98m/3.63◦ on RobotCar dataset, which outperforms the state-of-the-art method by 62.97%/47.08%.
The source code of our implementation is available at
https://github.com/zju3dv/RVL-Dynamic.

1. Introduction
Localization is a fundamental problem in many applications including robotics, AR/VR, autonomous driving, etc.
A typical localization scenario is that a robot equipped by
sensors, e.g., camera, lidar, etc., is locating itself in a large∗ Corresponding authors: {bao, zhangguofeng}@cad.zju.edu.cn
† The authors from State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
are also affiliated with ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision. This work
was partially supported by NSF of China (Nos. 61822310 and 61672457),
and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Nos.
2018FZA5011 and 2019XZZX004-09).

Test Image

P

Figure 1. Example images from the RobotCar dataset. Foreground objects are different in training and test images, which introduces bias when learning a camera pose regressor and leads to
unstable localization.

scale urban scene. Visual localization only requires a camera and has drawn increasing attention because of its low
cost and broad applicability compared to other localization techniques. Traditional geometric localization methods [32, 14, 13] mainly use handcrafted features and descriptors and are rather sensitive to illumination variation,
viewpoint change, and dynamic elements, which are common in unconstrained environments.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
shown outstanding performance in object and place recognition, which also motivates researchers to exploit the potential of CNNs in visual localization. Many endeavors
have been made to address the limitations of traditional
methods, which will be discussed in Sec. 2. Among these
explorations, PoseNet [28] is a pioneering work that leverages CNNs originally designed for object recognition to
solve camera pose regression, which has validated the feasibility of visual localization through end-to-end neural networks. We refer to this kind of visual localization methods
as neural pose regressors since they directly regress 6-DOF
camera poses from images via a neural network.
Currently, most visual localization methods assume that
the environment is static, which is obviously not true in
practical scenarios. While neural pose regressors didn’t explicitly make this assumption, foreground moving objects
would inevitably degrade their accuracy and reliability as
shown in Fig. 1. To the best of our knowledge, handling
the dynamic objects for neural pose regressor has not been

2791

