C3DPO: Canonical 3D Pose Networks for Non-Rigid Structure From Motion
David Novotny∗

Nikhila Ravi∗

Benjamin Graham

Natalia Neverova Andrea Vedaldi

{dnovotny,nikhilar,benjamingraham,nneverova,vedaldi}@fb.com

Facebook AI Research
Train

Monocular reconstruction of:

Test
Non-rigid objects

Rigid objects

Dense keypoints

2D keypoints
and visibility

(Y, v)
3D shape
and viewpoint

ϕ

Factorization
network

ϕ

(α, θ )

Figure 1: Our method learns a 3D model of a deformable object category from 2D keypoints in unconstrained images. It
comprises a deep network that learns to factorize shape and viewpoint and, at test time, performs monocular reconstruction.

Abstract
We propose C3DPO, a method for extracting 3D models
of deformable objects from 2D keypoint annotations in unconstrained images. We do so by learning a deep network
that reconstructs a 3D object from a single view at a time,
accounting for partial occlusions, and explicitly factoring
the effects of viewpoint changes and object deformations.
In order to achieve this factorization, we introduce a novel
regularization technique. We first show that the factorization is successful if, and only if, there exists a certain canonicalization function of the reconstructed shapes. Then, we
learn the canonicalization function together with the reconstruction one, which constrains the result to be consistent.
We demonstrate state-of-the-art reconstruction results for
methods that do not use ground-truth 3D supervision for a
number of benchmarks, including Up3D and PASCAL3D+.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction of static scenes is mature, but the
problem remains challenging when objects can deform due
to articulation and intra-class variations. In some cases, de-

formations can be avoided by capturing multiple simultaneous images of the object. However, this requires expensive
hardware comprising several imaging sensors and only provides instantaneous 3D reconstructions of the objects without modelling their deformations. Extracting deformation
models requires establishing correspondences between the
instantaneous 3D reconstructions, which is often done by
means of physical markers. Modern systems such as the
Panoptic Studio [14] can align 3D reconstructions without
markers, but require complex specialized hardware, making
them unsuitable for use outside a specialized laboratory.
In this paper, we thus consider the problem of reconstructing and modelling 3D deformable objects given only
unconstrained monocular views and keypoint annotations.
Traditionally, this problem has been regarded as a generalization of static scene reconstruction, and approached by
extending Structure from Motion (SFM) techniques. Due to
their legacy, such Non-Rigid SFM (NR-SFM) methods have
often focused on the geometric aspects of the problem, but
the quality of the reconstructions also depends on the ability
to model statistically the object shapes and deformations.
∗ Authors contributed equally.

7688

