Variational Uncalibrated Photometric Stereo under General Lighting
Bjoern Haefner∗, 1 Zhenzhang Ye∗, 1 Maolin Gao2 Tao Wu1 Yvain Quéau3 Daniel Cremers1
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Artisense 3 GREYC, UMR CNRS 6072
{bjoern.haefner, zz.ye, tao.wu, cremers}@tum.de maolin@artisense.ai yvain.queau@ensicaen.fr

I1

∗ Authors contributed equally.
1 https://github.com/zhenzhangye/general_ups

...

IM

...

Reflectance

Shape

Figure 1. We present an efficient variational scheme to solve uncalibrated photometric stereo under general lighting. Given a set
of input RGB images captured from the same viewing angle but
under unknown, varying general illumination (top, M = 20 images were acquired in an office under daylight, while freely moving a hand-held LED light source), fine-detailed reflectance and
shape (bottom, we show the estimated albedo and perspective
depth maps) are recovered by an end-to-end variational approach.

• The joint estimation of shape, reflectance and general
lighting is formulated as an end-to-end, mathematically transparent variational problem;

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo techniques aim at acquiring both the
shape and the reflectance of a scene. To this end, multiple
images are acquired under the same viewing angle but varying lighting, and a physics-based image formation model
is inverted. However, the classic way to solve this inverse
problem requires lighting to be highly controlled, which
restricts practical applications to laboratory setups where
careful calibration of lighting must be carried out.
The objective of this research work is to simplify the
overall photometric stereo pipeline, by providing an efficient solution to uncalibrated photometric stereo under
general lighting, as illustrated in Figure 1 (the code is released1 ). In comparison with existing efforts in the same
direction, the proposed one has the following advantages:

I2

Output

Photometric stereo (PS) techniques nowadays remain
constrained to an ideal laboratory setup where modeling
and calibration of lighting is amenable. To eliminate such
restrictions, we propose an efficient principled variational
approach to uncalibrated PS under general illumination. To
this end, the Lambertian reflectance model is approximated
through a spherical harmonic expansion, which preserves
the spatial invariance of the lighting. The joint recovery
of shape, reflectance and illumination is then formulated as
a single variational problem. There the shape estimation
is carried out directly in terms of the underlying perspective depth map, thus implicitly ensuring integrability and
bypassing the need for a subsequent normal integration. To
tackle the resulting nonconvex problem numerically, we undertake a two-phase procedure to initialize a balloon-like
perspective depth map, followed by a “lagged” block coordinate descent scheme. The experiments validate efficiency
and robustness of this approach. Across a variety of evaluations, we are able to reduce the mean angular error consistently by a factor of 2–3 compared to the state-of-the-art.

Input

Abstract

• A real 3D-surface represented as a depth map is recovered, rather than possibly non-integrable normals;
• It is robust, due to the use of Cauchy’s robust Mestimator and Huber-TV albedo regularization;
• It is computationally efficient, thanks to a tailored
lagged block coordinate descent scheme initialized using a simple balloon-like shape.
After reviewing related works in Section 2, we discuss
in Section 3 the image formation model considered in this
work. It can be inverted using the variational approach in
Section 4. A dedicated numerical solution is then introduced in Section 5 and empirically evaluated in Section 6.
Section 7 eventually draws the conclusion of this research.

8539

