Accelerate Learning of Deep Hashing With Gradient Attention
Long-Kai Huang
Jianda Chen
Sinno Jialin Pan
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
lhuang018@e.ntu.edu.sg

jianda001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the success of learning to
hash in fast large-scale image retrieval. As deep learning
has shown its superior performance on many computer vision applications, recent designs of learning-based hashing
models have been moving from shallow ones to deep architectures. However, based on our analysis, we find that gradient descent based algorithms used in deep hashing models
would potentially cause hash codes of a pair of training instances to be updated towards the directions of each other
simultaneously during optimization. In the worst case, the
paired hash codes switch their directions after update, and
consequently, their corresponding distance in the Hamming
space remain unchanged. This makes the overall learning
process highly inefficient. To address this issue, we propose
a new deep hashing model integrated with a novel gradient attention mechanism. Extensive experimental results on
three benchmark datasets show that our proposed algorithm
is able to accelerate the learning process and obtain competitive retrieval performance compared with state-of-theart deep hashing models.

1. Introduction
With the explosive growth of visual content on the Internet in recent years, learning to hash techniques have attracted more and more attention in large-scale image retrieval. By mapping the raw data to binary codes while preserving data similarity information in the Hamming space,
hashing techniques facilitate the storage of large-scale images data and enable efficient approximate nearest neighbors search. Among various hashing techniques [29, 28],
supervised hashing has proven to be effective to generate
domain relevant and compact codes and achieve satisfactory
performance. With the development of deep learning, most
recently developed supervised hashing models are build on
top of deep neural networks to provide an end-to-end solution for image retrieval [14, 35, 3, 5, 2, 24]. In this paper, we
focus on deep learning based supervised hashing models.
The overall objective of hashing is to learn similarity-

sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg

preserving binary codes to represent images. In most supervised hashing methods, supervision is provided in the
form of pairwise similarities, i.e. each training “example”
is in the form of a pair of instances with a label to denote
whether the paired instances are similar or dissimilar. Note
that though in some hashing methods [14, 34], supervision
is provided in the form of triplet ranking or list ranking, the
ranking information still depends on pairwise similarities.
Therefore, in most deep hashing models, the loss function
or the objective function is designed based on the predictions on pairwise similarities.
In deep hashing models, similar to other deep learning
models, a commonly used optimization algorithm is gradient descent. Basically, given a labeled pair of instances,
based on the prediction error on their similarity, the hash
codes of pairs of instances are first updated based on gradient descent, and then the decomposed error would be backpropagated to update other model parameters via gradient
descent. However, based on our analysis in Section 3, we
find that optimizing a deep hashing model by gradient descent possibly leads to a “dilemma” in optimization, where
the hash codes of the pairs of instances may be always updated towards the directions of each other simultaneously
during optimization. In the worst case, the paired hash
codes may switch their directions after update, and their inner product or Hamming distance remains the same. When
the update of some training pairs falls into this dilemma,
their corresponding loss will not be decreased, which slows
down the learning process.
As the aforementioned dilemma is caused by backward
passing the gradients of both hash codes of a pair of training
instances, a solution to overcome this dilemma is to selectively ignore or downgrade the gradient of one hash code of
the pair during back-propagation. In this way, the optimization focuses on optimizing the desired code of one instance
of each pair only. As a result the hash codes of the paired
instances do not move towards the directions of each other
simultaneously. Now, the remaining issue is which one of a
paired hash codes should be chosen for update. This issue
becomes much more complicated when taking all training
pairs in a mini-batch into consideration.
15271

