xR-EgoPose: Egocentric 3D Human Pose from an HMD Camera
Denis Tome1,2 , Patrick Peluse2 , Lourdes Agapito1 and Hernan Badino2
1
University College London 2 Facebook Reality Lab
{D.Tome, L.Agapito}@cs.ucl.ac.uk

{patrick.peluse, hernan.badino}@oculus.com

Figure 1: Left: Our xR-EgoPose Dataset setup: (a) external camera viewpoint showing a synthetic character wearing the
headset; (b) example of photorealistic image rendered from the egocentric camera perspective; (c) 2D and (d) 3D poses
estimated with our algorithm. Right: results on real images; (e) real image acquired with our HMD-mounted camera with
predicted 2D heatmaps; (f) estimated 3D pose, showing good generalization to real images.

Abstract
We present a new solution to egocentric 3D body pose
estimation from monocular images captured from a downward looking fish-eye camera installed on the rim of a head
mounted virtual reality device. This unusual viewpoint, just
2 cm away from the user’s face, leads to images with unique
visual appearance, characterized by severe self-occlusions
and strong perspective distortions that result in a drastic
difference in resolution between lower and upper body. Our
contribution is two-fold. Firstly, we propose a new encoderdecoder architecture with a novel dual branch decoder designed specifically to account for the varying uncertainty in
the 2D joint locations. Our quantitative evaluation, both on
synthetic and real-world datasets, shows that our strategy
leads to substantial improvements in accuracy over state of
the art egocentric pose estimation approaches. Our second
contribution is a new large-scale photorealistic synthetic
dataset – xR-EgoPose – offering 383K frames of high quality renderings of people with a diversity of skin tones, body
shapes, clothing, in a variety of backgrounds and lighting
conditions, performing a range of actions. Our experiments
show that the high variability in our new synthetic training
corpus leads to good generalization to real world footage
and to state of the art results on real world datasets with
ground truth. Moreover, an evaluation on the Human3.6M
benchmark shows that the performance of our method is
on par with top performing approaches on the more classic
problem of 3D human pose from a third person viewpoint.

1. Introduction
The advent of xR technologies (such as AR, VR, and
MR) have led to a wide variety of applications in areas such
as entertainment, communication, medicine, CAD design,
art, and workspace productivity. These technologies mainly
focus on immersing the user into a virtual space by the
use of a head mounted display (HMD) which renders the
environment from the very specific viewpoint of the user.
However, current solutions have been focusing so far on
the video and audio aspects of the user’s perceptual system, leaving a gap in the touch and proprioception senses.
Partial solutions to the proprioception problem have been
limited to hands whose positions are tracked and rendered
in real time by the use of controller devices. The 3D pose of
the rest of the body can be inferred from inverse kinematics of the head and hand poses [16], but this often results in
inaccurate estimates of the body configuration with a large
loss of signal which impedes compelling social interaction
[14] and even leads to motion sickness [36].
In this paper we present a new approach for full-body 3D
human pose estimation from a monocular camera mounted
on the rim of a HMD looking down, effectively just 2 cm
away from an average size nose. With this unique camera
viewpoint, most of the lower body appears self-occluded
(see right images of Fig. 2). In addition, the strong perspective distortion, due to the fish-eye lens and the camera being
so close to the face, results in a drastic difference in resolution between the upper and lower body (see Fig. 3). Con-

7728

