Bayesian Optimized 1-Bit CNNs
Jiaxin Gu,1,† Junhe Zhao,1,† Xiaolong Jiang,1,2,3 Baochang Zhang,1,*
Jianzhuang Liu,4 Guodong Guo,2,3 Rongrong Ji5,6
1
Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research, Beijing China
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Application
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
5
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
6
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
*
Corresponding author, email: bczhang@buaa.edu.cn
†
Co-ﬁrst author

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have
dominated the recent developments in computer vision
through making various record-breaking models. However,
it is still a great challenge to achieve powerful DCNNs
in resource-limited environments, such as on embedded
devices and smart phones. Researchers have realized that
1-bit CNNs can be one feasible solution to resolve the
issue; however, they are bafﬂed by the inferior performance
compared to the full-precision DCNNs. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach, called Bayesian optimized
1-bit CNNs (denoted as BONNs), taking the advantage of
Bayesian learning, a well-established strategy for hard
problems, to signiﬁcantly improve the performance of
extreme 1-bit CNNs. We incorporate the prior distributions
of full-precision kernels and features into the Bayesian
framework to construct 1-bit CNNs in an end-to-end
manner, which have not been considered in any previous
related methods. The Bayesian losses are achieved with a
theoretical support to optimize the network simultaneously
in both continuous and discrete spaces, aggregating
different losses jointly to improve the model capacity.
Extensive experiments on the ImageNet and CIFAR
datasets show that BONNs achieve the best classiﬁcation
performance compared to state-of-the-art 1-bit CNNs.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have exhibited their superior feature representation power in both
low-level [7, 15] and high-level vision tasks [10, 16, 23, 24].
However, this superiority comes with prohibitive computa-

1
3

2
4

Figure 1. The evolution of the prior p(x), the distribution of
the observation y, and the posterior p(x|y) during learning,
where x is the latent variable representing the full-precision
parameters and y is the quantization error. At the beginning, the
parameters x are initialized according to a single-mode Gaussian
distribution. When our learning algorithm converges, the ideal
case is that (i) p(y) becomes a Gaussian distribution N (0, ν),
which corresponds to the minimum reconstruction error, and (ii)
p(x|y) = p(x) is a Gaussian mixture distribution with two modes
where the binarized values x̂ and −x̂ are located.

tion and storage overheads. In most cases, heavy parameters
of DCNNs are stored as ﬂoating point numbers, each of
which usually takes 32 bits, and the convolution operation
is implemented as matrix multiplication between ﬂoatingpoint operands. These ﬂoating-point based operations are
time-consuming and storage-demanding. Consequently,
DCNNs are infeasible to be deployed on edge devices such
as cellphones and drones, due to the conﬂict between high
demands and limited resources. To tackle this problem,

4909

