On Network Design Spaces for Visual Recognition
Ilija Radosavovic

Justin Johnson

Saining Xie

Wan-Yen Lo

Piotr Dollár

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract
Over the past several years progress in designing better neural network architectures for visual recognition has
been substantial. To help sustain this rate of progress, in
this work we propose to reexamine the methodology for
comparing network architectures. In particular, we introduce a new comparison paradigm of distribution estimates,
in which network design spaces are compared by applying statistical techniques to populations of sampled models, while controlling for confounding factors like network
complexity. Compared to current methodologies of comparing point and curve estimates of model families, distribution
estimates paint a more complete picture of the entire design
landscape. As a case study, we examine design spaces used
in neural architecture search (NAS). We find significant statistical differences between recent NAS design space variants that have been largely overlooked. Furthermore, our
analysis reveals that the design spaces for standard model
families like ResNeXt can be comparable to the more complex ones used in recent NAS work. We hope these insights
into distribution analysis will enable more robust progress
toward discovering better networks for visual recognition.

1. Introduction
Our community has made substantial progress toward
designing better convolutional neural network architectures
for visual recognition tasks over the past several years. This
overall research endeavor is analogous to a form of stochastic gradient descent where every new proposed model architecture is a noisy gradient step traversing the infinitedimensional landscape of possible neural network designs.
The overall objective of this optimization is to find network
architectures that are easy to optimize, make reasonable
tradeoffs between speed and accuracy, generalize to many
tasks and datasets, and overall withstand the test of time. To
make continued steady progress toward this goal, we must
use the right loss function to guide our search—in other
words, a research methodology for comparing network architectures that can reliably tell us whether newly proposed
models are truly better than what has come before.

Figure 1. Comparing networks. (a) Early work on neural networks for visual recognition tasks used point estimates to compare
architectures, often irrespective of model complexity. (b) More recent work compares curve estimates of error vs. complexity traced
by a handful of selected models. (c) We propose to sample models
from a parameterized model design space, and measure distribution estimates to compare design spaces. This methodology allows
for a more complete and unbiased view of the design landscape.

One promising avenue lies in developing better theoretical understanding of neural networks to guide the development of novel network architectures. However, we need not
wait for a general theory of neural networks to emerge to
make continued progress. Classical statistics provides tools
for drawing informed conclusions from empirical studies,
even in the absence of a generalized theory governing the
subject at hand. We believe that making use of such statistically grounded scientific methodologies in deep learning
research may facilitate our future progress.
Overall, there has already been a general trend toward
better empiricism in the literature on network architecture
design. In the simplest and earliest methodology in this
area (Figure 1a), progress was marked by simple point estimates: an architecture was deemed superior if it achieved
lower error on a benchmark dataset [15, 19, 35, 31], often
irrespective of model complexity.
An improved methodology adopted in more recent work
compares curve estimates (Figure 1b) that explore design
tradeoffs of network architectures by instantiating a handful
of models from a loosely defined model family and tracing
curves of error vs. model complexity [34, 11, 39]. A model
family is then considered superior if it achieves lower error
at every point along such a curve. Note, however, that in this
methodology other confounding factors may vary between
model families or may be suboptimal for one of them.
11882

