GAN-based Projector for Faster Recovery with Convergence Guarantees
in Linear Inverse Problems
Ankit Raj∗
Yuqi Li∗
Yoram Bresler
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
{ankitr3, yuqil3, ybresler}@illinois.edu

Abstract
A Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) with generator G trained to model the prior of images has been shown
to perform better than sparsity-based regularizers in illposed inverse problems. Here, we propose a new method of
deploying a GAN-based prior to solve linear inverse problems using projected gradient descent (PGD). Our method
learns a network-based projector for use in the PGD algorithm, eliminating expensive computation of the Jacobian of
G. Experiments show that our approach provides a speedup of 60-80× over earlier GAN-based recovery methods
along with better accuracy. Our main theoretical result is
that if the measurement matrix is moderately conditioned on
the manifold range(G) and the projector is δ-approximate,
then the algorithm is guaranteed to reach O(δ) reconstruction error in O(log(1/δ)) steps in the low noise regime. Additionally, we propose a fast method to design such measurement matrices for a given G. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the efficacy of this method by requiring 5-10×
fewer measurements than random Gaussian measurement
matrices for comparable recovery performance. Because
the learning of the GAN and projector is decoupled from
the measurement operator, our GAN-based projector and
recovery algorithm are applicable without retraining to all
linear inverse problems, as confirmed by experiments on
compressed sensing, super-resolution, and inpainting.

1. Introduction
Many application such as computational imaging, and
remote sensing fall in the compressive sensing (CS)
paradigm. CS [9, 5] refers to projecting a high dimensional,
sparse or sparsifiable signal x ∈ Rn to a lower dimensional
measurement y ∈ Rm , m ≪ n, using a small set of linear,
∗ Equal contribution. Ankit Raj and Yoram Bresler’s research work was

supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant IIS 1447879 . Yuqi Li and Yoram Bresler’s reseach work was supported in part
by Sandia National Laboratories under Grant ID: AE056, IP: 00371547

Figure 1: Our network-based PGD solves the following inverse
problems: compressive sensing with 61× compression, 4× superresolution, scatterd inpaining with high noise (σ = 40) and 50%
blocked inpainting with high noise.

non-adaptive frames. The noisy measurement model is:
y = Ax + v, A ∈ Rm×n , v ∼ N (0, σ 2 I)

(1)

where the measurement matrix A is often a random matrix.
In this work, we are interested in the problem of recovering
the unknown natural signal x, from the compressed measurement y, given the measurement matrix A. Traditionally, for signal priors, natural images are considered sparse
in some fixed or learnable basis [11, 8, 36, 22, 7, 38, 10, 21].
Instead of the sparse prior commonly adopted by CS literature, we turn to a learned prior. Neural networkbased inverse problem solvers have been explored recently
[14, 35, 31, 1, 12, 15, 25, 32, 22, 37, 26]. However,
[1, 12, 15, 25] use information about the measurement matrix A while training the network. Thus, their algorithms
are limited to a particular set-up to solve specific inverseproblem and usually cannot solve other problems without
retraining. Another line of work, [28, 29] jointly optimizes
the measurement matrix and recovery algorithm, again resulting in algorithm limited to a particular inverse problem
and measurement matrix. Instead, in this paper the network
is trained independently of A and can be generalized across
different inverse problems. This aspect is shared by two
other neural-network-based solvers [35, 31], however, they
model the image prior only implicitly by training a denoiser

5602

