SBSGAN: Suppression of Inter-Domain Background Shift for Person
Re-Identification
Yan Huang† Qiang Wu†
JingSong Xu†
Yi Zhong§
†School of Electrical and Data Engineering, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
§School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
{yanhuang.uts, zhongyim2m}@gmail.com, {Qiang.Wu, JingSong.Xu}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Cross-domain person re-identification (re-ID) is challenging due to the bias between training and testing domains. We observe that if backgrounds in the training and
testing datasets are very different, it dramatically introduces difficulties to extract robust pedestrian features, and
thus compromises the cross-domain person re-ID performance. In this paper, we formulate such problems as a background shift problem. A Suppression of Background Shift
Generative Adversarial Network (SBSGAN) is proposed to
generate images with suppressed backgrounds. Unlike simply removing backgrounds using binary masks, SBSGAN allows the generator to decide whether pixels should be preserved or suppressed to reduce segmentation errors caused
by noisy foreground masks. Additionally, we take ID-related
cues, such as vehicles and companions into consideration.
With high-quality generated images, a Densely Associated
2-Stream (DA-2S) network is introduced with Inter Stream
Densely Connection (ISDC) modules to strengthen the complementarity of the generated data and ID-related cues. The
experiments show that the proposed method achieves competitive performance on three re-ID datasets, i.e., Market1501, DukeMTMC-reID, and CUHK03, under the crossdomain person re-ID scenario.

1. Introduction
The task of person re-identification (re-ID) is to match
the identities of a person under non-overlapped camera
views [10, 39, 18, 41, 24]. Most existing methods assume
that the training and testing images are captured from the
same scenario. However, this assumption is not guaranteed in many applications. For instance, person images
captured from two different campuses have distinct illumination condition and background (BG) (e.g., Market1501 [38] and DukeMTMC-reID [29, 41] datasets). In this
situation, the bias between data distributions on two do-

Original Images

General Style Transfer (SPGAN)

Market1501
DukeMTMC-reID
General Style Transfer (PTGAN)

Large BG noise + Large BG shift
Removing BG by JPPNet

Large BG Noise + BG Shift

Badly Damaged FG

Ours Soft-Mask
Images (SBSGAN)

Large BG Noise
BG Shift
Badly Damaged FG

Figure 1. Comparison between different input images for
cross-domain person re-ID. Images from Market-1501 and
DukeMTMC-reID show distinct BG shift. Images generated by
SPGAN [7] and PTGAN [36] do not suppress the BG noise, and
have the BG shift problem. The hard-mask solution, i.e., JPPNet [25] damages the FG. Our SBSGAN takes all the impacts into
consideration.

mains becomes large. Directly training a classifier from one
dataset (i.e., source domain) often produces a degraded performance when testing is conducted on another dataset (i.e.,
target domain). Therefore, it is important to investigate solutions for such a cross-domain issue. For person re-ID, the
domain adaption solutions have drawn attention in recent
years [4, 7, 35, 36, 42].
Recent cross-domain person re-ID methods usually
adopt (or resort to) Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
to learn the domain variants [4, 7, 36, 42]. These approaches
can be categorized into two main types: 1) general interdomain style transfer [4, 7, 36]; 2) inter-camera style transfer [42]. All of them may perform well on certain cases,
i.e., domain style changes or camera style changes. However, they do not consider to remove or suppress BGs for
reducing domain gaps. For instance, when a network is
trained based on limited BG information presented in a
source domain, such network may not well distinguish es-

9527

