Second-order Non-local Attention Networks for Person Re-identification
Bryan (Ning) Xia, Yuan Gong, Yizhe Zhang, Christian Poellabauer
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA
{nxia, ygong1, yzhang29, cpoellab}@nd.edu

Abstract
Recent efforts have shown promising results for person
re-identification by designing part-based architectures to
allow a neural network to learn discriminative representations from semantically coherent parts. Some efforts use
soft attention to reallocate distant outliers to their most similar parts, while others adjust part granularity to incorporate more distant positions for learning the relationships.
Others seek to generalize part-based methods by introducing a dropout mechanism on consecutive regions of the feature map to enhance distant region relationships. However, only few prior efforts model the distant or non-local
positions of the feature map directly for the person re-ID
task. In this paper, we propose a novel attention mechanism to directly model long-range relationships via secondorder feature statistics. When combined with a generalized DropBlock module, our method performs equally to or
better than state-of-the-art results for mainstream person
re-identification datasets, including Market1501, CUHK03,
and DukeMTMC-reID.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) is an essential component of intelligent surveillance systems, which draws increasing interest from the computer vision community. It
is challenging to associate multiple images captured by
cameras with non-overlapping viewpoints with the same
person-of-interest. Specifically, this task is challenging
due to the dramatic variations with respect to illumination, occlusion, resolution, human pose, view angle, clothing, and background. The person re-ID research community has proposed various effective hand-crafted features
[2, 20, 26, 28, 24, 6, 21, 25] to address these challenges.
Methods based on deep convolutional networks have also
been introduced to learn discriminative features and representations that are robust to these variations, thereby
pushing multiple re-ID benchmarks to a whole new level.
Among these methods, several efforts [30, 35, 39, 49] learn

Figure 1. Illustration of second-order non-local attention for person re-identification. We show images from two views of one person and illustration of the attention map. Our second-order nonlocal attention map allows the model to learn to encode non-local
part-to-part correlations (marked in orange).

detailed features from local parts of a person’s image, while
others extract useful global features [34, 52, 3, 5].
Recently, part-based models [35, 39, 49] have made great
progress towards learning effective part-informed representations for person re-ID, achieving very promising results.
By partitioning the backbone network’s feature map horizontally into multiple parts, the deep neural networks can
concentrate on learning more fine-grained salient features
in each individual local part. The aggregation of these features from all parts provides discriminative cues for each
identity as a whole. However, these models, on one hand,
suffer from one common drawback: they require relatively
well-aligned body parts for the same person in order to learn
salient part features. On the other hand, strict uniform partitioning of the feature map breaks within-part consistency.
Several recent efforts proposed different remedies to compensate for the side effects of part partitioning, which are
described below.
When related image areas fall into other parts, Part-based

3760

