What Synthesis Is Missing: Depth Adaptation
Integrated With Weak Supervision for Indoor Scene Parsing
Keng-Chi Liu, Yi-Ting Shen, Jan P. Klopp, Liang-Gee Chen
National Taiwan University
{calvin89029,dennis45677,kloppjp}@gmail.com, lgchen@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Scene Parsing is a crucial step to enable autonomous
systems to understand and interact with their surroundings. Supervised deep learning methods have made great
progress in solving scene parsing problems, however, come
at the cost of laborious manual pixel-level annotation. Synthetic data as well as weak supervision have been investigated to alleviate this effort. Nonetheless, synthetically generated data still suffers from severe domain shift while weak
labels often lack precision. Moreover, most existing works
for weakly supervised scene parsing are limited to salient
foreground objects. The aim of this work is hence twofold:
Exploit synthetic data where feasible and integrate weak
supervision where necessary. More concretely, we address
this goal by utilizing depth as transfer domain because its
synthetic-to-real discrepancy is much lower than for color.
At the same time, we perform weak localization from easily obtainable image level labels and integrate both using a
novel contour-based scheme. Our approach is implemented
as a teacher-student learning framework to solve the transfer learning problem by generating a pseudo ground truth.
Using only depth-based adaptation, this approach already
outperforms previous transfer learning approaches on the
popular indoor scene parsing SUN RGB-D dataset. Our
proposed two-stage integration more than halves the gap
towards fully supervised methods when compared to previous state-of-the-art in transfer learning.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing is an important computer vision task aiming at assigning semantic information to the entire image and providing a complete understanding of the scene.
State-of-the-art scene parsing works [7, 23, 24, 46] heavily rely on human labeled pixel-level data, which is expensive and cumbersome to collect. To enable computer vision
applications without such labeling efforts, two paradigms
have been investigated: unsupervised domain adaptation

Source Domain
Synthetic Data
Depth
Target Domain
Real Data

Depth
RGB

Domain
Adaptation

……

Depth-based
Predictions

Teacher

……

Pseudo Labels

Fusion

Student

…

Weak Localizations

Teacher

Figure 1. Illustration of our teacher-student framework. The
teacher utilize depth as a low domain-shift auxiliary cue. This
is fused with weak localization information to generate pseudo labels, which are used to train the student.

and weak supervision. Domain adaptation for scene parsing (c.f. [15]) addresses the problem by transferring from
a source domain (simulation) to features that are aligned
with target domain (real data) without any labeled target
samples. In spite of the progress that has been accomplished in realistic scene rendering and transfer learning
approaches, there is still a significant domain discrepancy
between real and synthetic imagery, especially in texturing. Weak supervision tackles this issue by leveraging weak
annotations with lower acquisition costs such as bounding boxes [10, 21, 26, 27], scribble [22], points [3] or even
image-level labels [1,6,19,20,27,30–33,35,38,41–43]. This
enables a more cost-effective scaling of training datasets.
Nevertheless, for image-level annotations, issues such as
lack of boundary information, rare pixels for objects of interest, class co-occurrence and discriminative localization
remain tremendous challenges. Moreover, the majority of
existing works for weak supervision are only capable of
handling salient foreground objects.
In this work, we aim at improving performance by transferring through a path of little domain discrepancy. While
RGB images contain rich information, it is difficult to trans-

7345

