Self-Training With Progressive Augmentation for Unsupervised Cross-Domain
Person Re-Identification∗
Xinyu Zhang1
Jiewei Cao2
Chunhua Shen2
Mingyu You1
1
2
Tongji University, China The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is a crucial task in
surveillance and security, which aims to locate a target
pedestrian across non-overlapping camera views using a
probe image. With the advantages of convolutional neural networks (CNN), many person Re-ID works focus on
supervised learning [14, 32, 39, 5, 48, 4, 6, 20, 31, 7, 26]
and achieve satisfactory improvements. Despite the great
∗ Work was done when X. Zhang was visiting The University of Adelaide, Australia. First two authors contributed to this work equally. C. Shen
is the corresponding author: chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

Pseudo Label Accuracy (%)

60

55

50

45

40

CTL
CTL+RTL
PAST

35
0

1

2

3

4

Number of Iterations
80

70

Rank1 and mAP (%)

Person re-identification (Re-ID) has achieved great improvement with deep learning and a large amount of labelled training data. However, it remains a challenging task
for adapting a model trained in a source domain of labelled
data to a target domain of only unlabelled data available. In
this work, we develop a self-training method with progressive augmentation framework (PAST) to promote the model
performance progressively on the target dataset. Specially,
our PAST framework consists of two stages, namely, conservative stage and promoting stage. The conservative stage
captures the local structure of target-domain data points
with triplet-based loss functions, leading to improved feature representations. The promoting stage continuously optimizes the network by appending a changeable classification layer to the last layer of the model, enabling the use
of global information about the data distribution. Importantly, we propose a new self-training strategy that progressively augments the model capability by adopting conservative and promoting stages alternately. Furthermore, to
improve the reliability of selected triplet samples, we introduce a ranking-based triplet loss in the conservative stage,
which is a label-free objective function based on the similarities between data pairs. Experiments demonstrate that
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art person Re-ID
performance under the unsupervised cross-domain setting.
Code is available at: tinyurl.com/PASTReID

65

60

50

40

CTL Rank1
CTL+RTL Rank1
PAST Rank1
CTL mAP
CTL+RTL mAP
PAST mAP

30

20
0

1

2

3

4

Number of Iterations

Figure 1 – Label quality vs. model generalization. The accuracy of
pseudo labels prediction (top) and performance comparison (bottom) of
different methods over training iterations. Here we use Duke [45] as the
source domain and Market-1501 [44] as the target domain.

success, they depend on large labelled datasets which are
costly and sometime impossible to obtain.
To tackle this problem, a few unsupervised learning
methods [36, 24, 22] propose to take advantage of abundant
unlabelled data, which are easier to collect in general. Unfortunately, due to lack of supervision information, the performance of unsupervised methods is typically weak, thus
being less effective for practical usages. In contrast, unsupervised cross-domain methods [38, 10, 36, 47, 18, 27,
12, 25, 21, 30] propose to use both labelled datasets (source
domain) and unlabelled datasets (target domain). However,
directly applying the models trained in the source domain to

8222

