Linearized Multi-Sampling for Differentiable Image Transformation
Wei Jiang1

Weiwei Sun1
1

Andrea Tagliasacchi1,2

Visual Computing Group, University of Victoria

Eduard Trulls2
2

Kwang Moo Yi1

Google Research

{jiangwei, weiweisun, kyi}@uvic.ca, {taglia, trulls}@google.com

Figure 1: Image alignment example - We iteratively find the image transformation parameters that produce the downsampled target
image when applied to the source image using different sampling strategies. We visualize the transformed source image at convergence
when using bilinear sampling and the proposed linearized sampling. We further display the optimization path – iterations – for each
method. The proposed linearized sampling provides improved gradients, leading to better convergence.

Abstract
We propose a novel image sampling method for differentiable image transformation in deep neural networks. The
sampling schemes currently used in deep learning, such as
Spatial Transformer Networks, rely on bilinear interpolation, which performs poorly under severe scale changes,
and more importantly, results in poor gradient propagation.
This is due to their strict reliance on direct neighbors. Instead, we propose to generate random auxiliary samples in
the vicinity of each pixel in the sampled image, and create
a linear approximation with their intensity values. We then
use this approximation as a differentiable formula for the
transformed image.
We demonstrate that our approach produces more representative gradients with a wider basin of convergence
for image alignment, which leads to considerable performance improvements when training networks for classification tasks. This is not only true under large downsampling,
but also when there are no scale changes. We compare our
approach with multi-scale sampling and show that we outperform it. We then demonstrate that our improvements to
the sampler are compatible with other tangential improvements to Spatial Transformer Networks and that it further
improves their performance. 1
1 Code and models are available at https://github.com/
vcg-uvic/linearized_multisampling_release.

1. Introduction
The seminal work of [17] introduced Spatial Transformer Networks (STN), a differentiable component that
allows for spatial manipulation of image data by deep networks. It has since become commonplace to include attention mechanisms in deep architectures in the form of image transformation operations. STNs have been applied to
object detection [10], segmentation [15, 24], dense image
captioning [19], local correspondence for image classification [1], local features [38, 28, 27], and as a tool for local
hard attention [21]. Regardless of application and architecture, all of these methods rely on bilinear interpolation.
A major drawback of bilinear interpolation is that it is extremely local – it considers only the four closest pixel neighbors of the query. As this sampling does not account for the
magnitude of the applied transformation, the performance
of networks that rely on it degrades when scale changes are
severe, as for example shown in Fig. 1. This shortcoming of
the differentiable sampler was already hinted at in the original STN paper [17], but never fully investigated. Note that
this is a problem in practice, as applications that leverage
attention mechanisms often transform the image to a resolution much lower than the original [37, 28, 15]. Furthermore, STNs are typically used as pre-alignment networks
for classification [17, 23]. The inability of the bilinear sampler in the STN to cope with large downsampling results in
increased capacity requirements for the classification net12988

