Self-supervised Learning with Geometric Constraints in Monocular Video
Connecting Flow, Depth, and Camera
Yuhua Chen1,2

Cordelia Schmid1
1

Cristian Sminchisescu1
2

Google Research

ETH Zurich

yuhua.chen@vision.ee.ethz.ch, {cordelias, sminchisescu}@google.com

Abstract
We present GLNet, a self-supervised framework for
learning depth, optical flow, camera pose and intrinsic parameters from monocular video – addressing the difficulty
of acquiring realistic ground-truth for such tasks. We propose three contributions: 1) we design new loss functions
that capture multiple geometric constraints (e.g. epipolar
geometry) as well as an adaptive photometric loss that supports multiple moving objects, rigid and non-rigid, 2) we extend the model such that it predicts camera intrinsics, making it applicable to uncalibrated video, and 3) we propose
several online refinement strategies that rely on the symmetry of our self-supervised loss in training and testing, in
particular optimizing model parameters and/or the output
of different tasks, thus leveraging their mutual interactions.
The idea of jointly optimizing the system output, under all
geometric and photometric constraints can be viewed as a
dense generalization of classical bundle adjustment. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on KITTI and
Cityscapes, where we outperform previous self-supervised
approaches on multiple tasks. We also show good generalization for transfer learning in YouTube videos.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental computer vision problems is estimating the 3D geometry of dynamic scenes captured by a
moving camera. This encompasses many visual tasks such
as depth estimation, optical flow, odometry, etc. Robust solutions would support a wide range of applications in autonomous driving, robotics, augmented reality, and scene
interaction.
The 3D visual reconstruction problem has been studied
extensively. At one end, there are structure from motion
systems that leverage sparse, hand-crafted geometric features (e.g. SIFT [29] or SURF [2]), exact linear mathematical relations [17] (e.g. the epipolar constraint and the fundamental matrix for the two view geometry), as well as the

non-linear refinement of the structure and motion outputs
under geometric re-projection losses based on bundle adjustment [39]. Impressive real-time processing pipelines of
this type are now available, but they still offer sparse reconstructions, are affected by partial occlusion, and face difficulties in cases when the geometry of the scene or the motion is degenerate.
At the other end, recent years have witnessed the development of deep learning techniques where structure
and motion estimation is formulated in a supervised setting [10, 24], as a pure prediction problem with little reference to exact geometric relations. This produces dense 3D
estimates but comes with the inherent limitation of possible geometric inconsistency, the dependence on large training sets, domain sensitivity, and the difficulty of collecting
good quality real-world ground-truth using special equipment like laser or stereo rigs with sensitive calibration [13].
Another option is to use synthetic data [31], however bridging the realism gap can be challenging.
More recently, several authors [15, 51] focused on designing self-supervised systems with training signals resulting from photometric consistency losses between pairs of
images. These systems are effective and implicitly embed
basic 3D geometry – as points in the first view are backprojected in 3D, displaced by the camera motion and reprojected in the second view –, but still lack the fundamental
geometric constraints that link the rigid and apparent motion in multiple views.
In this work we introduce a self-supervised geometric
learning framework, GLNet, which aims to integrate the
advantages of modern deep-learning based self-supervised
systems – (a) training without labeled data, (b) offering
dense reconstructions where prior knowledge can be automatically incorporated, and (c) leveraging multiple interconnected tasks, with the ones of classical structure from
motion – (i) explicitly representing exact mathematical relations (e.g. the epipolar constraint) that always hold for rigid
scenes, (ii) being able to jointly refine all outputs, including depth, pose and camera intrinsics, under photometric
17063

