Laplace Landmark Localization
Joseph P Robinson1∗, Yuncheng Li2 , Ning Zhang2 , Yun Fu1 , and Sergey Tulyakov2
1
2
Northeastern University
Snap Inc.

Abstract
Landmark localization in images and videos is a classic problem solved in various ways. Nowadays, with deep
networks prevailing throughout machine learning, there are
revamped interests in pushing facial landmark detectors to
handle more challenging data. Most efforts use network
objectives based on L1 or L2 norms, which have several
disadvantages. First of all, the generated heatmaps translate to the locations of landmarks (i.e. confidence maps)
from which predicted landmark locations (i.e. the means)
get penalized without accounting for the spread: a highscatter corresponds to low confidence and vice-versa. For
this, we introduce a LaplaceKL objective that penalizes for
low confidence. Another issue is a dependency on labeled
data, which are expensive to obtain and susceptible to error.
To address both issues, we propose an adversarial training
framework that leverages unlabeled data to improve model
performance. Our method claims state-of-the-art on all of
the 300W benchmarks and ranks second-to-best on the Annotated Facial Landmarks in the Wild (AFLW) dataset. Furthermore, our model is robust with a reduced size: 1/8 the
number of channels (i.e. 0.0398 MB) is comparable to the
state-of-the-art in real-time on CPU. Thus, this work is of
high practical value to real-life application.

1. Introduction
To localize landmarks is to find pixel locations in visual
media corresponding to points of interest. In face alignment, these points correspond to face parts. For bodies and
hands, landmarks correspond to projections of joints on to
the camera plane [31, 35]. Historically, landmark detection
and shape analysis tasks date back decades: from Active
Shape Models [4] to Active Appearance Models [3], with
the latter proposed to analyze and detect facial landmarks.
A need for more advanced models to handle increasingly
tricky views has triggered revamped interest in facial landmark localization. Thus, came a wave of different types
∗ The work was done while the first author was interning at Snap Inc.

Input

Honari et al.
Input
2018

Our method

Figure 1. Heatmaps generated by softargmax-based models (middle block) and the proposed LaplaceKL (right block), each with
heatmaps on the input images (left) and a zoomed-in view of an
eye region (right). These heatmaps are confidence scores (i.e.
probabilities) that a pixel is a landmark. softargmax-based methods generate highly scattered mappings (low certainty), while the
same network trained with our loss is concentrated (i.e. high certainty). We further validate the importance of minimizing scatter
experimentally (Table 2). Best if viewed electronically.

of deep neural architectures that pushed state-of-the-art on
more challenging datasets. These modern-day networks are
trained end-to-end on paired labeled data (d, s), where d is
the image and s are the actual landmark coordinates. Many
of these used encoder-decoder style networks to generate
feature maps (i.e. heatmaps) to transform into pixel coordinates [23, 24, 40]. The network must be entirely differentiable to train end-to-end. Hence, the layer (or operation)
for transforming the K heatmaps to pixel coordinates must
be differentiable [15]. Note that each of the K heatmaps
corresponds to the coordinates of a landmark. Typically, the
softargmax operation determines the location of a landmark
as the expectation over the generated 2D heatmaps. Thus,
metrics like or determine the distance between the actual

10103

