Racial Faces in the Wild: Reducing Racial Bias by Information Maximization
Adaptation Network

1

Mei Wang1 , Weihong Deng1* , Jiani Hu1 , Xunqiang Tao2 , Yaohai Huang2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 2 Canon Information Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd
{wangmei1, whdeng, jnhu}@bupt.edu.cn, {taoxunqiang, huangyaohai}@canon-ib.com.cn

Abstract
Racial bias is an important issue in biometric, but has
not been thoroughly studied in deep face recognition. In
this paper, we first contribute a dedicated dataset called
Racial Faces in-the-Wild (RFW) database, on which we
firmly validated the racial bias of four commercial APIs and
four state-of-the-art (SOTA) algorithms. Then, we further
present the solution using deep unsupervised domain adaptation and propose a deep information maximization adaptation network (IMAN) to alleviate this bias by using Caucasian as source domain and other races as target domains.
This unsupervised method simultaneously aligns global distribution to decrease race gap at domain-level, and learns the discriminative target representations at cluster level.
A novel mutual information loss is proposed to further enhance the discriminative ability of network output without
label information. Extensive experiments on RFW, GBU,
and IJB-A databases show that IMAN successfully learns features that generalize well across different races and
across different databases.

1. Introduction
The emergence of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [38, 55, 59, 31, 32] greatly advances the frontier of
face recognition (FR) [63, 58, 54]. However, more and more
people find that a problematic issue, namely racial bias, has
always been concealed in the previous studies due to biased
benchmarks but it explicitly degrades the performance in
realistic FR systems [2, 13, 25, 8]. For example, Amazon’s
Rekognition Tool incorrectly matched the photos of 28 U.S.
congressmen with the faces of criminals, especially the error rate was up to 39% for non-Caucasian people. Although
several studies [49, 29, 23, 50, 36] have uncovered racial
bias in non-deep FR algorithms, this field still remains to be
vacant in deep learning era because so little testing information available makes it hard to measure the racial bias.
To facilitate the research towards this issue, in this

work we construct a new Racial Faces in-the-Wild (RFW)
database, as shown in Fig. 1 and Table 4, to fairly measure racial bias in deep FR. Based on experiments on RFW,
we find that both commercial APIs and SOTA algorithms indeed suffer from racial bias: the error rates on African
faces are about two times of Caucasians, as shown in Table
1. To investigate the biases caused by training data, we also
collect a race-balanced training database, and validate that
racial bias comes on both data and algorithm aspects. Some
specific races are inherently more difficult to recognize even
trained on the race-balanced training data. Further research
efforts on algorithms are requested to eliminate racial bias.

Figure 1. Examples and average faces of RFW database. In rows
top to bottom: Caucasian, Indian, Asian, African.

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [64] is one of
the promising methodologies to address algorithm biases,
which can map two domains into a domain-invariant feature
space and improve target performances in an unsupervised
manner [61, 40, 60, 24]. Unfortunately, most UDA methods
for object recognition are not applicable for FR because of
two unique challenges. First, face identities (classes) of two
domains are non-overlapping in FR, so that many skills in
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods based on sharing classes
are inapplicable. Second, popular methods by the global
alignment of source and target domain are insufficient to
acquire the discriminating power for classification in FR.
How to meet these two challenges is meaningful but few
works have been proposed in this community.

692

