Watch, Listen and Tell: Multi-modal Weakly Supervised Dense Event Captioning
Tanzila Rahman1,2
1
University of British Columbia

Bicheng Xu1,2
Leonid Sigal1,2,3
2
3
Vector Institute for AI
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

{trahman8, bichengx, lsigal}@cs.ubc.ca

Input Video with Audio Track

Abstract

Time

One of the friends plays
a song on his guitar and
the others listen.

.
.
.

One friend falls back
into the chair in
amazement after the
song

..

Humans often perceive the world through multiple sensory modalities, such as watching, listening, smelling,
touching, and tasting. Consider two people sitting in a
restaurant; seeing them across the table suggests that they
maybe friends or coincidental companions; hearing, even
the coarse demeanor of their conversation, makes the nature of their relationship much clearer. In our daily life,
there are many other examples that produce strong evidence
that multi-modal co-occurrences give us fuller perception of
events. Recall how difficult it is to perceive the intricacies
of the story from a silent film. Multi-modal perception has
been widely studied in areas like psychology [10, 42], neurology [33], and human computer interaction [37].
In the computer vision community, however, the
progress in learning representations from multiple modalities has been limited, especially for high-level perceptual tasks where such modalities (e.g., audio or sound)

.
.
.

..

1. Introduction

A group of friends sit
together in a living room
talking.

..

Multi-modal learning, particularly among imaging and
linguistic modalities, has made amazing strides in many
high-level fundamental visual understanding problems,
ranging from language grounding to dense event captioning. However, much of the research has been limited to
approaches that either do not take audio corresponding to
video into account at all, or those that model the audiovisual correlations in service of sound or sound source localization. In this paper, we present the evidence, that audio
signals can carry surprising amount of information when
it comes to high-level visual-lingual tasks. Specifically,
we focus on the problem of weakly-supervised dense event
captioning in videos and show that audio on its own can
nearly rival performance of a state-of-the-art visual model
and, combined with video, can improve on the state-of-theart performance. Extensive experiments on the ActivityNet
Captions dataset show that our proposed multi-modal approach outperforms state-of-the-art unimodal methods, as
well as validate specific feature representation and architecture design choices.

Dense Event Captions

The two friends
congratulate
the
man for his guitar
performance and
shake hands.

Figure 1: Multi-modal Dense Event Captioning. Illustration of our problem definition, where we use both audio
features and visual information to generate the dense captions for a video in a weakly supervised manner.
can play an integral role. Recent works [27, 31] propose
approaches for localizing audio in unconstrained videos
(sound source localization) or utilize sound in video captioning [15, 16, 44, 38]. However, these approaches consider relatively short videos, i.e., usually about 20 seconds,
and focus on description of a single salient event [47]. More
importantly, while they show that audio can boost the performance of visual models to an extent, such improvements
are typically considered marginal and the role of audio is
delegated to being secondary (or not nearly as important) as
visual signal [16, 44].
We posit that sound (or audio) may in fact be much more
important than the community may realize. Consider the
previously mentioned example of a silent film. The lack
of sound makes it significantly more difficult, if not impossible in many cases, to describe the rich flow of the story
and constituent events. Armed with this intuition, we focus on dense event captioning [22, 43, 49] (a.k.a. densecaptioning of events in videos [20]) and endow our models
with ability to utilize rich auditory signals for both event lo-

8908

