Approximated Bilinear Modules for Temporal Modeling
Xinqi Zhu1 , Chang Xu1 , Langwen Hui2 , Cewu Lu2 , and Dacheng Tao1
1
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
xzhu7491@uni.sydney.edu.au, {c.xu, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au,
{kunosarges, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider two less-emphasized temporal properties
of video: 1. Temporal cues are fine-grained; 2. Temporal modeling needs reasoning. To tackle both problems at
once, we exploit approximated bilinear modules (ABMs)
for temporal modeling. There are two main points making the modules effective: two-layer MLPs can be seen as a
constraint approximation of bilinear operations, thus can
be used to construct deep ABMs in existing CNNs while
reusing pretrained parameters; frame features can be divided into static and dynamic parts because of visual repetition in adjacent frames, which enables temporal modeling to be more efficient. Multiple ABM variants and implementations are investigated, from high performance to
high efficiency. Specifically, we show how two-layer subnets
in CNNs can be converted to temporal bilinear modules by
adding an auxiliary-branch. Besides, we introduce snippet
sampling and shifting inference to boost sparse-frame video
classification performance. Extensive ablation studies are
conducted to show the effectiveness of proposed techniques.
Our models can outperform most state-of-the-art methods
on Something-Something v1 and v2 datasets without Kinetics pretraining, and are also competitive on other YouTubelike action recognition datasets. Our code is available on
https://github.com/zhuxinqimac/abm-pytorch.

1. Introduction
Video action recognition has been one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision for decades. Since
CNNs achieved great success in image classification [23,
36, 40, 16, 17], deep models have been introduced to video
domain for action recognition [18, 35, 6, 42, 47, 38, 8, 48].
Different from image classification, video action recognition requires effort for temporal modeling, which is still an
open problem in this field.

Up to now there have been three promising ways for temporal modeling in action recognition. The first one is twostream architecture [35, 9, 47] where the temporal information is captured by optical flow (can cost over 90% of the
run time [39]). The second one is 3D CNN [18, 42, 43, 2].
This methods has the problem of high pretraining cost because 3D CNNs are hard to be directly used for small
datasets due to overfitting. This pretraining can be very expensive, e.g. 64 GPUs used in [2] and 56 GPUs used in
[51]. A late fusion step is usually used along with the above
two methods for long-term prediction, which slowdowns
their inference again. We refer the above two methods as
heavy methods. On the contrary, the third way is a light
method which conducts temporal modeling based on 2D
backbones where input frames are usually sparsely sampled
[6, 32, 31, 34, 55, 54, 27]. Without expensive late fusion,
preprocessing and postprocessing computational overheads
are eliminated. We value these merits of light architectures,
and discover a very powerful module which works harmoniously and effectively with them. Addtionally, the module
we propose is very flexible and can also work with heavy
methods to get an evident performance boost.
This paper is based on our two discoveries about videos.
The first one is: Temporal cues are fine-grained. Here we
refer fine-grained since the temporal information (motion
or state changes) could be easily dominated by spatial information (color blobs). This property can explain the usage of optical flow [35] or dense trajectory [45] which magnify the impact of temporal features by extracting them explicitly. As bilinear models have been shown effective for
fine-graind classification [29, 28], it motivates us to bring
bilinear operation to video temporal modeling. The second
discovery is: Temporal modeling needs reasoning. Unlike
image processing where low-level features like texture or
color blobs are crucial for classification, the key features
in time could be more high-level and reasoning-required,
e.g. basic physics, causality, and human’s intention. As the
state-of-the-art technique for VQA problem which requires

3494

