Joint Embedding of 3D Scan and CAD Objects
Manuel Dahnert1
1

Angela Dai1

Technical University of Munich

Leonidas Guibas2,3
2

Stanford University

Matthias Nießner1
3

Facebook AI Research

Figure 1: We learn a joint embedding space of scan and CAD object geometry, visualized here by t-SNE. Semantically
similar objects lie close together, despite very different lower-level geometric characteristics (clutter, noise, partialness, etc).

Abstract
3D scan geometry and CAD models often contain complementary information towards understanding environments, which could be leveraged through establishing a
mapping between the two domains. However, this is a challenging task due to strong, lower-level differences between
scan and CAD geometry. We propose a novel approach to
learn a joint embedding space between scan and CAD geometry, where semantically similar objects from both domains lie close together. To achieve this, we introduce a
new 3D CNN-based approach to learn a joint embedding
space representing object similarities across these domains.
To learn a shared space where scan objects and CAD models can interlace, we propose a stacked hourglass approach
to separate foreground and background from a scan object,
and transform it to a complete, CAD-like representation to
produce a shared embedding space. This embedding space
can then be used for CAD model retrieval; to further enable
this task, we introduce a new dataset of ranked scan-CAD

similarity annotations, enabling new, fine-grained evaluation of CAD model retrieval to cluttered, noisy, partial
scans. Our learned joint embedding outperforms current
state of the art for CAD model retrieval by 12% in instance
retrieval accuracy.

1. Introduction
The capture and reconstruction of real-world 3D scenes
has seen significant progress in recent years, driven by increasing availability of commodity RGB-D sensors such as
the Microsoft Kinect or Intel RealSense. State-of-the-art 3D
reconstruction approaches can achieve impressive reconstruction fidelity with robust tracking [18, 14, 20, 32, 7, 9].
Such 3D reconstructions have now begun to drive forward
3D scene understanding with the recent availability of annotated reconstruction datasets [8, 3]. With the simultaneous
availability of synthetic CAD model datasets [4], we have
an opportunity to drive forward both 3D scene understanding and geometric reconstruction.
18749

