Guessing Smart: Biased Sampling for Efficient Black-Box Adversarial Attacks
Thomas Brunner1,2
Frederik Diehl1,2
Michael Truong Le1,2
Alois Knoll2
1
2
fortiss GmbH
Technical University of Munich
{brunner,diehl,truongle}@fortiss.org

knoll@in.tum.de

Abstract
We consider adversarial examples for image classification in the black-box decision-based setting. Here, an attacker cannot access confidence scores, but only the final
label. Most attacks for this scenario are either unreliable
or inefficient. Focusing on the latter, we show that a specific
class of attacks, Boundary Attacks, can be reinterpreted as
a biased sampling framework that gains efficiency from domain knowledge. We identify three such biases, image frequency, regional masks and surrogate gradients, and evaluate their performance against an ImageNet classifier. We
show that the combination of these biases outperforms the
state of the art by a wide margin. We also showcase an efficient way to attack the Google Cloud Vision API, where
we craft convincing perturbations with just a few hundred
queries. Finally, the methods we propose have also been
found to work very well against strong defenses: Our targeted attack won second place in the NeurIPS 2018 Adversarial Vision Challenge.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) and (b): Black-box adversarial examples obtained by
random sampling. (c) and (d): isolated perturbation patterns. (c)
is sampled from a normal distribution, and (d) is sampled from a
distribution of Perlin noise patterns, which is one of the biases we
propose. Both (a) and (b) fool the classifier, but (b) can be obtained
with fewer samples.

1. Introduction
Ever since the term was fist coined, adversarial examples have enjoyed much attention from machine learning
researchers. The fact that tiny perturbations can lead otherwise robust-seeming models to misclassify an input could
pose a major problem for safety and security. But when discussing adversarial examples, it is often unclear how realistic the scenario of a proposed attack truly is. In this work,
we consider a threat setting with the following parameters:
Black-box. The black-box setting assumes that an attacker has access only to the input and output of a model.
Compared to the white-box setting, where an attacker has
complete access to the architecture and parameters of the
model, attacks in this setting are significantly harder to conduct: Most state-of-the-art white-box attacks [7, 4, 13] rely
on gradients that are directly computed from the model parameters, which are not available in the black-box setting.

Decision-based classification (label-only). Depending
on the output format of the model, the problem of missing
gradients can be circumvented. In a score-based scenario,
the model provides real-valued outputs (for example, softmax activations). By applying tiny modifications to the input, an attacker can estimate gradients by observing changes
in the output [5] and then follow this estimate to generate
adversarial examples. The decision-based setting, in contrast, provides only a single discrete result (the top-1 label)
on which gradient estimation is very inefficient [9]. This
form of black-box attack is much more difficult, but also
extends the range of possible targets in the real world [3].
Limited queries. Black-box attacks might not be feasible if they need millions of queries to the model, and possibly multiple hours’ time, to be successful. We therefore
consider a scenario where the attacker must find a convinc-

4958

