An Internal Learning Approach to Video Inpainting
Haotian Zhang1 ∗ Long Mai2
1

Ning Xu2

Stanford University

haotianz@stanford.edu

2

Zhaowen Wang2

Adobe Research

3

John Collomosse2,3

Hailin Jin2

University of Surrey

{malong,nxu,zhawang,collomos,hljin}@adobe.com

Abstract
We propose a novel video inpainting algorithm that simultaneously hallucinates missing appearance and motion
(optical flow) information, building upon the recent ‘Deep
Image Prior’ (DIP) that exploits convolutional network architectures to enforce plausible texture in static images. In
extending DIP to video we make two important contributions. First, we show that coherent video inpainting is possible without a priori training. We take a generative approach to inpainting based on internal (within-video) learning without reliance upon an external corpus of visual data
to train a one-size-fits-all model for the large space of general videos. Second, we show that such a framework can
jointly generate both appearance and flow, whilst exploiting these complementary modalities to ensure mutual consistency. We show that leveraging appearance statistics specific to each video achieves visually plausible results whilst
handling the challenging problem of long-term consistency.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting is the problem of synthesizing plausible
visual content within a missing region (‘hole’); for example, to remove unwanted objects. Inpainting is fundamentally ill-posed; there is no unique solution for the missing
content. Rather, the goal is to generate visually plausible
content that is coherent in both space and time. Priors play
a critical role in expressing these constraints. Patch-based
optimization methods [16, 27, 33, 44] effectively leverage
different priors such as patch recurrence, total variation, and
motion smoothness to achieve state-of-the-art video inpainting results. These priors, however, are mostly hand-crafted
and often not sufficient to capture natural image priors,
which often leads to distortion in the inpainting results, especially for challenging videos with complex motion (Fig.
1). Recent image inpainting approaches [18, 31, 35, 48]
learn better image priors from an external image corpus
∗ This work was done primarily during Haotian Zhang’s internship at
Adobe Research.

via a deep neural network, applying the learned appearance
model to hallucinate content conditioned upon observed regions. Extending these deep generative approaches to video
is challenging for two reasons. First, the coherency constraints for video are much stricter than for images. The
hallucinated content must not only be consistent within its
own frame, but also be consistent across adjacent frames.
Second, the space of videos is orders of magnitude larger
than that of images, making it challenging to train a single model on an external dataset to learn effective priors for
general videos, as one requires not only a sufficiently expressive model to generate all variations in the space, but
also large volumes of data to provide sufficient coverage.
This paper proposes internal learning for video inpainting inspired by the recently proposed ‘Deep Image Prior’
(DIP) for single image generation [40]. The striking result
of DIP is that ‘knowledge’ of natural images can be encoded
through a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture;
i.e. the network structure rather than actual filter weights.
The translation equivariance of CNN enables DIP to exploit
the internal recurrence of visual patterns in images [37], in
a similar way as the classical patch-based approaches [19]
but with more expressiveness. Furthermore, DIP does not
require an external dataset and therefore suffers less from
the aforementioned exponential data problem. We explore
this novel paradigm of DIP for video inpainting as an alternative to learning priors from external datasets.
Our core technical contribution is the first internal learning framework for video inpainting. Our study establishes
the significant result that it is possible to internally train
a single frame-wise generative CNN to produce high quality video inpainting results. We report on the effectiveness
of different strategies for internal learning to address the
fundamental challenge of temporal consistency in video inpainting. Therein, we develop a consistency-aware training strategy based on joint image and flow prediction. Our
method enables the network to not only capture shortterm motion consistency but also propagate the information across distant frames to effectively handle long-term
12720

