Self-Ensembling with GAN-based Data Augmentation for Domain Adaptation in
Semantic Segmentation
Jaehoon Choi
KAIST

Taekyung Kim
KAIST

Changick Kim
KAIST

{whdns44, tkkim93, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

STEP 1

Labeled Synthetic Data
Labeled Augmented Data

Deep learning-based semantic segmentation methods
have an intrinsic limitation that training a model requires
a large amount of data with pixel-level annotations. To address this challenging issue, many researchers give attention to unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic segmentation. Unsupervised domain adaptation seeks to adapt
the model trained on the source domain to the target domain. In this paper, we introduce a self-ensembling technique, one of the successful methods for domain adaptation
in classification. However, applying self-ensembling to semantic segmentation is very difficult because heavily-tuned
manual data augmentation used in self-ensembling is not
useful to reduce the large domain gap in the semantic segmentation. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel
framework consisting of two components, which are complementary to each other. First, we present a data augmentation method based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), which is computationally efficient and effective to facilitate domain alignment. Given those augmented
images, we apply self-ensembling to enhance the performance of the segmentation network on the target domain.
The proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art semantic
segmentation methods on unsupervised domain adaptation
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has been widely studied in the
computer vision field. Its goal is to assign image category
labels to each pixel in the image. A wide variety of algorithms based on deep neural networks have achieved high
performance with sufficient amounts of annotated datasets.
However, creating large labeled datasets for semantic segmentation is cost-expensive and time-consuming [7]. To
overcome the annotation burden, researchers utilize modern computer graphics to easily generate synthetic images
with ground truth labels [36]. Unfortunately, in practice,

TGCF-DA
Unlabeled Real Data

STEP 2

}

⋯

Teacher
Weight
Update

Transfer
Knowledge

Student

Epoch 1

⋯

Epoch N

⋯

Figure 1. The overall framework of our method. Given labeled
synthetic data and unlabeled real data, we propose a Target-Guided
and Cycle-Free Data Augmentation (TGCF-DA) method to generate labeled augmented data (green). We introduce two segmentation networks as the teacher and the student in order to implement
the self-ensembling algorithm (orange). Both segmentation networks are trained by augmented data as well as synthetic and real
data. During the learning process, the teacher network transfers its
knowledge to the student network.

models trained with synthetic data do not perform well on
a realistic domain because there exists a distribution difference called domain shift. Unsupervised domain adaptation
handles the domain shift by transferring knowledge from
the labeled dataset in the source domain to the unlabeled
dataset in the target domain [3].
Recent approaches for domain adaptation focus on aligning features extracted from the source and target data. In
particular, most of the domain adaptation methods in semantic segmentation depend on adversarial training aiming
to minimize the domain discrepancy through domain confusion [15, 14, 44, 41, 16, 52]. However, adversarial approaches suffer from a significant drawback. Since these
methods seek to align the global distributions of two dif-

6830

