Deep Multi-Model Fusion for Single-Image Dehazing
Zijun Deng1,∗ , Lei Zhu3,∗, Xiaowei Hu2 , Chi-Wing Fu2 , Xuemiao Xu1,5,6,†,
Qing Zhang7 , Jing Qin8 , and Pheng-Ann Heng2,4
1
South China University of Technology, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual
Reality Technology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS
4
CAS Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy
Systems, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS
5
State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Building Science
6
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Computational Intelligence and Cyberspace Information
7
Sun Yat-sen University 8 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Abstract
This paper presents a deep multi-model fusion network
to attentively integrate multiple models to separate layers
and boost the performance in single-image dehazing. To
do so, we first formulate the attentional feature integration module to maximize the integration of the convolutional neural network (CNN) features at different CNN layers
and generate the attentional multi-level integrated features
(AMLIF). Then, from the AMLIF, we further predict a hazefree result for an atmospheric scattering model, as well as
for four haze-layer separation models, then fuse the results
together to produce the final haze-free image. To evaluate
the effectiveness of our method, we compare our network
with several state-of-the-art methods on two widely-used
dehazing benchmark datasets, as well as on two sets of realworld hazy images. Experimental results demonstrate clear
quantitative and qualitative improvements of our method
over the state-of-the-arts.

(a) Input image

(b) Our result

(c) DCPDN [36] (CVPR’18) (d) PDNet [35] (ECCV’18)

Figure 1: Haze removal on a real-world photo under heavy
haze. Results in (b)-(d) are obtained by training these networks using the training set of NTIRE-dehazing challenge.
mulated by an atmospheric scattering (AS) model [36, 35]:
I(p) = J(p) × T (p) + A(p) × (1 − T (p)) ,

1. Introduction
In hazy conditions, ﬂoating particles in the atmosphere
absorb and scatter the light, thereby distorting the photo contents and degrading the accuracy of subsequent visual analysis. To overcome the issues, many methods [8, 11, 23, 28, 36, 35] have been proposed to recover the
underlying haze-free image from the single hazy input.
The image degradation caused by the haze is usually for∗ Zijun Deng and Lei Zhu are the joint ﬁrst authors of this work.
† Corresponding author (xuemx@scut.edu.cn)

(1)

where I is the observed hazy image; p is the pixel location;
J is the underlying scene radiance image to be recovered;
T is the transmission map, which represents the distancedependent factor affecting the fraction of light that reaches
the camera sensor; and A is the global atmospheric light,
indicating the ambient light intensity.
Early dehazing methods employed hand-crafted priors
based on the statistics of clean images to estimate the transmission map T [5, 9, 30, 2], such as local max contrast [31],
dark channel prior [13], color-line prior [10], and color attenuation prior [44], then use the atmospheric scattering
12453

