Pyramid Graph Networks with Connection Attentions for Region-Based
One-Shot Semantic Segmentation

1

Chi Zhang1 , Guosheng Lin1∗, Fayao Liu2 , Jiushuang Guo3 , Qingyao Wu 4 , Rui Yao5
Nanyang Technological University, 2 Institute for Infocomm Research A*STAR, 3 Stanford University,
4
South China University of Technology, 5 China University of Mining and Technology
E-mail: chi007@e.ntu.edu.sg , gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
One-shot image segmentation aims to undertake the segmentation task of a novel class with only one training image available. The difficulty lies in that image segmentation has structured data representations, which yields a
many-to-many message passing problem. Previous methods often simplify it to a one-to-many problem by squeezing support data to a global descriptor. However, a mixed
global representation drops the data structure and information of individual elements. In this paper, We propose to
model structured segmentation data with graphs and apply attentive graph reasoning to propagate label information from support data to query data. The graph attention mechanism could establish the element-to-element correspondence across structured data by learning attention
weights between connected graph nodes. To capture correspondence at different semantic levels, we further propose
a pyramid-like structure that models different sizes of image regions as graph nodes and undertakes graph reasoning at different levels. Experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012
dataset demonstrate that our proposed network significantly
outperforms the baseline method and leads to new stateof-the-art performance on 1-shot and 5-shot segmentation
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Fully supervised learning has shown great success
in many computer vision tasks, thanks to large-scale
datasets [2, 13] and deep neural networks [11, 8]. However,
standard supervised learning tasks, such as image classification and semantic segmentation, have their intrinsic limitations that both training and testing have to be applied on
a specific task, i.e., the categories to be classified. More
recently, meta-learning along with the power of deep neural networks has received growing interests in the machine
∗ Corresponding author: G. Lin.

Labeled Support Set

Prediction

Query Set
Attentive Graph Reasoning

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed Pyramid Graph Networks for solving one-shot image segmentation. Given only
one training image, our model could perform segmentation
on new test images. The proposed Graph Attention mechanism could find the correspondence between image regions.

learning community. Meta-learning, also called learning
to learn, aims to train a meta learner that is able to produce good generalization performance on unseen but similar tasks with scarce training data. The training of a metalearner is not performed on a specific task, and instead, on
a distribution of similar tasks.
A well-studied area of meta-learning is one-shot image
classification which aims to classify a test image given only
one training image in each class. One-shot segmentation
further extends this task to pixel levels. With only one pixelwise labeled training image, the goal is to predict a binary
mask in the testing images. Unlike one-shot image classification tasks where each data point has a label, in segmentation, the data is represented with a group of structured pixels. This yields a many-to-many message passing problem
that we do not know which pixels in two images are related.
To solve the problems mentioned above, previous methods transform it to a one-to-many problem, using global
pooling operations to squeeze structured support data to
a global descriptor and exploit it to guide dense predictions [18, 3, 15, 26, 27]. In this case, the prediction of each

9587

