Learning to Collocate Neural Modules for Image Captioning
Xu Yang1 , Hanwang Zhang1 , Jianfei Cai1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
2
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia,
s170018@e.ntu.edu.sg,{hanwangzhang@,ASJFCai@}ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We do not speak word by word from scratch; our brain
quickly structures a pattern like STH DO STH AT SOME PLACE and then fills in the detailed descriptions. To render
existing encoder-decoder image captioners such humanlike reasoning, we propose a novel framework: learning
to Collocate Neural Modules (CNM), to generate the “inner pattern” connecting visual encoder and language decoder. Unlike the widely-used neural module networks in
visual Q&A, where the language (i.e., question) is fully observable, CNM for captioning is more challenging as the
language is being generated and thus is partially observable. To this end, we make the following technical contributions for CNM training: 1) compact module design — one
for function words and three for visual content words (e.g.,
noun, adjective, and verb), 2) soft module fusion and multistep module execution, robustifying the visual reasoning in
partial observation, 3) a linguistic loss for module controller being faithful to part-of-speech collocations (e.g.,
adjective is before noun). Extensive experiments on the
challenging MS-COCO image captioning benchmark validate the effectiveness of our CNM image captioner. In particular, CNM achieves a new state-of-the-art 127.9 CIDErD on Karpathy split and a single-model 126.0 c40 on the
official server. CNM is also robust to few training samples,
e.g., by training only one sentence per image, CNM can
halve the performance loss compared to a strong baseline.

1. Introduction
Let’s describe the three images in Figure 1a. Most of
you will compose sentences varying vastly from image to
image. In fact, the ability of using diverse language to
describe the colorful visual world is a gift to humans, but
a formidable challenge to machines. Although recent advances in visual representation learning [16, 42] and language modeling [18, 50] demonstrate the impressive power
of modeling the diversity in their respective modalities, it

(a) Three diverse images.
STH.
A man plays a
board on the road.

DO

STH. AT SOMEPLACE

A cow is eating
grass in a grassy hill

A train is coming
into a platform

(b) Three captions with the same sentence pattern.
ATTRIBUTE

OBJECT

Module

Module

black

cat

FUNCTION

Module

a
RELATION

RELATION

OBJECT

Module

Module

Module
FUNCTION

Module

sits

in

a

suitcase

(c) The caption generation process of CNM.

Figure 1: The motivation of the proposed learning to Collocate Neural Modules (CNM) for image captioning: neural
module collocation imitates the inductive bias — sentence
pattern, which regularizes the diverse training effectively.
is still far from being resolved to establish a robust crossmodal connection between them. Indeed, image captioning
is not the only model that can easily exploit the dataset bias
to captioning even without looking at the image [44], almost all existing models for visual reasoning tasks such as
visual Q&A [23, 46, 48] have been spotted mode collapse
to certain dataset idiosyncrasies and failed to reproduce the
diversity of our world — the more complex the task is, the
more severe the collapse will be, such as image paragraph
generation [27], scene graph generation [5, 14], and visual
dialog [7, 38]. For example, in MS-COCO [32] training
set, as the co-occurrence chance of “man” and “standing”

4250

