3D Face Modeling From Diverse Raw Scan Data
Feng Liu, Luan Tran, Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{liufeng6, tranluan, liuxm}@msu.edu
Abstract
Traditional 3D face models learn a latent representation
of faces using linear subspaces from limited scans of a single database. The main roadblock of building a large-scale
face model from diverse 3D databases lies in the lack of
dense correspondence among raw scans. To address these
problems, this paper proposes an innovative framework to
jointly learn a nonlinear face model from a diverse set of
raw 3D scan databases and establish dense point-to-point
correspondence among their scans. Specifically, by treating
input scans as unorganized point clouds, we explore the
use of PointNet architectures for converting point clouds
to identity and expression feature representations, from
which the decoder networks recover their 3D face shapes.
Further, we propose a weakly supervised learning approach
that does not require correspondence label for the scans.
We demonstrate the superior dense correspondence and
representation power of our proposed method, and its
contribution to single-image 3D face reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Robust and expressive 3D face modeling is valuable for
computer vision problems, e.g., 3D reconstruction [7,24,41,
54] and face recognition [42, 43, 58], as well as computer
graphics problems, e.g., character animation [15, 31]. The
state-of-the-art 3D face representations mostly adopt linear
transformations [39, 59, 60], e.g., 3D Morphable Model
(3DMM) or higher-order tensor generalizations [1, 13, 14,
67], e.g., Blendshapes Model. However, these linear models
fall short of capturing the nonlinear deformations such as
high-frequency details and extreme expressions. Recently,
with the advent of deep learning, there have been several
attempts at using deep neural networks for nonlinear datadriven face modeling [4, 32, 51, 65].
To model 3D face shapes, a large amount of high-quality
3D scans is required. The widely used 3DMM-based
BFM2009 [48] is built from scans of merely 200 subjects
in neutral expressions. Lack of expression may be com-

Figure 1: Comparison between 3D face modeling of (a)
existing methods and (b) our proposed method. Dense point-topoint correspondence is a pre-requisite for the existing 3D face
modeling methods. Our proposed CNN-based approach learns
face models directly from raw scans of multiple 3D face databases
and establish dense point-to-point correspondence among all scans
(best viewed in color). Despite the diversity of scans in resolution
and expression, our model can express the fine level of details.
pensated with expression bases from FaceWarehouse [14]
or BD-3FE [70]. After more than a decade, almost all
existing models use less than 300 training subjects. Such a
small training set is far from adequate to describe the full
variability of faces. Until recently, Booth et al. [11, 12]
build the first Large-Scale Face Model (LSFM) from neutral
scans of 9,663 subjects. Unfortunately, with only the
resultant linear 3DMM bases being released instead of the
original scans, we cannot fully leverage this large database
to explore different 3D modeling techniques.
In fact, there are many publicly available 3D face
databases, as shown in Fig. 1. However, these databases are
often used individually, rather than jointly to create largescale face models. The main hurdle lies in the challenge

9408

