Surface Networks via General Covers
Niv Haim ∗

Nimrod Segol ∗
Heli Ben-Hamu
Yaron Lipman

Haggai Maron

Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel

Abstract
Developing deep learning techniques for geometric data
is an active and fruitful research area. This paper tackles
the problem of sphere-type surface learning by developing a
novel surface-to-image representation. Using this representation we are able to quickly adapt successful CNN models
to the surface setting.
The surface-image representation is based on a covering
map from the image domain to the surface. Namely, the map
wraps around the surface several times, making sure that
every part of the surface is well represented in the image.
Differently from previous surface-to-image representations,
we provide a low distortion coverage of all surface parts
in a single image. Specifically, for the use case of learning
spherical signals, our representation provides a low distortion alternative to several popular spherical parameterizations used in deep learning.
We have used the surface-to-image representation to apply standard CNN architectures to 3D models including
spherical signals. We show that our method achieves state
of the art or comparable results on the tasks of shape retrieval, shape classification and semantic shape segmentation.

1. Introduction
Adapting deep learning methods to geometric data (e.g.,
shapes) is a vibrant research area that has already produced
state of the art algorithms for several geometric learning
tasks (e.g., [32, 33, 38]).
Two prominent approaches are: (i) mapping the geometric data to tensors (e.g., images) and using off-the-shelf
convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures and optimization techniques [38, 45, 36, 25]; and (ii) developing
novel architectures and optimization techniques that are tailored to the geometric data [26, 32, 33]. An important benefit of (i) is in reducing the geometric learning task to an image learning one, allowing to harness the huge algorithmic
∗ Equal contribution

progress of neural networks for images directly to geometric data.
Some previous attempts, following (i), to perform learning tasks on geometric data use projections to 2D planes,
e.g., by rendering the shapes [38]. Such projections are not
injective and suffer from occlusions, thus often require a
collection of projections for a single shape. Other methods
embed the shape in an encapsulating 3D grid [45, 27]; these
methods require dealing with higher dimensional tensors
and are usually less robust to deformations. Other methods [36, 25] try to find low distortion 2D mappings to an
image domain. In this case the intrinsic dimensionality of
the data is preserved, however, these maps suffer from high
distortion and/or ignore the difference in the topologies of
the surface (no boundary) and the image (with boundary).
In this paper, we advocate a novel 2D mapping method
for representing sphere-type (genus zero, e.g., the human
model in Figure 1a, left) surfaces as images. The challenge
in using an image to represent a surface has two aspects: geometrical and topological. Geometrically, a general curved
surface cannot be mapped to a flat domain (i.e., the image)
without introducing a significant distortion. Topologically,
an image has a boundary while sphere-type surfaces do not;
hence, any mapping between the two will introduce cuts and
discontinuities. Furthermore, a naive application of 2D convolution to the image would be ambiguous on the surface
(see Figure 2 and Subsection 3.1).
To address these challenges we think of the image as a
periodic domain (i.e., a torus) and relax the notion of a oneto-one mapping to that of a covering map from the image
domain onto the surface. That is, we construct a mapping
from the image domain to the surface that covers the surface
several times. For example, Figure 1a visualizes a degree5 covering map. Meaning, the surface appears 5 times in
the image; note how each part of the surface appears with
low distortion at-least once in the image. The image generated by our covering map is periodic, namely its left and
right boundaries as well as its bottom and top boundaries
correspond, making the image boundaryless. Importantly,
1632

