Compositional Video Prediction
Yufei Ye1
1

Maneesh Singh2

Carnegie Mellon University

Abhinav Gupta13*
2

Verisk Analytics

Shubham Tulsiani3*
3

Facebook AI Research

{yufeiy2,abhinavg}@cs.cmu.edu
maneesh.singh@verisk.com
https://judyye.github.io/CVP/

shubtuls@fb.com

Abstract
We present an approach for pixel-level future prediction given an input image of a scene. We observe that a
scene is comprised of distinct entities that undergo motion
and present an approach that operationalizes this insight.
We implicitly predict future states of independent entities
while reasoning about their interactions, and compose future video frames using these predicted states. We overcome the inherent multi-modality of the task using a global
trajectory-level latent random variable, and show that this
allows us to sample diverse and plausible futures. We empirically validate our approach against alternate representations and ways of incorporating multi-modality. We examine two datasets, one comprising of stacked objects that
may fall, and the other containing videos of humans performing activities in a gym, and show that our approach
allows realistic stochastic video prediction across these diverse settings. See project website for video predictions.

1. Introduction
A single image of a scene allows us humans to make a remarkable number of judgments about the underlying world.
For example, consider the two images on the left in Fig 1.
We can easily infer that the top image depicts some stacked
blocks, and the bottom shows a human with his arms raised.
While these inferences showcase our ability to understand
what is, even more remarkably, we are capable of predicting what will happen next. For example, not only do we
know that there are stacked blocks in the top image, we understand that the blue and yellow ones will topple and fall
to the left. Similarly, we know that the person in the bottom
image will lift his torso while keeping his hands in place.
In this work, we aim to build a model that can do the same
– from a single (annotated) image of a scene, predict at a
pixel level, what the future will be.
* The last two authors were equally uninvolved.

Figure 1. Given a still image with locations of entities (objects or
joints), we predict a sequence of future frames. We visualize two
frames from the predicted sequence for the given inputs.

A key factor in the ability to make these predictions is
that we understand scenes in terms of ‘entities’, that can
move and interact e.g. the blocks are separate objects that
move; the human body’s motion can similarly be understood in terms of the correlated motion of the limbs. We
operationalize this ideology and present an approach that
instead of directly predicting future frames, learns to predict the future locations and appearance of the entities in
the scene, and via these composes a prediction of the future
frame. The modeling of appearance and the learned composition allows our method to leverage the benefits of independent per-entity representations while allowing for reasoning
in pose changes or overlap/occlusions in pixel space.
Although our proposed factorization allows learning
models capable of predicting the future frames via entitybased reasoning, this task of inferring future frames from a
single input image is fundamentally ill-posed. To allow for
the inherent multi-modality of the prediction space, we propose to use a trajectory-level latent random variable that implicitly captures the ambiguities over the whole video and
110353

