Bayesian Loss for Crowd Count Estimation with Point Supervision
Zhiheng Ma1∗ Xing Wei1∗ Xiaopeng Hong1,2† Yihong Gong1
1
Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laborotory
mazhiheng@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

xingxjtu@gmail.com

Abstract
In crowd counting datasets, each person is annotated by
a point, which is usually the center of the head. And the
task is to estimate the total count in a crowd scene. Most of
the state-of-the-art methods are based on density map estimation, which convert the sparse point annotations into
a “ground truth” density map through a Gaussian kernel,
and then use it as the learning target to train a density map
estimator. However, such a “ground-truth” density map
is imperfect due to occlusions, perspective effects, variations in object shapes, etc. On the contrary, we propose
Bayesian loss, a novel loss function which constructs a density contribution probability model from the point annotations. Instead of constraining the value at every pixel in
the density map, the proposed training loss adopts a more
reliable supervision on the count expectation at each annotated point. Without bells and whistles, the loss function
makes substantial improvements over the baseline loss on
all tested datasets. Moreover, our proposed loss function
equipped with a standard backbone network, without using
any external detectors or multi-scale architectures, plays
favourably against the state of the arts. Our method outperforms previous best approaches by a large margin on
the latest and largest UCF-QNRF dataset. The source code
is available at https://github.com/ZhihengCV/
Baysian-Crowd-Counting.

1. Introduction
Counting dense crowds using computer vision techniques has attracted remarkable attentions in recent years.
It has a wide range of applications such as estimating the
scale of, and counting the number of participants in political rallies, civil unrest, social and sport events, etc. In
addition, methods for crowd counting also have great potentials to handle similar tasks in other domains, includ∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

{hongxiaopeng,ygong}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

ing estimating the number of vehicles in traffic congestion
[29, 30, 56, 14, 28], counting the cells and bacteria from
microscopic images [20, 42, 44, 45, 8], and animal crowd
estimations for ecological survey [27, 1, 18], to name a few.
Crowd counting is a very challenging task because: 1)
dense crowds often have heavy overlaps and occlusions between each other; 2) perspective effects may cause large
variations in human size, shape, and appearance in the image. In the past decade, a number of crowd counting algorithms [22, 58, 21, 12, 5, 35, 20, 11, 7, 31] have been proposed in the literature. Recently, crowd counting methods
using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have made
remarkable progresses [53, 46, 36, 6, 57, 59, 38, 9, 4, 32,
16]. The best performing methods are mostly based on the
density map estimation, which typically obtain the crowd
count by predicting a density map for the input image and
then summing over the estimated density map. Nowadays,
publicly available datasets [15, 57, 16] for training crowd
count estimators only provide point annotations for each
training image, i.e., only one pixel of each person is labeled
(typically the center of the head). Currently, the most common approach for using these annotations is to first convert
the point annotations for each training image to a “groundtruth” density map using the Gaussian kernel, and then train
a CNN model by regressing the value at each pixel in this
density map. With such pixel-level strict supervisions, the
accuracy of a CNN model is highly dependent on the quality
of the obtained “ground-truth” density maps.
Obviously, “ground-truth” density maps obtained by applying a hypothetical Gaussian kernel to the point annotations can hardly be of top quality, due to the occlusions,
irregular crowd distributions, large variations in object size,
shape, density, etc. On the contrary, we propose Bayesian
loss, which constructs a density contribution probability
model from the point annotations. Then the expected count
at each annotated point is calculated by summing the product of the contribution probability and estimated density at
each pixel, which can be reliably supervised by the groundtruth count value (apparently, one). Compared with previous loss functions that constrain the density value at every

6142

