Dynamic Anchor Feature Selection for Single-Shot Object Detection
Shuai Li1,2 , Lingxiao Yang1 , Jianqiang Huang2 , Xian-Sheng Hua2 , Lei Zhang1,2 ∗
1
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{csshuaili, cslyang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, jianqiang.hjq@alibaba-inc.com
huaxiansheng@gmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
The design of anchors is critical to the performance of
one-stage detectors. Recently, the anchor refinement module (ARM) has been proposed to adjust the initialization of
default anchors, providing the detector a better anchor reference. However, this module brings another problem: all
pixels at a feature map have the same receptive field while
the anchors associated with each pixel have different positions and sizes. This discordance may lead to a less effective detector. In this paper, we present a dynamic feature
selection operation to select new pixels in a feature map
for each refined anchor received from the ARM. The pixels
are selected based on the new anchor position and size so
that the receptive filed of these pixels can fit the anchor areas well, which makes the detector, especially the regression
part, much easier to optimize. Furthermore, to enhance the
representation ability of selected feature pixels, we design
a bidirectional feature fusion module by combining features
from early and deep layers. Extensive experiments on both
PASCAL VOC and COCO demonstrate the effectiveness of
our dynamic anchor feature selection (DAFS) operation.
For the case of high IoU threshold, our DAFS can improve
the mAP by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a prerequisite for many downstream computer vision applications, such as person reidentification [2], autonomous driving [7], and action recognition [12]. As such a fundamental and important task,
object detection has been extensively studied for several
decades. Due to the progressively promising development
in Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) recently, object
detection has seen significant improvements both in speed
and accuracy [14, 18, 33, 15, 3, 6, 35].
Based on the deep CNN feature, there are mainly two
dominant detection frameworks. One is two-stage detec∗ Corresponding author. This work is supported by China NSFC grant
(no. 61672446) and Hong Kong RGC GRF grant (PolyU 152135/16E).

Table 1: The original IoU distribution of adjusted positive
anchors
0-0.1
0.02%

0.1-0.2
0.32%

0.2-0.3
9.0%

0.3-0.4
47.6%

0.4-0.5
27.9%

0.5-0.6
10.8%

0.6-1.0
4.4%

tors such as Faster-RCNN [29] and the other one is onestage detectors such as SSD [24]. Given color images as input, both type of detectors employ a stack of convolutional
layers (usually some typical backbone like ResNet [14] or
VGG [33]) to extract several feature maps for the input. For
one stage detectors, classification scores are predicted and
bounding boxes are estimated directly on the feature maps
with respect to a set of default anchors using extra convolutional layers. By contrast, two stage detectors also start with
anchors, but utilize a two-step cascade detector, where the
first step mainly aims to regress better initialized proposals
and eliminate a large number of negatives.
Inspired by the two stage detectors, some researchers
borrow the two-step cascade regression method into onestage detectors. One example is RefineDet [36]. It uses
an Anchor Refinement Module (ARM) to adjust the locations and sizes of anchors, and at the same time to filter
out easy negative anchors. Experiments show that the accuracy gain mainly results from the adjusted anchors. Table 1
shows the original IoU distribution of the new positive anchors (IoU >0.5). We can see that after the refinement, the
number of positive anchors greatly increases. Nearly 85%
of positive anchors come from negative anchors. However,
RefineDet keeps the feature points associated with each anchor unchanged, resulting in a discordance between the adjusted anchors and the receptive field of the feature points.
The discordance at each position of a feature map is different from each other since the shapes of the adjusted anchors
become irregular, making the detector especially the regression part be sub-optimal.
Since the anchor positions are adjusted, why can not the
sampling feature points associated with the anchors be adjusted? Motivated by this, we propose a simple yet effective
feature selection operation to dynamically select suitable
feature points for each adjusted anchor basing on its new position and size. The selected feature points can cover most
16609

