Data-Free Quantization
Through Weight Equalization and Bias Correction
Markus Nagel∗

Mart van Baalen∗

Tijmen Blankevoort

Max Welling

Qualcomm AI Research†
Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V.
{markusn, mart, tijmen, mwelling}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
We introduce a data-free quantization method for deep
neural networks that does not require fine-tuning or hyperparameter selection. It achieves near-original model performance on common computer vision architectures and
tasks. 8-bit fixed-point quantization is essential for efficient inference on modern deep learning hardware. However, quantizing models to run in 8-bit is a non-trivial task,
frequently leading to either significant performance reduction or engineering time spent on training a network to be
amenable to quantization. Our approach relies on equalizing the weight ranges in the network by making use of a
scale-equivariance property of activation functions. In addition the method corrects biases in the error that are introduced during quantization. This improves quantization
accuracy performance, and can be applied to many common computer vision architectures with a straight forward
API call. For common architectures, such as the MobileNet
family, we achieve state-of-the-art quantized model performance. We further show that the method also extends to
other computer vision architectures and tasks such as semantic segmentation and object detection.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning based computer vision
models have moved from research labs into the cloud and
onto edge devices. As a result, power consumption and
latency of deep learning inference have become an important concern. For this reason fixed-point quantization is often employed to make inference more efficient. By quantizing floating point values onto a regularly spaced grid,
the original floating point values can be approximated by
a set of integers, a scaling factor, and an optional zero point
∗ Equal Contribution
† Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

Inc.

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Imagenet Top1 Accuracy

FP32

INT16

INT12

INT10

INT8

DFQ (ours)
Baseline

INT6

INT5

Figure 1. Fixed point inference for MobileNetV2 on ImageNet.
The original model has significant drop in performance at 12-bit
quantization whereas our model maintains close to FP32 performance even at 6-bit quantization.

offset [16]. This allows for the use of faster and more
power-efficient integer operations in matrix multiplication
and convolution computations, at the expense of lower representational power. We refer the reader to [18] for details
on commonly used, hardware-friendly quantization methods for deep learning models.
Quantization of 32-bit full precision (FP32) models into
8-bit fixed point (INT8) introduces quantization noise on
the weights and activations, which often leads to reduced
model performance. This performance degradation ranges
from very minor to catastrophic. To minimize the quantization noise, a wide range of different methods have been
introduced in the literature (see Section 2). A major drawback of these quantization methods is their reliance on data
and fine-tuning. As an example, consider real-world actors
that manage hardware for quantized models, such as cloudbased deep learning inference providers or cellphone manufacturers. To provide a general use quantization service they
would have to receive data from the customers to fine-tune
the models, or rely on their customers to do the quantization. In either case, this can add a difficult step to the process. For such stakeholders it would be preferable if FP32
models could be converted directly to INT8, without needing the know-how, data or compute necessary for running
traditional quantization methods. Even for model develop-

1325

