Balanced Datasets Are Not Enough:
Estimating and Mitigating Gender Bias in Deep Image Representations
Tianlu Wang1 , Jieyu Zhao2 , Mark Yatskar3 , Kai-Wei Chang2 , Vicente Ordonez1
1
University of Virginia, 2 University of California Los Angeles,
3
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
tianlu@virginia.edu, jyzhao@cs.ucla.edu, marky@allenai.org,
kwchang@cs.ucla.edu, vicente@virginia.edu

Abstract
In this work, we present a framework to measure and
mitigate intrinsic biases with respect to protected variables
–such as gender– in visual recognition tasks. We show
that trained models significantly amplify the association
of target labels with gender beyond what one would expect from biased datasets. Surprisingly, we show that even
when datasets are balanced such that each label co-occurs
equally with each gender, learned models amplify the association between labels and gender, as much as if data had
not been balanced! To mitigate this, we adopt an adversarial approach to remove unwanted features corresponding to
protected variables from intermediate representations in a
deep neural network – and provide a detailed analysis of
its effectiveness. Experiments on two datasets: the COCO
dataset (objects), and the imSitu dataset (actions), show
reductions in gender bias amplification while maintaining
most of the accuracy of the original models.

1. Introduction
While visual recognition systems have made great
progress toward practical applications, they are also sensitive to spurious correlations and often depend on these erroneous associations. When such systems are used on images
containing people, they risk amplifying societal stereotypes
by over associating protected attributes such as gender, race
or age with target predictions, such as object or action labels. Known negative outcomes have included representation harms (e.g., male software engineers are being overrepresented in image search results [11]), harms of opportunity, (e.g., facial recognition is not as effective for people
with different skin tones [3]), to life-threatening situations
(e.g., recognition rates of pedestrians in autonomous vehicles are not equally accurate for all groups of people [32]).
In this paper we study gender bias amplification: the ef-

DATASET LEAKAGE @ F1

knife
table
spoon
vase
cabinet
window

Randomly Perturb
True Labels

knife
tv-set
spoon
vase
cabinet
hammer

Predict Gender
from Labels

MODEL LEAKAGE @ F1
Predict Labels
from Image

Predict Gender from
knife
Predicted Labels
spoon
fork
vase
hair drier
oven

^

Figure 1. On the top we illustrate our newly introduced concept
of Dataset Leakage which measures the extent to which gender
–or more generally a protected variable– can be inferred from randomly perturbed ground-truth labels. On the bottom we illustrate
our concept of Model Leakage which measures the extent to which
gender can be inferred from the outputs of a model. A model amplifies bias if model leakage exceeds dataset leakage.

fect that trained models exaggerate gender stereotypes that
are present in the training data. We focus on the tasks of
recognizing objects in the COCO dataset [16] and actions
in the imSitu dataset [36], where training resources exhibit
gender skew and models trained on these datasets exhibit
bias amplification [39].1 In an effort to more broadly characterize bias amplification, we generalize existing measures
of bias amplification. Instead of measuring the similarity
between training data and model prediction distributions,
we compare the predictability of gender from ground truth
labels (dataset leakage, Figure 1 on the top) and model predictions (model leakage, Figure 1 on the bottom). Each of
these measures is computed using a classifier that is trained
1 For example women are represented as cooking twice as often as men
in imSitu, but after models are trained and evaluated on similarly distributed data, they predict cooking for women three times as often as men.

5310

