On the Efficacy of Knowledge Distillation
Jang Hyun Cho
Cornell University

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

jc2926@cornell.edu

bh497@cornell.edu

on achieving the same or similar accuracy with smaller
models. Some of this work has involved building more efficient neural network families [13, 7], pruning weights from
larger neural networks [10], quantizing existing networks to
use fewer bits for weights and activations [22] and distilling
knowledge from larger networks into smaller ones [12, 1].

Figure 1. An illustration of standard knowledge distillation. Despite widespread use, an understanding of when the student can
learn from the teacher is missing.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a thorough evaluation of the efficacy of knowledge distillation and its dependence on student and teacher architectures. Starting with the observation that more accurate teachers often don’t make good
teachers, we attempt to tease apart the factors that affect
knowledge distillation performance. We find crucially that
larger models do not often make better teachers. We show
that this is a consequence of mismatched capacity, and that
small students are unable to mimic large teachers. We find
typical ways of circumventing this (such as performing a sequence of knowledge distillation steps) to be ineffective. Finally, we show that this effect can be mitigated by stopping
the teacher’s training early. Our results generalize across
datasets and models.

1. Introduction
The past few years have seen dramatic improvements in
visual recognition systems, but these improvements have
been driven by deeper and larger convolutional network architectures. The large computational complexity of these
architectures has limited their use in many downstream applications. As such, there has been a lot of recent research

The last of these, knowledge distillation, is a generalpurpose technique that at first glance is widely applicable
and complements all other ways of compressing neural networks [20]. The key idea is to use soft probabilities (or
‘logits’) of a larger “teacher network” to supervise a smaller
“student” network, in addition to the available class labels.
These soft probabilities reveal more information than the
class labels alone, and can purportedly help the student network learn better.
The appeal of this approach is in its apparent generality:
any student can learn from any teacher. But does knowledge
distillation fulfill this promise of generality? Unfortunately,
in spite of the recent interest in variants of knowledge distillation [17, 24, 23, 21, 27, 26, 5, 14], an empirical answer
to this question is missing. Prior experiments have typically
looked at a small number of carefully chosen architectures,
with the implicit assumption that conclusions will generalize across student or teacher architectures. However, there
are a few isolated reports of failed experiments with knowledge distillation that suggest that this might not be true. For
example, Zagoruyko and Komodakis observe that they are
“unable to achieve positive results with knowledge distillation on ImageNet” [26]. What characterizes this, and other
experiments where knowledge distillation does not seem to
improve performance? Are there student-teacher combinations that perform better? And finally, is there something
we can do to improve performance for other combinations?
In this paper, we seek to answer these questions. We find
that in general, the teacher accuracy is a poor predictor of
the student’s performance. Larger teachers, though they are
more accurate by themselves, do not necessarily make for
better teachers. We explore the reasons for this and demonstrate that as the teacher grows in capacity and accuracy, the
student often finds it difficult to emulate the teacher (resulting in a high KL divergence from the teacher logits even

4794

