Calibration Wizard: A Guidance System for Camera Calibration
Based on Modelling Geometric and Corner Uncertainty
Songyou Peng∗
ETH Zurich

Peter Sturm
INRIA Grenoble – Rhône-Alpes

songyou.peng@inf.ethz.ch

peter.sturm@inria.fr

Abstract
It is well known that the accuracy of a calibration depends strongly on the choice of camera poses from which
images of a calibration object are acquired. We present a
system – Calibration Wizard – that interactively guides a
user towards taking optimal calibration images. For each
new image to be taken, the system computes, from all previously acquired images, the pose that leads to the globally
maximum reduction of expected uncertainty on intrinsic parameters and then guides the user towards that pose. We
also show how to incorporate uncertainty in corner point
position in a novel principled manner, for both, calibration
and computation of the next best pose. Synthetic and realworld experiments are performed to demonstrate the effectiveness of Calibration Wizard.

1. Introduction
Camera calibration is a prerequisite to many methods
and applications in computer vision and photogrammetry,
in particular for most problems where 3D reconstruction or
motion estimation is required. In this paper we adopt the
popular usage of planar calibration objects, as introduced1
by [17, 23] and made available through OpenCV [2] and
Matlab [1], even though our approach can be directly applied to 3D calibration objects too.
It is well known that when using planar calibration
targets, the accuracy of the resulting calibration depends
strongly on the poses used to acquire images. From the theoretical study of degenerate sets of camera poses in [17, 23],
it follows for example intuitively that it is important to vary
the orientation (rotation) of the camera as much as possible during the acquisition process. It is also widely known
to practitioners that a satisfactory calibration requires images such that the target successively covers the entire im∗ Most work was done while he was an intern at INRIA.
1 Planar targets were used before, but essentially in combination with
motion stages, in order to effectively generate 3D targets [18, 7, 20, 9]

age area, otherwise the estimation of radial distortion and
other parameters usually remains suboptimal. We have observed that inexperienced users usually do not take calibration images that lead to a sufficiently accurate calibration.
Several efforts have been done in the past to guide users
in placing the camera. In photogrammetry for instance, the
so-called network design problem was addressed, through
an off-line process: how to place a given number of cameras
such as to obtain an as accurate as possible 3D reconstruction of an object of assumed proportions [10, 11]. Optimal
camera poses for camera calibration have been computed
in [14], however only for constrained camera motions and
especially, only for the linear approach of [23], whereas we
consider the non-linear optimization for calibration. Also,
these poses are difficult to realize, even for expert users.
The ROS [12] monocular camera calibration toolbox provides text instructions so that users can move the target accordingly. More recently, some cameras, such as the ZED
stereo system from StereoLabs, come with software that interactively guides the user to good poses during the calibration process; these poses are however pre-computed for the
particular stereo system and this software cannot be used to
calibrate other systems, especially monocular cameras.
In this paper we propose a system that guides the user
through a simple graphical user interface (GUI) in order
to move the camera to poses that are optimal for calibrating a camera. Optimality is considered for the bundle adjustment type non-linear optimization formulation for calibration. For each new image to be acquired, the system
computes the optimal pose, i.e. which adds most new information on intrinsic parameters, in addition to that provided by the already acquired images. The most closely
related works we are aware of are [13, 15]. They also suggest next best poses to the user. However, unlike ours, they
are both strategy-based methods, where suggestions are selected from a fixed dataset of pre-defined poses, which may
not be enough for various camera models or calibration targets. In our approach, each new suggested pose results from
a global optimization step. Furthermore, we propose a novel
method for incorporating the uncertainty of corner point po-

1497

