Video Object Segmentation using Space-Time Memory Networks
Seoung Wug Oh*
Yonsei University

Joon-Young Lee
Adobe Research

Ning Xu
Adobe Research

Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University

Abstract
We propose a novel solution for semi-supervised video
object segmentation. By the nature of the problem, available cues (e.g. video frame(s) with object masks) become
richer with the intermediate predictions. However, the existing methods are unable to fully exploit this rich source
of information. We resolve the issue by leveraging memory networks and learn to read relevant information from
all available sources. In our framework, the past frames
with object masks form an external memory, and the current frame as the query is segmented using the mask information in the memory. Specifically, the query and the
memory are densely matched in the feature space, covering
all the space-time pixel locations in a feed-forward fashion. Contrast to the previous approaches, the abundant use
of the guidance information allows us to better handle the
challenges such as appearance changes and occlussions.
We validate our method on the latest benchmark sets and
achieved the state-of-the-art performance (overall score of
79.4 on Youtube-VOS val set, J of 88.7 and 79.2 on DAVIS
2016/2017 val set respectively) while having a fast runtime
(0.16 second/frame on DAVIS 2016 val set).

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation is a task of separating the
foreground and the background pixels in all frames of a
given video. It is an essential step for many video editing
tasks, which is getting more attention as videos have become the most popular form of shared media contents. We
tackle the video object segmentation problem in the semisupervised setting, where the ground truth mask of the target object is given in the first frame and the goal is to estimate the object masks in all other frames. It is a very
challenging task as the appearance of the target object can
change drastically over time and also due to occlusions and
drifts.
As in most tasks in computer vision, many deep learning based algorithms have been introduced to solve the
video object segmentation problem. With deep learning
* This work was done during an internship at Adobe Research.

(a)

…

…

(b)

…

…

(c)

…

…
Memory

…

(d)
First

Read

…
Intermediate

Previous

Current

Figure 1: Previous DNN-based algorithms extract features
in different frames for video object segmentation (a-c). We
propose an efficient algorithm that exploits multiple frames
in the given video for more accurate segmentation (d).

approaches, the essential question is from which frame(s)
should the deep networks learn the cues? In some algorithms, the features were extracted and propagated from the
previous frame (Fig. 1(a)) [11, 26]. The main strength of
this approach is that it can deal with changes in appearance better, while sacrificing robustness against occlusions
and error drifts. Another direction for deep learning based
video segmentation is to use the first frame as a reference
and independently detect the target object at each frame
(Fig. 1(b)) [2, 42, 12]. The pros and cons of this approach
are exactly the opposite from the previous approach. Methods that use both the first frame and the previous frame to
take the advantages of the two approaches were proposed
in [24, 40] (Fig. 1(c)). By using two frames as the source
for cues, the algorithm [24] achieved the state-of-the-art accuracy with faster running time, as the algorithm does not
require online learning as with other methods.
As using two frames has shown to be beneficial for video
segmentation, a natural extension is to use more frames,
possibly every frame in the video, for the segmentation task.

9226

