Scalable Verified Training for Provably Robust Image Classification
Sven Gowal*
DeepMind

Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham*

Robert Stanforth*

dvij@google.com

stanforth@google.com

Rudy Bunel

sgowal@google.com

Chongli Qin

Jonathan Uesato

Relja Arandjelović

Abstract
Recent work has shown that it is possible to train deep
neural networks that are provably robust to norm-bounded
adversarial perturbations. Most of these methods are based
on minimizing an upper bound on the worst-case loss over
all possible adversarial perturbations. While these techniques show promise, they often result in difficult optimization procedures that remain hard to scale to larger networks.
Through a comprehensive analysis, we show how a simple
bounding technique, interval bound propagation (IBP), can
be exploited to train large provably robust neural networks
that beat the state-of-the-art in verified accuracy. While
the upper bound computed by IBP can be quite weak for
general networks, we demonstrate that an appropriate loss
and clever hyper-parameter schedule allow the network to
adapt such that the IBP bound is tight. This results in a
fast and stable learning algorithm that outperforms more
sophisticated methods and achieves state-of-the-art results
on M NIST, C IFAR -10 and S VHN. It also allows us to train
the largest model to be verified beyond vacuous bounds on a
downscaled version of I MAGE N ET.

1. Introduction
Despite the successes of deep learning [1], it is wellknown that neural networks are not robust. In particular, it
has been shown that the addition of small but carefully chosen deviations to the input, called adversarial perturbations,
can cause the neural network to make incorrect predictions
with high confidence [2–6]. Starting with Szegedy et al. [6],
there has been a lot of work on understanding and generating
adversarial perturbations [3, 7], and on building models that
are robust to such perturbations [4, 8–10]. Unfortunately,
many of the defense strategies proposed in the literature are
targeted towards a specific adversary (e.g., obfuscating gradients against projected gradient attacks), and as such they
are easily broken by stronger adversaries [11, 12]. Robust
optimization techniques, like the one developed by Madry

Timothy Mann

Pushmeet Kohli

Perturbation found
using PGD
Empirically robust but
not provably robust model

Predictions

8 (PGD)
2 (MIP)

Perturbation found
through exhaustive search
(via MIP solver)

Figure 1: Example motivating why robustness to the projected
gradient descent (PGD) attack is not a true measure of robustness
(even for small convolutional neural networks). Given a seemingly
robust neural network, the worst-case perturbation of size ǫ = 0.1
found using 200 PGD iterations and 10 random restarts (shown at
the top) is correctly classified as an “eight”. However, a worst case
perturbation classified as a “two” can be found through exhaustive
search (shown at the bottom).

et al. [9], overcome this problem by trying to find the worstcase adversarial examples at each training step and adding
them to the training data. While the resulting models show
strong empirical evidence that they are robust against many
attacks, we cannot yet guarantee that a different adversary
(for example, one that does brute-force enumeration to compute adversarial perturbations) cannot find inputs that cause
the model to predict incorrectly. In fact, Figure 1 provides
an example that motivates why projected gradient descent
(PGD) – the technique at the core of Madry et al.’s method –
does not always find the worst-case attack (a phenomenon
also observed by Tjeng et al. [13]).
This has driven the need for formal verification: a provable guarantee that neural networks are consistent with a
specification for all possible inputs to the network. Substantial progress has been made: from complete methods
14842

