Learning to Rank Proposals for Object Detection
Zhiyu Tan1

Xuecheng Nie2
1

2

Qi Qian1

Nan Li1

Hao Li1

Alibaba Group, Beijing, China

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore

{zhiyu.tzy, qi.qian, nanli.ln, lihao.lh}@alibaba-inc.com niexuecheng@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) is an essential step
of modern object detection models for removing duplicated
candidates. The efficacy of NMS heavily affects the final
detection results. Prior works exploit suppression criterions relying on either the objectiveness derived from classification or the localization produced by regression, both of
which are heuristically designed and fail to explicitly link
with the suppression rank. To address this issue, in this paper, we propose a novel Learning-to-Rank (LTR) model to
produce the suppression rank via a learning procedure, thus
facilitating the candidate generation and lifting the detection performance. In particular, we define a ranking score
based on IoU to indicate the ranks of candidates during the
NMS step, where candidates with high ranking score will
be reserved and the ones with low ranking score will be
eliminated. We design a lightweight network to predict the
ranking score. We introduce a ranking loss to supervise the
generation of these ranking scores, which encourages candidates with IoU to the ground-truth to rank higher. To facilitate the training procedure, we design a novel sampling
strategy via dividing candidates into different levels and select hard pairs to adopt in the training. During the inference
phase, this module can be exploited as a plugin to current
object detector. The training and inference of the overall
framework is end-to-end. Comprehensive experiments on
benchmarks PASCAL VOC and MS COCO demonstrate the
generality and effectiveness of our model for facilitating existing object detectors to state-of-the-art accuracy.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental yet challenging task in
computer vision, It is extensively applied in video/image indexing [29] [24], face recognition [31], autonomous driving
cars [7] [19] and human pose estimation [32].
Existing object detection models heavily rely on the
Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) algorithm to remove
duplicated bounding boxes via a suppression criterion,

IoU:0.60
Cls conf:0.70
Local conf:0.75
Rank conf:0.81
IoU:0.93
Cls conf:0.62
Local conf:0.73
Rank conf:1.3

IoU:0.92
Cls conf:0.73
Local conf:0.45
Rank conf:0.97

IoU:0.66
Cls conf:0.80
Local conf:0.67
Rank conf:0.22

Figure 1. Motivations for the proposed Learning-to-Rank model
for oject detection. Yellow boxes represent the groundtruth. Read
and green boxes represent the predicted candidates. Existing
works fail to reserve the more accurate green candidates due to
the heuristically designed suppression criterions based on classification or localization scores. The proposed LTR model addresses
this problem via producing the suppression rank with a learning
procedure. See text for details.

which is defined either from the objectness derived from
classification or localization produced by regression. However, these existing suppression criterions fail to explicitly
link with the candidate rank in the elimination procedure,
as shown in Figure 1. Inaccurate ranks of candidates will
cause error eliminations and degrades the performance of
object detectors. The suppression criterion still needs to be
improved to facilitate the performance of object detectors.
In this paper, we propose to enhance the suppression criterion in both the training and inference phases of object detectors. We observe existing criterions are either designed
in a heuristic manner or produced in an implicit way. An
explicit ranking score definition and generation can successfully remove the gap between the suppression criterion
and candidate preservation. Motivated by this, we propose
a Learning-To-Rank (LTR) model to predict the ranking
scores of candidates in a learning procedure, thus overcoming the limitations of existing methods and improving the
object detection.
In particular, we define a ranking score based on IoU
to indicate the ranks of candidates during the NMS step,
where candidates with high ranking score will be reserved
and the ones with low ranking score will be eliminated. We

8273

