Memory-Based Neighbourhood Embedding for Visual Recognition
Suichan Li1,2∗
Dapeng Chen3†
Bin Liu1,2†
Nenghai Yu1,2
Rui Zhao3
1
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information, the Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
SenseTime Research
lsc1230@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {chendapeng,zhaorui}@sensetime.com, {flowice,ynh}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning discriminative image feature embeddings is of
great importance to visual recognition. To achieve better
feature embeddings, most current methods focus on designing different network structures or loss functions, and the
estimated feature embeddings are usually only related to
the input images. In this paper, we propose Memory-based
Neighbourhood Embedding (MNE) to enhance a general
CNN feature by considering its neighbourhood. The method
aims to solve two critical problems, i.e., how to acquire
more relevant neighbours in the network training and how
to aggregate the neighbourhood information for a more discriminative embedding. We first augment an episodic memory module into the network, which can provide more relevant neighbours for both training and testing. Then the
neighbours are organized in a tree graph with the target instance as the root node. The neighbourhood information is
gradually aggregated to the root node in a bottom-up manner, and aggregation weights are supervised by the class
relationships between the nodes. We apply MNE on image search and few shot learning tasks. Extensive ablation
studies demonstrate the effectiveness of each component,
and our method significantly outperforms the state-of-theart approaches.

1. Introduction
Encoding the semantic information of an image into a
feature embedding is a core requirement for visual recognition. Images from the same or related classes are desired to
be mapped to nearby points on a manifold, which is critical to many applications like few-shot learning [41, 31, 37],
visual search [7, 13, 45], face/person recognition [20, 26,
43, 2] and fine-grained retrieval [19, 18]. With ideal feature embeddings, classification tasks could be reduced to
∗ This work is done when Suichan Li is an intern at SenseTime.
† D. Chen and B. Liu are the co-corresponding authors.

Our method

Our method

(a) The original feature
embeddings

(b)

The proposed method over
the neighbourhood graph

(c) The obtained
embeddings

graph

Figure 1: A case to explain the basic idea of the proposed method.
The red nodes and blue nodes represent the feature embeddings of
two classes respectively. The original feature embeddings may
not be able to separate the samples of different classes as the two
nodes connected by the red line. While our approach, taking the
feature and its neighbourhood graph into account, can modify the
current feature embeddings with their context structure and output
the embeddings more consistent with their labels.

the nearest neighbour problem, while retrieval tasks would
be made easier by examining the inter-image relationships.
To improve the feature embeddings with deep neural networks, state-of-the-art methods mainly focused on designing network structures. For example, VGGNets [30] and
GoogleNet [38] suggested increasing the depth of a network can improve the quality of feature embedding, while
ResNet [10] showed that adding the identity-based skip
connections can help to learn deeper and stronger networks.
At the same time, there also exists a stream of methods
which supervise the feature embeddings by imposing different loss functions, including the contrastive loss [8], the
triplet loss [45] and quadruplet loss [3]. Chen et al. [2] built
a graph within an image batch, forming a kind of group
loss with CRF. The main goals of these loss functions are to
reduce the intra-class variations while enlarging the interclass variations.
Although these efforts continuously bring better feature
embeddings, most of them estimate a feature embedding
based on a single image, and the abundant contextual in-

6102

