Person-in-WiFi: Fine-grained Person Perception using WiFi
Fei Wang†¶∗ Sanping Zhou‡¶
†

§

Jinsong Han†§

Dong Huang¶

School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
¶

‡

Stanislav Panev¶

The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University

Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies

{feiwang,spanev,donghuang}@cmu.edu sanpingzhou@stu.xjtu.edu.cn hanjinsong@zju.edu.cn

Figure 1. Person-in-WiFi. Top: WiFi antennas as sensors for person perception. Receiver antennas record WiFi signals as inputs to
Person-in-WiFi. The rest rows are, images used to annotate WiFi signals, and two outputs: person segmentation masks and body poses.

Abstract
Fine-grained person perception such as body segmentation and pose estimation has been achieved with many 2D
and 3D sensors such as RGB/depth cameras, radars (e.g.
RF-Pose), and LiDARs. These solutions require 2D images,
depth maps or 3D point clouds of person bodies as input.
In this paper, we take one step forward to show that finegrained person perception is possible even with 1D sensors:
WiFi antennas. Specifically, we used two sets of WiFi antennas to acquire signals, i.e., one transmitter set and one
receiver set. Each set contains three antennas horizontally
lined-up as a regular household WiFi router. The WiFi sig-

nal generated by a transmitter antenna, penetrates through
and reflects on human bodies, furniture, and walls, and then
superposes at a receiver antenna as 1D signal samples. We
developed a deep learning approach that uses annotations
on 2D images, takes the received 1D WiFi signals as input,
and performs body segmentation and pose estimation in an
end-to-end manner. To our knowledge, our solution is the
first work based on off-the-shelf WiFi antennas and standard IEEE 802.11n WiFi signals. Demonstrating comparable results to image-based solutions, our WiFi-based person
perception solution is cheaper and more ubiquitous than
radars and LiDARs, while invariant to illumination and has
little privacy concern comparing to cameras.

∗ Work done when Fei Wang was a visiting PhD student at CMU.

5452

