Reflective Decoding Network for Image Captioning
Lei Ke1 ,

Wenjie Pei2 ,
Ruiyu Li2 ,
Xiaoyong Shen2 ,
Yu-Wing Tai2
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Tencent

keleiwhu@gmail.com,wenjiecoder@outlook.com,{royryli,dylanshen,yuwingtai}@tencent.com

Abstract
State-of-the-art image captioning methods mostly focus
on improving visual features, less attention has been paid to
utilizing the inherent properties of language to boost captioning performance. In this paper, we show that vocabulary coherence between words and syntactic paradigm of
sentences are also important to generate high-quality image caption. Following the conventional encoder-decoder
framework, we propose the Reflective Decoding Network
(RDN) for image captioning, which enhances both the longsequence dependency and position perception of words in
a caption decoder. Our model learns to collaboratively attend on both visual and textual features and meanwhile perceive each word’s relative position in the sentence to maximize the information delivered in the generated caption. We
evaluate the effectiveness of our RDN on the COCO image
captioning datasets and achieve superior performance over
the previous methods. Further experiments reveal that our
approach is particularly advantageous for hard cases with
complex scenes to describe by captions.

1. Introduction
The goal of image captioning is to automatically generate fluent and informative language description of an image
for human understanding. As an interdisciplinary task connecting Computer Vision and Nature Language Processing,
it explores towards the cutting edge techniques of scene understanding [23] and it is drawing increasing interests in recent years.
To build a top captioning system, there are two crucial requirements. First, the captioning model needs to
distill representative and meaningful visual representation
from an image. Thanks to the success in image classification [20] and object recognition [12, 33], recent methods
[2, 26, 45, 47] have shown significant advancements which
mostly benefited from the improved quality of extracted visual features. Second, and the relatively neglected requirement, is to make the generated captions coherent and intelligent. Similar to the human language system, it needs to
1 This work was done while Lei Ke was an intern at Tencent.

Basis decoder: A black and white photo
of a clock tower in the background.
Ours: A view of a bridge with a clock
tower over a river.

A view of a bridge with a clock tower over a river.
Figure 1. Top: Example captions generated by the basis decoder
(using traditional LSTM) and our Reflective Decoding Network
model. Bottom: The reflective attention weight distribution over
the past generated hidden states is shown when predicting the word
‘river’. The thicker line indicates a relatively larger weight and the
red line means the largest contribution to the prediction.

inference and reason during the generation process based
on what has been generated and watched. Typically, this
process is achieved by RNN (specifically, LSTM [14]) in
storing the sequential information during caption decoding.
The traditional LSTM model, however, tends to focus
more on the relatively closer vocabulary while neglecting
the farther one. For example, in Figure 1, the word ‘bridge’
has an important hint on predicting the word ‘river’ (which
is neglected by the basis decoder), but the two words are
separated by 6 words. Current mainstream caption decoder
is weak in handling this kind of long-term dependency in
sequential sentence, especially when the visual content of
an image is complex and hard to describe, which usually
leads to a general and less accurate caption description.
In this paper, we propose the Reflective Decoding Network (RDN) for image captioning, which mitigates the
drawback of traditional caption decoder by enhancing its
long sequential modeling ability. Different from previous
methods which boost captioning performance by improving the visual attention mechanism [2, 26, 45], or by improving the encoder to supply more meaningful intermediate representation for the decoder [17, 47, 48, 50], our RDN
focuses directly on the target decoding side and jointly apply attention mechanism in both visual and textual domain.

8888

