VTNFP: An Image-based Virtual Try-on Network with Body and Clothing
Feature Preservation
Ruiyun Yu1 Xiaoqi Wang1∗ Xiaohui Xie2
Software College, Northeastern University, China
2
Department of computer science, University of California, Irvine, CA 92617
1

yury@mail.neu.edu.cn, 1701290@stu.neu.edu.cn, xhx@uci.edu

Abstract
Image-based virtual try-on systems with the goal of
transferring a desired clothing item onto the corresponding region of a person have made great strides recently,
but challenges remain in generating realistic looking images that preserve both body and clothing details. Here
we present a new virtual try-on network, called VTNFP,
to synthesize photo-realistic images given the images of a
clothed person and a target clothing item. In order to better preserve clothing and body features, VTNFP follows a
three-stage design strategy. First, it transforms the target
clothing into a warped form compatible with the pose of the
given person. Next, it predicts a body segmentation map
of the person wearing the target clothing, delineating body
parts as well as clothing regions. Finally, the warped clothing, body segmentation map and given person image are
fused together for fine-scale image synthesis. A key innovation of VTNFP is the body segmentation map prediction
module, which provides critical information to guide image
synthesis in regions where body parts and clothing intersects, and is very beneficial for preventing blurry pictures
and preserving clothing and body part details. Experiments
on a fashion dataset demonstrate that VTNFP generates
substantially better results than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
As more and more consumers are shopping apparel and
accessories online, technologies that allow consumers to
virtually try on clothes can not only enhance consumers’
shopping experience, but also help transform the way how
people shop for fashion items. Motivated by this, a number of methods have been proposed to solve the virtual tryon problem, which can be broadly classified into two categories: methods based on 3D modeling [10, 43, 28, 35, 4],
and methods based on 2D images [13, 30, 11, 39].
∗ Corresponding author.

Classical virtual try-on methods are primarily 3D based.
Applications in this category include SenseMi, triMirror,
etc. 3D-based methods rely on computer graphics to build
3D models and render the resulting images, which can
well control clothing deformation, material performance
and other issues. However, they are computationally intensive and require additional information to build 3D models [35], which has constrained their adoption in online ecommerce or real-time AR applications.
Recently virtual try-on methods based solely on RGB
images have also been proposed [11, 39, 13, 30]. These
methods formulate virtual try-on as a conditional image
generation problem, which are much less resource intensive and having the potential for widespread applications, if
proven effective.
On the other hand, generating perceptually convincing
virtual try-on images without 3D information is challenging. For a synthetic image to be realistic and effective, it
has to meet the following criteria: 1) the posture and body
shape of the person should be preserved, and body parts
should be clearly rendered; 2) clothing items not intended
to be replaced, such as trousers, should be preserved; 3) the
target clothing item should well fit to the intended body part
of the person; and 4) the texture and embroidery details of
the target clothing should be retained as much as possible.
Recent methods have taken a two-stage approach by first
aligning the target clothing to the body shape of a given
person and then fusing warped clothing and person images
together. VITON [11] implemented a coarse-to-fine framework, generating warped clothing using thin-plate spline
(TPS) transformation. CP-VTON [39] proposed a geometric matching module to directly learn the parameters of TPS
for clothing warping, and a single-step synthetic network to
merge rendered person and warped clothing images. CPVTON improved the preservation of clothing details, but it
has drawbacks on preserving body parts and clothing items
that should not be changed.
Figure 1 shows example synthetic images generated by
VITON and CP-VTON. A few issues are worth noting: 1)

10511

