Learning Semantic-Specific Graph Representation
for Multi-Label Image Recognition
Tianshui Chen1,2
1

Muxin Xu1

Xiaolu Hui1

Sun Yat-sen University

2

Hefeng Wu1 ∗

Liang Lin1,2

DarkMatter AI Research

{tianshuichen, wuhefeng}@gmail.com, {xumx7, huixlu}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract

Multi-label image classification is a fundamental yet
practical task in computer vision, as real-world images generally contain multiple diverse semantic objects. Recently,
∗ Corresponding author is Hefeng Wu. This work was supported in
part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
under Grant No. 2018YFC0830103, in part by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant No. 61622214, 61876045, and
U1811463, in part by National High Level Talents Special Support Plan
(Ten Thousand Talents Program), in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province under Grant No. 2017A030312006, and in
part by Zhujiang Science and Technology New Star Project of Guangzhou
under Grant No. 201906010057.

bicycle

··
·

person

car
person
kite
bicycle

··
·

·
··

1. Introduction

car

···

Recognizing multiple labels of images is a practical and
challenging task, and significant progress has been made
by searching semantic-aware regions and modeling label
dependency. However, current methods cannot locate the
semantic regions accurately due to the lack of part-level supervision or semantic guidance. Moreover, they cannot fully
explore the mutual interactions among the semantic regions
and do not explicitly model the label co-occurrence. To address these issues, we propose a Semantic-Specific Graph
Representation Learning (SSGRL) framework that consists of two crucial modules: 1) a semantic decoupling module that incorporates category semantics to guide learning
semantic-specific representations and 2) a semantic interaction module that correlates these representations with a
graph built on the statistical label co-occurrence and explores their interactions via a graph propagation mechanism. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks show that
our SSGRL framework outperforms current state-of-the-art
methods by a sizable margin, e.g. with an mAP improvement of 2.5%, 2.6%, 6.7%, and 3.1% on the PASCAL VOC
2007 & 2012, Microsoft-COCO and Visual Genome benchmarks, respectively. Our codes and models are available at
https://github.com/HCPLab-SYSU/SSGRL.

··
·

··
·

kite

Semantic-Specific Graph Representation Learning

Label
distribution

Figure 1. Illustration of our Semantic-Specific Graph Representation Learning framework. It incorporates category semantics to
guide learning semantic-specific representation via a semantic decoupling module and explores their interactions via a semantic interaction module.

it is receiving increasing attention [17, 28, 34], since it underpins plenty of critical applications in content-based image retrieval and recommendation systems [4, 31]. Besides
handling the challenges of complex variations in viewpoint,
scale, illumination and occlusion, predicting the presence of
multiple labels further requires mining semantic object regions as well as modeling the associations and interactions
among these regions, rendering multi-label image classification an unsolved and challenging task.
Current methods for multi-label image classification
usually employ object localization techniques [28, 30] or
resort to visual attention networks [34] to locate semantic object regions. However, object localization techniques
[23, 35] have to search numerous category-agnostic and redundant proposals and can hardly be integrated into deep
neural networks for end-to-end training, while visual attention networks can merely locate object regions roughly due
to the lack of supervision or guidance. Some other works introduce RNN/LSTM [13, 24, 2] to further model contextual dependencies among semantic regions and capture
label dependencies. However, the RNN/LSTM sequentially models regions/labels dependencies, which cannot fully

522

