RainFlow: Optical Flow under Rain Streaks and Rain Veiling Effect∗
Ruoteng Li1 , Robby T. Tan1,2 , Loong-Fah Cheong1 , Angelica I. Aviles-Rivero3 , Qingnan Fan 4 , and
Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb3
1

National University of Singapore
2
Yale-NUS College
3
University of Cambridge
4
Stanford University

Abstract
Optical flow in heavy rainy scenes is challenging due
to the presence of both rain steaks and rain veiling effect,
which break the existing optical flow constraints. Concerning this, we propose a deep-learning based optical flow
method designed to handle heavy rain. We introduce a feature multiplier in our network that transforms the features of
an image affected by the rain veiling effect into features that
are less affected by it, which we call veiling-invariant features. We establish a new mapping operation in the feature
space to produce streak-invariant features. The operation
is based on a feature pyramid structure of the input images,
and the basic idea is to preserve the chromatic features of
the background scenes while canceling the rain-streak patterns. Both the veiling-invariant and streak-invariant features are computed and optimized automatically based on
the the accuracy of our optical flow estimation. Our network is end-to-end, and handles both rain streaks and the
veiling effect in an integrated framework. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of our method, which outperforms the state of the art method and other baseline methods. We also show that our network can robustly maintain
good performance on clean (no rain) images even though it
is trained under rain image data. 1

1. Introduction
Existing optical flow methods (e.g. [49, 1, 44, 22, 19,
20, 39]) show accurate and robust performance in several
benchmarking datasets [17, 2, 7]. Most of them, however,
∗ This work is supported by the DIRP Grant R-263-000-C46-232. R.T.
Tan’s research is supported in part by Yale-NUS College Start-Up Grant.
1 The code is available at https://github.com/liruoteng/
RainFlow

(a) Input First Frame

(b) PWC-Rain [44]

(c) Robust Flow [26]

(d) Ours

Figure 1: An example of our algorithm compared with Robust Flow [26] and PWC-Net [44] on real rain image input.
Moving objects are indicated in the yellow boxes.
still face challenges when applied to rain images [26]. We
consider addressing the problem of optical flow in rainy
scenes is important, since more and more vision-based systems, which require motion information, are deployed in
outdoor environments. Most of them have to work in any
weather condition and rain is the most adverse weather phenomenon [40] that occurs frequently in the real world.
There are two main properties of rain, particularly heavy
rain, which causes existing optical flow methods to be erroneous: rain streaks and the rain veiling effect. Rain streaks
occlude the background scene, and appear in different locations in different input frames, and thus induce violation
to the brightness constancy constraint (BCC). Rain streaks
4321
7304

