Learn to Scale: Generating Multipolar Normalized Density Maps for Crowd
Counting
Chenfeng Xu1∗, Kai Qiu2 , Jianlong Fu2 , Song Bai3 , Yongchao Xu1†, Xiang Bai1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Microsoft Research Asia, 3 University of Oxford
{xuchenfeng, yongchaoxu, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, {kaqiu, jianf}@microsoft.com, songbai.site@gmail.com

Abstract
Dense crowd counting aims to predict thousands of human instances from an image, by calculating integrals of a
density map over image pixels. Existing approaches mainly
suffer from the extreme density variations. Such density pattern shift poses challenges even for multi-scale model ensembling. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective
approach to tackle this problem. First, a patch-level density
map is extracted by a density estimation model and further
grouped into several density levels which are determined
over full datasets. Second, each patch density map is automatically normalized by an online center learning strategy
with a multipolar center loss. Such a design can significantly condense the density distribution into several clusters, and enable that the density variance can be learned
by a single model. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed method. Our work outperforms
the state-of-the-art by 4.2%, 14.3%, 27.1% and 20.1% in
MAE, on the ShanghaiTech Part A, ShanghaiTech Part B,
UCF CC 50 and UCF-QNRF datasets, respectively.

1. Introduction
A robust crowd counting system is of signiﬁcant value
in many real-world applications such as video surveillance,
security alerting, event planning, etc. In recent years, the
deep learning based approaches have been the mainstream
of crowd counting, thanks to the powerful representation
learning ability of convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
To estimate the count, predominant approaches adopt CNNs
to generate a density map, from which the count of instances
can be integrated over image pixels.
Although crowd counting has been extensively studied
by previous methods, handling the large density variations
which cause huge density pattern shift in crowd images is
∗ This work was done when Chenfeng Xu was a research intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
† Corresponding author

Sparse

Medium

Dense

(a)

(b)
Figure 1. (a) Three examples from ShanghaiTech Part A dataset,
which show extreme density variations. (b) Comparison of Mean
Relative Error on four crowd counting datasets (the scale variations get larger from left to right) of different approaches. Results
show the robustness of the proposed approach to extreme scale
variations. [best viewed in color].

still an open issue. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the densities of crowd image patches can vary signiﬁcantly, changing
from a bit sparse (e.g., ShanghaiTech Part B) to extremely
dense (e.g., UCF-QNRF). Such large density pattern shifts
usually bring grand challenges to density prediction by a
single CNN model, due to its ﬁxed sizes of receptive ﬁelds.
Remarkable progress has been achieved by learning a density map through designing multi-scale architectures [23]
or aggregating multi-scale features [3, 33], which indicates
that the ability to cope with density variations is crucial
for crowd counting methods. Although density maps with
multiple scales can be generated and aggregated, it is still
hard to ensure robustness when the density variations get

8382

