Joint Acne Image Grading and Counting via Label Distribution Learning
Xiaoping Wu1∗ , Ni Wen2∗, Jie Liang1 , Yu-Kun Lai3 , Dongyu She1 , Ming-Ming Cheng1 , Jufeng Yang1 ☞
1
College of Computer Science, Nankai University 2 Beijing Tsinghua Changgung Hospital
3
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University
xpwu95@163.com, nini1992713@126.com, liang27jie@163.com, LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk,
sherry6656@163.com, {cmm, yangjufeng}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate grading of skin disease severity plays a crucial
role in precise treatment for patients. Acne vulgaris, the
most common skin disease in adolescence, can be graded
by evidence-based lesion counting as well as experiencebased global estimation in the medical field. However, due
to the appearance similarity of acne with close severity,
it is challenging to count and grade acne accurately. In
this paper, we address the problem of acne image analysis via Label Distribution Learning (LDL) considering the
ambiguous information among acne severity. Based on the
professional grading criterion, we generate two acne label
distributions considering the relationship between the similar number of lesions and severity of acne, respectively.
We also propose a unified framework for joint acne image
grading and counting, which is optimized by the multi-task
learning loss. In addition, we further build the ACNE04
dataset with annotations of acne severity and lesion number
of each image for evaluation. Experiments demonstrate that
our proposed framework performs favorably against stateof-the-art methods. We make the code and dataset publicly
available at https://github.com/xpwu95/ldl.

1. Introduction
Automatic grading of skin disease severity is of great importance in the medical ﬁeld. Acne vulgaris, commonly
named acne, is the most common skin disease, which has
prevalence peaks during adolescence [28, 33]. About 80%
adolescents suffer from acne [9] and the symptoms last
through adulthood in 3% men and 12% women [23]. Therefore, there are a massive number of acne patients that need
speciﬁc treatment imminently, since acne may also leave
scars and pigmentation and often leads to considerable inferior and depressed emotions [48]. The severity of acne
∗ Equal contributions

D

0LOG
'

0RGHUDWH
'

6HYHUH

9HU\6HYHUH

'

'

E





1XPEHU

'




 1XPEHU

'




 1XPEHU



'


 1XPEHU

'

F
6HYHULW\
G





6HYHULW\


6HYHULW\

6HYHULW\




Figure 1. Image examples (a) and their corresponding label distributions (b, c). The x-axes in (b, c) indicate the number of lesions
and acne severity, respectively. The label distributions cover several neighboring labels which represent the degree each label describes the instance (denoted as “D”). Acne images can be divided
into different severity levels according to the lesion numbers [24]
(d). Different colors indicate different severity levels, e.g., blue is
for mild, and green is for moderate.

is essential for dermatologists to make a precise and standardized treatment decision [24]. Besides, junior dermatologists also need an objective and reliable diagnosis for reference. A standard criterion used by dermatologists for grading acne severity is the Hayashi criterion [24], which combines the outcome measures of lesion counting and global
assessment. Speciﬁcally, acne can be graded into four levels of severity, i.e. mild, moderate, severe, and very severe,
according to the number of lesions.
In the past years, substantial advances have been made
for acne lesion analysis [2, 6, 16]. Most methods indirectly focus on the classiﬁcation or detection of acne lesions and generally rely on hand-crafted features. For example, Abas et al. [1] employ discrete wavelet frames and
gray-level co-occurrence matrices to extract features for detecting acne lesions. Recently, Convolutional Neural Net-

10642

