Enhancing Low Light Videos by Exploring High Sensitivity Camera Noise
Wei Wang1

Xin Chen1

Cheng Yang1,2 Xiang Li1,2 Xuemei Hu1 Tao Yue1,2
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
NJU institute of sensing and imaging engineering, Nanjing, China
1

{MF1723052, MF1723008, DG1623027}@smail.nju.edu.cn

{xiangli,

xuemeihu,

yuetao}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Enhancing low light videos, which consists of denoising and brightness adjustment, is an intriguing but knotty
problem. Under low light condition, due to high sensitivity
camera setting, commonly negligible noises become obvious and severely deteriorate the captured videos. To recover high quality videos, a mass of image/video denoising/enhancing algorithms are proposed, most of which follow a set of simple assumptions about the statistic characters of camera noise, e.g., independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), white, additive, Gaussian, Poisson or mixture noises. However, the practical noise under high sensitivity setting in real captured videos is complex and inaccurate to model with these assumptions. In this paper, we
explore the physical origins of the practical high sensitivity
noise in digital cameras, model them mathematically, and
propose to enhance the low light videos based on the noise
model by using an LSTM-based neural network. Specifically, we generate the training data with the proposed noise
model and train the network with the dark noisy video as
input and clear-bright video as output. Extensive comparisons on both synthetic and real captured low light videos
with the state-of-the-art methods are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Under extremely low light conditions, high ISO setting is commonly adopted for capturing videos. However,
with a high sensitivity, the dynamic streak noise (DSN),
color channel heterogeneous and clipping effect, which are
commonly negligible, become signiﬁcant and deteriorate
the quality of captured videos dramatically. For example,
Fig. 1(a) is a real-captured high ISO image in low light environment, and Fig. 1(b) is the corresponding clear image
under sufﬁcient light condition, deteriorated with common
Gaussian noise model. The noise distribution in Fig. 1(a) is
obviously different than that in Fig. 1(b), including dynamic
streak noise (Fig. 1(c)), color heterogenous (Fig. 1(d)) and

(a) Real captured noisy image

(c) Dynamic streak noise

(b) Synthetic noisy image

(d) Channel heterogeneous

(e) Clipping effect

Figure 1. Characteristic of noise distribution in low-light imaging.
(a) Video frame captured by Canon 5D mark III with ISO 25600
under low light condition. (b) Video frame synthsized with i.i.d.
AWGN of approximately equal noise variance. (c) The dark ﬁeld
frame of Canon 5D mark III, with obvious horizontal streak noise,
changing from frame to frame. (d) Intensity histograms of different color channels of a certain line, showing color heterogeneous
among channels. (e) The intensity histogram of a low light image,
with observed clipping effect.

clipping effect (Fig. 1(e)).
In this paper, we explore the physical origin of the high
sensitivity noise of both rolling and global shutter cameras,
propose a novel noise model for handling the high sensitivity noise (i.e. dynamic streak noise, color heterogeneous, and clipping effect) in low light imaging, and build
the estimation methods for estimating the model parameters
of practical cameras. With the calibrated high sensitivity
noise model, we generate the training dataset that could preciously simulate the real acquisition process of videos under low light environments, and train a LSTM-based video
denoising network for enhancing the low light videos. We
thoroughly evaluate the proposed method on both synthetic
and real-captured videos and demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed method via comparing with the state-of-the-art
methods. In all, the main contributions of this paper are:
• We propose a practical high sensitivity noise model
based on the capturing process and the hardware characteristic of sensor, which could accurately model the

4111

