Solving Vision Problems via Filtering
Sean I. Young1

Aous T. Naman2

sean0@stanford.edu

aous@unsw.edu.au
1

Stanford University

2

Bernd Girod1

David Taubman2

bgirod@stanford.edu

d.taubman@unsw.edu.au

University of New South Wales

Depth SR

Abstract

Deblurring Optical ﬂow

Disparity

We propose a new, ﬁltering approach for solving a large
number of regularized inverse problems commonly found in
computer vision. Traditionally, such problems are solved by
ﬁnding the solution to the system of equations that expresses
the ﬁrst-order optimality conditions of the problem. @is can
be slow if the system of equations is dense due to the use of
nonlocal regularization, necessitating iterative solvers such
as successive over-relaxation or conjugate gradients. In this
paper, we show that similar solutions can be obtained more
easily via ﬁltering, obviating the need to solve a potentially
dense system of equations using slow iterative methods. Our
ﬁltered solutions are very similar to the true ones, but often
up to 10 times faster to compute.

Denoising

1. Introduction
Inverse problems are mathematical problems where one’s
objective is to recover a latent variable given observed input
data. In computer vision, a classic inverse problem is that of
estimating the optical ﬂow [1], where the goal is to recover
the apparent motion between an image pair. ?e problems of
image super-resolution, denoising, deblurring, disparity and
illumination estimation are examples of inverse problems in
imaging and computer vision [2]–[5]. ?e ubiquity of these
inverse problems for real-time computer vision applications
places signiﬁcant importance on eﬃcient numerical solvers
for such inverse problems. Traditionally, an inverse problem
is formulated as a regularized optimization problem and the
optimization problem then solved by ﬁnding the solution to
its ﬁrst-order optimality conditions, which can be expressed
as a system of linear (or linearized) equations.
Recently, edge-preserving regularizers based on bilateral
or nonlocal means weighting have found use in many vision
problems [5]–[7]. Whereas such nonlocal regularizers often
produce better solutions than local ones, they generate dense
systems of equations that in practice can only be solved via
slow numerical methods like successive over-relaxation and
conjugate gradients. Such numerical methods are inherently
iterative, and are sensitive to the conditioning of the overall
problem. Iterative methods such as conjugate gradients also
require the problem to be symmetric (and semi-deﬁnite).

True solvers

Our ﬁltering solvers

Figure 1. Solving regularized inverse problems in vision typically
requires using iterative solvers like conjugate gradients. We solve
the same type of problems via ﬁltering for a 10× speed-up.

In this work, we solve regularized optimization problems
of the form
minimize 𝑓(𝐮) = ‖𝐇𝐮 − 𝐳‖22 + 𝜆𝐮∗ 𝐋𝐮

(1)

using fast non-iterative ﬁltering, obviating the need to solve
dense systems of linear equations produced by geodesic and
bilateral regularizers for example. We validate our approach
on three classic vision problems: optical ﬂow (and disparity)
estimation, depth superresolution, and image deblurring and
denoising, all of which are expressible in the form (1). Our
ﬁltered solutions to such problems are all very similar to the
the true ones as seen in Figure 1, but 10× faster to compute
in some cases. Compared to the fast bilateral solver [5], our
formalism is not speciﬁc to the bilateral regularizer, and can
solve more advanced inverse problems such as the disparity
and the optical ﬂow estimation problems.

5592

