Remote Heart Rate Measurement from Highly Compressed Facial Videos: an
End-to-end Deep Learning Solution with Video Enhancement
∗

Zitong Yu1 , Wei Peng1* , Xiaobai Li1 , Xiaopeng Hong2,4,1 , Guoying Zhao3,1†
1
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland
2
Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, PRC
3
School of Information and Technology, Northwest University, PRC; 4 Peng Cheng Laborotory, China
{zitong.yu, wei.peng, xiaobai.li, xiaopeng.hong, guoying.zhao}@oulu.fi

Abstract
Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG), which aims at
measuring heart activities without any contact, has great
potential in many applications (e.g., remote healthcare).
Existing rPPG approaches rely on analyzing very fine details of facial videos, which are prone to be affected by
video compression. Here we propose a two-stage, endto-end method using hidden rPPG information enhancement and attention networks, which is the first attempt to
counter video compression loss and recover rPPG signals
from highly compressed videos. The method includes two
parts: 1) a Spatio-Temporal Video Enhancement Network
(STVEN) for video enhancement, and 2) an rPPG network (rPPGNet) for rPPG signal recovery. The rPPGNet
can work on its own for robust rPPG measurement, and
the STVEN network can be added and jointly trained to
further boost the performance especially on highly compressed videos. Comprehensive experiments are performed
on two benchmark datasets to show that, 1) the proposed
method not only achieves superior performance on compressed videos with high-quality videos pair, 2) it also generalizes well on novel data with only compressed videos
available, which implies the promising potential for realworld applications.

1. Introduction
Electrocardiography (ECG) and Photoplethysmograph
(PPG) provide common ways for measuring heart activities. These two types signals are important for healthcare
applications since they provide the measurement of both
basic average heart rate (HR) and more detailed information like heart rate variability (HRV). However, these signals are mostly measured from skin-contact ECG/BVP sensors, which may cause discomfort and are inconvenient for
long-term monitoring. To solve this problem, remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) , which targets to measure heart
∗ Equal contribution

† Corresponding author

Figure 1. rPPG measurement from highly compressed videos.
Due to video compression artifact and rPPG information loss, the
rPPG in (a) has very noisy shape and inaccurate peak counts which
lead to erroneous heart rate measures, while after video enhancement by STVEN, the rPPG in (b) shows more regular pulse shape
with accurate peak locations comparing to the ground truth ECG.

activity remotely and without any contact, has been developing rapidly in recent years [4, 12, 19, 18, 31, 32, 22].
However, most previous rPPG measurement works did
not take the influence of video compression into consideration, whereas the fact is that most videos captured by commercial cameras are compressed through different compression codecs with various bitrates. Recently, two works [7,
16] pointed out and demonstrated that the performance of
rPPG measurement dropped to various extents when using compressed videos with different bitrates. As shown in
Fig. 1(a), rPPG signals measured from highly compressed
videos usually suffer from noisy curve shape and inaccurate peak locations due to information loss caused by both
intra-frame and inter-frame coding of the video compression process. Video compression is inevitable for remote
services considering the convenient storage and transmis-

151

