An Empirical Study of Spatial Attention Mechanisms in Deep Networks
Xizhou Zhu1,2†∗ Dazhi Cheng2†∗
1

Zheng Zhang2∗

Stephen Lin2

Jifeng Dai2

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
ezra0408@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{v-dachen,zhez,stevelin,jifdai}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Attention mechanisms have become a popular component in deep neural networks, yet there has been little examination of how different influencing factors and methods for computing attention from these factors affect performance. Toward a better general understanding of attention mechanisms, we present an empirical study that ablates various spatial attention elements within a generalized
attention formulation, encompassing the dominant Transformer attention as well as the prevalent deformable convolution and dynamic convolution modules. Conducted on a
variety of applications, the study yields significant findings
about spatial attention in deep networks, some of which run
counter to conventional understanding. For example, we
find that the comparison of query and key content in Transformer attention is negligible for self-attention, but vital for
encoder-decoder attention. On the other hand, a proper
combination of deformable convolution with key content
saliency achieves the best accuracy-efficiency tradeoff in
self-attention. Our results suggest that there exists much
room for improvement in the design of attention mechanisms.

1. Introduction
Attention mechanisms enable a neural network to focus more on relevant elements of the input than on irrelevant parts. They were first studied in natural language
processing (NLP), where encoder-decoder attention modules were developed to facilitate neural machine translation [2, 28, 14]. In computing the output for a given query
element (e.g., a target word in the output sentence), certain key elements (e.g., source words in the input sentence)
are prioritized according to the query. Later, self-attention
modules were presented for modeling intra-sentence rela∗ Equal contribution. †This work was done when Xizhou Zhu and Dazhi
Cheng were interns at Microsoft Research Asia.

tions [6, 26, 30, 31, 36], where both the key and query
are from the same set of elements. In a milestone paper [36], the Transformer attention module is presented,
superseding past works and substantially surpassing their
performance. The success of attention modeling in NLP
has led to its adoption in computer vision, where different variants of Transformer attention are applied to recognition tasks such as object detection and semantic segmentation [20, 38, 17, 22, 46, 13], where the query and key are
visual elements such as image pixels or regions of interest.
In determining the attention weight assigned to a certain
key for a given query, there exist just a few properties of the
input that are commonly considered. One is the content of
the query. For the case of self-attention, the query content
may be the features at the query pixel in an image, or of a
word in a sentence. Another is the content of the key, where
a key may be a pixel within a local neighborhood of the
query, or another word within the sentence. The third is the
relative position of the query and key.
Based on these input properties, there are four possible
attention factors from which the attention weight for a key
with respect to a query is determined, as these factors must
account for information about the key. Specifically, these
factors are (1) the query and key content, (2) the query content and relative position, (3) the key content only, and (4)
the relative position only. In the latest version of Transformer attention [10], attention weights are expressed as a
sum of four terms (E1 , E2 , E3 , E4 ), one for each of these attention factors as illustrated in Fig. 1. The nature of the dependencies involved with these terms vary. For example, the
first two (E1 , E2 ) are sensitive to the query content. While,
the latter two (E3 , E4 ) do not account for query content, but
rather they mainly capture salient key elements and exploit
global positional biases, respectively. Although attention
weights can be decomposed into terms based on these factors, their relative significance in various inference problems has not been closely examined in the literature. Moreover, prevalent modules like deformable convolution [9, 47]
16688

