Interactive Sketch & Fill: Multiclass Sketch-to-Image Translation
Arnab Ghosh1
Richard Zhang2
Puneet K. Dokania1
Oliver Wang2
Alexei A. Efros2,3
Philip H. S. Torr1
Eli Shechtman2
1

University of Oxford

2

3

Adobe Research

UC Berkeley

Interactive Sketch & Fill
Basketball

Soccer

Watermelon

Orange

Cookie

Moon

Strawberry

Pineapple

Cupcake

Fried chicken

Class-conditioned Outline-to-Image Translation

Figure 1: (Top) Given sparse user input (first row), our model estimates the complete shape and provides this as a recommendation to the user (shown in gray), along with the final synthesized object (second row). These estimates are updated as the
user adds (green) or removes strokes (red) over time – previous edits are shown in black. (Bottom) This generation is classconditioned, and our method is able to generate distinct multiple objects for the same outline (e.g. ‘circle’) by conditioning
the generator on the object category.

Abstract

1. Introduction

tion map, and translating it to a real image. These methods
run at interactive rates, and combining them with a user interface allows the user to quickly create fun (but usually,
unrealistic) images. A few limitations prevent them from
being used as a true interactive tool that assists the user in
generating an image of an object they have in mind. First,
the user is required to provide an entire abstract map as input (full edge or label map). This may prove difficult for
many, as untrained practitioners generally struggle at freehand drawing of accurate proportions of objects and their
parts [6], 3D shapes and perspective [45]. It is much easier with current image translation methods to obtain realistic looking images by editing existing images [8, 40] than
creating images from scratch. Second, current GAN-based
image translation methods are limited to a single class of
images. For example, switching from a cat to a dog requires
loading (or storing in memory) a new model per class.

Conditional GAN-based image translation [25, 43, 61]
models have shown remarkable success at taking an abstract
user input, such as an edge map or a semantic segmenta-

We propose a new GAN-based interactive image generation system for drawing objects that: 1) generates full
images given only sparse and partial user strokes (or

We propose an interactive GAN-based sketch-to-image
translation method that helps novice users easily create images of simple objects. The user starts with a sparse sketch
and a desired object category, and the network then recommends its plausible completion(s) and shows a corresponding synthesized image. This enables a feedback loop, where
the user can edit the sketch based on the network’s recommendations, while the network is able to better synthesize
the image that the user might have in mind. In order to
use a single model for a wide array of object classes, we
introduce a gating-based approach for class conditioning,
which allows us to generate distinct classes without feature
mixing, from a single generator network.

11171

