Adversarial Learning with Margin-based Triplet Embedding Regularization
Yaoyao Zhong, Weihong Deng∗
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{zhongyaoyao, whdeng}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
The Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great
success on a variety of computer vision tasks, however, they
are highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks. To address this
problem, we propose to improve the local smoothness of the
representation space, by integrating a margin-based triplet
embedding regularization term into the classification objective, so that the obtained model learns to resist adversarial
examples. The regularization term consists of two steps optimizations which find potential perturbations and punish
them by a large margin in an iterative way. Experimental results on MNIST, CASIA-WebFace, VGGFace2 and MSCeleb-1M reveal that our approach increases the robustness
of the network against both feature and label adversarial attacks in simple object classification and deep face recognition. The code is available at https://github.com/
zhongyy/Adversarial_MTER.

instance, DNNs in an automatic vehicle system can be confused by carefully manipulated road signs [12], and DNNs
in a face recognition system are susceptible to feature level
adversarial attacks [35, 1, 39].
The existence of adversarial examples has given birth
to a variety of researches on adversarial defenses. One
straightforward defense strategy is to increase the robustness of the model by injecting adversarial examples in the
training process [42, 22, 44], which is essentially a regularization of the training data augmentation. This strategy is
effective in close-set classification like object classification,
while may not suitable in open-set settings like deep face
recognition where training categories could be in million
level. Another strategy is to detect adversarial examples at
inference time [27, 50, 39]. This strategy is appropriate for
both open-set and close-set classification settings, while it
can be easily broken in the white-box setting where the specific defense method is known [5].

1. Introduction
The Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great
success [20, 38, 15, 17], significantly improving the development of a variety of challenging applications such as deep
face recognition [7, 36, 47, 25, 45, 9, 46, 24] and automatic
driving [3, 8].
However, contradictions between the vulnerability of
DNNs and the demand of security have become increasingly obvious. On one hand, DNNs are vulnerable. Previous works have discovered, with elaborate strategies, DNNs
can be easily fooled by test images with imperceptible
noise [42]. This type of images is named as adversarial
examples. Moreover, adversarial examples are transferable
in different models [31, 10], which means black-box attacks can be launched without knowing the details of target
models (e.g. architectures, parameters and defense methods). On the other hand, the demand of security arises in
safety crucial domains driven by DNNs. Adversarial examples can attack physical-world DNNs applications [21]. For
∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the defense before MTER training (top) versus after training (bottom). Arrows indicate the gradients arising from the optimization of the cost function. The same
color represents the same predict class.

In this paper, we propose a margin-based triplet embedding regularization (MTER) method to train DNNs with robustness. Our intuition is that by training a model to improve the local smoothness of embedding space with fewer
singular points, it will be more resistant to adversarial examples. The regularization term consists of two steps opti16549

