ABD-Net: Attentive but Diverse Person Re-Identification
Tianlong Chen1 , Shaojin Ding1∗, Jingyi Xie2∗, Ye Yuan1 , Wuyang Chen1
Yang Yang3 , Zhou Ren4 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
Texas A&M University, 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Walmart Technology, 4 Wormpex AI Research
{wiwjp619,shjd,ye.yuan,wuyang.chen,atlaswang}@tamu.edu
hsfzxjy@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yang.yang2@walmart.com, zhou.ren@bianlifeng.com

https://github.com/TAMU-VITA/ABD-Net

Abstract
Attention mechanisms have been found effective for person re-identification (Re-ID). However, the learned “attentive” features are often not naturally uncorrelated or
“diverse”, which compromises the retrieval performance
based on the Euclidean distance. We advocate the complementary powers of attention and diversity for Re-ID,
by proposing an Attentive but Diverse Network (ABD-Net).
ABD-Net seamlessly integrates attention modules and diversity regularizations throughout the entire network to
learn features that are representative, robust, and more discriminative. Specifically, we introduce a pair of complementary attention modules, focusing on channel aggregation and position awareness, respectively. Then, we plug in
a novel orthogonality constraint that efficiently enforces diversity on both hidden activations and weights. Through
an extensive set of ablation study, we verify that the attentive and diverse terms each contributes to the performance boosts of ABD-Net. It consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on there popular person Re-ID
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) aims to associate individual identities across different time and locations. It embraces many applications in intelligent video surveillance.
Given a query image and a large set of gallery images,
person Re-ID represents each image with a feature embedding, and then ranks the gallery images in terms of feature
embeddings’ similarities to the query. Despite the exciting progress in recent years, person Re-ID remains to be
extremely challenging in practical unconstrained scenarios.
Common challenges arise from body misalignment, occlusion, background perturbance, view point changes, pose
∗ Equal Contribution.

Figure 1. Visualization of attention maps. (i) Original images; (ii)
Attentive feature maps; (iii) Attentive but diverse feature maps. In
general, diversity is observed to make attention “broader” and to
reduce the (incorrect) overfitting of local regions (such as clothes
textures) by attention. (L: large values; S: small values)

variations and noisy labels, among many others [1].
Substantial efforts have been devoted to addressing those
various challenges. Among them, incorporating body part
information [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] has empirically proven to be effective in enhancing the feature robustness against body misalignment, incomplete parts, and occlusions. Motivated by
such observations, the attention mechanism [7] was introduced to enforce the features to mainly capture the discriminative appearances of human bodies (or certain body parts).
Since then, the attention-based models [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]
have boosted person Re-ID performance much.
On a separate note, the feature embeddings are used to
compute similarities between images, typically based on the
Euclidean distance, to return the closest matches. Sun et
al. [13] pointed out that correlations among feature embeddings would significantly compromise the matching performance. The low feature correlation property is, however, not naturally guaranteed by attention-based models.
Our observation is that those attention-based models are often more prone to higher feature correlations, because intuitively, the attention mechanism tends to have features focus
on a more compact subspace (such as foreground instead of

8351

