3D Instance Segmentation via Multi-Task Metric Learning
Jean Lahoud
KAUST

Bernard Ghanem
KAUST

Marc Pollefeys
ETH Zurich

Martin R. Oswald
ETH Zurich

Abstract
We propose a novel method for instance label segmentation of dense 3D voxel grids1 . We target volumetric scene
representations, which have been acquired with depth sensors or multi-view stereo methods and which have been processed with semantic 3D reconstruction or scene completion methods. The main task is to learn shape information
about individual object instances in order to accurately separate them, including connected and incompletely scanned
objects. We solve the 3D instance-labeling problem with a
multi-task learning strategy. The first goal is to learn an
abstract feature embedding, which groups voxels with the
same instance label close to each other while separating
clusters with different instance labels from each other. The
second goal is to learn instance information by densely estimating directional information of the instance’s center of
mass for each voxel. This is particularly useful to find instance boundaries in the clustering post-processing step, as
well as, for scoring the segmentation quality for the first
goal. Both synthetic and real-world experiments demonstrate the viability and merits of our approach. In fact, it
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the ScanNet 3D
instance segmentation benchmark [5].

1. Introduction
A central goal of computer vision research is high-level
scene understanding. Recent methodological progress for
2D images makes reliable results possible for a variety
of computer vision problems, including image classification [24, 44, 48], image segmentation [1, 32, 42], object detection [30, 39, 41] and instance segmentation in 2D images [9, 18, 37]. Furthermore, it is now possible to recover
highly-detailed 3D geometry with low-cost depth sensors
[20,35,47,55] or with image-based 3D reconstruction algorithms [12, 22, 43]. Combining both these concepts, many
algorithms have been developed for 3D scene and object
classification [33, 45, 51], 3D object detection [26, 52], and
joint 3D reconstruction and semantic labeling [4,6,7,25,49].
1 https://sites.google.com/view/3d-instance-mtml

Input Scene

Our Instance Labels

Ground truth Instance Labels

Our Instance Labels

Figure 1. Sample results of our method. Our proposed method
takes as input a 3D point cloud, and outputs instance labels unique
to each object within the scene. The labels are generated by learning a metric that groups parts of the same object instance and estimates the direction towards the instance’s center of mass.

Advances in 2D instance segmentation were mainly fueled by the large number of datasets and challenges available in the 2D realm. When compared to the plethora of
powerful methods for instance segmentation of 2D images,
the 3D counterpart problem has been less explored in the
literature. In addition to the lack of datasets, the majority
of 2D methods are not applicable to the 3D setting or their
extension is by no means straightforward.
With the emergence of labeled datasets and benchmarks
for the task of 3D instance segmentation (e.g. ScanNet [5]),
numerous works have surfaced to tackle this task. In many
cases, the work in 3D benefits from pioneering work in 2D,
with modifications that allow processing of 3D input data.
As such, this 3D processing tends to be similar to other 3D
understanding techniques, mainly semantic segmentation.
In this paper, we address the problem of 3D instance segmentation. Given the 3D geometry of a scene, we want
to label all the geometry that belongs to the same object
with a unique label. Unlike previous methods that entangle instance labeling with semantic labeling, we propose a
technique that mainly focuses on instance labeling through

9256

