Attention Bridging Network for Knowledge Transfer
Kunpeng Li1 , Yulun Zhang1 , Kai Li1 , Yuanyuan Li1 and Yun Fu1,2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA

Abstract
The attention of a deep neural network obtained by backpropagating gradients can effectively explain the decision
of the network. They can further be used to explicitly access to the network response to a specific pattern. Considering objects of the same category but from different domains share similar visual patterns, we propose to treat the
network attention as a bridge to connect objects across domains. In this paper, we use knowledge from the source domain to guide the network’s response to categories shared
with the target domain. With weights sharing and domain adversary training, this knowledge can be successfully
transferred by regularizing the network’s response to the
same category in the target domain. Specifically, we transfer the foreground prior from a simple single-label dataset
to another complex multi-label dataset, leading to improvement of attention maps. Experiments about the weaklysupervised semantic segmentation task show the effectiveness of our method. Besides, we further explore and validate that the proposed method is able to improve the generalization ability of a classification network in domain adaptation and domain generalization settings.

1. Introduction
Since Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have
achieved a lot of progress in many areas, various methods have been proposed recently to explain how they work
[3, 37, 49]. Visual attention [35, 50] is one effective method
to locate image regions that contribute to the final prediction of the network. Attention maps can be obtained for a
given input with back-propagation of the decision signal on
a CNN [35]. They act as an effective way to analyze the
network response and explain its decision.
Due to the close correlation with the network decision
and response, attention maps can further be used to explicitly access to the network’s response to a specific pattern or
category. Considering objects of the same category but from
different domains share similar visual patterns, the network
is likely to have similar responses to them. We are will-

Source domain images
(single-label, simple scene)

Target domain images
(multi-label, complex scene)
Knowledge
Transfer

Foreground
Prior Guidance

Attention maps

Source improved
attention maps

Attention maps Target improved
attention maps

Figure 1. The proposed Attention Bridging Network (AttnBN)
transfers the foreground prior from a simple single-label dataset
(source domain) to another complex multi-label dataset (target domain), resulting in significant improvements of attention maps. By
covering more complete regions of objects, these maps 1) help
boost the performance of weakly-supervised semantic segmentation, and 2) guide the classification network to learn complete visual patterns of objects leading to better generalization ability.

ing to explore the possibility of using network attention as a
bridge to connect objects from different domains and transfer knowledge through it.
Domains here could be datasets with different knowledge or priors. Transferring useful knowledge from one to
the other could benefit the task of interest. Suppose there
are two domains, the source and the target. Based on the
understanding of the network attention mechanism, we can
use knowledge from the source domain to guide the network’s response to categories that are also included in the
target domain. With weights sharing and domain adversary
training, this knowledge can be successfully transferred by
regularizing the network’s response to the same category
in the target domain. We define this property as attention
bridging mechanism and apply it in our model design.
We rely on two roles of network attention to design experiments accordingly to validate the effectiveness of the
attention bridging mechanism. (1) On the one hand, using

5198

