GeoStyle: Discovering Fashion Trends and Events
Utkarsh Mall1

Kevin Matzen2

Bharath Hariharan1

utkarshm@cs.cornell.edu

matzen@fb.com

bharathh@cs.cornell.edu

Noah Snavely1

Kavita Bala1

snavely@cs.cornell.edu

kb@cs.cornell.edu

1

Cornell University, 2 Facebook

Abstract
Understanding fashion styles and trends is of great potential interest to retailers and consumers alike. The photos
people upload to social media are a historical and public
data source of how people dress across the world and at
different times. While we now have tools to automatically
recognize the clothing and style attributes of what people
are wearing in these photographs, we lack the ability to analyze spatial and temporal trends in these attributes or make
predictions about the future. In this paper we address this
need by providing an automatic framework that analyzes
large corpora of street imagery to (a) discover and forecast long-term trends of various fashion attributes as well
as automatically discovered styles, and (b) identify spatiotemporally localized events that affect what people wear. We
show that our framework makes long term trend forecasts
that are > 20% more accurate than prior art, and identifies
hundreds of socially meaningful events that impact fashion
across the globe.

1. Introduction
Each day, we collectively upload to social media platforms billions of photographs that capture a wide range of
human life and activities around the world. At the same time,
object detection, semantic segmentation, and visual search
are seeing rapid advances [13] and are being deployed at
scale [22]. With large-scale recognition available as a fundamental tool in our vision toolbox, it is now possible to ask
questions about how people dress, eat, and group across the
world and over time. In this paper we focus on how people dress. In particular, we ask: can we detect and predict
fashion trends and styles over space and time?
We answer these questions by designing an automated
method to characterize and predict seasonal and year-overyear fashion trends, detect social events (e.g., festivals or
sporting events) that impact how people dress, and iden-

tify social-event-specific style elements that epitomize these
events. Our approach uses existing recognition algorithms
to identify a coarse set of fashion attributes in a large corpus
of images. We then fit interpretable parametric models of
long-term temporal trends to these fashion attributes. These
models capture both seasonal cycles as well as changes in
popularity over time. These models not only help in understanding existing trends, but can also make up to 20% more
accurate, temporally fine-grained forecasts across long time
scales compared to prior methods [1]. For example, we find
that year-on-year more people are wearing black, but that
they tend to do so more in the winter than in the summer.
Our framework not only models long-term trends, but also
identifies sudden, short-term changes in popularity that buck
these trends. We find that these outliers often correspond
to festivals, sporting events, or other large social gatherings.
We provide a methodology to automatically discover the
events underlying such outliers by looking at associated image tags and captions, thus tying visual analysis to text-based
discovery. We find that our framework finds understandable
reasons for all of the most salient events it discovers, and in
so doing surfaces intriguing social events around the world
that were unknown to the authors. For example, it discovers
an unusual increase in the color yellow in Bangkok in early
December, and associates it with the words “father”, “day”,
“king”, “live”, and “dad”. This corresponds to the king’s
birthday, celebrated as Father’s Day in Thailand by wearing yellow [36]. Our framework similarly surfaces events
in Ukraine (Vyshyvanka Day), Indonesia (Batik Day), and
Japan (Golden Week). Figure 1 shows more of the worldwide events discovered by our framework and the clothes
that people wear during those events.
We further show that we can predict trends and events
not just at the level of individual fashion attributes (such as
“wearing yellow”), but also at the level of styles consisting
of recurring visual ensembles. These styles are identified
by clustering photographs in feature space to reveal style
clusters: clusters of people dressed in a similar style. Our

411

