What Else Can Fool Deep Learning?
Addressing Color Constancy Errors on Deep Neural Network Performance

1

Mahmoud Afifi1
York University, Toronto

2

Michael S Brown1,2
Samsung AI Center, Toronto

mafifi@eecs.yorku.ca

mbrown@eecs.yorku.ca

class: Persian cat

1. Introduction
There is active interest in local image manipulations that
can be used to fool deep neural networks (DNNs) into producing erroneous results. Such “adversarial attacks” often
result in drastic misclassifications. We examine a less explored problem of global image manipulations that can result in similar adverse effects on DNNs’ performance. In
particular, we are interested in the role of computational
color constancy, which makes up the white-balance (WB)
routine on digital cameras.
We focus on computational color constancy because it
represents a common source of global image errors found
in real images. When WB is applied incorrectly on a camera, it results in an undesirable color cast in the captured image. Images with such strong color casts are often discarded

Semantic segmentation results

There is active research targeting local image manipulations that can fool deep neural networks (DNNs) into
producing incorrect results. This paper examines a type
of global image manipulation that can produce similar adverse effects. Specifically, we explore how strong color casts
caused by incorrectly applied computational color constancy – referred to as white balance (WB) in photography
– negatively impact the performance of DNNs targeting image segmentation and classification. In addition, we discuss
how existing image augmentation methods used to improve
the robustness of DNNs are not well suited for modeling
WB errors. To address this problem, a novel augmentation
method is proposed that can emulate accurate color constancy degradation. We also explore pre-processing training and testing images with a recent WB correction algorithm to reduce the effects of incorrectly white-balanced images. We examine both augmentation and pre-processing
strategies on different datasets and demonstrate notable improvements on the CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ADE20K
datasets.

Classification results

Abstract

Correct WB

Correct WB

class: carton

Incorrect WB

class: Walker Hound

Correct WB

class: snorkel

Incorrect WB

Incorrect WB

Incorrect WB
Correct WB
wall tree car plant painting grass road rock floor shelf person

Figure 1. The effect of correct/incorrect computational color
constancy (i.e., white balance) on (top) classification results by
ResNet [29]; and (bottom) semantic segmentation by RefineNet
[39].

by users. As a result, online image databases and repositories are biased to contain mostly correctly white-balanced
images. This is an implicit assumption that is not acknowledged for datasets composed of images crawled from the
web and online. However, in real-world applications, it is
unavoidable that images will, at some point, be captured
with the incorrect WB applied. Images with incorrect WB
can have unpredictable results on DNNs trained on whitebalanced biased training images, as demonstrated in Fig. 1.
Contribution We examine how errors related to computational color constancy can adversely affect DNNs focused
on image classification and semantic segmentation. In addition, we show that image augmentation strategies used to
expand the variation of training images are not well suited
to mimic the type of image degradation caused by color
constancy errors. To address these problems, we introduce
a novel augmentation method that can accurately emulate

243

