ARGAN: Attentive Recurrent Generative Adversarial Network for Shadow
Detection and Removal

1

Bin Ding1 , Chengjiang Long2∗, Ling Zhang3 , Chunxia Xiao1∗
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
2
Kitware Inc., Clifton Park, NY, USA
3
Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China

dingbin@whu.edu.cn, chengjiang.long@kitware.com, zhling@wust.edu.cn, cxxiao@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper we propose an attentive recurrent generative adversarial network (ARGAN) to detect and remove
shadows in an image. The generator consists of multiple
progressive steps. At each step a shadow attention detector
is firstly exploited to generate an attention map which specifies shadow regions in the input image. Given the attention
map, a negative residual by a shadow removal encoder will
recover a shadow-lighter or even a shadow-free image. A
discriminator is designed to classify whether the output image in the last progressive step is real or fake. Moreover,
ARGAN is suitable to be trained with a semi-supervised
strategy to make full use of sufficient unsupervised data. The
experiments on four public datasets have demonstrated that
our ARGAN is robust to detect both simple and complex
shadows and to produce more realistic shadow removal results. It outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, especially
in detail of recovering shadow areas.

1. Introduction
Shadow exists in most images and is formulated in interaction among the illumination, object materials and scene
geometry. Obviously, the detected shadows can provide
important clues for various applications of visual scene understanding, such as scene geometry depiction [41], camera location [21], object relighting [22], and scene illumination inference [60]. Meanwhile, the shadow removal is
able to boost the performance of some computer vision and
computer graphics tasks, such as object detection and tracking [37, 33, 36], object recognition [5, 17, 31, 32, 18], intrinsic image decomposition [29]. Therefore, it is desirable
to develop an effective method of shadow detection and removal.
∗ This work was co-supervised by Chengjiang Long and Chunxia Xiao.

Figure 1. Given an input image (left) with shadow, our goal is
to generate a more accurate attention map gradually indicating
the detected shadow region (right-top) and recover a more realistic shadow-removal image (right-bottom) gradually with multiple
progressive steps.

Previous works for shadow detection and removal can
be mainly divided into two categories. One category is traditional methods [12, 61] based on some prior knowledge,
such as consistent illumination in shadow regions. Its shortcoming is that the priors might dissatisfy some shadow images under a complex environment so that the performance
of shadow removal result cannot be guaranteed. The other is
deep learning methods [44, 15, 53, 26, 65] whose effectiveness rely heavily on supervised data to learn a robust model.
Particularly, however, when the training data is insufficient,
such deep learning methods often appear color distortion or
other problems in the shadow removal results.
In this paper, we propose a novel attentive recurrent generative adversarial network (ARGAN) for shadow detection
and removal. As illustrated in Figure 2, the generator involves multiple progressive step for shadow detection and
removal in a coarse-to-fine fashion, and the discriminator is
designed to classify whether the generated shadow-removal
image at the last step from the generator is real or fake.
At each progressive step in the generator, a shadow attention detector is used to generate an attention map. Then a
shadow removal encoder is designed to combine the previous shadow-removal image and the current detected shadow
attention map to obtain a negative residual [8] for recover-

10213

