InGAN: Capturing and Retargeting the “DNA” of a Natural Image
Assaf Shocher∗
∗

Shai Bagon†

Michal Irani∗

Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Math, The Weizmann Institute of Science
†

‡

Phillip Isola‡

Weizmann Artificial Intelligence Center (WAIC)

Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Project Website: http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/˜vision/ingan/

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) typically learn
a distribution of images in a large image dataset, and are
then able to generate new images from this distribution.
However, each natural image has its own internal statistics, captured by its unique distribution of patches. In this
paper we propose an “Internal GAN” (InGAN) – an imagespecific GAN – which trains on a single input image and
learns its internal distribution of patches. It is then able
to synthesize a plethora of new natural images of significantly different sizes, shapes and aspect-ratios all with the
same internal patch-distribution (same “DNA”) as the input image. In particular, despite large changes in global
size/shape of the image, all elements inside the image maintain their local size/shape. InGAN is fully unsupervised, requiring no additional data other than the input image itself.
Once trained on the input image, it can remap the input to
any size or shape in a single feedforward pass, while preserving the same internal patch distribution. InGAN provides a unified framework for a variety of tasks, bridging
the gap between textures and natural images. 1

1. Introduction
Each natural image has its unique internal statistics:
small patches (e.g., 5x5, 7x7) recur abundantly inside a single natural image [13, 36]. This patch recurrence was shown
to form a strong image-specific prior for solving many illposed vision tasks in an unsupervised way [3, 6, 9, 8, 13,
29, 23, 2, 5]. In this paper we capture and visualize this
unique image-specific patch-distribution, and map it to new
target images of different sizes and shapes – all with the
same internal patch distribution as the input image (which
we loosely call “same DNA”).
1 Acknowledgement:

Funded by the European Research Council
(ERC) under the Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant
No 788535). Also supported by a research grant from the Carolito Stiftung.
Dr Bagon is a Robin Chemers Neustein Artificial Intelligence Fellow.

For example, imagine you are given an input image, and
you wish to transform it to a new image, of drastically different shape, size and aspect ratio. But you don’t want
to distort any of its internal elements; you want to keep
them all in their original size, shape, aspect ratio, and in the
same relative position within the image. Such examples are
shown in Fig. 1. Note that despite changing the global size
and shape of the farmhouse image, the windows in the target
images maintain their local size and shape. Rows of windows are automatically added/removed, and likewise for the
number of windows in each row. Similarly, when the fruitstand image in Fig. 1 is enlarged, more fruits are added in
each fruit-box while keeping the size of each fruit the same;
and vice versa when the image grows smaller, the number of fruits grows smaller, while maintaining their size and
their relative position within the image. Furthermore, note
that the target image may not necessarily be rectangular.
How can this be done? One way to satisfy these criteria
is to require that the distribution of patches in the target images match the distribution of patches in the input image, at
multiple image scales. We propose Distribution-Matching
as a new objective for “visual retargeting”. Note that we
use the term retargeting here differently than its common
use in image-retargeting methods [1, 4, 33]. Distributionmatching allows synthesizing new target images of different
sizes and shapes - all with the same internal patch distribution as the input image.
A closely related work is the Bidirectional-Similarity
of Simakov et al. [29]. The Bidirectional objective constrains the target image to contain only patches from the
input image (“Visual Coherence”), and vice versa, the input should contain only patches from the target (“Visual
Completeness”). Hence, no new artifacts are introduced
in the target image and no critical information is lost either. Our new “Distribution Matching” formulation extends
the Bidirectional-Similarity and goes beyond it in multiple
ways: (i) It requires not only that all input patches be in
the output (and vice versa), but also that the frequency of
these patches remain the same. (ii) By matching distribu14492

