Controllable Attention for Structured Layered Video Decomposition
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac1∗

João Carreira1∗

Relja Arandjelović1

Andrew Zisserman1,2

{jalayrac,joaoluis}@google.com
1

DeepMind

2

VGG, Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
The objective of this paper is to be able to separate a
video into its natural layers, and to control which of the
separated layers to attend to. For example, to be able to
separate reflections, transparency or object motion.
We make the following three contributions: (i) we introduce a new structured neural network architecture that
explicitly incorporates layers (as spatial masks) into its design. This improves separation performance over previous
general purpose networks for this task; (ii) we demonstrate
that we can augment the architecture to leverage external
cues such as audio for controllability and to help disambiguation; and (iii) we experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach and training procedure with
controlled experiments while also showing that the proposed model can be successfully applied to real-word applications such as reflection removal and action recognition
in cluttered scenes.

1. Introduction
“The more you look the more you see”, is generally true
for our complex, ambiguous visual world. Consider the everyday task of cleaning teeth in front of a mirror. People
performing this task may first attend to the mirror surface to
identify any dirty spots, clean them up, then switch attention to their mouth reflected in the mirror. Or they may hear
steps behind them and switch attention to a new face now
reflecting in the mirror. Not all visual possibilities can be
investigated at once given a fixed computational budget and
this creates the need for such controllable attention mechanisms.
Layers offer a simple but useful model for handling this
complexity of the visual world [51]. They provide a compositional model of an image or video sequence, and cover
a multitude of scenarios (reflections, shadows, occlusions,
haze, blur, ...) according to the composition rule. For example, an additive composition models reflections, and occlu∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1: We propose a model, C3 , able to decompose a video
into meaningful layers. This decomposition process is controllable
through external cues such as audio, that can select the layer to
output.

sion is modelled by superimposing opaque layers in a depth
ordering. Given a a layered decomposition, attention can
switch between the various layers as necessary for the task
at hand.
Our objective in this paper is to separate videos into
their constituent layers, and to select the layers to attend
to as illustrated in Figure 1. A number of recent works
have used deep learning to separate layers in images and
videos [4, 13, 17, 19, 27, 58], with varying success, but the
selection of the layers has either had to be hard coded into
the architecture, or the layers are arbitrarily mapped to the
outputs. For example, [4] considers the problem of separating blended videos into component videos, but because
the mapping between input videos and outputs is arbitrary,
training is forced to use a permutation invariant loss, and
there is no control over the mapping at inference time. How
can this symmetry between the composed input layers and
output layers be broken?
The solution explored here is based on the simple fact
that videos do not consist of visual streams alone, they also
have an audio stream; and, significantly, the visual and au15734

