Making the Invisible Visible: Action Recognition Through Walls and Occlusions
Tianhong Li∗ Lijie Fan∗

Mingmin Zhao Yingcheng Liu
MIT CSAIL

Dina Katabi

Abstract
Understanding people’s actions and interactions typically depends on seeing them. Automating the process of
action recognition from visual data has been the topic of
much research in the computer vision community. But what
if it is too dark, or if the person is occluded or behind a
wall? In this paper, we introduce a neural network model
that can detect human actions through walls and occlusions, and in poor lighting conditions. Our model takes
radio frequency (RF) signals as input, generates 3D human
skeletons as an intermediate representation, and recognizes
actions and interactions of multiple people over time. By
translating the input to an intermediate skeleton-based representation, our model can learn from both vision-based
and RF-based datasets, and allow the two tasks to help each
other. We show that our model achieves comparable accuracy to vision-based action recognition systems in visible
scenarios, yet continues to work accurately when people are
not visible, hence addressing scenarios that are beyond the
limit of today’s vision-based action recognition.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is a core task in computer vision. It has broad applications in video games, surveillance, gesture recognition, behavior analysis, etc. Action
recognition is defined as detecting and classifying human
actions from a time series (video frames, human skeleton
sequences, etc). Over the past few years, progress in deep
learning has fueled advances in action recognition at an
amazing speed [30, 40, 36, 31, 48, 10, 18, 8, 11, 23, 17,
20]. Nonetheless, camera-based approaches are intrinsically limited by occlusions – i.e., the subjects have to be
visible to recognize their actions. Previous works mitigate
this problem by changing camera viewpoint or interpolating
frames over time. Such approaches, however, fail when the
camera is fixed or the person is fully occluded for a relatively long period, e.g., the person walks into another room.
Intrinsically, cameras suffer from the same limitation we,
∗ Indicates equal contribution. Ordering determined by inverse alphabetical order.

Figure 1: The figure shows two test cases of our system. On the left, two
people are shaking hands, while one of them is behind the wall. On the
right, a person is hiding the dark and throwing an object at another person who is making a phone call. The bottom row shows both the skeletal
representation generated by our model and the action prediction.

humans, suffer from: our eyes sense only visible light and
hence cannot see through walls and occlusions. Yet visible light is just one end of the frequency spectrum. Radio
signals in the WiFi frequencies can traverse walls and occlusions. Further, they reflect off the human body. If one
can interpret such radio reflections, one can perform action
recognition through walls and occlusions. Indeed, some research on wireless systems has attempted to leverage this
property for action recognition [33, 39, 19, 1, 37]. However,
existing radio-based action recognition systems lag significantly behind vision-based systems. They are limited to
a few actions (2 to 10), poorly generalize to new environments or people unseen during training, and cannot deal
with multi-person actions (see section 2 for details).
In this paper, we aim to bridge the two worlds. We
introduce, RF-Action, an end-to-end deep neural network
that recognizes human actions from wireless signals. It
achieves performance comparable to vision-based systems,
but can work through walls and occlusions and is insensitive to lighting conditions. Figure 1 shows RF-Action’s
performance in two scenarios. On the left, two people are
shaking hands, yet one of them is occluded. Vision-based

872

