Visualization of Convolutional Neural Networks
for Monocular Depth Estimation

1

Junjie Hu1,2
Yan Zhang2
Takayuki Okatani1,2
Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Japan
2
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan
{junjie.hu, zhang, okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
shown great success on the task of monocular depth estimation. A fundamental yet unanswered question is: how
CNNs can infer depth from a single image. Toward answering this question, we consider visualization of inference of
a CNN by identifying relevant pixels of an input image to
depth estimation. We formulate it as an optimization problem of identifying the smallest number of image pixels from
which the CNN can estimate a depth map with the minimum
difference from the estimate from the entire image. To cope
with a difficulty with optimization through a deep CNN, we
propose to use another network to predict those relevant image pixels in a forward computation. In our experiments, we
first show the effectiveness of this approach, and then apply
it to different depth estimation networks on indoor and outdoor scene datasets. The results provide several findings
that help exploration of the above question.

1. Introduction
Enabling computers to perceive depth from monocular
images has attracted a lot of attention over the past decades.
It was shown recently [6] that employment of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) achieves promising performance. Since then, a number of studies [25, 5, 2, 3, 16, 40,
26, 8, 19] have been published on this approach, leading to
significant improvement of estimation accuracy.
On the other hand, it is largely unknown why and how
CNNs can estimate depth of a scene from its monocular image; they are basically black boxes as in other tasks. This
will be an obstacle for this method to be employed in realworld applications, such as vision for self-driving cars and
service robots, although it could be a cheap alternative solution to existing 3D sensors. In these applications, interpretability is essential for safety reasons.
Long-term studies in psychophysics have revealed that

Figure 1. An example of the proposed visualization of single view
depth estimation. Upper: an input image. Lower: a mask generated by our method showing relevant pixels for depth estimation.

human vision uses several cues for monocular depth estimation, such as linear perspective, relative size, interposition, texture gradient, light and shades, aerial perspective,
etc. [24, 13, 23, 32, 30, 18]. A natural question arises, do
CNNs utilize these cues? Exploring this question will help
our understanding of why CNNs can (or cannot) estimate
depth from a given scene image. To the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first attempt to analyze how
CNNs work on the task of monocular depth estimation.
It is, however, hard to find direct answers to the above
questions; after all, it is still difficult even with human vision. Thus, as the first step toward this end, we consider
visualization of CNNs on the task. To be specific, as in
previous studies of visualization of CNNs for object recognition, we attempt to identify the image pixels that are relevant to depth estimation; see Fig. 1 for an example. To do
this, we hypothesize that the CNNs can infer depths fairly
accurately from only a selected set of image pixels. An underlying idea is an observation with human vision that most
of the cues are considered to be associated with small regions in the visual field.
We then formulate the problem of identifying relevant
pixels as a problem of sparse optimization. Specifically, we

3869

