Moulding Humans:
Non-parametric 3D Human Shape Estimation from Single Images
Valentin Gabeur1,2
1

Jean-Sébastien Franco1 Xavier Martin1
2
Inria∗
Google Research

Cordelia Schmid1,2 Grégory Rogez3,†
3
NAVER LABS Europe

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of 3D human shape
estimation from single RGB images. While the recent
progress in convolutional neural networks has allowed impressive results for 3D human pose estimation, estimating the full 3D shape of a person is still an open issue. Model-based approaches can output precise meshes
of naked under-cloth human bodies but fail to estimate details and un-modelled elements such as hair or clothing. On
the other hand, non-parametric volumetric approaches can
potentially estimate complete shapes but, in practice, they
are limited by the resolution of the output grid and cannot produce detailed estimates. In this work, we propose
a non-parametric approach that employs a double depth
map to represent the 3D shape of a person: a visible depth
map and a “hidden” depth map are estimated and combined, to reconstruct the human 3D shape as done with a
“mould”. This representation through 2D depth maps allows a higher resolution output with a much lower dimension than voxel-based volumetric representations. Additionally, our fully derivable depth-based model allows us
to efficiently incorporate a discriminator in an adversarial fashion to improve the accuracy and “humanness” of
the 3D output. We train and quantitatively validate our approach on SURREAL and on 3D-HUMANS, a new photorealistic dataset made of semi-synthetic in-house images annotated with 3D ground truth surfaces.

1. Introduction
Recent works have shown the success of deep network
architectures for the problem of retrieving 3D features such
as kinematic joints [4, 33] or surface characterizations [43]
from single images, with extremely encouraging results.
Such successes, sometimes achieved with simple, standard network architectures [30], have naturally motivated
∗ Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
Grenoble, France. † Most of the work was done while the last author was
a research scientist at Inria.

Figure 1. Our non-parametric representation for human 3D shape:
given a single image, we estimate the “visible” and the “hidden”
depth maps from the camera point of view. The two depth maps
can be seen as the two halves of a virtual “mould”. We show this
representation for one of the images of our new dataset.

the applicability of these methodologies for the more challenging problem of end-to-end full 3D human shape retrieval [2, 18]. The ability to retrieve such information from
single images or videos is relevant to a broad number of applications, from self-driving cars, where spatial understanding of surrounding obstacles and pedestrians plays a key
role, to animation or augmented reality applications such as
virtual change rooms that can offer the E-commerce industry a virtual fitting solution for clothing or bodywear.
Designing a deep architecture that produces full 3D
shapes of humans observed in an input image or a sequence
of input images raises several key challenges. First, there is
a representational issue. While the comfort zone of CNNs
is in dealing with regular 2D input and output grids, the gap
must be bridged between the 2D nature of inputs and the 3D
essence of the desired outputs. One solution is to follow a
parametric method and estimate the deformation parameters
of a predefined human 3D model [2, 18]. These methods are
limited to the level of details covered by the model. In contrast, non parametric approaches can potentially account for
shape surface details but are prone to produce physicallyimpossible body shapes. This is the case of the recent volumetric approach proposed in [38] that encodes the human
body as a voxel grid whose dimensionality directly impacts

2232

