SC-FEGAN: Face Editing Generative Adversarial Network with User’s Sketch
and Color
Youngjoo Jo

Jongyoul Park∗
ETRI
South Korea

{run.youngjoo,jongyoul}@etri.re.kr

Abstract
We present a novel image editing system that generates images as the user provides free-form masks, sketches
and color as inputs. Our system consists of an end-to-end
trainable convolutional network. In contrast to the existing
methods, our system utilizes entirely free-form user input in
terms of color and shape. This allows the system to respond
to the user’s sketch and color inputs, using them as guidelines to generate an image. In this work, we trained the
network with an additional style loss, which made it possible to generate realistic results despite large portions of
the image being removed. Our proposed network architecture SC-FEGAN is well suited for generating high-quality
synthetic images using intuitive user inputs.

1. Introduction
Image completion with generative adversarial networks
(GANs) is a topic of great interest in computer vision.
With image exchange becoming a common medium of daily
communication in the present day, there is an increasing demand for realism in images generated with minimal image
completion features. This demand is reflected in social media statistics. However, most current image editing software
requires considerable expertise, such as knowing which specific tools to use in certain scenarios to effectively modify
the image in the desired way. Alternatively, an image completion method that could respond to user input would allow
a novice to easily modify images as desired. To this end,
our proposed system has the ability to easily produce highquality face images provided given sketch and color inputs,
even in the case that parts of the image have been erased.
In recent works, deep-learning-based image completion
methods have been used to restore erased portions of an
image. The most typical method is to use an ordinary
(square) mask and then restore the masked region using an
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Face image editing results generated by our system. It
can take free-form inputs consisting of masks, sketches and color.
These examples show that our system allows users to easily edit
the shape and color of the face, even if the user wants to completely
change the hairstyle and eyes (second row). Interestingly, the user
can even edit earrings with our system (third row).

encoder-decoder generator. Then, global and local discriminators can be used to estimate whether the result is real
or fake [5, 9]. However, the applicability of this system
is limited to low-resolution images, and the generated images contain awkward edges around the masked regions. In
addition, the synthesized images in the restored regions often fall short of user expectations since the generator is not
given any user input to serve as a guide. Several works
that have improved upon these limitations include DeepFillv2 [17], which utilizes user sketches as inputs, a work

1745

