SILCO: Show a Few Images, Localize the Common Object
Tao HU, Pascal Mettes, Jia-Hong Huang and Cees G. M. Snoek
University of Amsterdam

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional networks exhibit superior accuracy in a
wide variety of computer vision challenges, but a key limitation remains their hunger for labeled data [8, 33, 45]. Typically, large amounts of annotated examples are required to
achieve a high accuracy. This issue becomes even more
severe for localization tasks, which typically require additional localized annotations [31, 38, 39]. In recent years,
a new research line has emerged that strives to learn new
concepts from limited amounts of data, known as few-shot
learning [43, 48]. Though widely explored in tasks like image classification, few-shot learning is rarely considered for
object localization problems.
In this paper, we propose the new task of few-shot
common-localization, which takes N support images (without box annotations) and one query image as input and tries

Spatial similarity
Backbone
Feature reweighting

Detection

Few-shot learning is a nascent research topic, motivated
by the fact that traditional deep learning requires tremendous amounts of data. In this work, we propose a new task
along this research direction, we call few-shot commonlocalization. Given a few weakly-supervised support images, we aim to localize the common object in the query image without any box annotation. This task differs from standard few-shot settings, since we aim to address the localization problem, rather than the global classification problem. To tackle this new problem, we propose a network
that aims to get the most out of the support and query images. To that end, we introduce a spatial similarity module that searches the spatial commonality among the given
images. We furthermore introduce a feature reweighting
module to balance the influence of different support images
through graph convolutional networks. To evaluate fewshot common-localization, we repurpose and reorganize the
well-known Pascal VOC and MS-COCO datasets, as well
as a video dataset from ImageNet VID. Experiments on the
new settings for few-shot common-localization shows the
importance of searching for spatial similarity and feature
reweighting, outperforming baselines from related tasks.

Support branch

Query branch

Figure 1. Few-shot common-localization. Starting from a few
weakly-supervised support images and a query image, we are able
to localize the common object in the query image without the need
for a single box annotation. We only know that there is a common
object, we do not know where and what the common object is.

to localize the common object in the query image guided by
the support images. Our task is demonstrated in Figure 1
for four support images and one query image. Unique to
our task is we only know there is a common class among
the support and query images, but the class itself and its
spatial extent is unknown. In practice, we can obtain query
and support images with a common class by leveraging social tags, hash tags, or an off-the-shelf image classification
network. Our method adds the bounding box for free.
We investigate this task in an attempt to alleviate the double burden of annotation in visual localization tasks, namely
regarding the number of examples and regarding the box annotations for each example. This task is therefore on the intersection between few-shot learning [43, 48] and weaklysupervised detection [4, 46]. We also envision a number
of applications that arise from this task. First, few-shot
common-localization enables us to search spatially for specific instances in large and complex scenes. Second, we
can use this task to enhance other learning tasks. Few-shot
common localization can for example be used as a quick annotation tool or as a form of prior annotation for tasks such
as active learning [14]. Third, this approach enables easier
search in tasks such as remote sensing [32, 23].
At the core of few-shot common-localization is getting
the most out of the limited information. To that end, we
15067

