SENSE: a Shared Encoder Network for Scene-flow Estimation
Huaizu Jiang1†
Deqing Sun2∗
Varun Jampani2∗
Zhaoyang Lv3†
Erik Learned-Miller1
Jan Kautz2
1
2
3
UMass Amherst
NVIDIA
Georgia Tech

Abstract
We introduce a compact network for holistic scene flow
estimation, called SENSE, which shares common encoder
features among four closely-related tasks: optical flow estimation, disparity estimation from stereo, occlusion estimation, and semantic segmentation. Our key insight is that
sharing features makes the network more compact, induces
better feature representations, and can better exploit interactions among these tasks to handle partially labeled data.
With a shared encoder, we can flexibly add decoders for different tasks during training. This modular design leads to
a compact and efficient model at inference time. Exploiting
the interactions among these tasks allows us to introduce
distillation and self-supervised losses in addition to supervised losses, which can better handle partially labeled realworld data. SENSE achieves state-of-the-art results on several optical flow benchmarks and runs as fast as networks
specifically designed for optical flow. It also compares favorably against the state of the art on stereo and scene flow,
while consuming much less memory.

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation aims at recovering the 3D structure (disparity) and motion of a scene from image sequences
captured by two or more cameras [52]. It generalizes the
classical problems of optical flow estimation for monocular
image sequences and disparity prediction for stereo image
pairs. There has been steady and impressive progress on
scene flow estimation, as evidenced by results on the KITTI
benchmark [39]. State-of-the-art scene flow methods outperform the best disparity (stereo) and optical flow methods
by a significant margin, demonstrating the benefit of additional information in the stereo video sequences. However,
the top-performing scene flow methods [5, 54] are based
on the energy minimization framework [18] and are thus
computationally expensive for real-time applications, such
†The work was begun while the author was an intern at NVIDIA.
*Currently affiliated with Google.
Project page: http://jianghz.me/projects/sense

(a) Image 1 of left camera

(b) Image 2 of left camera

(c) Optical flow

(d) Occlusions for flow

(e) Disparity

(f) Occlusions for disparity

(g) Segmentation of (a)

(h) Segmentation of (b)

Figure 1. Given stereo videos, we train compact networks for several holistic scene understanding problems by sharing features.

as 3D motion capture [11] and autonomous driving [27].
Recently, a flurry of convolutional neural network
(CNN)-based methods have been developed for the subproblems of stereo and optical flow. These methods achieve
state-of-the-art performance and run in real-time. However, while stereo and flow are closely-related, the topperforming networks for stereo and flow adopt significantly
different architectures. Further, existing networks for scene
flow stack sub-networks for stereo and optical flow together [37, 25], which does not fully exploit the structure
of the two tightly-coupled problems.
As both stereo and flow rely on pixel features to establish
correspondences, will the same features work for these two
or more related tasks? To answer this question, we take
a modular approach and build a Shared Encoder Network
for Scene-flow Estimation (SENSE). Specifically, we share
a feature encoder among four closely-related tasks: optical
flow, stereo, occlusion, and semantic segmentation. Sharing
features makes the network compact and also leads to better
feature representation via multi-task learning.
The interactions among closely-related tasks further con-

3195

