GridDehazeNet: Attention-Based Multi-Scale Network for Image Dehazing
Xiaohong Liu∗ Yongrui Ma∗ Zhihao Shi
McMaster University

Jun Chen

{liux173, may85, shiz31, chenjun}@mcmaster.ca

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end trainable Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), named GridDehazeNet, for single
image dehazing. The GridDehazeNet consists of three
modules: pre-processing, backbone, and post-processing.
The trainable pre-processing module can generate learned
inputs with better diversity and more pertinent features
as compared to those derived inputs produced by handselected pre-processing methods. The backbone module implements a novel attention-based multi-scale estimation on
a grid network, which can effectively alleviate the bottleneck issue often encountered in the conventional multi-scale
approach. The post-processing module helps to reduce the
artifacts in the final output. Experimental results indicate
that the GridDehazeNet outperforms the state-of-the-arts
on both synthetic and real-world images. The proposed
hazing method does not rely on the atmosphere scattering
model, and we provide an explanation as to why it is not
necessarily beneficial to take advantage of the dimension
reduction offered by the atmosphere scattering model for
image dehazing, even if only the dehazing results on synthetic images are concerned. Project website: https:
//proteus1991.github.io/GridDehazeNet/.

1. Introduction
The image dehazing problem has received significant attention in the computer vision community over the past two
decades. Image dahazing aims to recover the clear version
of a hazy image (see Fig. 1). It helps mitigate the impact of
image distortion induced by the environmental conditions
on various visual analysis tasks, which is essential for the
development of robust intelligent surveillance systems.
The atmosphere scattering model [17, 20, 21] provides
a simple approximation of the haze effect. Specifically, it
assumes that
Ii (x) = Ji (x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x)),
∗ Authors contributed equally.

i = 1, 2, 3,

(1)

(a) Hazy Image

(b) Our dehazed Image

Figure 1. An example of image dehazing.

where Ii (x) (Ji (x)) is the intensity of the ith color channel
of pixel x in the hazy (clear) image, t(x) is the transmission map, and A is the global atmospheric light intensity;
moreover, we have t(x) = e−βd(x) with β and d(x) being
the atmosphere scattering parameter and the scene depth,
respectively. This model indicates that image dehazing is
in general an underdetermined problem without the knowledge of A and t(x).
As a canonical example of image restoration, the dehazing problem can be tackled using a variety of techniques that
are generic in nature. Moreover, many misconceptions and
difficulties encountered in image dehazing manifest in other
restoration problems as well. Therefore, it is instructive to
examine the relevant issues in a broader context, three of
which are highlighted below.
1. Role of physical model: Many data-driven approaches
to image restoration require synthetic datasets for training.
To create such datasets, it is necessary to have a physical
model of the relevant image degradation process (e.g., the
atmosphere scattering model for the haze effect). A natural
question arises whether the design of the image restoration
algorithm itself should rely on this physical model. Apparently a model-dependent algorithm may suffer inherent performance loss on real-world images due to model mismatch.
However, it is often taken for granted that such an algorithm
must have advantages on synthetic images created using the
same physical model.
2. Selection of pre-processing method: Pre-processing
is widely used in image preparation to facilitate follow-up
operations [39, 27]. It can also be used to generate several variants of the given image, providing a certain form
of diversity that can be harnessed via proper fusion. How-

7314

