Batch DropBlock Network for Person Re-identification and Beyond
Zuozhuo Dai1

Mingqiang Chen1
1
Alibaba A.I. Labs

Xiaodong Gu1
Siyu Zhu1
2
Simon Fraser University

Ping Tan2

Abstract
Since the person re-identification task often suffers from
the problem of pose changes and occlusions, some attentive
local features are often suppressed when training CNNs. In
this paper, we propose the Batch DropBlock (BDB) Network
which is a two branch network composed of a conventional
ResNet-50 as the global branch and a feature dropping
branch. The global branch encodes the global salient representations. Meanwhile, the feature dropping branch consists of an attentive feature learning module called Batch
DropBlock, which randomly drops the same region of all input feature maps in a batch to reinforce the attentive feature
learning of local regions. The network then concatenates
features from both branches and provides a more comprehensive and spatially distributed feature representation. Albeit simple, our method achieves state-of-the-art on person
re-identification and it is also applicable to general metric
learning tasks. For instance, we achieve 76.4% Rank-1 accuracy on the CUHK03-Detect dataset and 83.0% Recall-1
score on the Stanford Online Products dataset, outperforming the exsiting works by a large margin (more than 6%).

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) amounts to identify the
same person from multiple detected pedestrian images, typically seen from different cameras without view overlap.
It has important applications in surveillance and presents
a significant challenge in computer vision. Most of recent
works focus on learning suitable feature representation that
is robust to pose, illumination, and view angle changes to
facilitate person re-ID using convolution neural networks.
Because the body parts such as faces, hands and feet are unstable as the view angle changes, the CNN tends to focus
on the main body part and the other descriminative body
parts are consequently suppressed. To solve this problem,
many pose-based works [23, 48, 49, 74, 71] seek to localize different body parts and align their associated features,
and other part-based works [8, 27, 30, 31, 51, 56, 64] use
coarse partitions or attention selection network to improve
feature learning. However, such pose-based networks usu-

Figure 1: The class activation map on Baseline and BDB Network.
Compared with the Baseline, the two-branch structure in BDB
Network learns more comprehensive and spatially distributed features consisting of both global and attentive local representations.

ally require additional body pose or segment information.
Moreover, these networks are designed using specific partition mechanisms, such as a horizontal partition, which is fit
for person re-ID but hard to be generalized to other metric
learning tasks. The problems above motivate us to propose
a simple and generalized network for person re-ID and other
metric learning tasks.
In this paper, we propose the Batch DropBlock Network
(BDB Network) for the roughly aligned metric learning
tasks. The Batch DropBlock Network is a two-branch network consisting of a conventional global branch and a feature dropping branch where the Batch DropBlock, an attentive feature learning module, is applied. The global branch
encodes the global feature representations and the feature
dropping branch learns local detailed features. Specifically,
Batch DropBlock randomly drops the same region of all
the feature maps, namely the same semantic body parts, in
a batch during training and reinforces the attentive feature
learning of the remaining parts. Concatenating the features

3691

