OmniMVS: End-to-End Learning for Omnidirectional Stereo Matching
Changhee Won, Jongbin Ryu and Jongwoo Lim*
Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.
{chwon, jongbinryu, jlim}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end deep neural
network model for omnidirectional depth estimation from
a wide-baseline multi-view stereo setup. The images captured with ultra wide field-of-view (FOV) cameras on an
omnidirectional rig are processed by the feature extraction
module, and then the deep feature maps are warped onto
the concentric spheres swept through all candidate depths
using the calibrated camera parameters. The 3D encoderdecoder block takes the aligned feature volume to produce
the omnidirectional depth estimate with regularization on
uncertain regions utilizing the global context information.
In addition, we present large-scale synthetic datasets for
training and testing omnidirectional multi-view stereo algorithms. Our datasets consist of 11K ground-truth depth
maps and 45K fisheye images in four orthogonal directions
with various objects and environments. Experimental results show that the proposed method generates excellent results in both synthetic and real-world environments, and it
outperforms the prior art and the omnidirectional versions
of the state-of-the-art conventional stereo algorithms.

1. Introduction
Image-based depth estimation, including stereo and
multi-view dense reconstruction, has been widely studied
in the computer vision community for decades. In conventional two-view stereo matching, deep learning methods [12, 4] have achieved drastic performance improvement
recently. Besides, there are strong needs on omnidirectional or wide FOV depth sensing in autonomous driving
and robot navigation to sense the obstacles and surrounding
structures. Human drivers watch all directions, not just the
front, and holonomic robots need to sense all directions to
move freely. However, conventional stereo rigs and algorithms cannot capture or estimate ultra wide FOV (>180◦ )
depth maps. Merging depth maps from multiple conventional stereo pairs can be one possibility, but the useful
global context information cannot be propagated between
* Corresponding author.

the pairs and there might be a discontinuity at the seam.
Recently, several works have been proposed for the omnidirectional stereo using multiple cameras [29], reflective
mirrors [25], or wide FOV fisheye lenses [6]. Nevertheless, very few works utilize deep neural networks for the
omnidirectional stereo. In SweepNet [30] a convolutional
neural network (CNN) is used to compute the matching
costs of equirectangular image pairs warped from the ultrawide FOV images. The result cost volume is then refined by cost aggregation (e.g., Semi-global matching [10]),
which is a commonly used approach in conventional stereo
matching [5, 32, 15]. However, such an approach may
not be optimal in the wide-baseline omnidirectional setup
since the occlusions are more frequent and heavier, and
there can be multiple true matches for one ray (Fig. 2b).
On the other hand, recent methods for conventional stereo
matching such as GC-Net [14] and PSMNet [4] employ the
end-to-end deep learning without separate cost aggregation,
and achieve better performance compared to the traditional
pipeline [32, 8, 26].
We introduce a novel end-to-end deep neural network
for estimating omnidirectional depth from multi-view fisheye images. It consists of three blocks, unary feature extraction, spherical sweeping, and cost volume computation
as illustrated in Fig. 1. The deep features built from the
input images are warped to spherical feature maps for all
hypothesized depths (spherical sweeping). Then a 4D feature volume is formed by concatenating the spherical feature maps from all views so that the correlation between
multiple views can be learned efficiently. Finally, the 3D
encoder-decoder block computes a regularized cost volume
in consideration of the global context for omnidirectional
depth estimation. While the proposed algorithm can handle
various camera layouts, we choose the rig in Fig. 2a because
it provides good coverage while it can be easily adopted in
the existing vehicles.
Large-scale data with sufficient quantity, quality, and diversity are essential to train robust deep neural networks.
Nonetheless, acquiring highly accurate dense depth measurements in real-world is very difficult due to the limitations of available depth sensors. Recent works [16, 21] have

8987

