Multinomial Distribution Learning for Effective Neural Architecture Search
Xiawu Zheng 1,2 , Rongrong Ji1,2∗, Lang Tang1,2 , Baochang Zhang3 , Jianzhuang Liu4 , Qi Tian5
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China,
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, 3 Beihang University, China,
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 5 Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio
{zhengxiawu,langt}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn
bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com, qitian@cs.utsa.edu

Abstract
Architectures obtained by Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) have achieved highly competitive performance in
various computer vision tasks. However, the prohibitive
computation demand of forward-backward propagation in
deep neural networks and searching algorithms makes it
difficult to apply NAS in practice. In this paper, we propose a Multinomial Distribution Learning for extremely effective NAS, which considers the search space as a joint
multinomial distribution, i.e., the operation between two
nodes is sampled from this distribution, and the optimal
network structure is obtained by the operations with the
most likely probability in this distribution. Therefore, NAS
can be transformed to a multinomial distribution learning
problem, i.e., the distribution is optimized to have high expectation of the performance. Besides, a hypothesis that
the performance ranking is consistent in every training
epoch is proposed and demonstrated to further accelerate
the learning process. Experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. On
CIFAR-10, the structure searched by our method achieves
2.55% test error, while being 6.0× (only 4 GPU hours on
GTX1080Ti) faster compared with state-of-the-art NAS algorithms. On ImageNet, our model achieves 75.2% top1 accuracy under MobileNet settings (MobileNet V1/V2),
while being 1.2× faster with measured GPU latency. Test
code with pre-trained models are available at https:
//github.com/tanglang96/MDENAS

1. Introduction
Given a dataset, Neural architecture search (NAS) aims
to discover high-performance convolution architectures
with a searching algorithm in a tremendous search space.
∗ Corresponding Author.

NAS has achieved much success in automated architecture
engineering for various deep learning tasks, such as image
classification [19, 34, 32], language modeling [20, 33] and
semantic segmentation [18, 6]. As mentioned in [9], NAS
methods consist of three parts: search space, search strategy, and performance estimation. A conventional NAS algorithm samples a specific convolutional architecture by a
search strategy and estimates the performance, which can be
regarded as an objective to update the search strategy. Despite the remarkable progress, conventional NAS methods
are prohibited by intensive computation and memory costs.
For example, the reinforcement learning (RL) method in
[34] trains and evaluates more than 20,000 neural networks
across 500 GPUs over 4 days. Recent work in [20] improves
the scalability by formulating the task in a differentiable
manner where the search space is relaxed to a continuous
space, so that the architecture can be optimized with the
performance on a validation set by gradient descent. However, differentiable NAS still suffers from the issued of high
GPU memory consumption, which grows linearly with the
size of the candidate search set.
Indeed, most NAS methods [34, 18] perform the performance estimation using standard training and validation
over each searched architecture, typically, the architecture
has to be trained to converge to get the final evaluation on
validation set, which is computationally expensive and limits the search exploration. However, if the evaluation of
different architectures can be ranked within a few epochs,
why do we need to estimate the performance after the neural
network converges? Consider an example in Fig. 1, we randomly sample different architectures (LeNet [17], AlexNet
[16], ResNet-18 [11] and DenseNet [14]) with different layers, the performance ranking in the training and testing is
consistent (i.e, the performance ranking is ResNet-18 >
DenseNet-BC > AlexNet > LeNet on different networks
and training epochs). Based on this observation, we state
the following hypothesis for performance ranking:
11304

