CDPN: Coordinates-Based Disentangled Pose Network for Real-Time
RGB-Based 6-DoF Object Pose Estimation
Zhigang Li

Gu Wang
Xiangyang Ji
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

{lzg15, wangg16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
6-DoF object pose estimation from a single RGB image
is a fundamental and long-standing problem in computer
vision. Current leading approaches solve it by training
deep networks to either regress both rotation and translation from image directly or to construct 2D-3D correspondences and further solve them via PnP indirectly. We argue
that rotation and translation should be treated differently
for their significant difference. In this work, we propose a
novel 6-DoF pose estimation approach: Coordinates-based
Disentangled Pose Network (CDPN), which disentangles
the pose to predict rotation and translation separately to
achieve highly accurate and robust pose estimation. Our
method is flexible, efficient, highly accurate and can deal
with texture-less and occluded objects. Extensive experiments on LINEMOD and Occlusion datasets are conducted
and demonstrate the superiority of our approach. Concretely, our approach significantly exceeds the state-of-theart RGB-based methods on commonly used metrics.

I. Coordinates-based pose estimation

II. Disentangled

1. Introduction

Figure 1: I. We propose a novel coordinates-based pose estimation approach. From top to bottom (left), we show the
query image, 3D object coordinates we estimate and the
2D projection of object model using the predicted 6-DoF
pose. However, the translation shows unbalance performance across objects (middle). II. We further propose disentangled pose estimation approach, which is able to handle this problem and show robust and accurate translation
across objects (right).

Object pose estimation is essential for a variety of applications in real world including robotic manipulation, augmented reality and so on. In this work, we focus on estimating 6-DoF object pose from a single RGB image, which
is still a challenging problem in this area. The ideal solution should be able to deal with texture-less and occluded
objects in cluttered scenes with various lighting conditions
and meet the speed requirement for real-time tasks.
Traditionally, this task was considered as a geometric
problem and solved by matching feature points between 2D
images and 3D object models. However, they require rich
textures to detect features for matching. Thus, texture-less
objects cannot be handled. Benefiting from the rise of deep
learning [7], plentiful data-driven approaches emerge and a
large improvement has been achieved. Current leading ap-

proaches either directly regress 6-DoF object pose from image [8, 28] or predict 2D keypoints in image and indirectly
solve the pose via PnP [20, 19]. However, for the direct approaches, they relies heavily on elaborate post refinement
steps with 3D information to improve the accuracy of the
estimated pose. For the indirect approaches, the sparse 2D3D correspondences make them sensitive to partial occlusions. Also, they still need pose refinement to achieve a better performance. Except for these approaches, another way
is coordinates-based approach, which has been confirmed
to be robust to heavy occlusion [9, 18]. It predicts the 3D
location in the object coordinate system for each pixel of
the object to build dense 2D-3D correspondences to solve
the pose. However, existing coordinates-based methods rely

7678

