Rethinking ImageNet Pre-training
Kaiming He

Ross Girshick

Piotr Dollár

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract

bbox AP: R50-FPN, GN
45

We report competitive results on object detection and instance segmentation on the COCO dataset using standard
models trained from random initialization. The results
are no worse than their ImageNet pre-training counterparts
even when using the hyper-parameters of the baseline system (Mask R-CNN) that were optimized for fine-tuning pretrained models, with the sole exception of increasing the
number of training iterations so the randomly initialized
models may converge. Training from random initialization
is surprisingly robust; our results hold even when: (i) using only 10% of the training data, (ii) for deeper and wider
models, and (iii) for multiple tasks and metrics. Experiments show that ImageNet pre-training speeds up convergence early in training, but does not necessarily provide
regularization or improve final target task accuracy. To
push the envelope we demonstrate 50.9 AP on COCO object detection without using any external data—a result on
par with the top COCO 2017 competition results that used
ImageNet pre-training. These observations challenge the
conventional wisdom of ImageNet pre-training for dependent tasks and we expect these discoveries will encourage
people to rethink the current de facto paradigm of ‘pretraining and fine-tuning’ in computer vision.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks [21, 23] revolutionized computer vision arguably due to the discovery that feature representations learned on a pre-training task can transfer useful information to target tasks [9, 6, 50]. In recent
years, a well-established paradigm has been to pre-train
models using large-scale data (e.g., ImageNet [39]) and then
to fine-tune the models on target tasks that often have less
training data. Pre-training has enabled state-of-the-art results on many tasks, including object detection [9, 8, 36],
image segmentation [29, 13], and action recognition [42, 4].
A path to ‘solving’ computer vision then appears to be
paved by pre-training a ‘universal’ feature representation
on ImageNet-like data at massive scale [44, 30]. Attempts
along this path have pushed the frontier to up to 3000×
[30] the size of ImageNet. However, the success of these
experiments is mixed: although improvements have been

40
35
30
25
typical
fine-tuning
schedule

20
15
10

random init
w/ pre-train

5
0

0

1

2

3

4

5

iterations (105 )

Figure 1. We train Mask R-CNN [13] with a ResNet-50 FPN [26]
and GroupNorm [48] backbone on the COCO train2017 set
and evaluate bounding box AP on the val2017 set, initializing
the model by random weights or ImageNet pre-training. We explore different training schedules by varying the iterations at which
the learning rate is reduced (where the accuracy leaps). The model
trained from random initialization needs more iterations to converge, but converges to a solution that is no worse than the finetuning counterpart. Table 1 shows the resulting AP numbers.

observed, for object detection in particular they are small
and scale poorly with the pre-training dataset size. That this
path will ‘solve’ computer vision is open to doubt.
This paper questions the paradigm of pre-training even
further by exploring the opposite regime: we report that
competitive object detection and instance segmentation accuracy is achievable when training on COCO from random
initialization (‘from scratch’), without any pre-training.
More surprisingly, we can achieve these results by using
baseline systems [8, 36, 26, 13] and their hyper-parameters
that were optimized for fine-tuning pre-trained models. We
find that there is no fundamental obstacle preventing us
from training from scratch, if: (i) we use normalization
techniques appropriately for optimization, and (ii) we train
the models sufficiently long to compensate for the lack of
pre-training (Figure 1).
We show that training from random initialization on
COCO can be on par with its ImageNet pre-training coun14918

