Dual Directed Capsule Network for Very Low Resolution Image Recognition
Maneet Singh, Shruti Nagpal, Richa Singh, and Mayank Vatsa
IIIT-Delhi, India
{maneets, shrutin, rsingh, mayank}@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract
Very low resolution (VLR) image recognition corresponds to classifying images with resolution 16 × 16 or
less. Though it has widespread applicability when objects are captured at a very large stand-off distance (e.g.
surveillance scenario) or from wide angle mobile cameras,
it has received limited attention. This research presents a
novel Dual Directed Capsule Network model, termed as
DirectCapsNet, for addressing VLR digit and face recognition. The proposed architecture utilizes a combination of
capsule and convolutional layers for learning an effective
VLR recognition model. The architecture also incorporates
two novel loss functions: (i) the proposed HR-anchor loss
and (ii) the proposed targeted reconstruction loss, in order
to overcome the challenges of limited information content
in VLR images. The proposed losses use high resolution
images as auxiliary data during training to “direct” discriminative feature learning. Multiple experiments for VLR
digit classification and VLR face recognition are performed
along with comparisons with state-of-the-art algorithms.
The proposed DirectCapsNet consistently showcases stateof-the-art results; for example, on the UCCS face database,
it shows over 95% face recognition accuracy when 16 × 16
images are matched with 80 × 80 images.

1. Introduction
In typical surveillance scenarios, images are often captured from a large stand-off distance, thus rendering the region of interest to be of a very low resolution (VLR), often
times less than 16 × 16 [33]. Figure 1(a) shows sample
real-world applications of VLR recognition where the region of interest can be a face, a suspicious object, or the
license plate number of a moving vehicle. These samples
demonstrate the arduous nature of the problem where some
of the key challenges of VLR recognition are the presence
of limited information content and blur. VLR recognition
also has applicability in image tagging, where multiple objects/people are captured in the frame, and each of these
entities are of small resolution.

(i) Digit Classification

(ii) Face Recognition

(a) Real-world applications of VLR recognition. Image source: (i) Internet, (ii) UCCS dataset [24]

Class 1
Class 2

VLR Images
HR Features
HR Anchor

Class n-1
Class n

Capsules

Classification
Capsule

(i) Traditional CapsNet based VLR Recognition

VLR Features

Class 1
Class 2

VLR Images

Capsules
HR Images

HR Images

Class n-1
Class n

Classification
Capsule

HR Images

(ii) Proposed DirectCapsNet for VLR Recognition

(b) Proposed Dual Directed Capsule Network (DirectCapsNet)

Figure 1: The proposed DirectCapsNet utilizes HR samples
to direct learning of more meaningful and discriminative
features for VLR image recognition via the proposed HRanchor loss and the targeted reconstruction loss.

Netzer et al. [17] demonstrated the poor performance
of humans on identifying VLR digits captured in real surroundings. For the Street View House Numbers (SVHN)
dataset, the authors observed cent percent accuracy by humans for samples with 101 − 125 pixel height. On the other
hand, the performance dropped to 82.0% ± 2% when classifying very low resolution samples, i.e. images of height
up to 25 pixels, thereby reinstating the challenging nature
of the problem. Direct up-sampling via interpolation could
be viewed as a possible solution for VLR recognition, however, multiple studies have demonstrated poor performance
owing to the required large magnification factor [14, 25] and
1340

