RepPoints: Point Set Representation for Object Detection
Ze Yang1†∗ Shaohui Liu2,3†∗ Han Hu3 Liwei Wang1 Stephen Lin3
1
Peking University 2 Tsinghua University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
yangze@pku.edu.cn, b1ueber2y@gmail.com, wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn
{hanhu, stevelin}@microsoft.com

Abstract
convert

Modern object detectors rely heavily on rectangular
bounding boxes, such as anchors, proposals and the final predictions, to represent objects at various recognition
stages. The bounding box is convenient to use but provides only a coarse localization of objects and leads to a
correspondingly coarse extraction of object features. In
this paper, we present RepPoints (representative points),
a new finer representation of objects as a set of sample
points useful for both localization and recognition. Given
ground truth localization and recognition targets for training, RepPoints learn to automatically arrange themselves
in a manner that bounds the spatial extent of an object
and indicates semantically significant local areas. They
furthermore do not require the use of anchors to sample
a space of bounding boxes. We show that an anchor-free
object detector based on RepPoints can be as effective as
the state-of-the-art anchor-based detection methods, with
46.5 AP and 67.4 AP50 on the COCO test-dev detection
benchmark, using ResNet-101 model. Code is available at
https://github.com/microsoft/RepPoints.

1. Introduction
Object detection aims to localize objects in an image and
provide their class labels. As one of the most fundamental
tasks in computer vision, it serves as a key component for
many vision applications, including instance segmentation
[30], human pose analysis [37], and visual reasoning [41].
The significance of the object detection problem together
with the rapid development of deep neural networks has led
to substantial progress in recent years [7, 11, 10, 33, 14, 3].
In the object detection pipeline, bounding boxes, which
encompass rectangular areas of an image, serve as the basic element for processing. They describe target locations
∗ Equal contribution. † The work is done when Ze Yang and Shaohui
Liu are interns at Microsoft Research Asia.

feature extraction
+ classification

localization
supervision

recognition
supervision

Figure 1. RepPoints is a new representation for object detection
that consists of a set of points which indicate the spatial extent of
an object and semantically significant local areas. This representation is learned via weak localization supervision from rectangular
ground-truth boxes and implicit recognition feedback. Based on
the richer RepPoints representation, we develop an anchor-free object detector that yields improved performance compared to using
bounding boxes.

of objects throughout the stages of an object detector, from
anchors and proposals to final predictions. Based on these
bounding boxes, features are extracted and used for purposes such as object classification and location refinement.
The prevalence of the bounding box representation can
partly be attributed to common metrics for object detection
performance, which account for the overlap between estimated and ground truth bounding boxes of objects. Another
reason lies in its convenience for feature extraction in deep
networks, because of its regular shape and the ease of subdividing a rectangular window into a matrix of pooled cells.
Though bounding boxes facilitate computation, they provide only a coarse localization of objects that does not conform to an object’s shape and pose. Features extracted from
the regular cells of a bounding box may thus be heavily
influenced by background content or uninformative foreground areas that contain little semantic information. This
may result in lower feature quality that degrades classification performance in object detection.
In this paper, we propose a new representation, called
19657

