Dynamic Multi-scale Filters for Semantic Segmentation
Junjun He 1,2
Zhongying Deng 1
Yu Qiao1∗
1
ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
hejunjun@sjtu.edu.cn, {zy.deng1,yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Multi-scale representation provides an effective way to
address scale variation of objects and stuff in semantic segmentation. Previous works construct multi-scale representation by utilizing different filter sizes, expanding filter sizes
with dilated filters or pooling grids, and the parameters of
these filters are fixed after training. These methods often
suffer from heavy computational cost or have more parameters, and are not adaptive to the input image during inference. To address these problems, this paper proposes a
Dynamic Multi-scale Network (DMNet) to adaptively capture multi-scale contents for predicting pixel-level semantic
labels. DMNet is composed of multiple Dynamic Convolutional Modules (DCMs) arranged in parallel, each of which
exploits context-aware filters to estimate semantic representation for a specific scale. The outputs of multiple DCMs
are further integrated for final segmentation. We conduct
extensive experiments to evaluate our DMNet on three challenging semantic segmentation and scene parsing datasets,
PASCAL VOC 2012, Pascal-Context, and ADE20K. DMNet
achieves a new record 84.4% mIoU on PASCAL VOC 2012
test set without MS COCO pre-trained and post-processing,
and also obtains state-of-the-art performance on PascalContext and ADE20K.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is an important yet challenging
task in computer vision which aims at assigning a category label to every pixel in an image. It plays an important role in scene understanding [51, 52], medical image
analysis [36], self-driving [40, 45], and many other applications. Recently, approaches based on deep convolutional
neural networks (DCNNs) , especially fully convolutional
networks (FCNs) [32], have achieved great success in semantic segmentation. However, the existence of objects
∗ Corresponding author

and stuff with large scale variations often cause difficulty in
pixel-level dense prediction, especially for extremely small
or large scale objects and stuff. So it is not reasonable to
predict the labels of all pixels with a single scale representation. Therefore, multi-scale representations are desired for
robust and accurate semantic segmentation [39, 5, 6, 51]. In
DCNNs, different scales of objects and stuff can be captured
by filters with different receptive fields. The most appropriate receptive field usually corresponds to the sizes of objects
and stuff. If the receptive field can only cover a small part
of a large scale object or stuff, inconsistent segmentation
result may happen. While the receptive field is extremely
larger than the object or stuff with small scale, background
may dominate the predictions, leading to invisible of small
object and stuff. Thus, using multiple receptive fields to
capture multi-scale objects and stuff with large variation is
critical for dense image prediction in DCNNs.
An intuitive way toward this problem is to utilize multiple kernels with different sizes in parallel. Inception block
proposed in [39] adopts multiple branches with different
kernel sizes to capture multi-scale information. However,
it is inefficient to use large receptive filed for large scale objects, due to the parameters and computational cost increase
exponentially to the kernel size. It also increases the risk of
over-fitting. Pyramid Pooling Module (PPM) proposed in
PSPNet [51], performs pooling operation at different grids
which can be seen as a series different non-parametric convolutions with large kernel sizes and strides. It provides an
effective method to capture multi-scale context information.
But PPM puts equal weights at every position and the finedetail information may lose in pooling operation, which can
hamper the final performance.
Atrous convolution can enlarge the receptive field without adding extra parameters and computational cost, compared with regular convolution with larger filters. [5] proposed Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) module to
capture multi-scale information by employing multiple dilated filters with different dilation rates which lays out in
parallel. It can handle scale variations to some extent, but
13562

