Two-Stream Action Recognition-Oriented Video Super-Resolution
Haochen Zhang, Dong Liu, Zhiwei Xiong
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-Spatial Information Processing and Application System,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
zhc12345@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {dongeliu, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the video super-resolution (SR) problem for facilitating video analytics tasks, e.g. action recognition, instead of for visual quality. The popular action recognition
methods based on convolutional networks, exemplified by
two-stream networks, are not directly applicable on video
of low spatial resolution. This can be remedied by performing video SR prior to recognition, which motivates us to improve the SR procedure for recognition accuracy. Tailored
for two-stream action recognition networks, we propose two
video SR methods for the spatial and temporal streams respectively. On the one hand, we observe that regions with
action are more important to recognition, and we propose
an optical-flow guided weighted mean-squared-error loss
for our spatial-oriented SR (SoSR) network to emphasize
the reconstruction of moving objects. On the other hand, we
observe that existing video SR methods incur temporal discontinuity between frames, which also worsens the recognition accuracy, and we propose a siamese network for our
temporal-oriented SR (ToSR) training that emphasizes the
temporal continuity between consecutive frames. We perform experiments using two state-of-the-art action recognition networks and two well-known datasets–UCF101 and
HMDB51. Results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed SoSR and ToSR in improving recognition accuracy.

1. Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have been applied to action recognition task and obtained
state-of-the-art performance over the traditional arts. For
the convenience of classification, most of them adopt fullyconnected layers in their architecture and thus these welltrained CNNs cannot be directly applied on low-resolution
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Plan under Grant 2017YFB1002401, and by the Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61772483. (Corresponding author:
Dong Liu.)

(LR) video. As a result, their widely application could be
hindered by video’s resolution. Most of the datasets used
for studying action recognition have a fixed resolution, e.g.
UCF101 (about 320×240), HMDB51 (about 340×256),
Sports-1M (about 640×360) [10]. But the resolution in real
world usually varies among different sources of video capturing, inevitably being low, e.g. in surveillance scenario.
There are also many situations where the video has high
resolution but the region containing action is quite small.
To address the resolution problem, most of existing
works choose interpolation to simply re-scale the input
while some recent works in other areas propose superresolution (SR) as an alternative solution. For example,
[26] investigated the effects of SR on object detection and
[37] proposed a dataset for assessing the impact of image
restoration and enhancement on image classification. Most
of them stop at a preliminary experimental study on existing SR methods without proposing approaches targeting on
their tasks, e.g. action recognition.
Super-resolution, aiming to enhance the resolution of
images or video, has long attracted the attention of researchers. In early years, the target of enhancement is
mainly signal fidelity, e.g. PSNR, partly because of an intuitive assumption that PSNR is consistent with visual quality,
and mean-squared-error (MSE) is extensively used during
optimization. However, some recent works challenge this
assumption by showing distortion and perception can be
tradeoff [1], and introduce some perceptual loss [15, 20] in
addition to MSE, targeting for better visual quality of superresolved image. Nonetheless, it is still not clear whether
visual quality determines the quality of visual analytics results, e.g. action recognition accuracy. Since the analytics
tasks are performed by computer instead of human, we argue that the SR methods optimized for visual quality may
not be optimal for action recognition task.
We investigate the video SR problem aiming to facilitate
recognition quality, exemplified by action recognition, instead of visual quality. In particular, we use SR as a preprocessing step before feeding LR video into an action recognition network that is well-trained on HR video. We inves-

8799

