U4D: Unsupervised 4D Dynamic Scene Understanding
Armin Mustafa
Chris Russell
Adrian Hilton
CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
{a.mustafa, c.russell, a.hilton}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce the first approach to solve the challenging problem of unsupervised 4D visual scene understanding for complex dynamic scenes with multiple interacting
people from multi-view video. Our approach simultaneously estimates a detailed model that includes a per-pixel
semantically and temporally coherent reconstruction, together with instance-level segmentation exploiting photoconsistency, semantic and motion information. We further
leverage recent advances in 3D pose estimation to constrain
the joint semantic instance segmentation and 4D temporally
coherent reconstruction. This enables per person semantic instance segmentation of multiple interacting people in
complex dynamic scenes. Extensive evaluation of the joint
visual scene understanding framework against state-of-theart methods on challenging indoor and outdoor sequences
demonstrates a significant (≈ 40%) improvement in semantic segmentation, reconstruction and scene flow accuracy.

1. Introduction
With the advent of autonomous vehicles and rising demand for immersive content in augmented and virtual reality, understanding dynamic scenes has become increasingly
important. In this paper we propose an unsupervised framework for 4D dynamic scene understanding to address this
demand. By “4D Scene understanding” we refer to a unified
framework that describes: 3D modelling; motion/flow estimation; and semantic instance segmentation on a per frame
basis for an entire sequence. Recent advances in pose estimation [8, 46] and recognition [20, 56, 9] using deep learning have achieved excellent performance for complex images. We exploit these advances to obtain 3D human-pose
and an initial semantic instance segmentation from multiple
view videos to bootstrap the detailed 4D understanding and
modelling of complex dynamic scenes captured with multiple static or moving cameras (see Figure 1). Joint 4D reconstruction allows us to understand how people move and
interact, giving contextual information in general scenes.
Existing multi-task methods for scene understanding
perform per frame joint reconstruction and semantic in-

Figure 1. Joint 4D semantic instance segmentation and reconstruction exploiting 3D human-pose of interacting people in dynamic
scenes. Shades of pink in segmentation represents instances of
people. Colour assigned to reconstruction of frame 80 is reliably
propagated to frame 120 using proposed temporal coherence.

stance segmentation from a single image [25], showing
that joint estimation can improve each task. Other methods have fused semantic segmentation with reconstruction
[34] or flow estimation [41] demonstrating significant improvement in both semantic segmentation and reconstruction/scene flow. We exploit the joint estimation to understand dynamic scenes by simultaneous reconstruction, flow
and segmentation estimation from multiple view video.
The first category of methods in joint estimation for
dynamic scenes generate segmentation and reconstruction
from multi-view [35] and monocular video [16, 30] without any output scene flow estimate. The second category
of methods segment and estimates motion in 2D [41], or
give spatio-temporal aligned segmentation [11, 32, 12] from
multiple views without retrieving the shape of the objects.
The third category of methods in 4D temporally coherent
reconstruction either align meshes using correspondence information between consecutive frames [58] or extract the
scene flow by estimating the pairwise surface correspondence between reconstructions at successive frames [53, 5].
However methods in these three categories do not exploit
semantic information of the scene. The fourth category
of joint estimation methods exploit semantic information
110423

