Object-Aware Instance Labeling for Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Satoshi Kosugi Toshihiko Yamasaki Kiyoharu Aizawa
The University of Tokyo, Japan
{kosugi, yamasaki, aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD), where a detector is trained with only image-level annotations, is attracting more and more attention. As a method to obtain a
well-performing detector, the detector and the instance labels are updated iteratively. In this study, for more efficient
iterative updating, we focus on the instance labeling problem, a problem of which label should be annotated to each
region based on the last localization result. Instead of simply labeling the top-scoring region and its highly overlapping regions as positive and others as negative, we propose
more effective instance labeling methods as follows. First,
to solve the problem that regions covering only some parts
of the object tend to be labeled as positive, we find regions
covering the whole object focusing on the context classification loss. Second, considering the situation where the other
objects contained in the image can be labeled as negative,
we impose a spatial restriction on regions labeled as negative. Using these instance labeling methods, we train the
detector on the PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 and obtain
significantly improved results compared with other state-ofthe-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Object detectors trained on large-scale datasets with
instance-level annotations (i.e., strongly supervised object
detectors) have made significant progress [7, 13, 14] with
the recent development of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), but such detailed large-scale datasets are timeconsuming and labor-intensive to collect accurately. On the
other hand, image-level labels that indicate the presence of
an object can be acquired easily and in large amounts because such labels take less time to annotate manually or can
be collected using an image search on the Internet. In order
to take advantage of readily available image-level annotations, in this study, we focus on the problem of training a
detector with only image-level annotations; that is, weakly
supervised object detection (WSOD).
As a method to obtain a well-performing detector with
only image-level annotations, both a detector and instance

labels are updated iteratively. Conventional methods include an alternating iterative strategy [3, 9, 12, 18]. A detector is trained on instance labels initialized based on a simple rule (e.g., supposing the object is at the center of the
image [18]), and the instance labels are updated using the
trained detector, over and over again. Although the initial instance labels are rough and the detector trained on
the initial labels has low performance, the detector and the
instance labels are refined step by step through the alternate optimization. In a recent method [20], for end-to-end
iterative update of detectors and instance labels, multiple
instance classifiers (object detectors) have been employed.
Each instance classifier is trained using the last instance
classifier’s localization result as supervisions. The method
can reduce the training time by optimizing multiple instance
classifiers end-to-end, and achieves good performance.
In order to obtain efficient iterative update, we focus
on an instance labeling problem, a problem of which label should be annotated to each region based on the last
localization result. The instance labeling method employed
by one of the state-of-the-art methods [20] is rather simple; the most confident region and its highly overlapping
regions are labeled as positive, and other regions are labeled as negative or background. For more effective instance labeling, we propose two methods: Context-Aware
Positive (CAP) labeling and Spatially Restricted Negative
(SRN) labeling. CAP labeling is aimed at solving the problem that the most discriminative parts of the object (e.g.,
faces in the person class) tend to be detected rather than
the whole object. We find that the classification loss of the
context of the region (i.e., the outside of the region) differs
depending on whether the region covers the whole object or
not. Utilizing this characteristic, we replace the incomplete
detected region with a region covering the whole object. In
addition to CAP labeling, we develop SRN labeling to consider the negative labeling; that is, which region should be
annotated as background. When an image has multiple objects of the same class, even though one object is labeled as
positive, the other objects can be labeled as negative. SRN
labeling solves this problem by imposing a spatial restriction on negative labeling. We show a comparison with the
baseline labeling in Figure 1.

6064

