Delving into Robust Object Detection from Unmanned Aerial Vehicles:
A Deep Nuisance Disentanglement Approach
Zhenyu Wu1∗, Karthik Suresh1∗ , Priya Narayanan2 , Hongyu Xu3†, Heesung Kwon2 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
Texas A&M University 2 U.S. Army Research Laboratory 3 University of Maryland

Abstract
Object detection from images captured by Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) is becoming increasingly useful. Despite the great success of the generic object detection methods trained on ground-to-ground images, a huge performance drop is observed when they are directly applied to
images captured by UAVs. The unsatisfactory performance
is owing to many UAV-specific nuisances, such as varying
flying altitudes, adverse weather conditions, dynamically
changing viewing angles, etc. Those nuisances constitute
a large number of fine-grained domains, across which the
detection model has to stay robust. Fortunately, UAVs will
record meta-data that depict those varying attributes, which
are either freely available along with the UAV images, or
can be easily obtained. We propose to utilize those free
meta-data in conjunction with associated UAV images to
learn domain-robust features via an adversarial training
framework dubbed Nuisance Disentangled Feature Transform (NDFT), for the specific challenging problem of object detection in UAV images, achieving a substantial gain
in robustness to those nuisances. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm, by showing state-ofthe-art performance (single model) on two existing UAVbased object detection benchmarks. The code is available
at https:// github.com/ TAMU-VITA/ UAV-NDFT.

Despite high demands, object detection from UAV is yet
insufficiently investigated. In the meantime, the large mobility of UAV-mounted cameras bring in greater challenges
than traditional object detection (using surveillance or other
ground-based cameras), such as but not limited to:
• Variations in altitude and object scale: The scales of
objects captured in the image are closely affected by
the flying altitude of UAVs. For example, the image
captured by a DJI Inspire 2 series flying at 500 meters altitude [2] will contain very small objects, which
are very challenging to detect and track. In addition,
a UAV can be operated in a variety of altitudes while
capturing images. When shooting in lower altitudes,
its camera can capture more details of objects of interest. When it flies to higher altitudes, the camera can inspect a larger area and more objects will be captured in
the image. As a consequence, the same object can vary
a lot in terms of scale throughout the captured video,
with different flying altitudes during a single flight.
• Variations in view angle: The mobility of UAVs leads
to video shoots from different and free angles, in addition to the varying altitudes. For example, a UAV
can look at one object from front view, to side view, to
bird view, in a very short period of time. The diverse
view angles cause arbitrary orientations and aspect ratios of the objects. Some view angles such as bird-view
hardly occur in traditional ground-based object detection. As a result, the UAV-based detection model has
to deal with more different visual appearances of the
same object. Note that more view angles can be presented when altitudes grow higher. Also, wider view
angles often lead to denser objects in the view.

1. Introduction
Object detection has been extensively studied over the
decades. While most of the promising detectors are able
to detect objects of interest in clear images, such images
are usually captured from ground-based cameras. With
the rapid development of machinery technology, Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) equipped with cameras have been
increasingly deployed in many industrial application, opening up a new frontier of computer vision applications in
security surveillance, peacekeeping, agriculture, deliveries,
aerial photography, disaster assistance [40, 25, 3, 14, 44],
etc. One of the core features for the UAV-based applications
is to detect objects of interest (e.g., pedestrians or vehicles).
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this paper.
† Currently works at Apple Inc.

• Variations in weather and illumination: A UAV operated in uncontrolled outdoor environments may fly
under various weather and lighting conditions. The
changes in illumination (daytime versus nighttime)
and weathers (e.g. sunny, cloudy, foggy or rainy), will
drastically affect the object visibility and appearance.
Most off-the-shelf detectors are trained with usually less
varied, more restricted-view data. In comparison, the abundance of UAV-specific nuisances will cause the resulting

1201

