Physics-Based Rendering for Improving Robustness to Rain
Shirsendu Sukanta Halder
Inria, Paris, France

Jean-François Lalonde
Université Laval, Québec, Canada

Raoul de Charette
Inria, Paris, France

shalder@cs.iitr.ac.in

jflalonde@gel.ulaval.ca

raoul.de-charette@inria.fr

To improve the robustness to rain, we present a physicallybased rain rendering pipeline for realistically inserting rain
into clear weather images. Our rendering relies on a physical particle simulator, an estimation of the scene lighting and
an accurate rain photometric modeling to augment images
with arbitrary amount of realistic rain or fog. We validate
our rendering with a user study, proving our rain is judged
40% more realistic that state-of-the-art. Using our generated weather augmented Kitti and Cityscapes dataset, we
conduct a thorough evaluation of deep object detection and
semantic segmentation algorithms and show that their performance decreases in degraded weather, on the order of
15% for object detection and 60% for semantic segmentation.
Furthermore, we show refining existing networks with our
augmented images improves the robustness of both object
detection and semantic segmentation algorithms. We experiment on nuScenes and measure an improvement of 15% for
object detection and 35% for semantic segmentation compared to original rainy performance. Augmented databases
and code are available on the project page.

1. Introduction
A common assumption in computer vision is that light
travels, unaltered, from the scene to the camera. In clear
weather, this assumption holds: the atmosphere behaves like
a transparent medium and transmits light with very little
attenuation or scattering. However, inclement weather conditions such as rain fill the atmosphere with particles producing
spatio-temporal artifacts such as attenuation or rain streaks.
This creates noticeable changes to the appearance of images
(see fig. 1), thus creating additional challenges to computer
vision algorithms who must be robust to these conditions.
Most, if not all computer vision practitioners know that
bad weather affect our algorithms. However, very few of
us actually know how much it affects them. Indeed, how
can one know what the impact of, say, a rainfall rate of
100 mm/hour (a typical autumn shower) will have on the
performance of an object detector? Our existing databases

Semantic segmentation [45]

Abstract

Object detection [52]

https://team.inria.fr/rits/computer-vision/weather-augment/

Clear weather

Rain (200 mm/hr)

Figure 1. Our synthetic rain rendering framework allows for the
evaluation of computer vision algorithms in these challenging bad
weather scenarios. We render physically-based, realistic rain on
images from the Kitti [20] (rows 1-2) and Cityscapes [8] (rows
3-4) datasets with object detection from mx-RCNN [52] (row 2)
and semantic segmentation from ESPNet [45] (last row). Both
algorithms are quite significantly affected by rainy conditions.

all contain images overwhelmingly captured under clear
weather conditions. To quantify this effect, one would need
a labeled object detection dataset, where all the images have
been captured under 100 mm/hour rain! Needless to say,
such a “rain-calibrated” dataset does not exist, and capturing
one would be prohibitive.
In this paper, we propose a method to realistically augment existing image databases with rainy conditions. Our
method relies on well-understood physical models to generate visually convincing results. Our approach is the first
to allow controlling the amount of rain in order to generate
arbitrary amounts, ranging from very light rain (5 mm/hour
rainfall) to very heavy storms (300+ mm/hour). This key feature allows us to produce weather-augmented datasets, where
the rainfall rate is known and calibrated. Subsequently, we
augment two existing datasets (Kitti [20] and Cityscapes [8])
with rain, and evaluate the robustness of popular computer
110203

