ShapeMask: Learning to Segment Novel Objects by Refining Shape Priors
Weicheng Kuo1 , Anelia Angelova1 , Jitendra Malik2 , Tsung-Yi Lin1
1
Google Brain 2 University of California, Berkeley
1

{weicheng, anelia, tsungyi}@google.com, 2 malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Instance segmentation aims to detect and segment individual objects in a scene. Most existing methods rely
on precise mask annotations of every category. However,
it is difficult and costly to segment objects in novel categories because a large number of mask annotations is required. We introduce ShapeMask, which learns the intermediate concept of object shape to address the problem of
generalization in instance segmentation to novel categories.
ShapeMask starts with a bounding box detection and gradually refines it by first estimating the shape of the detected
object through a collection of shape priors. Next, ShapeMask refines the coarse shape into an instance level mask
by learning instance embeddings. The shape priors provide a strong cue for object-like prediction, and the instance
embeddings model the instance specific appearance information. ShapeMask significantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art by 6.4 and 3.8 AP when learning across categories,
and obtains competitive performance in the fully supervised setting. It is also robust to inaccurate detections, decreased model capacity, and small training data. Moreover,
it runs efficiently with 150ms inference time on a GPU and
trains within 11 hours on TPUs. With a larger backbone
model, ShapeMask increases the gap with state-of-the-art
to 9.4 and 6.2 AP across categories. Code will be publicly
available at: https://sites.google.com/view/
shapemask/home.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is the task of providing pixellevel classification of objects and identifying individual
objects as separate entities. It is fundamental to applications such as autonomous driving or robot manipulation [8, 44], since segmenting individual objects could help
autonomous agents’ planning and decision making. The
community has made great headway on this task recently
[38, 39, 19, 17, 36, 10, 26, 2, 33, 21, 23]. However, these
approaches require precise pixelwise supervision for every
category. The need for annotation limits instance segmentation to a small slice of visual world that we have dense

Figure 1: ShapeMask instance segmentation is designed to
learn the shape of objects by refining object shape priors.
Starting from a bounding box (leftmost column), the shape
is progressively refined in our algorithm until reaching the
final mask (rightmost column). The bounding box is only
needed to approximately localize the object of interest and
is not required to be accurate (bottom row).
annotations for. But how can instance segmentation generalize better to novel categories?
Existing instance segmentation algorithms can be categorized into two major approaches: detection-based [38,
39, 19, 17, 10] and grouping-based [35, 1, 36, 26, 2, 33]. To
generalize to novel categories, detection-based approaches
can use class-agnostic training which treats all categories as
one foreground category. For example, previous works perform figure-ground segmentation inside a box region without distinguishing object classes [38, 39]. Although class
agnostic learning can be readily applied to novel categories,
there still exists a clear gap compared to the fully super19207

