Stochastic Filter Groups for Multi-Task CNNs:
Learning Specialist and Generalist Convolution Kernels
Felix J.S. Bragman∗
University College London, UK

Ryutaro Tanno∗
University College London, UK

f.bragman@ucl.ac.uk

ryutaro.tanno.15@ucl.ac.uk

Sebastien Ourselin
Kings College London

Daniel C. Alexander
University College London

M. Jorge Cardoso
Kings College London

sebastien.ourselin@kcl.ac.uk

d.alexander@ucl.ac.uk

m.jorge.cardoso@kcl.ac.uk

Manually speciﬁed
architecture

Abstract
The performance of multi-task learning in Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) hinges on the design of feature
sharing between tasks within the architecture. The number of possible sharing patterns are combinatorial in the
depth of the network and the number of tasks, and thus
hand-crafting an architecture, purely based on the human
intuitions of task relationships can be time-consuming and
suboptimal. In this paper, we present a probabilistic approach to learning task-specific and shared representations
in CNNs for multi-task learning. Specifically, we propose
“stochastic filter groups” (SFG), a mechanism to assign
convolution kernels in each layer to “specialist” or “generalist” groups, which are specific to or shared across different tasks, respectively. The SFG modules determine the connectivity between layers and the structures of task-specific
and shared representations in the network. We employ variational inference to learn the posterior distribution over
the possible grouping of kernels and network parameters.
Experiments demonstrate that the proposed method generalises across multiple tasks and shows improved performance over baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) aims to enhance learning efficiency and predictive performance by simultaneously solving multiple related tasks [3]. Recently, applications of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in MTL have demonstrated promising results in a wide-range of computer vision applications, ranging from visual scene understanding [30, 5, 25, 16, 27, 1] to medical image computing
[26, 4, 2, 32].
A key factor for successful MTL neural network models
is the ability to learn shared and task-specific representa∗ Both authors contributed equally

Learned architecture
with our method

Task 1
Gender

Input

x

Age
Shared

Task 2

Figure 1: Figure on the left illustrates a typical multi-task architecture, while the figure on the right shows an example architecture
that can be learned with our method. We propose Stochastic Filter
Groups, a principled way to learn the assignment of convolution
kernels to task-specific and shared groups.

tions [25]. A mechanism to understand the commonalities
and differences between tasks allows the model to transfer information between tasks while tailoring the predictive
model to describe the distinct characteristics of the individual tasks. The quality of such representations is determined by the architectural design of where model components such as features [29] and weights [24] are shared and
separated between tasks. However, the space of possible architectures is combinatorially large, and the manual exploration of this space is inefficient and subject to human biases. For example, Fig. 1 shows a typical CNN architecture
for MTL comprised of a shared “trunk” feature extractor
and task-specific “branch” networks [32, 9, 13, 15, 27, 2].
The desired amount of shared and task-specific representations, and their interactions within the architecture are dependent on the difficulty of the individual tasks and the relation between them, neither of which are a priori known in
most cases [34]. This illustrates the challenge of handcrafting an appropriate architecture, and the need for an effective
automatic method to learn it from data.
In this paper, we propose Stochastic Filter Groups
(SFGs); a probabilistic mechanism to learn the amount
of task-specific and shared representations needed in each
11385

