Dynamic Kernel Distillation for Efficient Pose Estimation in Videos
Xuecheng Nie1,∗
1

Yuncheng Li2

Linjie Luo3

Ning Zhang4

Jiashi Feng1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2

Snap Inc.

3

ByteDance AI Lab

4

DawnLight Technologies Inc.

niexuecheng@u.nus.edu raingomm@gmail.com
ning@dawnlight.com

Abstract
Existing video-based human pose estimation methods extensively apply large networks onto every frame in the video
to localize body joints, which suffer high computational cost
and hardly meet the low-latency requirement in realistic
applications. To address this issue, we propose a novel Dynamic Kernel Distillation (DKD) model to facilitate small
networks for estimating human poses in videos, thus significantly lifting the efficiency. In particular, DKD introduces a
light-weight distillator to online distill pose kernels via leveraging temporal cues from the previous frame in a one-shot
feed-forward manner. Then, DKD simplifies body joint localization into a matching procedure between the pose kernels
and the current frame, which can be efficiently computed via
simple convolution. In this way, DKD fast transfers pose
knowledge from one frame to provide compact guidance for
body joint localization in the following frame, which enables
utilization of small networks in video-based pose estimation.
To facilitate the training process, DKD exploits a temporally
adversarial training strategy that introduces a temporal discriminator to help generate temporally coherent pose kernels
and pose estimation results within a long range. Experiments
on Penn Action and Sub-JHMDB benchmarks demonstrate
outperforming efficiency of DKD, specifically, 10× flops reduction and 2× speedup over previous best model, and its
state-of-the-art accuracy.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation in videos aims to generate framewise joint localization of the human body. It is important for
many applications including surveillance [8], computer animation [18], and AR/VR [19]. Compared to its still-image
based counterpart, this task is more challenging due to its
low-latency requirement and various distracting factors, e.g.,
motion blur, pose variation and viewpoint change.
∗ This work was partly done while Xuecheng was an intern as Snap Inc.

linjie.luo@bytedance.com

elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Frame t-1
Small
CNN

Frame t
Pose Kernel
Distillator

Matching

Small
CNN

Frame t+1
Pose Kernel
Distillator

Matching

Small
CNN

Matching

(a) Our DKD Model

Frame t-1
Large
CNN

Classiﬁcation

Frame t
RNN or
Optical Flow

Large
CNN

Frame t+1
RNN or
Optical Flow

Classiﬁcation

Large
CNN

Classiﬁcation

(b) The Traditional Model

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) our DKD model and (b) the
traditional model for video-based human pose estimation. DKD
online distills coherent pose knowledge and simplifies body joint
localization into a matching procedure, facilitating small networks
to efficiently estimate human pose in videos while achieving outperforming accuracy. See text for details.

Prior CNN based methods to solve this task [10, 22, 25,
20] usually use a large network to extract representative features for every frame and localize body joints based on them
via pixel-wise classification. Some recent works also incorporate temporal cues from optical flow [9] or RNN units [30]
to improve the performance, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Despite
their notable accuracy, these methods suffer expensive computation cost from the large model size, and hardly meet
the low-latency requirement for realistic applications. The
efficiency of video-based pose estimation still needs to be
largely enhanced.
In this paper, we propose to enhance efficiency of human
pose estimation in videos by fully leveraging temporal cues
to enable small networks to localize body joints accurately.
Such an idea is motivated by observing the computational
bottleneck for prior models. Considering the temporal consistency across adjacent frames, it is not necessary to pass
every frame through a large network for feature extraction.
Instead, the model only needs to learn how to effectively
transfer knowledge of pose localization in previous frames
to the subsequent frames. Such transfer can help alleviate

6942

