Towards Latent Attribute Discovery From Triplet Similarities
Ishan Nigam
Pavel Tokmakov
Deva Ramanan
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{inigam,ptokmako,deva}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the task of learning latent attributes
from triplet similarity comparisons. Consider, for instance,
the three shoes in Fig. 1(a). They can be compared according
to color, comfort, size, or shape resulting in different rankings. Most approaches for embedding learning either make
a simplifying assumption - that all inputs are comparable
under a single criterion, or require expensive attribute supervision. We introduce Latent Similarity Networks (LSNs): a
simple and effective technique to discover the underlying latent notions of similarity in data without any explicit attribute
supervision. LSNs can be trained with standard triplet supervision and learn several latent embeddings that can be
used to compare images under multiple notions of similarity.
LSNs achieve state-of-the-art performance on UT-Zappos50k Shoes and Celeb-A Faces datasets and also demonstrate
the ability to uncover meaningful latent attributes.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning has undeniably revolutionized computer vision and machine learning. Such supervision is often
provided in terms of high-level semantic concepts, which
are straightforward to define for many domains, such as the
space of objects [27, 8, 20]. But they are less clear for others what is the right ontology of concepts for attributes [9, 3, 24]
or actions [5, 11]? Indeed, even object labels may be culturally ambiguous to define - for example, overseas annotators
struggled to correctly label hotdogs in COCO [20]! The
difficulty associated with defining and obtaining such labels
gives rise to a considerable body of work in unsupervised
learning [10, 16, 18, 26, 32].
Our work explores a third avenue for learning through
similarity embeddings, where human annotators provide labels for similar and dissimilar objects [4, 7, 28, 31]. Such
supervision is easier to scale as labels can be extracted from
web-scale click data [29] and relies less on cultural and linguistics norms. A large body of work in the psychophysics
community on Just-Noticeable-Differences illustrates the
universality of similar and dissimilar comparisons [23].

Similar
Dissimilar

Color
(a)

{
{
{

Comfort
...

}
} ConvNet
}

...
...

(b)

Figure 1: (a) The first triplet corresponds to the notion of
color while the second triplet corresponds to the notion of
comfort. Relative similarity measurements encode useful
contextual information. We explore the problem of learning
latent attribute concepts from the context encoded in triplet
comparisons. (b) (Left) Our proposed method learns latent
attribute embeddings from triplet comparison data. (Right)
The latent attribute embeddings learned by our system are
useful for knowledge representation as well as for applications such as multi-attribute image retrieval.

Specifically, our work demonstrates that one can discover
discrete latent concepts from large-scale similarity-based object comparisons. Intuitively, concepts correspond to latent
attributes. The heart of our approach is based on the observation that objects can be similar (or dissimilar) in different
ways. For example, an annotator might label two particular
shoes as being similar according to color (Fig. 1 (a)), but
another annotator might label them as different according to
their comfort. A single embedding space for shoes cannot
capture both notions of similarity.
One simple solution is learning different embeddings
for each notion of similarity, such as color, comfort,
etc. Given a pair of images and an observed attribute label,
one can compute the distance between the images in the
appropriate attribute-specific embedding. As we argue
above, such semantic attribute labels are non-trivial and
sometimes even impossible to obtain. Indeed, the task of

402

