FreiHAND: A Dataset for Markerless Capture of Hand Pose and Shape from
Single RGB Images
Christian Zimmermann1 , Duygu Ceylan2 , Jimei Yang2 , Bryan Russell2 ,
Max Argus1 , and Thomas Brox1
1

University of Freiburg
2
Adobe Research

Project page: https://lmb.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/projects/freihand/

Abstract
Estimating 3D hand pose from single RGB images is a
highly ambiguous problem that relies on an unbiased training dataset. In this paper, we analyze cross-dataset generalization when training on existing datasets. We find that approaches perform well on the datasets they are trained on,
but do not generalize to other datasets or in-the-wild scenarios. As a consequence, we introduce the first large-scale,
multi-view hand dataset that is accompanied by both 3D
hand pose and shape annotations. For annotating this realworld dataset, we propose an iterative, semi-automated
‘human-in-the-loop’ approach, which includes hand fitting
optimization to infer both the 3D pose and shape for each
sample. We show that methods trained on our dataset consistently perform well when tested on other datasets. Moreover, the dataset allows us to train a network that predicts
the full articulated hand shape from a single RGB image.
The evaluation set can serve as a benchmark for articulated
hand shape estimation.

1. Introduction
3D hand pose and shape estimation from a single RGB
image has a variety of applications in gesture recognition,
robotics, and AR. Various deep learning methods have approached this problem, but the quality of their results depends on the availability of training data. Such data is created either by rendering synthetic datasets [4, 6, 19, 20, 33]
or by capturing real datasets under controlled settings typically with little variation [7, 22, 27]. Both approaches have
limitations, discussed in our related work section.
Synthetic datasets use deformable hand models with texture information and render this model under varying pose
configurations. As with all rendered datasets, it is difficult
to model the wide set of characteristics of real images, such
as varying illumination, camera lens distortion, motion blur,
depth of field and debayering. Even more importantly, ren-

Figure 1: We create a hand dataset via a novel iterative procedure that utilizes multiple views and sparse annotation
followed by verification. This results in a large scale real
world data set with pose and shape labels, which can be
used to train single-view networks that have superior crossdataset generalization performance on pose and shape estimation.
dering of hands requires samples from the true distribution
of feasible and realistic hand poses. In contrast to human
pose, such distributional data does not exist to the same extent. Consequently, synthetic datasets are either limited in
the variety of poses or sample many unrealistic poses.
Capturing a dataset of real human hands requires annotation in a post-processing stage. In single images, manual
annotation is difficult and cannot be easily crowd sourced
due to occlusions and ambiguities. Moreover, collecting
and annotating a large scale dataset is a respectable effort.
In this paper, we analyze how these limitations affect the
ability of single-view hand pose estimation to generalize
across datasets and to in-the-wild real application scenarios.
We find that datasets show excellent performance on the respective evaluation split, but have rather poor performance
on other datasets, i.e., we see a classical dataset bias.
As a remedy to the dataset bias problem, we created
a new large-scale dataset by increasing variation between
samples. We collect a real-world dataset and develop a
methodology that allows us to automate large parts of the
labeling procedure, while manually ensuring very highfidelity annotations of 3D pose and 3D hand shape. One of
1813

