Local Relation Networks for Image Recognition
Han Hu1 Zheng Zhang1 Zhenda Xie1,2∗ Stephen Lin1
1
2
Microsoft Research Asia
Tsinghua University
{hanhu, zhez, v-zhxia, stevelin}@microsoft.com

Abstract
channel #1

The convolution layer has been the dominant feature extractor in computer vision for years. However, the spatial
aggregation in convolution is basically a pattern matching process that applies fixed filters which are inefficient
at modeling visual elements with varying spatial distributions. This paper presents a new image feature extractor,
called the local relation layer, that adaptively determines
aggregation weights based on the compositional relationship of local pixel pairs. With this relational approach, it
can composite visual elements into higher-level entities in
a more efficient manner that benefits semantic inference. A
network built with local relation layers, called the Local Relation Network (LR-Net), is found to provide greater modeling capacity than its counterpart built with regular convolution on large-scale recognition tasks such as ImageNet
classification.

1. Introduction
Humans have a remarkable ability to “see the infinite
world with finite means” [27, 2]. From perceiving a limited set of low-level visual primitives, they can productively compose unlimited higher-level visual concepts, from
which an understanding of a viewed scene can be formed.
In computer vision, this compositional behavior may be
approximated by the building of hierarchical representations in a convolutional neural network, where different layers represent different levels of visual elements. At lower
layers, basic elements such as edges are extracted. These
are combined at middle layers to form object parts, and then
finally at higher layers, whole objects are represented [35].
Although a series of convolutional layers can construct
a hierarchical representation, its mechanism for composing lower-level elements into higher-level entities can be
viewed as highly inefficient in regards to conceptual inference. Rather than recognizing how elements can be meaningfully joined together, convolutional layers act as tem∗ This work was done when Zhenda Xie was interns at Microsoft Re-

search Asia.

0.5

0.5
0.5

0.5

channel #2

0.5 0.5

0.5 0.5

channel #3

0.5

0.5

convolution

channel #1

0.5
0.5

local relation

Figure 1. Illustration of the 3×3 convolution layer and the 3×3
local relation layer. While 3 channels are required by convolution
to represent the spatial variability between bird eye and beak, the
local relation layer requires only 1 channel.

plates, where input features are spatially aggregated according to convolutional filter weights. For an effective composition of features, suitable filters would need to be learned
and applied. This requirement is problematic when trying
to infer visual concepts that have significant spatial variability, such as from geometric deformation as illustrated in
Fig. 1, since filter learning could potentially face a combinatorial explosion of different valid compositional possibilities [24, 34, 23].
In this paper, we present a new computational network
layer, called the local relation layer, in which meaningful
compositional structure can be adaptively inferred among
visual elements in a local area. In contrast to convolution
layers which employ fixed aggregation weights over spatially neighboring input features, our new layer adapts the
aggregation weights based on the composability of local
pixel pairs. Inspired by recent works on relation modeling [1], composability is determined by the similarity of
two pixels’ feature projections into a learned embedding
space. This embedding may additionally account for geometric priors, which have proven to be useful in visual
recognition tasks1 . By learning how to adaptively compose
1 For example, geometric priors are intrinsically encoded in the con-

volution layer, as its aggregation weights are parameterized on relative
positions. This is an important property leading to its success in visual
recognition.

13464

