Fine-Grained Segmentation Networks: Self-Supervised Segmentation for
Improved Long-Term Visual Localization
Måns Larsson

Erik Stenborg

Carl Toft Lars Hammarstrand Torsten Sattler
Chalmers University of Technology
Image

Abstract
Long-term visual localization is the problem of estimating the camera pose of a given query image in a scene
whose appearance changes over time. It is an important problem in practice, for example, encountered in autonomous driving. In order to gain robustness to such
changes, long-term localization approaches often use segmantic segmentations as an invariant scene representation,
as the semantic meaning of each scene part should not be
affected by seasonal and other changes. However, these
representations are typically not very discriminative due
to the limited number of available classes. In this paper,
we propose a new neural network, the Fine-Grained Segmentation Network (FGSN), that can be used to provide
image segmentations with a larger number of labels and
can be trained in a self-supervised fashion. In addition, we
show how FGSNs can be trained to output consistent labels
across seasonal changes. We demonstrate through extensive experiments that integrating the fine-grained segmentations produced by our FGSNs into existing localization
algorithms leads to substantial improvements in localization performance.

1. Introduction
Visual localization is the problem of estimating the camera pose of a given image relative to a visual representation of a known scene. It is a classical problem in computer vision and solving the visual localization problem is
one key to advanced computer vision applications such as
self-driving cars and other autonomous robots, as well as
Augmented / Mixed / Virtual Reality.
The scene representation used by localization algorithms is typically recovered from images depicting a given
scene. The type of representation can vary from a set
of images with associated camera poses [8, 75, 98], over
3D models constructed from Structure-from-Motion [77,
81], to weights encoded in convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [8, 10, 12, 13, 35, 36, 52] or random forests [11, 16,
79]. In practice, capturing a scene from all possible view-

Sem. Classes

Fredrik Kahl

100 Clusters

Figure 1. Rather than using a small set of human-defined semantic
classes, we train a neural network that automatically discovers a
large set of fine-grained clusters. We experimentally show that using a larger number of clusters improves localization performance.

points and under all potential conditions, e.g., different illumination conditions, is prohibitively expensive [74]. Localization algorithms thus need to be robust to such changes.
In the context of long-term operation, e.g., under seasonal changes, the scene appearance can vary drastically
over time. However, the semantic meaning of scene parts
remains the same, e.g., a tree is a tree whether it carries
leaves or not. Based on this insight, approaches for semantic long-term visual localization use semantic segmentations of images or object detections to obtain an invariant
scene representation [4, 21, 64, 78, 80, 83, 85, 86, 93, 94, 94].
However, this invariance comes at the price of a lower discriminative power as often only few classes are available.
For example, the Cityscapes dataset [22] uses 19 classes
for evaluation, 8 of which cover dynamic objects such as
cars or pedestrians that are not useful for localization. The
Mapillary Vistas dataset [55] contains 66 classes, with 15
classes for dynamic objects. At the same time, annotating
more classes comes at significant human labor cost and annotation time.
In this paper, we show that using significantly more class
labels leads to better performance of semantic visual localization algorithms. In order to avoid heavy human annotation time, we use the following central insight: the image segmentations used by such methods need to be stable under viewpoint, illumination, seasonal, etc. changes.
However, the classes of the segmentations do not need
to map to human-understandable concepts to be useful,
i.e., they might not necessarily need to be semantic. Inspired by recent work on using k-means clustering to pretrain CNNs from unlabelled data [15], we thus propose a

31

