TextPlace: Visual Place Recognition and Topological Localization Through
Reading Scene Texts
Ziyang Hong1 , Yvan Petillot1 , David Lane1 , Yishu Miao2 , Sen Wang1∗
1

Edinburgh Centre for Robotics, Heriot-Watt University

2

University of Oxford

{zh9, y.r.petillot, d.m.lane, s.wang}@hw.ac.uk, yshu.miao@gmail.com

Abstract
lebara

Visual place recognition is fundamental for many vision based applications. Sparse feature and deep learning based methods have been successful and dominant over
the decade. However, most of them do not explicitly leverage high-level semantic information to deal with challenging scenarios where they may fail. This paper proposes a
novel visual place recognition algorithm, termed TextPlace,
based on scene texts in the wild. Since scene texts are highlevel information invariant to illumination changes and very
distinct for different places when considering spatial correlation, it is beneficial for visual place recognition tasks under extreme appearance changes and perceptual aliasing. It
also takes spatial-temporal dependence between scene texts
into account for topological localization. Extensive experiments show that TextPlace achieves state-of-the-art performance, verifying the effectiveness of using high-level scene
texts for robust visual place recognition in urban areas.

1. Introduction
Visual place recognition (VPR) is one of the fundamental
elements of many computer vision and robotics applications
and has attracted considerable attention over the decades
[15]. Its goal is to recognize revisited places accurately by
using visual information.
Most of the established visual place recognition systems
rely on local visual features and the so-called Bag of Visual Words (BoVWs) technique [20, 27]. Some of them
have shown impressive place recognition performance for
large-scale environments by using a single image matching
[4, 5]. However, for long-term operation, their performance
may degrade due to extreme appearance variations caused
by day-night cycles, weather and seasonal conditions. For
example, as shown in Fig. 1, the visual appearance of a
∗ Corresponding author

lebara

bargain

bargain

vero

hill

evas

Figure 1: Place recognition with scene texts. Top: Same place
with different visual appearance at day and night. Bottom: Different places with strong perceptual aliasing. Note scene texts are
consistent for the same place and distinct for different ones.

same place can be very different at day and night (top),
while different places may look visually similar with strong
perceptual aliasing (bottom). Therefore, sparse local feature
based place recognition approaches may be fragile when encountering a large appearance variation due to illumination
and season changes. To overcome these problems, sequence
based methods [17, 19] use global image descriptors and a
sequence of images for matching. Current state-of-the-art
VPR systems mainly rely on deep learning techniques [2, 7]
to learn a latent representation for place recognition in challenging scenarios. However, most of them do not explicitly
leverage high-level semantic information.
Human is remarkably good at the visual place recognition task. One of the reasons is that human can make full use
of high-level semantic information for scene understanding
and place recognition. Texts, as one of main types of highlevel semantics and the fruit of human’s wisdom, have been
long used for reading maps, giving directions and finding
destinations. However, they have not been fully exploited
for visual place recognition research although scene texts
pervasively exist in man-made environments and urban areas, e.g., road signs, street names and shop signage. Revisit
the example in Fig. 1. It can be seen that the scene texts can

2861

