Learning Lightweight Lane Detection CNNs by Self Attention Distillation
Yuenan Hou1 , Zheng Ma2 , Chunxiao Liu2 , and Chen Change Loy3†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Group Limited 3 Nanyang Technological University
hy117@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {mazheng, liuchunxiao}@sensetime.com, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract
Training deep models for lane detection is challenging
due to the very subtle and sparse supervisory signals inherent in lane annotations. Without learning from much
richer context, these models often fail in challenging scenarios, e.g., severe occlusion, ambiguous lanes, and poor
lighting conditions. In this paper, we present a novel knowledge distillation approach, i.e., Self Attention Distillation
(SAD), which allows a model to learn from itself and gains
substantial improvement without any additional supervision
or labels. Specifically, we observe that attention maps extracted from a model trained to a reasonable level would
encode rich contextual information. The valuable contextual information can be used as a form of ‘free’ supervision
for further representation learning through performing topdown and layer-wise attention distillation within the network itself. SAD can be easily incorporated in any feedforward convolutional neural networks (CNN) and does not
increase the inference time. We validate SAD on three popular lane detection benchmarks (TuSimple, CULane and
BDD100K) using lightweight models such as ENet, ResNet18 and ResNet-34. The lightest model, ENet-SAD, performs comparatively or even surpasses existing algorithms.
Notably, ENet-SAD has 20 × fewer parameters and runs
10 × faster compared to the state-of-the-art SCNN [16],
while still achieving compelling performance in all benchmarks. Our code is available at https://github.
com/cardwing/Codes-for-Lane-Detection.

1. Introduction
Lane detection [1] plays a pivotal role in autonomous
driving as lanes could serve as significant cues for constraining the maneuver of vehicles on roads. Detecting
lanes in-the-wild is challenging due to poor lighting conditions, occlusions caused by other vehicles, irrelevant road
markings, and the inherent long and thin property of lanes.
Contemporary algorithms [5, 8, 14, 16] typically adopt
†: Corresponding author.

a dense prediction formulation, i.e., treat lane detection as a
semantic segmentation task, where each pixel in an image is
assigned with a binary label to indicate whether it belongs
to a lane or not. These methods heavily rely on the segmentation maps of lanes as the supervisory signals. Since
lanes are long and thin, the number of annotated lane pixels is far fewer than the background pixels. Learning from
such subtle and sparse annotations becomes a major challenge in training deep models for the task. A plausible way
is to increase the width of lane annotations. However, it
may degrade the detection performance.
Several schemes have been proposed to relieve the reliance of deep models on the sparse annotations, e.g., multitask learning (MTL) and message passing (MP). For example, Lee et al. [14] exploit vanishing points to guide the
training of deep models and Pan et al. [16] incorporate spatial MP in their lane detection models. MTL can indeed provide additional supervisory signals but it requires additional
efforts, usually with human intervention, to prepare the annotations, e.g., scene segmentation maps, vanishing points,
or drivable areas. MP can help propagate the information
between neurons to counter the effect of sparse supervision
and better capture the scene context. However, it increases
the inference time significantly due to the overhead of MP.
For instance, applying MP in a layer of SCNN [16] contributes 35% of its total feed-forward time.
In this work, we present a simple yet novel approach
that allows a lane detection network to reinforce representation learning of itself without the need of additional labels and external supervisions. In addition, it does not increase the inference time of the base model. Our approach
is named Self-Attention Distillation (SAD). As the name
implies, SAD allows a network to exploit attention maps
derived from its own layers as the distillation targets for
its lower layers. Such an attention distillation mechanism
is used to complement the usual segmentation-based supervised learning.
SAD is motivated by an interesting observation – when
a lane detection network is trained to a reasonable level, attention maps derived from different layers would capture
diverse and rich contextual information that hints the lane

1013

