Bilateral Adversarial Training: Towards Fast Training of More Robust Models
Against Adversarial Attacks
Jianyu Wang
Baidu Research USA

Haichao Zhang
Baidu Research USA

wjyouch@gmail.com

hczhang1@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study fast training of adversarially robust models. From the analyses of the state-of-the-art defense method, i.e., the multi-step adversarial training [34],
we hypothesize that the gradient magnitude links to the
model robustness. Motivated by this, we propose to perturb both the image and the label during training, which we
call Bilateral Adversarial Training (BAT). To generate the
adversarial label, we derive an closed-form heuristic solution. To generate the adversarial image, we use one-step
targeted attack with the target label being the most confusing class. In the experiment, we first show that random
start and the most confusing target attack effectively prevent the label leaking and gradient masking problem. Then
coupled with the adversarial label part, our model significantly improves the state-of-the-art results. For example,
against PGD100 white-box attack with cross-entropy loss,
on CIFAR10, we achieve 63.7% versus 47.2%; on SVHN,
we achieve 59.1% versus 42.1%. At last, the experiment
on the very (computationally) challenging ImageNet dataset
further demonstrates the effectiveness of our fast method.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in many visual recognition tasks in computer vision. However, deep
neural networks are extremely vulnerable to adversarial attacks [50]. Specifically, the network is easily fooled to
make wrong predictions in the face of adversarial examples, which are adversarially manipulated images by adding
small and imperceptible perturbations. This poses a great
danger to deploying real-world machine learning systems.
Therefore, training an adversarially robust model is of great
value towards commercialized AI technology.
In the recent years, many approaches have been proposed to defend against adversarial examples. As demonstrated by [1], multi-step adversarial training [34] is currently the best defense method. Specifically, adversarial

training solves a minimax (saddle point) problem. The inner
maximization generates adversarial examples by multi-step
projected gradient descent (PGD), which are then used in
the outer minimization to optimize the network parameters.
To understand the working mechanism of the multi-step
adversarial training, we first perform two diagnostic experiments on CIFAR10. The first experiment is to test a seemingly correct assumption: using stronger adversarial attacks
during training will lead to more robust models. To this end,
we compare two adversarially trained models, which only
differ in the hyper-parameters of the inner maximization:
1) the default setting in [34], denoted by PGD7-2, where
the number of iterations is 7 and the step size is 2 pixels; 2)
a model trained using a weaker attack, denoted by PGD2-8,
where the number of iteration is 2 and the step size is 8 pixels. We observe that PGD2-8 is largely as robust as PGD7-2
under different white-box attacks, even though PGD2-8 attack is weaker than PGD7-2 attack. This result leads us to
hypothesize that robustness may not be achieved by simply
fitting sufficient adversarial examples during training, and
to re-consider if there is more essential ingredients that directly relate to network robustness. With this in mind, we
conduct the second experiment where we compare the gradient magnitude of both undefended models and adversarially trained models. We observe that the gradient magnitude
of adversarially trained models is much smaller than that of
the undefended models. Intuitively speaking, if the gradient
(with respect to input images) becomes extremely small, the
gradient-based adversarial attacks are likely to fail no matter
how many iterations are used. This inspires us that gradient
magnitude may directly link to model robustness.
Based on the above observations, in order to achieve adversarial robustness, we would like a model to satisfy the
following two conditions: 1) low loss (zero-order condition); 2) small gradient magnitude (first-order condition).
To this end, in this paper, we propose a formulation to
achieve these two conditions by perturbing both input images and labels during training, which we call Bilateral Adversarial Training (BAT). As for generating the adversarial
image, we adopt one-step PGD which speeds up the train-

6629

