Order-Aware Generative Modeling Using the 3D-Craft Dataset
Zhuoyuan Chen∗ , Demi Guo∗ , Tong Xiao∗ , Saining Xie, Xinlei Chen,
Haonan Yu, Jonathan Gray, Kavya Srinet, Haoqi Fan, Jerry Ma, Charles R. Qi, Shubham Tulsiani,
Arthur Szlam, and C. Lawrence Zitnick
Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, CA

10%

20%

50%

70%

100%

Grass
Sand

Human

Stone
Snow
Ice

Raster Scan

Iron
Bricks
Oak Fence

Examples

Ladder

Figure 1. We present 3D-Craft, a new dataset of diverse houses built from scratch by human players in the game of Minecraft. The first
and second row illustrate the difference between a recorded human action sequence and a predefined raster scan order for building a house.
The human order information enables us to learn order-aware generative models to predict actions in a more intuitive, human-like manner.
Abstract
Research on 2D and 3D generative models typically
focuses on the final artifact being created, e.g., an image or a 3D structure. Unlike 2D image generation, the
generation of 3D objects in the real world is commonly
constrained by the process and order in which the object is constructed. For instance, gravity needs to be
taken into account when building a block tower.
In this paper, we explore the prediction of ordered
actions to construct 3D objects. Instead of predicting actions based on physical constraints, we propose
learning through observing human actions. To enable large-scale data collection, we use the Minecraft1
environment. We introduce 3D-Craft, a new dataset
of 2,500 Minecraft houses each built by human players sequentially from scratch. To learn from these
human action sequences, we propose an order-aware
3D generative model called VoxelCNN. In contrast
to other 3D generative models which either have
no explicit order (e.g. holistic generation with 3DGAN [35]), or follow a simple heuristic order (e.g.
raster-scan), VoxelCNN is trained to imitate human
∗ equal contribution
1 Minecraft features: c Mojang Synergies AB included courtesy of
Mojang AB

building order with spatial awareness. We also transferred the order to other dataset such as ShapeNet[10].
The 3D-Craft dataset, models, and benchmark system will be made publicly available, which may inspire new directions for future research exploration.
https://github.com/facebookresearch/VoxelCNN.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling is a fundamental problem in machine learning and has a long history in computer vision.
Numerous approaches have been proposed for 2D image
generation, including autoregressive models [32, 31, 25]
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [40, 6].
Along with the success of 2D models, there is an increasing
interest in generative modeling of 3D objects in the vision
community, with many applications such as multi-view 3D
reconstruction [29], 3D editing [23], and probabilistic generative modeling [35].
Unlike 2D image generative models, a potential goal of
3D generative models is to create real world physical objects. It is often the case that the creation of a physical
object not only requires the final design of the object, but
also the order and process used to create it to ensure it can
11764

