FSGAN: Subject Agnostic Face Swapping and Reenactment
Yuval Nirkin
Bar-Ilan University, Israel

Yosi Keller
Bar-Ilan University, Israel

Tal Hassner
The Open University of Israel, Israel

yuval.nirkin@gmail.com

yosi.keller@gmail.com

talhassner@gmail.com

Figure 1: Face swapping and reenactment. Left: Source face swapped onto target. Right: Target video used to control the
expressions of the face appearing in the source image. In both cases, our results appears in the middle. For more information
please visit our website: https://nirkin.com/fsgan.

Abstract
We present Face Swapping GAN (FSGAN) for face swapping and reenactment. Unlike previous work, FSGAN is
subject agnostic and can be applied to pairs of faces without requiring training on those faces. To this end, we describe a number of technical contributions. We derive a
novel recurrent neural network (RNN)–based approach for
face reenactment which adjusts for both pose and expression variations and can be applied to a single image or a
video sequence. For video sequences, we introduce continuous interpolation of the face views based on reenactment,
Delaunay Triangulation, and barycentric coordinates. Occluded face regions are handled by a face completion network. Finally, we use a face blending network for seamless blending of the two faces while preserving target skin
color and lighting conditions. This network uses a novel
Poisson blending loss which combines Poisson optimization
with perceptual loss. We compare our approach to existing state-of-the-art systems and show our results to be both
qualitatively and quantitatively superior.

1. Introduction
Face swapping is the task of transferring a face from
source to target image, so that it seamlessly replaces a face
appearing in the target and produces a realistic result (Fig. 1
left). Face reenactment (aka face transfer or puppeteering)
uses the facial movements and expression deformations of
a control face in one video to guide the motions and de-

formations of a face appearing in a video or image (Fig. 1
right). Both tasks are attracting significant research attention due to their applications in entertainment [1, 20, 48],
privacy [6, 25, 32], and training data generation.
Previous work proposed either methods for swapping or
for reenactment but rarely both. Earlier methods relied on
underlying 3D face representations [46] to transfer or control facial appearances. Face shapes were either estimated
from the input image [44, 42, 35] or were fixed [35]. The
3D shape was then aligned with the input images [9] and
used as a proxy when transferring intensities (swapping) or
controlling facial expression and viewpoints (reenactment).
Recently, deep network–based methods were proposed
for face manipulation tasks. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [12], for example, were shown to successfully generate realistic images of fake faces. Conditional
GANs (cGANs) [31, 16, 47] were used to transform an image depicting real data from one domain to another and
inspired multiple face reenactment schemes [37, 50, 40].
Finally, the DeepFakes project [11] leveraged cGANs for
face swapping in videos, making swapping widely accessible to non-experts and receiving significant public attention.
Those methods are capable of generating realistic face images by replacing the classic graphics pipeline. They all,
however, still implicitly use 3D face representations.
Some methods relied on latent feature space domain separation [45, 34, 33]. These methods decompose the identity
component of the face from the remaining traits, and encode identity as the manifestation of latent feature vectors,
resulting in significant information loss and limiting the

7184

