Learning Propagation for Arbitrarily-structured Data
Sifei Liu1 , Xueting Li1,2 , Varun Jampani1∗, Shalini De Mello1 , Jan Kautz1
1
NVIDIA, 2 University of California, Merced

Abstract
Processing an input signal that contains arbitrary structures, e.g., superpixels and point clouds, remains a big challenge in computer vision. Linear diffusion, an effective
model for image processing, has been recently integrated
with deep learning algorithms. In this paper, we propose
to learn pairwise relations among data points in a global
fashion to improve semantic segmentation with arbitrarilystructured data, through spatial generalized propagation
networks (SGPN). The network propagates information
on a group of graphs, which represent the arbitrarilystructured data, through a learned, linear diffusion process.
The module is flexible to be embedded and jointly trained
with many types of networks, e.g., CNNs. We experiment
with semantic segmentation networks, where we use our
propagation module to jointly train on different data – images, superpixels and point clouds. We show that SGPN
consistently improves the performance of both pixel and
point cloud segmentation, compared to networks that do
not contain this module. Our method suggests an effective
way to model the global pairwise relations for arbitrarilystructured data.

1. Introduction
The individual visual elements of spatially distributed
data, e.g., pixels/superpixels in an image or points in a point
cloud, exhibit strong pairwise relations. Capturing these relations is important for understanding and processing such
data. For example, in semantic segmentation, where each
pixel/point is assigned a semantic label, it is very likely that
the points that are spatially and photometrically close, or
structurally connected to each other have the same semantic label, compared to those that are farther away. We can
make use of such similarity cues to infer the relationships
among points and improve the propagation of information
(e.g., semantic labels, color etc.) between them. This pairwise relationship modeling is often called “affinity” modeling. Evidence from psychological [5, 42] and empirical
studies in computer vision [37, 17, 27] suggests that general
∗ The current affiliation is Google Research.

Figure 1. Groupings of different objects v and u in (a) with different strategies: (b) performing convolution on grids; explicit pairwise modeling via (c) fully-connected graphs, and (d) our pathaware propagation. Since v and u have the same color, we model
the similarity (κ) using spatial closeness between two points.

classification or regression problems can immensely benefit
from the explicit modeling of pairwise affinities.
With a dramatic rise in adoption for computer vision
tasks, CNNs implicitly model pairwise relationships, as
convolution filters learn to capture correlations across image
pixels. Several extensions of CNNs to process arbitrarilystructured data (such as point clouds) have been proposed
(e.g., permutohedral lattice [1, 24, 43]) that go beyond processing regular grid-like structured images. They transform
the data to some regular structures, such that convolutional
filters can be learned for them. However, convolutions can
only capture short-range pairwise relations and the filters
are also content-agnostic as their weights are fixed once
they are trained. As a result, we usually resort to using
very deep network architectures to model all possible pairwise relations, and long-range pixel dependencies. As an
alternative, several recent works [54, 10, 8, 24, 31, 7, 19,
34, 47, 36] propose neural network modules that can explicitly model pairwise relations, resulting in considerable
improvements in CNN performance for a variety of computer vision tasks. However, most of them are designed on
regularly-structured data, such as images and videos.
Despite the existence of these methods, several important challenges remain for processing arbitrarily-structured
data such as point clouds: First, we hope such data can
be represented with a more flexible structure, instead of
regular-grids (such as voxel grids or permutohedral lattice),
such that the original structure of the input data can be faithfully preserved. Second, as mentioned above, we hope to
explicitly model the pairwise relations among their data el-

652

