Progressive Sparse Local Attention for Video Object Detection
Chaoxu Guo1,2

Bin Fan1∗ Jie Gu1 Qian Zhang3 Shiming Xiang1,2
Véronique Prinet1 Chunhong Pan1
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Horizon Robotics
{chaoxu.guo,bfan,smxiang,prinet,chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {qian01.zhang}@horizon.ai

C t;t+²

Abstract
Transferring image-based object detectors to the domain
of videos remains a challenging problem. Previous efforts
mostly exploit optical flow to propagate features across
frames, aiming to achieve a good trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. However, introducing an extra model
to estimate optical flow can significantly increase the overall model size. The gap between optical flow and highlevel features can also hinder it from establishing spatial
correspondence accurately. Instead of relying on optical
flow, this paper proposes a novel module called Progressive Sparse Local Attention (PSLA), which establishes the
spatial correspondence between features across frames in a
local region with progressively sparser stride and uses the
correspondence to propagate features. Based on PSLA, Recursive Feature Updating (RFU) and Dense Feature Transforming (DenseFT) are proposed to model temporal appearance and enrich feature representation respectively in
a novel video object detection framework. Experiments on
ImageNet VID show that our method achieves the best accuracy compared to existing methods with smaller model
size and acceptable runtime speed.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental problem in computer
vision and serves as a core technique in many practical applications, e.g. robotics, autonomous driving and human
behavior analysis. With the development of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), remarkable successes have been
achieved on detecting objects from images [7, 12, 13, 16,
17, 26, 28, 29, 31]. However, applying those techniques
on a frame-by-frame basis to a video is often unsatisfactory
∗ Bin Fan is the corresponding author

Aggregate

Compare

f(F t+² )

ĸ

C t;t+²

ķ

g(F t )

: (x; y)
: ©0(x; y)
: ©1 (x; y) : ©2(x; y) : ©3(x; y)

F^ t+²
: Correspondence Weights
: Aligned Feature Cell

Ft

Figure 1. Illustration of Progressive Sparse Local Attention (PSLA). The
goal of PSLA is to align feature map Ft with F t+ǫ in an attention way,
which is formulated into two steps: the first step 1 is that each feature
cell in embedded feature map f (F t+ǫ ) compares to the surrounding cells
in the embedded feature map g(F t ), in a progressive sparser stride from
center to outside. Regions with different colors in g(F t ) represent regions
in different strides, which are illustrated in equation 2 and 3. The resulting feature affinities are used to compute correspondence weights C t,t+ǫ ,
which capture the spatial correspondence between features. The second
step 2 is that the chosen feature cells in F t are aggregated with the corresponding weights to generate a feature cell in F̂ t+ǫ , which is the aligned
feature map from F t .

due to the deteriorated appearance caused by issues such as
motion blur, out-of-focus camera, and rare poses frequently
encountered in videos. The temporal information encoded
inherently in videos has been used to improve the performance of video object detection, as it provides rich cues
about the motion in videos that are absent from still images.
Existing methods that leverage temporal information for
object detection from videos mainly fall into two categories. The first one relies on dedicated post-processing
[15, 20, 21, 23]. These methods firstly run an image-based
detector on single frames and then integrate the per-frame
results by box-level post-processing, which usually requires
an extra object tracker or off-the-shelf optical flow to estimate the motion field and associate the bounding boxes.
Modeling temporal coherence in this way is sub-optimal

3909

