Evaluating Robustness of Deep Image Super-Resolution
Against Adversarial Attacks
Jun-Ho Choi1 , Huan Zhang2 , Jun-Hyuk Kim1 , Cho-Jui Hsieh2 , and Jong-Seok Lee1
1

School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University

{idearibosome,junhyuk.kim,jong-seok.lee}@yonsei.ac.kr
2

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
huanzhang@ucla.edu

Abstract
Single-image super-resolution aims to generate a highresolution version of a low-resolution image, which serves
as an essential component in many computer vision applications. This paper investigates the robustness of deep
learning-based super-resolution methods against adversarial attacks, which can significantly deteriorate the superresolved images without noticeable distortion in the attacked low-resolution images. It is demonstrated that stateof-the-art deep super-resolution methods are highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Different levels of robustness of
different methods are analyzed theoretically and experimentally. We also present analysis on transferability of attacks,
and feasibility of targeted attacks and universal attacks.

1. Introduction
Single-image super-resolution, which is to generate a
high-resolution version of a low-resolution image, is one
of the popular research areas in recent years. While simple interpolation methods such as bilinear and bicubic upscaling have been used popularly, the development of deep
learning-based approaches, which is triggered by a simple convolutional network model named super-resolution
convolutional neural network (SRCNN) [7], offers much
better quality of the upscaled images. The improvement
of the super-resolution technique extends its applications
to broader areas, including video streaming, surveillance,
medical diagnosis, and satellite photography [23].
While many deep learning-based super-resolution methods have been introduced, their robustness against intended
attacks has not been thoroughly studied. The vulnerability of deep networks has been an important issue in recent
years, since various investigations report that the attack can

chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

fool the deep classification models and can cause severe security issues [9, 17]. The similar issues can be raised for the
super-resolution applications, since the deteriorated outputs
can directly affect the reliability and stability of the systems
employing super-resolution as their key components.
In this paper, we investigate the robustness of deep
learning-based super-resolution against adversarial attacks,
which is the first work to the best of our knowledge. Our attacks generate perturbations in the input images, which are
not visually noticeable but can largely deteriorate the quality of the outputs. The main contributions of this paper can
be summarized as follows.
• We propose three adversarial attack methods for
super-resolution, which slightly perturb a given lowresolution image but result in significantly deteriorated
output images, including basic, universal, and partial
attacks. The methods are based on the methods widely
used in the image classification tasks, and we optimize
them for the super-resolution tasks.
• We present thorough analysis of the robustness of the
super-resolution methods, by providing experimental results using the adversarial attack methods. We
employ various state-of-the-art deep learning-based
super-resolution methods having variable characteristics in terms of model structure, training objective, and
model size.
• We further investigate the relation of robustness to the
model properties and measure the transferability. In
addition, we provide three advanced topics, including
targeted attack, attack-agnostic robustness measurement, and simple defense methods of the attack.

2. Related Work
Super-resolution. Recently, the trend of super-resolution
researches has been shifted to the deep learning-based

303

