Adversarial Representation Learning for Text-to-Image Matching
Nikolaos Sarafianos
Xiang Xu
Ioannis A. Kakadiaris
Computational Biomedicine Lab
University of Houston
{nsarafianos, xxu21}@uh.edu, ikakadia@central.uh.edu

Abstract
For many computer vision applications such as image
captioning, visual question answering, and person search,
learning discriminative feature representations at both image and text level is an essential yet challenging problem.
Its challenges originate from the large word variance in the
text domain as well as the difficulty of accurately measuring the distance between the features of the two modalities. Most prior work focuses on the latter challenge, by
introducing loss functions that help the network learn better feature representations but fail to account for the complexity of the textual input. With that in mind, we introduce TIMAM: a Text-Image Modality Adversarial Matching
approach that learns modality-invariant feature representations using adversarial and cross-modal matching objectives. In addition, we demonstrate that BERT, a publiclyavailable language model that extracts word embeddings,
can successfully be applied in the text-to-image matching domain. The proposed approach achieves state-of-theart cross-modal matching performance on four widely-used
publicly-available datasets resulting in absolute improvements ranging from 2% to 5% in terms of rank-1 accuracy.

1. Introduction
We set out to develop a cross-modal matching method
that given a textual description, identifies and retrieves the
most relevant images. For example, given the sentence “A
woman with a white shirt carrying a black purse on her
hand” we aspire to obtain images of individuals with such
visual attributes. The first challenge of matching images
and text is the large word variability in the textual descriptions even when they are describing the same image. What
is considered as important information for one is not necessarily the same for another annotator. At the same time, textual descriptions might contain mistakes, the descriptions
can be too long or the annotator might describe additional
information that is available on the image but is not related
to the primary point of interest (e.g., human, object). All of

Figure 1: We learn discriminative embeddings from the visual and textual inputs by: (i) matching the distributions
of the features that belong to the same identity, and (ii) employing a modality discriminator that tries to distinguish the
encoded textual from the visual examples.
these factors make text-to-image matching a difficult problem since learning good feature representations from such
descriptions is not straightforward.
A second major challenge of text-to-image matching is
how to accurately measure the distance between the text
and image features. During deployment, the distance between the probe text features and all the gallery image features is computed and the results are ranked based on this
criterion. Most existing methods introduce loss functions
to tackle this challenge. For example, Li et al. [25] proposed to “bring close-together” cross-modal features originating from the same identity and “push away” features
from different identities. Although such methods have continuously outperformed previous state-of-the-art, their performance remains unsatisfactory. For example, the best
performing text-to-image matching method on the CUHKPEDES dataset [26] is below 50% in terms of rank-1 accuracy. Finally, most methods usually rely on some assumptions under which they perform matching. For example, in
the work of Chen et al. [6], part-of-speech (POS) tagging is
performed to extract local phrases (e.g., nouns with adjectives). However, when we performed POS tagging on the
same textual inputs, we observed that important information is lost since the same word can be tagged differently
depending on the context or its location within the sentence
15814

