Attention-Aware Polarity Sensitive Embedding for Affective Image Retrieval
Xingxu Yao1 , Dongyu She1 , Sicheng Zhao2 , Jie Liang1 , Yu-Kun Lai3 , Jufeng Yang1 
1
Nankai University 2 University of California, Berkeley 3 Cardiff University
{yxx hbgd, sherry6656}@163.com, schzhao@gmail.com, liang27jie@163.com
LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Images play a crucial role for people to express their
opinions online due to the increasing popularity of social
networks. While an affective image retrieval system is useful for obtaining visual contents with desired emotions from
a massive repository, the abstract and subjective characteristics make the task challenging. To address the problem, this paper introduces an Attention-aware Polarity Sensitive Embedding (APSE) network to learn affective representations in an end-to-end manner. First, to automatically
discover and model the informative regions of interest, we
develop a hierarchical attention mechanism, in which both
polarity- and emotion-specific attended representations are
aggregated for discriminative feature embedding. Second,
we present a weighted emotion-pair loss to take the interand intra-polarity relationships of the emotional labels into
consideration. Guided by attention module, we weight the
sample pairs adaptively which further improves the performance of feature embedding. Extensive experiments on four
popular benchmark datasets show that the proposed method
performs favorably against the state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
With the increasing popularity of online social networks,
people are more likely to express their opinions through
posting images on social platforms such as Flickr and Instagram. Recently, affective image analysis that studies the
emotional response of humans on visual stimuli has drawn
attention from both psychologists [38, 49, 32] and computer
vision researchers [30, 63] due to its wide applicability, e.g.
opinion mining [36, 39], image captioning [8, 31], etc.
How to search affective images based on human perception is a meaningful yet challenging task. Various
emotion-based image retrieval (EBIR) systems have been
proposed [54, 24, 34, 65]. Compared to content-based
image retrieval (CBIR), EBIR involves high-level abstract

Query Image

Attention Map

Retrieval

Query
Amusement
Contentment
Awe
Excitement
Fear
Anger
Disgust
Sadness

Affective Embedding Space

Positive

Negative

Figure 1. Illustration of retrieving affective images in the embedding space. The two regions in the space represent binary sentiment polarities, i.e. positive and negative. For the given query image, the retrieved image from exactly the same emotion category
is shown in a green box, while the images from the same polarity
but different category and the opposite polarity are in blue and red
boxes, respectively.

semantics and human perception subjectivity. To bridge
the “affective gap” between low-level features and highlevel affective semantics, some hand-crafted features are
proposed according to psychology and art theory [30, 68].
To capture the semantic similarity among affective images,
Zhao et al. [72] employ multi-graph learning for affective
image retrieval based on features of different levels including low-level color, texture, and other high-level features
that contribute to expressing image emotions. More recently, deep learning has been harnessed to predict emotions evoked by images via embedding images into a feature space [58, 41, 52, 47], which results in breakthrough
performance. Pang et al. [37] develop a unit density
model over the multi-modal space using a deep Boltzmann
machine, which enables emotion-oriented cross-modal retrieval. Yang et al. [57] propose a multi-task framework
to simultaneously optimize the classiﬁcation and retrieval
losses, in which the performances of both tasks are boosted.

1140

