Online Unsupervised Learning of the 3D Kinematic Structure of Arbitrary Rigid
Bodies
Urbano Miguel Nunes and Yiannis Demiris
Personal Robotics Lab, Imperial College London, UK
{um.nunes, y.demiris}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of 3D kinematic structure learning of arbitrary articulated rigid bodies from
RGB-D data sequences. Typically, this problem is addressed by offline methods that process a batch of frames,
assuming that complete point trajectories are available.
However, this approach is not feasible when considering
scenarios that require continuity and fluidity, for instance,
human-robot interaction. In contrast, we propose to tackle
this problem in an online unsupervised fashion, by recursively maintaining the metric distance of the scene’s 3D
structure, while achieving real-time performance. The influence of noise is mitigated by building a similarity measure based on a linear embedding representation and incorporating this representation into the original metric distance. The kinematic structure is then estimated based on a
combination of implicit motion and spatial properties. The
proposed approach achieves competitive performance both
quantitatively and qualitatively in terms of estimation accuracy, even compared to offline methods.

1. Introduction
The kinematic structure of an articulated rigid body provides a compact and meaningful representation, which is
useful for robot manipulation tasks and object kinematic
recognition [21], finding kinematic correspondences between objects [6], interactively perceiving and acting with
the environment [3], among others. Thus, it is an active research topic in computer vision [5, 17, 23] and robotics [14].
Model-based kinematic structure learning methods have
shown to be superior in domains where the model of the
scene is known [4]. However, when this is not the case,
unsupervised methods are commonly used, and the problem of kinematic structure learning is divided into two wellknown problems, namely motion segmentation of rigid bodies [7, 8, 11] and kinematic structure generation based on
motion and/or other cues [5, 23]. We adopt the unsupervised approach, as we intend to estimate the kinematic
structure of arbitrary articulated rigid objects.

There have been significant contributions to kinematic
structure estimation using images from monocular RGB
cameras [5, 23]. Typically, these methods rely on tracking complete feature point trajectories to perform motion
segmentation and are sensitive to outliers from the background. For example, to bridge the latter limitation, Chang
and Demiris [5] included an adaptive object boundary generation to distinguish the actual object from the background. This problem can be relatively easily overcome
using RGB-D sensors, which acquire 3D data where foreground/background segmentation is trivial.
Existing kinematic structure learning methods are offline and/or are not feasible for real-time applications, such
as perceiving and interacting with objects in the environment [3] by learning kinematic correspondences [6]. Thus,
to the best of our knowledge, we propose the first approach
that can maintain the 3D structure estimated in real-time
and in an online fashion. Based on the observation that the
distance between points belonging to the same rigid body is
constant [18], we maintain the motion information implicitly for each incoming frame. We then compute the similarity measure between each point, accommodating for lost
points and noise (e.g. due to occlusion) by devising an effective policy to incorporate new points while maintaining
an even distribution of points tracked. Finally, the underlying kinematic structure can be estimated on demand. An
illustration of our method in action is presented in Fig. 1.
Although the proposed method is independent of the actual source of 3D data, for simplicity we focus on data
acquired by an RGB-D sensor. We could also consider a
pipeline where the 3D shape of an object is estimated from
monocular images [1, 2] and the corresponding 3D points
are provided as inputs for the proposed method. The resultant scale ambiguity would not be an issue, since our approach relies on relative distances.
Main contributions: 1) To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first approach that directly tackles the problem
of online and real-time 3D kinematic structure learning of
arbitrary articulated rigid bodies; 2) We naturally handle
lost points and occurring noise, and thus the method does

3809

