The Sound of Motions
Hang Zhao1 , Chuang Gan2 , Wei-Chiu Ma1 , Antonio Torralba1
1
MIT 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{hangzhao,chuangg,weichium,torralba}@mit.edu

Abstract
Mazas Violin Duet Op38 No.1
Can we separate the sounds that come
from each violin?

Sounds originate from object motions and vibrations of
surrounding air. Inspired by the fact that humans is capable
of interpreting sound sources from how objects move visually, we propose a novel system that explicitly captures such
motion cues for the task of sound localization and separation. Our system is composed of an end-to-end learnable
model called Deep Dense Trajectory (DDT), and a curriculum learning scheme. It exploits the inherent coherence of
audio-visual signals from a large quantities of unlabeled
videos. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations show that
comparing to previous models that rely on visual appearance cues, our motion based system improves performance
in separating musical instrument sounds. Furthermore, it
separates sound components from duets of the same category of instruments, a challenging problem that has not
been addressed before.

(a) Single Frame

t

1. Introduction
In a scorching afternoon, you relax under the shadow of a
tree and enjoy the breeze. You notice that the tree branches
are vibrating and you hear a rustling sound. Without a second thought, you realize that the sound is caused by the
leaves rubbing one another. Despite a short notice, humans
have the remarkable ability to connect and integrate signals
from different modalities and perceptual inputs. In fact, the
interplay among senses are one of the most ancient scheme
of sensory organization in human brains [44] and is the key
to understand the complex interaction of the physical world.
With such inspiration in mind, researchers have been
painstakingly developing models that can effectively exploit
signals from different modalities. Take audio-visual learning for example, various approaches have been proposed
such as sound recognition [3, 1, 26], sound localization
[22, 24, 33, 2, 12], etc. In this work, we are particularly interested in the task of sound source separation [12, 53, 17],
where the goal is to distinguish the components of the sound
and associate them with the corresponding objects. While
current source separation methods achieve decent results on

Motion Trajectory

(b) Single Frame + Motion

Figure 1. Motion matters: When watching a violin duet video, we
can separate the melody from harmony. (a) Yet it is hard to tell the
sources without looking or with only one glance. (b) By watching for a bit longer, we can differentiate who is playing the first
violin and who is playing the second by associating their motions
with the tempo of the music. In this work, we take inspirations
from human to disambiguate and separate the sounds from multiple sources by exploring motion cues.

respective tasks, they often ignore the motion cues and simply rely on the static visual information. Motion signals,
however, are of crucial importance for audio-visual learning, in particular when the objects making sounds are visu11735

