DynamoNet: Dynamic Action and Motion Network
Ali Diba1,⋆ , Vivek Sharma2,⋆ , Luc Van Gool1,3 , Rainer Stiefelhagen2
1

ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, 2 CV:HCI, KIT, 3 CVL, ETH Zürich

{first.last}@esat.kuleuven.be, {first.last}@kit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we are interested in self-supervised learning the motion cues in videos using dynamic motion filters
for a better motion representation to finally boost human
action recognition in particular. Thus far, the vision community has focused on spatio-temporal approaches using
standard filters, rather we here propose dynamic filters that
adaptively learn the video-specific internal motion representation by predicting the short-term future frames. We
name this new motion representation, as dynamic motion
representation (DMR) and is embedded inside of 3D convolutional network as a new layer, which captures the visual
appearance and motion dynamics throughout entire video
clip via end-to-end network learning. Simultaneously, we
utilize these motion representation to enrich video classification. We have designed the frame prediction task as an
auxiliary task to empower the classification problem.
With these overall objectives, to this end, we introduce
a novel unified spatio-temporal 3D-CNN architecture (DynamoNet) that jointly optimizes the video classification and
learning motion representation by predicting future frames
as a multi-task learning problem. We conduct experiments on challenging human action datasets: Kinetics 400,
UCF101, HMDB51. The experiments using the proposed
DynamoNet show promising results on all the datasets.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition [3, 6, 7, 9, 55] in videos has
attracted a huge attention over the last decade, due to the
potential applications in video surveillance, understanding,
analysis, retrieval tasks and more. In practice, the performance of computer vision systems still falls behind that of
humans. On top of the challenges that make object class
recognition hard, complicating aspects like camera motion
and the continuously changing viewpoints negatively influences the vision system. Although, Convolutional Neural
Networks (ConvNets) have successfully upsurged several
⋆ Ali Diba and Vivek Sharma contributed equally to this work and
listed in alphabetical order.

Dynamo Net

Action
Class

Next
Frames
Dynamic Motion Filters

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed multi-task learning ConvNet
architecture to simultaneously classify action and learn motion
representation by predicting future frames in end-to-end learning
manner. ×, + denotes convolution and concatenation operations.

sub-fields of vision, for action recognition particularly, they
still lack to model the motion cues effectively.
Neural networks for action recognition can be mainly
categorized into two types, namely architecture-driven
ConvNets [42, 49] (which utilize standard filters and pooling kernels in a video architecture to exploit long-range dynamics) and encoding-driven ConvNets [9, 16] (which integrate new encoding methods in addition to standard filters
and pooling kernels in a video architecture to learn spatiotemporal feature representation). This paper falls in the pool
of encoding-driven ConvNets, where we extend the standard video understanding architecture to incorporate a new
layer to learn dynamic motion representation conditioned
on the action-specific basis.
In this paper, we propose to extend the training of
ConvNets-based action classification to incorporate the
high-level goal to learn action-specific motion representation via future frame prediction. Our contribution named as
DynamoNet is a method that jointly optimizes a ConvNet
for video action classification and future frame prediction
as a multi-task learning problem. We achieve this by adaptively learning the motion features on a video-specific basis
via dynamic motion filters, which enables the motion prediction model to selectively utilize only those motion features that lead to improved video classification.
Since we understand the vital role of motion feature representation, we propose to use the dynamic convolutional

6192

