Few-Shot Adversarial Learning of Realistic Neural Talking Head Models
Egor Zakharov1,2
1

Aliaksandra Shysheya1,2

Samsung AI Center, Moscow

Source

2

Egor Burkov1,2

Victor Lempitsky1,2

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

Target → Landmarks → Result

Source

Target → Landmarks → Result

Figure 1: The results of talking head image synthesis using face landmark tracks extracted from a different video sequence
of the same person (on the left), and using face landmarks of a different person (on the right). The results are conditioned on
the landmarks taken from the target frame, while the source frame is an example from the training set. The talking head
models on the left were trained using eight frames, while the models on the right were trained in a one-shot manner.

Abstract
Several recent works have shown how highly realistic
human head images can be obtained by training convolutional neural networks to generate them. In order to create a personalized talking head model, these works require
training on a large dataset of images of a single person.
However, in many practical scenarios, such personalized
talking head models need to be learned from a few image
views of a person, potentially even a single image. Here, we
present a system with such few-shot capability. It performs
lengthy meta-learning on a large dataset of videos, and after that is able to frame few- and one-shot learning of neural
talking head models of previously unseen people as adversarial training problems with high capacity generators and
discriminators. Crucially, the system is able to initialize the
parameters of both the generator and the discriminator in a
person-specific way, so that training can be based on just a
few images and done quickly, despite the need to tune tens
of millions of parameters. We show that such an approach is
able to learn highly realistic and personalized talking head
models of new people and even portrait paintings.

1. Introduction
In this work, we consider the task of creating personalized photorealistic talking head models, i.e. systems that

can synthesize plausible video-sequences of speech expressions and mimics of a particular individual. More specifically, we consider the problem of synthesizing photorealistic personalized head images given a set of face landmarks, which drive the animation of the model. Such ability
has practical applications for telepresence, including videoconferencing and multi-player games, as well as special effects industry. Synthesizing realistic talking head sequences
is known to be hard for two reasons. First, human heads
have high photometric, geometric and kinematic complexity. This complexity stems not only from modeling faces
(for which a large number of modeling approaches exist)
but also from modeling mouth cavity, hair, and garments.
The second complicating factor is the acuteness of the human visual system towards even minor mistakes in the appearance modeling of human heads (the so-called uncanny
valley effect [24]). Such low tolerance to modeling mistakes explains the current prevalence of non-photorealistic
cartoon-like avatars in many practically-deployed teleconferencing systems.
To overcome the challenges, several works have proposed to synthesize articulated head sequences by warping
a single or multiple static frames. Both classical warping
algorithms [4, 28] and warping fields synthesized using machine learning (including deep learning) [11, 29, 40] can be
used for such purposes. While warping-based systems can
create talking head sequences from as little as a single image, the amount of motion, head rotation, and disocclusion

9459

