Learning to Assemble Neural Module Tree Networks for Visual Grounding
Daqing Liu1
Hanwang Zhang2
Feng Wu1
Zheng-Jun Zha1∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Nanyang Technological University
liudq@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg, fengwu@ustc.edu.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual grounding, a task to ground (i.e., localize) natural language in images, essentially requires composite visual reasoning. However, existing methods over-simplify
the composite nature of language into a monolithic sentence
embedding or a coarse composition of subject-predicateobject triplet. In this paper, we propose to ground natural
language in an intuitive, explainable, and composite fashion as it should be. In particular, we develop a novel modular network called Neural Module Tree network (NMT REE)
that regularizes the visual grounding along the dependency
parsing tree of the sentence, where each node is a neural
module that calculates visual attention according to its linguistic feature, and the grounding score is accumulated in
a bottom-up direction where as needed. NMT REE disentangles the visual grounding from the composite reasoning, allowing the former to only focus on primitive and
easy-to-generalize patterns. To reduce the impact of parsing errors, we train the modules and their assembly endto-end by using the Gumbel-Softmax approximation and its
straight-through gradient estimator, accounting for the discrete nature of module assembly. Overall, the proposed
NMT REE consistently outperforms the state-of-the-arts on
several benchmarks. Qualitative results show explainable
grounding score calculation in great detail.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding (a.k.a., referring expression comprehension) aims to localize a natural language description in
an image. It is one of the core AI tasks for testing the
machine comprehension of visual scene and language [18].
Perhaps the most fundamental and related grounding system for words is object detection [32] (or segmentation [8]):
the image regions (or pixels) are classified to the corresponding word of the object class. Despite their diverse
model architectures [22], their sole objective is to calculate
a grounding score for a visual region and a word, measuring the semantic association between the two modalities.
∗ Corresponding Author.

a pink umbrella carried by a girl in pink boots

a pink umbrella carried by a girl in pink boots

(a) Holistic

(b) Triplet

Dependency Parsing Tree
amod

ADJ

acl
NN

agent
VB

pink umbrella carried

pobj
pobj

prep

Single[ROOT]

amod

ADP

NN

ADP

ADJ

NN

by

girl

in

pink

boots

Sum[umbrella]
Comp[carried]

Single[pink]

Sum[by]
Sum[girl]

Comp[in]

NMTREE

Sum[boots]
Single[pink]

(c) NMT REE

Figure 1. Existing grounding models are generally (a) holistic or
(b) coarsely composite. Words in gradient colors indicate wordlevel attentions. (c) The proposed NMT REE is based on dependency parsing tree and offers explainable grounding in great detail.
Word color corresponds to image regions.

Thanks to the development of deep visual features [9] and
language models [27], we can extend the grounding systems
from fixed-size inventory of words to open-vocabulary [12]
or even descriptive and relational phrases [41, 31].
However, grounding complex language sentences, e.g.,
“a pink umbrella carried by a girl in pink boots”, is far different from the above word or phrase cases. For example,
given the image in Figure 1, for us humans, how to localize the “umbrella”? One may have the following reasoning
process: 1) Identify the referent “umbrella”, but there are
two of them. 2) Use the contextual evidence “carried by a
girl”, but there are two girls. 3) By using more specific evidence “in pink boots”, localize the “girl” in the last step.
4) Finally, by accumulating the above evidences, localize
the target “umbrella”.

4673

