Holistic++ Scene Understanding:
Single-view 3D Holistic Scene Parsing and Human Pose Estimation
with Human-Object Interaction and Physical Commonsense
Yixin Chen⋆1 , Siyuan Huang⋆1 , Tao Yuan1 , Siyuan Qi1,2 , Yixin Zhu1,2 , and Song-Chun Zhu1,2
⋆

Equal Contributors

1

2

University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)
International Center for AI and Robot Autonomy (CARA)

{ethanchen,huangsiyuan,taoyuan,syqi,yixin.zhu}@ucla.edu,sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose a new 3D holistic++ scene understanding
problem, which jointly tackles two tasks from a single-view
image: (i) holistic scene parsing and reconstruction—3D estimations of object bounding boxes, camera pose, and room
layout, and (ii) 3D human pose estimation. The intuition behind is to leverage the coupled nature of these two tasks to
improve the granularity and performance of scene understanding. We propose to exploit two critical and essential
connections between these two tasks: (i) human-object interaction (HOI) to model the fine-grained relations between
agents and objects in the scene, and (ii) physical commonsense to model the physical plausibility of the reconstructed
scene. The optimal configuration of the 3D scene, represented by a parse graph, is inferred using Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC), which efficiently traverses through
the non-differentiable joint solution space. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm significantly
improves the performance of the two tasks on three datasets,
showing an improved generalization ability.

1. Introduction
Humans, even young infants, are adept at perceiving and
understanding complex indoor scenes. Such an incredible
vision system not only relies on the data-driven pattern
recognition but also roots from the visual reasoning system,
known as the core knowledge [41], that facilitates the 3D
holistic scene understanding tasks. Consider a typical indoor
scene shown in Figure 1 where a person sits in an office. We
can effortlessly extract rich knowledge from the static scene,
including 3D room layout, 3D position of all the objects and
agents, and correct human-object interaction (HOI) relations
in a physically plausible manner. In fact, psychology studies have established that even infants employ at least two
constraints—HOI and physical commonsense—in perceiv-

Scene

Parse Graph

Objects

Human-Object Interaction

Human

Use Computer

Layout

Sit

Physics Commonsense

Ground-Object Table-Monitor
Support
Support

…

Reconstruction Result
Table

Root Node

Monitor Keyboard

Chair

Non-terminal Node

Terminal Node

Attributes

Physical Relation

HOI Relation

++

Figure 1. holistic
scene understanding task requires to jointly
recover a parse graph that represents the scene, including human
poses, objects, camera pose, and room layout, all in 3D. Reasoning
human-object interaction (HOI) helps reconstruct the detailed spatial relations between humans and objects. Physical commonsense
(e.g., physical property, plausibility, and stability) further refines
relations and improves predictions.

ing occlusions [43, 20], tracking small objects even if contained by other objects [10], realizing object permanence [2],
recognizing rational HOI [46, 37], understanding intuitive
physic [11, 29, 1], and using exploratory play to understand
the environment [42]. All the evidence calls for a treatment
to integrate HOI and physical commonsense with a modern
computer vision system for scene understanding.
In contrast, few attempts have been made to achieve this
goal. This challenge is difficult partially due to the fact that
the algorithm has to jointly accomplish both 3D holistic
scene understanding task and the 3D human pose estimation task in a physically plausible fashion. Since this task
is beyond the scope of holistic scene understanding in the
literature, we define this comprehensive task as holistic++
scene understanding—to simultaneously estimate human
pose, objects, room layout, and camera pose, all in 3D.

8648

