GraphX-Convolution for Point Cloud Deformation in 2D-to-3D Conversion
Anh-Duc Nguyen

Seonghwa Choi
Woojae Kim
Yonsei University

Sanghoon Lee

{adnguyen,csh0772,wooyoa,slee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel deep method to reconstruct a point cloud of an object from a single still image. Prior arts in the field struggle to reconstruct an accurate and scalable 3D model due to either the inefficient
and expensive 3D representations, the dependency between
the output and number of model parameters or the lack
of a suitable computing operation. We propose to overcome these by deforming a random point cloud to the object shape through two steps: feature blending and deformation. In the first step, the global and point-specific shape
features extracted from a 2D object image are blended with
the encoded feature of a randomly generated point cloud,
and then this mixture is sent to the deformation step to produce the final representative point set of the object. In the
deformation process, we introduce a new layer termed as
GraphX that considers the inter-relationship between points
like common graph convolutions but operates on unordered
sets. Moreover, with a simple trick, the proposed model can
generate an arbitrary-sized point cloud, which is the first
deep method to do so. Extensive experiments verify that we
outperform existing models and halve the state-of-the-art
distance score in single image 3D reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Our world is 3D, and so is our perception. Making machines see the world like us is the ultimate goal of computer
vision. So far, we have made significant advancements in
2D machine vision tasks, and yet 3D reasoning from 2D
still remains very challenging. 3D shape reasoning is of
the utmost importance in computer vision as it plays a vital
role in robotics, modeling, graphics, and so on. Currently,
given multiple images from different viewpoints, computers are able to estimate a reliable shape of the interested
object. Yet, when we humans look at a single 2D image,
we still understand the underlying 3D space to some extent
thanks to our experience, but machines are nowhere near
our perception level. Thus, a crucial yet demanding question is whether we can help machines to achieve a similar

Figure 1. A sample showing what our model is capable of. (a)
An RGB input image. (b) A 2k-point. (c) A 40k-point clouds
produced by PCDNet. (d) A ground truth point cloud of the model.

3D understanding and reasoning ability of humans. At first,
a solution seems highly unlikely because some information
is permanently lost as we go from 3D to 2D. However, if a
machine is able to learn a shape prior like humans, then it
can infer 3D shape from 2D effortlessly.
Deep learning, or most of the time, deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), has recently shown a promising
learning ability in computer vision. However, there is not
yet an easy and efficient way to apply deep learning to 3D
reconstruction. Most modern progress of deep learning is
in areas where signals are ordered and regular – images, audios and languages to name a few, while common 3D representations such as meshes or point clouds are unordered
and irregular. Therefore, there is no guarantee that all the
bells and whistles from the 2D practice would work in the
3D counterpart. Other 3D structures may result in easier
learning such as grid voxels but at the cost of computational
efficiency. Also, quantization errors in these structures may
diminish the natural invariances of the data [23].
In this regard, we present a novel deep method to reconstruct a 3D point cloud representation of an object from a
single 2D image. Even though a point cloud representation
does not possess appealing 3D geometrical properties like
a mesh or CAD model, it is simple and efficient when it
comes to transformation and deformation, and can produce
high-quality shape models [4].
Our insight into prior arts leads to the realization of several key properties of the prospective system: (1) the model
should make predictions based on not only local features

8628

