Addressing Model Vulnerability to Distributional Shifts
over Image Transformation Sets
Riccardo Volpi1 , Vittorio Murino1,2, *
1

Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia 2 Università di Verona

{riccardo.volpi,vittorio.murino}@iit.it

Abstract
We are concerned with the vulnerability of computer vision models to distributional shifts. We formulate a combinatorial optimization problem that allows evaluating the
regions in the image space where a given model is more
vulnerable, in terms of image transformations applied to
the input, and face it with standard search algorithms. We
further embed this idea in a training procedure, where we
define new data augmentation rules according to the image
transformations that the current model is most vulnerable
to, over iterations. An empirical evaluation on classification and semantic segmentation problems suggests that the
devised algorithm allows to train models that are more robust against content-preserving image manipulations and,
in general, against distributional shifts1 .

1. Introduction
When designing a machine learning system, we generally desire it may perform well on a wide realm of different
domains. However, the training data at disposal is typically
defined by samples from a limited number of distributions,
resulting in unsatisfactory performance when the model has
to process data from unseen distributions [24, 7, 5, 53]. This
problem is typically referred to as distributional shift or domain shift, and it was shown to affect models even in cases
where the distance between training and testing domain is—
apparently—very limited [44, 45].
This vulnerability also affects the robustness of machine
learning models against input manipulations [17, 22, 23],
potentially leading to harmful situations. As a concrete
example, consider the algorithms that analyze images uploaded to social networks in order to evaluate, e.g., if an
image contains violence or adult content. The huge set of
image modifications that users might carry out can make
the underlying learning systems fail in several ways if they,
* VM is also with Huawei Technologies (Ireland) Co., Ltd., Dublin.
1 Code at github.com/ricvolpi/domain-shift-robustness

Figure 1. (Top) Image subdivided in 2 parts, in which the left part is original, and the right part was subject to a content-preserving (appearance)
transformation. Image transformations can cause distributional shifts that
models are not able to handle (bottom-left). Models trained with the methods proposed in this paper are more robust against a variety of image transformations (bottom-right)

accidentally or with malicious intent, cause a shift that the
models are not able to figure out. Recognizing this weakness of modern learning systems, an important research direction is defining methods to understand a priori which
distributional shifts will lead to a fail of the model.
In this paper, we start from this idea, and develop
methods to evaluate and improve the performance of machine learning models for vision tasks, when the input can
be modified through a series of content-preserving image
transformations. By “content-preserving” [17], we intend
transformations that do not modify an image content, but
only the way it is portrayed (e.g., modifying RGB intensities, enhancing contrast, applying filters, etc).
We cast this problem in terms of combinatorial optimization. Given a black-box model, a bunch of samples, and
a set of image transformations, our goal is to individuate
the distributional shifts that the model is most vulnerable to
when image transformation tuples (namely, concatenations
of transformations) are applied. To find these tuples, we
investigate two different search algorithms—random search
and evolution-based search—showing that it is easy to find
tuples that severely deteriorate the model performance for
a variety of tasks, such as face detection, semantic scene
segmentation, and classification. The main application
17980

