Multi-Garment Net: Learning to Dress 3D People from Images
Bharat Lal Bhatnagar
Garvita Tiwari
Christian Theobalt
Gerard Pons-Moll
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
{bbhatnag,gtiwari,theobalt,gpons}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
We present Multi-Garment Network (MGN), a method
to predict body shape and clothing, layered on top of the
SMPL [40] model from a few frames (1-8) of a video. Several experiments demonstrate that this representation allows higher level of control when compared to single mesh
or voxel representations of shape. Our model allows to
predict garment geometry, relate it to the body shape, and
transfer it to new body shapes and poses. To train MGN,
we leverage a digital wardrobe containing 712 digital garments in correspondence, obtained with a novel method
to register a set of clothing templates to a dataset of real
3D scans of people in different clothing and poses. Garments from the digital wardrobe, or predicted by MGN, can
be used to dress any body shape in arbitrary poses. We
will make publicly available the digital wardrobe, the MGN
model, and code to dress SMPL with the garments at [1].

Figure 1: Garment re-targeting with Multi-Garment Network
(MGN). Left to right: images from source subject, body from the
target subject, target dressed with source garments. From one or
more images, MGN can reconstruct the body shape and each of
the garments separately. We can transfer the predicted garments to
a novel body including geometry and texture.

ially map the garment texture captured from images to any
garment geometry of the same category (see Fig.7).

1. Introduction
The 3D reconstruction and modelling of humans from
images is a central problem in computer vision and graphics. Although a few recent methods [5, 3, 4, 25, 41, 51]
attempt reconstruction of people with clothing, they lack
realism and control. This limitation is in great part due to
the fact that they use a single surface (mesh or voxels) to
represent both clothing and body. Hence they can not capture the clothing separately from the subject in the image,
let alone map it to a novel body shape.
In this paper, we introduce Multi-Garment Network
(MGN), the first model capable of inferring human body
and layered garments on top as separate meshes from images directly. As illustrated in Fig. 1 this new representation
allows full control over body shape, texture and geometry
of clothing and opens the door to a range of applications in
VR/AR, entertainment, cinematography and virtual try-on.
Compared to previous work, MGN produces reconstructions of higher visual quality, and allows for more control:
1) we can infer the 3D clothing from one subject, and dress
a second subject with it, (see Fig. 1, 8) and 2) we can triv-

To achieve such level of control, we address two major
challenges: learning per-garment models from 3D scans of
people in clothing, and learning to reconstruct them from
images. We define a discrete set of garment templates (according to the categories long/short shirt, long/short pants
and coat) and register, for every category, a single template to each of the scan instances, which we automatically
segmented into clothing parts and skin. Since garment geometry varies significantly within one category (e.g. different shapes, sleeve lengths), we first minimize the distance between template and the scan boundaries, while trying to preserve the Laplacian of the template surface. This
initialization step only requires solving a linear system,
and nicely stretches and compresses the template globally,
which we found crucial to make subsequent non-rigid registration work. Using this, we compile a digital wardrobe
of real 3D garments worn by people, (see Fig. 3). From
such registrations, we learn a vertex based PCA model per
garment. Since garments are naturally associated with the
underlying SMPL body model, we can transfer them to different body shapes, and re-pose them using SMPL. From

5420

