Learning Temporal Action Proposals With Fewer Labels
Jingwei Ji, Kaidi Cao, Juan Carlos Niebles
Stanford University
{jingweij, kaidicao, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

Training
Labeled

Temporal action proposals are a common module in action detection pipelines today. Most current methods for
training action proposal modules rely on fully supervised
approaches that require large amounts of annotated temporal action intervals in long video sequences. The large cost
and effort in annotation that this entails motivate us to study
the problem of training proposal modules with less supervision. In this work, we propose a semi-supervised learning
algorithm specifically designed for training temporal action
proposal networks. When only a small number of labels
are available, our semi-supervised method generates significantly better proposals than the fully-supervised counterpart and other strong semi-supervised baselines. We validate our method on two challenging action detection video
datasets, ActivityNet v1.3 and THUMOS14. We show that
our semi-supervised approach consistently matches or outperforms the fully supervised state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
With millions of cameras in the world, a tremendous
amount of videos are generated and transmitted every day.
A very important subject in these videos is humans performing activities and actions. This has motivated the computer
vision community to study algorithms for understanding actions from video collections. An important task for action
understanding is action detection, or temporal action localization, where the goal is to temporally localize all actions
of interest within long video sequences. A common approach to tackle this problem is to first generate temporal
action proposals to localize temporal intervals of interest,
which are then fed into a classifier to obtain the corresponding action labels. In this paper, we focus on the temporal
action proposal module.
To achieve high prediction accuracy, most of the existing
state-of-the-art algorithms for temporal action proposals use
supervised deep learning approaches [3, 14, 15, 23]. Such
approaches require large amount of labeled videos. Different from labeling in other vision tasks like image recogni-

Unlabeled

Semi-supervised Proposals

Figure 1. With only a part of training videos labeled with ground
truth proposals, our semi-supervised framework can generate temporal action proposals with better quality than the state-of-the-art
fully-supervised approaches.

tion, labeling temporal boundaries of actions in untrimmed
videos is much more time-consuming. On the other hand
are unsupervised learning approaches [34] where no label
is needed for training. Although they are free from the burden of labeling, the overall performance in many tasks is
usually inevitably poor than that of supervised approaches.
Semi-supervised learning is a well fit solution when
large amount of data is available but only a small portion
is labeled. Different from unsupervised learning, semisupervised learning still leverages labeled data as strong supervision for high prediction accuracy. Compared to supervised learning, semi-supervised learning is less likely to
overfit on the small labeled dataset because it can make use
of the unlabeled data. Semi-supervised learning has been
effective in image classification [21, 25, 29, 36], but has
never been explored to assist generating temporal action
proposals. In our problem setup (see Figure 1), we assume
that during training only a part of the videos come with temporal boundary labels of actions for supervised learning. In
the meanwhile, other videos with no labels or annotations
are available to be leveraged by the training process. By extending the knowledge extracted from the labeled set to the
unlabeled set, we can obtain a more robust model due to the
regularization role that the unlabeled data can play.
One core philosophy behind semi-supervised learning
methods is to train the model with smooth and consistent
17073

