Unsupervised Procedure Learning via Joint Dynamic Summarization
Ehsan Elhamifar
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University

Zwe Naing
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University

eelhami@ccs.neu.edu

naing.z@husky.neu.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of unsupervised procedure
learning from unconstrained instructional videos. Our goal
is to produce a summary of the procedure key-steps and
their ordering needed to perform a given task, as well as
localization of the key-steps in videos. We develop a collaborative sequential subset selection framework, where we
build a dynamic model on videos by learning states and
transitions between them, where states correspond to different subactivities, including background and procedure
steps. To extract procedure key-steps, we develop an optimization framework that finds a sequence of a small number
of states that well represents all videos and is compatible
with the state transition model. Given that our proposed
optimization is non-convex and NP-hard, we develop a fast
greedy algorithm whose complexity is linear in the length of
the videos and the number of states of the dynamic model,
hence, scales to large datasets. Under appropriate conditions on the transition model, our proposed formulation is
approximately submodular, hence, comes with performance
guarantees. We also present ProceL, a new multimodal
dataset of 47.3 hours of videos and their transcripts from
diverse tasks, for procedure learning evaluation. By extensive experiments, we show that our framework significantly
improves the state of the art performance.

1. Introduction
There exists a large amount of instructional data on the
web in different forms. YouTube has over 500 million
video search results for the phrase ‘how to’, with more than
400,000 results for tasks such as ‘how to assemble a bike’
or ‘how to setup chromecast’. Such instructional data provide rich information for procedure1 learning, which is to
automatically learn the sequence of key-steps to perform
a certain task. Procedure learning can be used to design
1 According to Webster’s Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary of the
English Language, ‘Procedure’ is defined as “the sequence of actions or
instructions to be followed in solving a problem or completing a task.”

Perform CPR
Video 1

Ground
Truth

Video 2
Video 3

time
Video 1
Video 2
Video 3

Ours

Open airway

Check breath

Give compression

Give breath

Replace iPhone Battery
Video 1
Video 2

Ground
Truth

Video 3
time
Video 1
Video 2
Video 3

Ours

Open iPhone screen

Disconnect iPhone screen

Put iPhone battery

Screw screen

Figure 1: The goal of unsupervised procedure learning is to learn and
localize in data the sequence of key-steps to achieve a task. Ground-truth
annotations and automatic discovery and localization of key steps via our
method for the two tasks of ‘perform CPR’ (top) and ‘replace iPhone battery’ (bottom) for three videos in our new ProceL dataset are shown. We
also show a few frames from each localized key-step found by our method.

autonomous agents that can perform complex tasks [1], to
build knowledge bases of instructions, or to generate succinct procedures when human cannot spend time synthesizing the information from multiple sources [2]. Understanding instructional data at the scale necessary to build
knowledge bases of thousands of tasks or to build assistive
robots that respond to a large number of instructions, requires unsupervised procedure learning that does not rely
on annotated data, which is complex and costly to gather.
Unsupervised procedure learning is an extremely challenging problem that needs to not only discover and localize
the key-steps of a task, but also discover the logical ordering
of the key-steps. This requires reconciling variations among
instructions of a task, such as additional or missing steps
and substantial amount of background actions, which are
not related to the task. Over the past several years, we have
seen interesting advances on the problem [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
16341

