Learning Deep Priors for Image Dehazing

1

Yang Liu 1,2 Jinshan Pan3,∗ Jimmy Ren2 Zhixun Su1,4
Dalian University of Technology 2 SenseTime Research 3 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
4
Guilin University of Electronic Technology
https://lewisyangliu.github.io/projects/LDP

Abstract
Image dehazing is a well-known ill-posed problem,
which usually requires some image priors to make the problem well-posed. We propose an effective iteration algorithm
with deep CNNs to learn haze-relevant priors for image dehazing. We formulate the image dehazing problem as the
minimization of a variational model with favorable data fidelity terms and prior terms to regularize the model. We
solve the variational model based on the classical gradient
descent method with built-in deep CNNs so that iterationwise image priors for the atmospheric light, transmission
map and clear image can be well estimated. Our method
combines the properties of both the physical formation of
image dehazing as well as deep learning approaches. We
show that it is able to generate clear images as well as accurate atmospheric light and transmission maps. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods
in both benchmark datasets and real-world images.

1. Introduction
Single image dehazing aims to estimate a haze-free image from a hazy image. It is a classical image processing
problem, which has been an active research topic in the vision and graphics communities within the last decade. As
numerous real-world tasks (e.g., traffic detection and environmental monitoring) require high-quality images, and the
hazy environment usually leads to deprecated images, it is
of great interest to develop an effective algorithm to recover
haze-free images.
Haze is a complex atmospheric phenomenon. Images
with haze may lose color fidelity and visual contrast as a
result of light scattering through the haze particles. Mathematically, the hazing process can be simplified by
I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x)),

(1)

where I is the hazy image, J is the haze-free image, and t
is the medium transmission map which describes the relative portion of the light that reaches the camera sensor from
∗ Corresponding author: sdluran@gmail.com

(a) Input image

(b) Ren et al. [15]

(c) Yang and Sun [24]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. A real-world example. The proposed algorithm combines the advantages of the variational model and deep CNNs and
can generate much clearer results.

scene surfaces without being scattered. While A is the atmospheric light and x denotes pixel coordinate. If the atmospheric light A is homogeneous, the transmission map t can
be expressed as t(x) = e−βd(x) , where β denotes scattering
coefficient of the atmospheric light and d(x) is the scene
depth. As only I is available, we need to recover A, t, J
simultaneously. This problem is highly ill-posed because
many different pairs of A, t and J give rise to the same I,
e.g., a delta matrix for A, an all-ones matrix for t and a hazy
image for J.
To make image dehazing problem well-posed, most existing algorithms make assumptions on atmospheric light,
transmission maps, or clear images [7, 4, 28, 1]. For example, He et al. [7] propose a dark channel prior based
on statistical properties of clear images to estimate transmission map. Fattal [4] develops color lines for image dehazing. The non-local image prior has been used in [1].
Although image dehazing methods using such image priors have shown good performance, those priors mentioned
above are mainly based on the observations of specific image properties, which do not always reflect inherent properties of natural images.
Recently, image dehazing methods based on deep learning have been proposed [14, 2, 10, 15, 25, 24]. These al-

2492

