Similarity-Preserving Knowledge Distillation
Frederick Tung1,2 and Greg Mori1,2
1
Simon Fraser University 2 Borealis AI
ftung@sfu.ca, mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is a widely applicable technique
for training a student neural network under the guidance of
a trained teacher network. For example, in neural network
compression, a high-capacity teacher is distilled to train a
compact student; in privileged learning, a teacher trained
with privileged data is distilled to train a student without
access to that data. The distillation loss determines how
a teacher’s knowledge is captured and transferred to the
student. In this paper, we propose a new form of knowledge distillation loss that is inspired by the observation that
semantically similar inputs tend to elicit similar activation
patterns in a trained network. Similarity-preserving knowledge distillation guides the training of a student network
such that input pairs that produce similar (dissimilar) activations in the teacher network produce similar (dissimilar)
activations in the student network. In contrast to previous
distillation methods, the student is not required to mimic the
representation space of the teacher, but rather to preserve
the pairwise similarities in its own representation space.
Experiments on three public datasets demonstrate the potential of our approach.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are being used to solve an increasingly wide array of computer vision problems. While the
general trend in deep learning is towards deeper, wider, and
more complex networks, deploying deep learning solutions
in the real world requires us to consider the computational
cost. A mobile robot or self-driving vehicle, for example,
has limited memory and power. Even when resources are
abundant, such as when a vision system is hosted in the
cloud, more resource-efficient deep networks mean more
clients can be served at a lower cost. When performing
transfer learning in the real world, data privilege and privacy issues may restrict access to data in the source domain.
It may be necessary to transfer the knowledge of a network
trained on the source domain assuming access only to training data from the target task domain.

Teacher

b
c·w·h

b

b

b
Activations
Mini-batch

Pairwise Similarities

Distill.
Loss

b
c'·w’·h’

b
b

Student

Figure 1. Similarity-preserving knowledge distillation guides the
training of a student network such that input pairs that produce
similar (dissimilar) activations in the pre-trained teacher network
produce similar (dissimilar) activations in the student network.
Given an input mini-batch of b images, we derive b × b pairwise
similarity matrices from the activation maps, and compute a distillation loss on the matrices produced by the student and the teacher.

Knowledge distillation is a general technique for supervising the training of “student” neural networks by capturing and transferring the knowledge of trained “teacher” networks. While originally motivated by the task of neural network compression for resource-efficient deep learning [12],
knowledge distillation has found wider applications in such
areas as privileged learning [21], adversarial defense [25],
and learning with noisy data [19]. Knowledge distillation is
conceptually simple: it guides the training of a student network with an additional distillation loss that encourages the
student to mimic some aspect of a teacher network. Intuitively, the trained teacher network provides a richer supervisory signal than the data supervision (e.g. annotated class
labels) alone.
The conceptual simplicity of knowledge distillation belies the fact that how to best capture the knowledge of the
teacher to train the student (i.e. how to define the distillation
11365

