PLMP - Point-Line Minimal Problems in Complete Multi-View Visibility
Timothy Duff
School of Mathematics, Georgia Tech

Kathlén Kohn
KTH

Anton Leykin
School of Mathematics, Georgia Tech

Tomas Pajdla
CIIRC - Czech Technical University in Prague*

Abstract
We present a complete classification of all minimal problems for generic arrangements of points and lines completely observed by calibrated perspective cameras. We
show that there are only 30 minimal problems in total, no
problems exist for more than 6 cameras, for more than 5
points, and for more than 6 lines. We present a sequence of
tests for detecting minimality starting with counting degrees
of freedom and ending with full symbolic and numeric verification of representative examples. For all minimal problems discovered, we present their algebraic degrees, i.e.
the number of solutions, which measure their intrinsic difficulty. It shows how exactly the difficulty of problems grows
with the number of views. Importantly, several new minimal problems have small degrees that might be practical in
image matching and 3D reconstruction.

Figure 1: (1-st row) Points (red) and lines (blue) get detected independently as well as in arrangements with points
incident to lines [36]. (2-nd row) Examples of some interesting arrangements of points and lines providing new minimal problems. See Tab. 1 for the complete classification of
minimal problems for points, lines and their arrangements
in multiple images with complete multi-view visibility.

1. Introduction
Minimal1 problems [37, 50, 24, 26, 28, 29, 25, 30] play
an important role in 3D reconstruction [48, 49, 47], image matching [44], visual odometry [39, 4] and visual localization [52, 46, 51]. Many minimal problems have been
described and solved and new minimal problems are constantly appearing. In this paper, we present a step towards
a complete characterization of all minimal problems for
points, lines and their incidences in calibrated multi-view
geometry. This is a grand challenge, especially when dealing with partial visibility due to occlusions and missing detections. Here we provide a complete characterization for
the case of complete multi-view visibility. Informally, a
* CIIRC - Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics
1 We are grateful to ICERM (NSF DMS-1439786 and the Simons Foun-

dation grant 507536) for the hospitality (09/2018 – 02/2019), where most
ideas for this project were developed. We thank the many research visitors at ICERM for fruitful discussions on minimal problems. Research of
T. Duff and A. Leykin is supported in part by NSF DMS-1719968. T. Pajdla was supported by the European Regional Development Fund under the
project IMPACT (reg. no. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15 003/0000468).

minimal problem is a 3D reconstruction problem recovering camera poses and world coordinates from given images
such that random input instances have a finite positive number of solutions.
Contribution We give a complete classification of minimal
problems for generic arrangements of points and lines, including their incidences, completely observed by any number of calibrated perspective cameras. We consider calibrated scenarios since it avoids many degeneracies [15].
We show that there are exactly 30 minimal point-line
problems (up to an arbitrary number of lines in the case of
two views) when considering complete visibility (Tab. 1).
In particular, there is no such minimal problem for seven
or more cameras. For 6, 5, 4 and 3 cameras, there are
1, 3, 6 and 17 minimal problems, respectively. For two
views, there are three combinatorial constellations of five
points which yield minimal problems. We observe that
each minimal point-line problem has at most five points and

1675

