ClusterSLAM: A SLAM Backend for Simultaneous Rigid Body Clustering
and Motion Estimation

1

Jiahui Huang1 Sheng Yang1,2 Zishuo Zhao1 Yu-Kun Lai3 Shi-Min Hu1∗
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
2
Alibaba A.I. Labs, China 3 Cardiff University, UK

huang-jh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, shengyang93fs@gmail.com, wingedkuriboh@126.com
LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk, shimin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a practical backend for stereo visual SLAM
which can simultaneously discover individual rigid bodies and compute their motions in dynamic environments.
While recent factor graph based state optimization algorithms have shown their ability to robustly solve SLAM
problems by treating dynamic objects as outliers, the dynamic motions are rarely considered. In this paper, we exploit the consensus of 3D motions among the landmarks extracted from the same rigid body for clustering and estimating static and dynamic objects in a unified manner. Specifically, our algorithm builds a noise-aware motion affinity matrix upon landmarks, and uses agglomerative clustering for distinguishing those rigid bodies. Accompanied
by a decoupled factor graph optimization for revising their
shape and trajectory, we obtain an iterative scheme to update both cluster assignments and motion estimation reciprocally. Evaluations on both synthetic scenes and KITTI
demonstrate the capability of our approach, and further experiments considering online efficiency also show the effectiveness of our method for simultaneous tracking of egomotion and multiple objects.

1. Introduction
Perceiving and modeling surrounding environments are
the foundation of navigating modern Autonomous Things
(AuT), which is achieved via Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) formulated with onboard sensors.
With the booming demand of service robots and self-driving
cars, SLAM technology is now facing more challenging
scenarios, e.g., low-cost sensors which introduce considerable noise when running in complicated dynamic scenes.
Recent advanced visual SLAM approaches applicable
for dynamic scenes can be divided into two categories con∗ corresponding author.

sidering their treatment of dynamic components: exclusion [1, 7, 24, 5] or segmentation [36, 37, 4, 44]. While
the first category chooses to exclude these components to
ensure robust camera ego-motion tracking, the latter category inclines to further segment these components into multiple instances (i.e. rigid bodies). Although it is tolerable to
discard minor movements in an almost static environment,
most scenarios including autonomous driving and multirobot collaborating [34] require explicit motion information
of the surroundings to help with decision making and scene
understanding. In these cases, segmentation approaches are
preferred over exclusion solutions.
Existing segmentation based dynamic SLAM systems
detect and model dynamics through either semantics from
deep learning [37, 4] or motion consistency [22, 36]. Deep
neural networks have shown their effectiveness for object
detection and semantic segmentation [19, 8] in the past few
years. But the problems applying them to SLAM systems
are two-fold: First, they can only detect movable a-priori
dynamic categories (e.g. cars or people) but cannot recognize arbitrary moving instances. Second, the performance
of such models heavily depends on the amount of available
computing resources, which brings deployment issues in restricted platforms (e.g. embedded computing devices).
From another perspective, methods exploiting motion
consistency for segmentation [27, 22, 36, 44] achieve acceptable performance without such problems. These solutions aim to find inconsistencies in landmark observations
between adjacent frames. Current methods discover these
inconsistencies by identifying outliers apparently violating
predefined motion models and causing a high error residual.
However, these works have not sufficiently utilized the information calculated during the SLAM process, especially
tracked long-term 3D motions, which are effective for obtaining better segmentation considering motion consistency.
In this paper, we take a different approach to discovering
motion inconsistencies with a key observation that motions

5875

