Domain Randomization and Pyramid Consistency:
Simulation-to-Real Generalization without Accessing Target Domain Data
Xiangyu Yue1 , Yang Zhang2 , Sicheng Zhao1 , Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli1 ,
Kurt Keutzer1 , Boqing Gong3
1
University of California, Berkeley, 2 University of Central Florida, 3 Google
{xyyue,schzhao,alberto,keutzer}@berkeley.edu, yangzhang4065@gmail.com, boqinggo@outlook.com

Abstract

Ground Truth

Images with Different Styles

Image Crops with Different Styles

a
b

We propose to harness the potential of simulation for the
semantic segmentation of real-world self-driving scenes in
a domain generalization fashion. The segmentation network is trained without any data of target domains and
tested on the unseen target domains. To this end, we propose a new approach of domain randomization and pyramid consistency to learn a model with high generalizability. First, we propose to randomize the synthetic images with the styles of real images in terms of visual appearances using auxiliary datasets, in order to effectively
learn domain-invariant representations. Second, we further enforce pyramid consistency across different “stylized”
images and within an image, in order to learn domaininvariant and scale-invariant features, respectively. Extensive experiments are conducted on the generalization from
GTA and SYNTHIA to Cityscapes, BDDS and Mapillary;
and our method achieves superior results over the stateof-the-art techniques. Remarkably, our generalization results are on par with or even better than those obtained by
state-of-the-art simulation-to-real domain adaptation methods, which access the target domain data at training time.
1

1. Introduction
Simulation has spurred growing interests for training
deep neural nets (DNNs) for computer vision tasks [53, 10,
23, 55]. This is partially due to the community’s recent exploration to embodied vision [46, 62, 2], in which the perception has to be embodied and purposive for an agent to
actively perceive and/or navigate through a physical environment [7, 10]. Moreover, training data generated by simulation is often low-cost and diverse, especially benefiting
the tasks that otherwise need heavy human annotations (e.g.
semantic segmentation [19, 57, 18]). Finally, in the case
of autonomous driving, simulation can complement the in1 Our code is available at https://github.com/xyyue/DRPC.

Convolutional Neural Network
a

b

Pyramid Pooling
Convolutional Neural Network
...

Segmentation Loss

Pyramid Consistency Loss

Figure 1. Domain randomization and pyramid consistency enforce
the learned semantic segmentation network invariant to the change
of domains. As a result, the semantic segmentation network can
generalize to various domains, including those of real scenes.

sufficient coverage of real data by synthesizing rare events
and scenes, such as construction sites, lane merges, and accidents. In summary, the promise of simulation is that one
may conveniently acquire a large amount of labeled and diverse imagery from simulated environments. This scale is
vital for training state-of-the-art deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) with millions of parameters.
However, when we learn a semantic segmentation neural network from a synthetic dataset, its visual difference
from real-world scenes often discounts its performance on
real images. To mitigate the domain mismatch between
simulation and the real world, existing work often resorts
to domain adaptation [19, 18, 57], which aims to tailor
the model for a particular target domain by jointly learning from the source synthetic data and the (often unlabeled)
data of the target real domain. This setting is, unfortunately,
very stringent. Take autonomous driving for instance. It is
almost impossible for a car manufacturer to know in advance under which domain (which city, what weather, day
or night) the vehicle would be used.
In this paper, we instead propose to harness the potential of simulation from a domain generalization manner [1, 27, 14, 46], without the need of accessing any target

2100

