Align, Attend and Locate: Chest X-ray Diagnosis via
Contrast Induced Attention Network with Limited Supervision
Jingyu Liu1∗ , Gangming Zhao2∗, Yu Fei1 , Ming Zhang1 , Yizhou Wang1,2,3 , Yizhou Yu2†
1
2

Department of Computer Science, Peking University
3
Deepwise AI Lab
Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
Obstacles facing accurate identification and localization
of diseases in chest X-ray images lie in the lack of highquality images and annotations. In this paper, we propose
a Contrast Induced Attention Network (CIA-Net), which
exploits the highly structured property of chest X-ray images and localizes diseases via contrastive learning on the
aligned positive and negative samples. To force the attention module to focus on abnormalities, we also introduce
a learnable alignment module to adjust all the input images, which eliminates variations of scales, angles, and displacements of X-ray images generated under bad scan conditions. We show that the use of contrastive attention and
alignment module allows the model to learn rich identification and localization information using only a small amount
of location annotations, resulting in state-of-the-art performance in NIH chest X-ray dataset.

1. Introduction
Chest X-ray image analysis serves as a crucial role in
clinical diagnosis of chest diseases. Traditionally, it requires years of accumulated expertise and consistent concentration to finish the task, adding heavy workloads to radiologists. Fortunately, we can formulate chest X-ray image analysis as a classification task, which assigns a particular type of disease to an image, together with a detection
task, which provides location annotation of the abnormality. Therefore, automatic image analysis systems could be
implemented with the help of deep Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) methods [28, 5, 11, 12, 27].
To achieve good performance in natural images, classic
CNN approaches require tons of samples with image-level
labels for image classification, and samples with both category and location labels for object detection. However,
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Identification
&
Localization
Positive Sample

Contrast Induced
Attention

Pathology Diagnosis：
• Infiltration
• Mass
• Pneumothorax

Negative Sample

Figure 1. Our proposed framework consists of two branches. The
upper branch extracts convolutional features from the input image. The lower branch computes the contrast induced attention on
the extracted feature map. The information from each branch is
merged to produce disease identification and localization results
for the input chest X-ray images.

these requirements raise two challenges when it comes to
chest X-ray image diagnosis. First, accurate location labels
are expensive to acquire for chest X-ray images, making it
hard to train an accurate detector. Second, the diversity of
location, shape and texture make certain categories of abnormality vague and mutually confused.
In this paper, we propose a novel Contrast Induced
Attention Network (CIA-Net) (Figure 1) to address these
problems. The motivation of CIA-Net originates from the
consistency of thoracic structure among humans. Through
contrastive study, which exploits visual contrast between a
pair of positive image (with diseases) and negative image
(without diseases), CIA-Net captures additional identification and localization information in the lack of annotation.
Specifically, we extract high-level image feature representations of the image pair from CNN. Then, to utilize the highly structured property of inputs, we compute L1-distance
between corresponding pixels in the negative image and the
positive one, the result of which serves as an indication of
possible lesion sites on the latter. However, some images,

10632

