Human Mesh Recovery from Monocular Images
via a Skeleton-disentangled Representation
Yu Sun1∗ , Yun Ye2 ⋆ , Wu Liu2† ⋆ , Wenpeng Gao1 , YiLi Fu1 , and Tao Mei2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology 2 JD AI Research

yusun@stu.hit.edu.cn yun.ye@intel.com liuwu@live.cn
{wpgao, meylfu}@hit.edu.cn tmei@live.com

Abstract
We describe an end-to-end method for recovering 3D human body mesh from single images and monocular videos.
Different from the existing methods try to obtain all the complex 3D pose, shape, and camera parameters from one coupling feature, we propose a skeleton-disentangling based
framework, which divides this task into multi-level spatial
and temporal granularity in a decoupling manner. In spatial, we propose an effective and pluggable “disentangling
the skeleton from the details” (DSD) module. It reduces the
complexity and decouples the skeleton, which lays a good
foundation for temporal modeling. In temporal, the selfattention based temporal convolution network is proposed
to efficiently exploit the short and long-term temporal cues.
Furthermore, an unsupervised adversarial training strategy, temporal shuffles and order recovery, is designed to
promote the learning of motion dynamics. The proposed
method outperforms the state-of-the-art 3D human mesh recovery methods by 15.4% MPJPE and 23.8% PA-MPJPE
on Human3.6M. State-of-the-art results are also achieved
on the 3D pose in the wild (3DPW) dataset without any
fine-tuning. Especially, ablation studies demonstrate that
skeleton-disentangled representation is crucial for better
temporal modeling and generalization.

1. Introduction
Different from traditional 3D pose estimation that usually predicts the location of 14/17 skeleton joints [5, 24],
3D human body mesh recovery from the monocular images
is a more complex task, which tries to estimate the more
detailed 3D shape and joint angles. In detail, it needs to estimate more than 85 parameters, which controls 6890 ver∗ This work is done when Yu Sun is an intern at JD AI Research.
† Corresponding author: Wu Liu. ⋆ Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Human 3D mesh recovery from monocular video based
on skeleton disentangling and temporal coherence.

tices [22] that form the surface of 3D body mesh. Moreover, the information loss from the 3D scene to a 2D image, inherent ambiguity, and complex changes in human
body shape and pose further increase the complexity of
this task. Therefore, although the 3D body mesh recovery is important in computer vision, motion/event analysis [10, 11, 20, 23, 19], and virtual try-on [7, 6], it is
still a frontier challenge. In this paper, we try to solve
this problem via a skeleton-disentangled representation in
multi-level spatial and temporal granularity.
Most of the existing methods try to recover the human
3D mesh from single images. Previous multi-stage approaches [17, 26, 27] first extract human body information
(e.g. 2D pose and segmentation) and then estimate the 3D
model parameters from them, which is typically not optimal. Recently, HMR [15] provides an end-to-end solution
to learn a mapping from image pixels directly to model parameters, which shows a significant performance advantage
over the two-stage methods. However, as shown in Figure 1, severe coupling problem makes the prediction unstable. In HMR, 3D pose, body shape, and camera parameters
are derived directly from the same feature vector using the
fully connected layers. Without any decoupling measurements, high complexity makes features of different targets

5349

