Cascaded Context Pyramid for Full-Resolution 3D Semantic Scene Completion
Pingping Zhang†
†

Dalian University of Technology,

jssxzhpp@mail.dlut.edu.cn

‡

Wei Liu‡

Yinjie Lei§

University of Adelaide,

wei.liu02@adelaide.edu.au

§

Sichuan University,

⋆

China Science IntelliCloud Technology Co.Ltd

yinjie@scu.edu.cn lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) aims to simultaneously predict the volumetric occupancy and semantic category
of a 3D scene. It helps intelligent devices to understand
and interact with the surrounding scenes. Due to the highmemory requirement, current methods only produce lowresolution completion predictions, and generally lose the
object details. Furthermore, they also ignore the multiscale spatial contexts, which play a vital role for the 3D
inference. To address these issues, in this work we propose
a novel deep learning framework, named Cascaded Context
Pyramid Network (CCPNet), to jointly infer the occupancy
and semantic labels of a volumetric 3D scene from a single
depth image. The proposed CCPNet improves the labeling
coherence with a cascaded context pyramid. Meanwhile,
based on the low-level features, it progressively restores the
fine-structures of objects with Guided Residual Refinement
(GRR) modules. Our proposed framework has three outstanding advantages: (1) it explicitly models the 3D spatial
context for performance improvement; (2) full-resolution
3D volumes are produced with structure-preserving details;
(3) light-weight models with low-memory requirements are
captured with a good extensibility. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that in spite of taking a single-view depth map,
our proposed framework can generate high-quality SSC results, and outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on both
the synthetic SUNCG and real NYU datasets.

1. Introduction
Human can perceive the real-world through 3D views
with partial observations. For example, one can capture the
geometry of rigid objects by only seeing the corresponding
2D images. Thus, understanding and reconstructing a 3D
scene from its partial observations is a valuable technique
for many computer vision and robotic applications, such as
object localization, visual reasoning and indoor navigation.
As an encouraging direction, Semantic Scene Completion
∗ Corresponding author.

Huchuan Lu†∗ Xiaoyun Yang⋆
xiaoyun.yang@intellicloud.ai

(SSC) has draw more and more attentions in recent years.
It aims to simultaneously predict the volumetric occupancy
and semantic category of a 3D scene. Given a single depth
image, several outstanding works [32, 10, 36] have been
proposed for single-view SSC. By designing 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), these methods can automatically predict the semantic labels or complete 3D shapes
of the objects in the scene. However, it is not a trivial task
to utilize 3D CNNs for the SSC task. Vanilla 3D CNNs are
locked in the cubic growth of computational and memory
requirements with the increase of voxel resolution. Thus,
current methods inevitably limit the resolution of predictions and the depth of 3D CNNs, which leads to wrong labels and missing shape details in the completion results.
To achieve better SSC results, several works [8, 5, 23,
20] introduce the 2D semantic segmentation as an auxiliary,
which takes an additional RGB image and applies complex
2D CNNs for semantic enhancement. These methods can
fully exploit the high-resolution input, however, they ignore
the 3D context information of the scene. Thus, only based
on the 2D input image, they may not infer the invisible object parts of the complex scene. Recently, Song et al. [32]
show that global 3D context helps the prediction of SSC.
However, the 3D CNN used in their work simply adopts the
dilated convolutions [34], and concatenates the multi-stage
features for predictions. It only considers the global semantics, which result in low-resolution predictions, and lose the
scene details. In this work, we ﬁnd that both local geometric details and multi-scale 3D contexts of the scene play a
vital role in the SSC task. The local geometric details help
the SSC system to identify the ﬁne-structured objects. The
multi-scale 3D contexts can enhance the spatial coherence
and infer the occluded objects from the scene layout. However, designing a framework that can efﬁciently integrate
both characteristics is still a challenging task.
To address above problems, we propose a novel deep
learning framework, named Cascaded Context Pyramid
Network (CCPNet), for single depth image based SSC. The
proposed CCPNet effectively learns both local geometry details and multi-scale 3D contexts from the training dataset.
For semantic confusing objects, the CCPNet improves the

7801

