Fast Image Restoration with Multi-bin Trainable Linear Units
Shuhang Gu1 , Wen Li1 , Luc Van Gool1,2 , Radu Timofte1
1
ETH, Zurich, 2 KU Leuven
{shuhang.gu, liwen, vangool, radu.timofte@vision.ee.ethz.ch}
Abstract
Tremendous advances in image restoration tasks such as
denoising and super-resolution have been achieved using
neural networks. Such approaches generally employ very
deep architectures, large number of parameters, large receptive fields and high nonlinear modeling capacity. In order to obtain efficient and fast image restoration networks
one should improve upon the above mentioned requirements. In this paper we propose a novel activation function,
the multi-bin trainable linear unit (MTLU), for increasing the nonlinear modeling capacity together with lighter
and shallower networks. We validate the proposed fast image restoration networks for image denoising (FDnet) and
super-resolution (FSRnet) on standard benchmarks. We
achieve large improvements in both memory and runtime
over current state-of-the-art for comparable or better PSNR
accuracies.

1. Introduction
Image restoration refers to the task of estimating the latent clean image from its degraded observation, it is a classical and fundamental problem in the area of signal processing and computer vision. Recently, deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been shown to deliver standout performance
on a wide variety of image restoration tasks. With massive
training data, very deep models have been trained for pushing the state-of-the-art of different restoration tasks.
The idea of DNN-based image restoration method is
straight forward: training a neural network to capture the
mapping function between the degraded images and their
corresponding high quality images. By stacking the standard convolution layers and Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
activation functions, the VDSR approach [22] and the
DnCNN approach [43] have achieved state-of-the-art performance on the image super-resolution (SR) and image
denoising tasks, resp. Furthermore, it is perhaps unsurprising that we are able to further improve the results by these
models by further increasing their number of layers; since
deeper network structures not only have stronger nonlinear

Figure 1. Average PSNR on Set 14 (×4) vs. runtime (on Titan X
Pascal GPU with Caffe [20]) for processing a 512×512 HR image
by different approaches. Our MTLU improves fast SR methods
without increasing their runtime. Our FSRnet has a better tradeoff between speed and accuracy than state-of-the-art SR methods.

modeling capacity but also incorporate input pixels from a
larger area. However, in practice often only limited computational resources are available and how to design an appropriate network structure for such conditions is an important
research direction.
Generally, the key challenge in learning fast image
restoration networks is twofold: (i) to incorporate sufficient
receptive fields, and (ii) to economically increase the nonlinear modeling capacity of networks. In order to increase
the receptive field of the proposed network, we utilize a similar strategy with recent works [36, 45] and conduct all the
computations in a lower spatial resolution. While for the
purpose of stronger nonlinear capacity, we propose a multibin trainable linear unit (MTLU) as the activation function
used in our networks. The proposed MTLU parameterizes
each activation function with a group of parameters, which
can be trained jointly with other network parameters in an
end-to-end manner. Concretely, MTLU divides the activation space into equidistant bins and approximates the activation function in each bin with a linear function independently. Such a simple strategy enables us to greatly enhance
the nonlinear capacity of each activation function without
significantly increase its computational burden.
We evaluated the proposed MTLU on the classical SR
14190

