Mixture-Kernel Graph Attention Network for Situation Recognition
Mohammed Suhail1,2
Leonid Sigal1,2,3
1
2
3
University of British Columbia
Vector Institute for AI
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
suhail33@cs.ubc.ca

lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Understanding images beyond salient actions involves
reasoning about scene context, objects, and the roles they
play in the captured event. Situation recognition has recently been introduced as the task of jointly reasoning about
the verbs (actions) and a set of semantic-role and entity
(noun) pairs in the form of action frames. Labeling an
image with an action frame requires an assignment of values (nouns) to the roles based on the observed image content. Among the inherent challenges are the rich conditional structured dependencies between the output role assignments and the overall semantic sparsity. In this paper,
we propose a novel mixture-kernel attention graph neural
network (GNN) architecture designed to address these challenges. Our GNN enables dynamic graph structure during
training and inference, through the use of a graph attention
mechanism, and context-aware interactions between role
pairs. It also alleviates semantic sparsity by representing
graph kernels using a convex combination of learned basis.
We illustrate the efficacy of our model and design choices by
conducting experiments on imSitu benchmark dataset, with
accuracy improvements of up to 10% over state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
There has been enormous progress in recent years on
standard computer vision tasks that reason about objects
or actions in isolation, including object categorization [6,
15, 16, 19], object detection [8, 9, 13], and even single
image action recognition [33]. However, a more detailed
understanding and comprehension of image content, which
is needed for many real-world applications, remains a significant challenge. The problem of situation recognition,
initially proposed by Yatskar et al. [32], is an attempt at
exploring such more detailed understanding. In situation
recognition, the task is to jointly reason about the verbs and
a set of semantic-role and entity pairs. Effectively, the goal
is to label an image with a set of action frames, where each
verb-specific frame consists of a fixed set of roles that define

JUMPING
ROLE

VALUE

AGENT

JOCKEY

SOURCE

LAND

OBSTACLE

FENCE

DESTINATION

LAND

PLACE

OUTDOORS

Figure 1. Situation recognition involves understanding the image
beyond the salient action. Given the above image of jumping,
the task is to identify who is jumping (jockey), where is the
agent jumping to and from (land), what obstacle is the
agent jumping over (fence) and where the action is taking
place (outdoors).

the context of the action. Instantiating a frame requires an
assignment of values (nouns) to the roles based on observed
image content. The resulting frames allow easy structured
access to much needed semantic information, e.g., who is
performing the action, where the action is taking place and
what may be the outcome. Figure 1 illustrates an example.
Yatskar et al. [32] proposed the initial large-scale dataset
for the task and a baseline model. Later, in [31], they extended this baseline to include a compositional Conditional
Random Field model that aims to address one of the major
challenges in situation recognition, semantic sparsity1 . This
was achieved by encouraging sharing between nouns and
data augmentation. In [17], the authors explore the structured nature of the problem and propose a Graph Neural
Network (GNN) based architecture that learns to capture
pairwise dependencies between roles. Their model, however, is limited and assumes that the interactions between
different roles are global, i.e. given a pair of roles, the interaction between the roles are independent of the verb. The
model also relies on a static fully connected graph structure
for training and inference, which fails to account for variable interactions between various role-pairs.
1 Semantic sparsity here refers to inability of a training dataset to span
combinatorial number of possible action frame outputs.

10363

