Learning Discriminative Model Prediction for Tracking
Goutam Bhat∗

Martin Danelljan∗

Luc Van Gool

Radu Timofte

CVL, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract
The current strive towards end-to-end trainable computer vision systems imposes major challenges for the task
of visual tracking. In contrast to most other vision problems,
tracking requires the learning of a robust target-specific appearance model online, during the inference stage. To be
end-to-end trainable, the online learning of the target model
thus needs to be embedded in the tracking architecture itself. Due to the imposed challenges, the popular Siamese
paradigm simply predicts a target feature template, while
ignoring the background appearance information during
inference. Consequently, the predicted model possesses limited target-background discriminability.
We develop an end-to-end tracking architecture, capable of fully exploiting both target and background appearance information for target model prediction. Our architecture is derived from a discriminative learning loss by
designing a dedicated optimization process that is capable of predicting a powerful model in only a few iterations.
Furthermore, our approach is able to learn key aspects of
the discriminative loss itself. The proposed tracker sets
a new state-of-the-art on 6 tracking benchmarks, achieving an EAO score of 0.440 on VOT2018, while running
at over 40 FPS. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/visionml/pytracking.

1. Introduction
Generic object tracking is the task of estimating the state
of an arbitrary target in each frame of a video sequence. In
the most general setting, the target is only defined by its initial state in the sequence. Most current approaches address
the tracking problem by constructing a target model, capable of differentiating between the target and background appearance. Since target-specific information is only available
at test-time, the target model cannot be learned in an offline training phase, as in for instance object detection. Instead, the target model must be constructed during the inference stage itself by exploiting the target information given
∗ Both authors contributed equally.

Image
Siamese based
Ours
Figure 1. Confidence maps of the target object (red box) provided
by the target model obtained using i) a Siamese approach (middle),
and ii) Our approach (right). The model predicted in a Siamese
fashion, using only target appearance, struggles to distinguish the
target from distractor objects in the background. In contrast, our
model prediction architecture also integrates background appearance, providing superior discriminative power.

at test-time. This unconventional nature of the visual tracking problem imposes significant challenges when pursuing
an end-to-end learning solution.
The aforementioned problems have been most successfully addressed by the Siamese learning paradigm [2, 22].
These approaches first learn a feature embedding, where
the similarity between two image regions is computed by
a simple cross-correlation. Tracking is then performed by
finding the image region most similar to the target template.
In this setting, the target model simply corresponds to the
template features extracted from the target region. Consequently, the tracker can easily be trained end-to-end using
pairs of annotated images.
Despite its recent success, the Siamese learning framework suffers from severe limitations. Firstly, Siamese trackers only utilize the target appearance when inferring the
model. This completely ignores background appearance
information, which is crucial for discriminating the target
from similar objects in the scene (see figure 1). Secondly,
the learned similarity measure is not necessarily reliable for
objects that are not included in the offline training set, leading to poor generalization. Thirdly, the Siamese formulation
16182

