Neural Inter-Frame Compression for Video Coding
Abdelaziz Djelouah1
1

Joaquim Campos1

DisneyResearch|Studios

2

Simone Schaub-Meyer1,2

Christopher Schroers1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich

abdelaziz.djelouah@disney.com

christopher.schroers@disney.com

Abstract
While there are many deep learning based approaches for
single image compression, the field of end-to-end learned
video coding has remained much less explored. Therefore,
in this work we present an inter-frame compression approach for neural video coding that can seamlessly build up
on different existing neural image codecs. Our end-to-end
solution performs temporal prediction by optical flow based
motion compensation in pixel space. The key insight is that
we can increase both decoding efficiency and reconstruction quality by encoding the required information into a
latent representation that directly decodes into motion and
blending coefficients. In order to account for remaining
prediction errors, residual information between the original
image and the interpolated frame is needed. We propose to
compute residuals directly in latent space instead of in pixel
space as this allows to reuse the same image compression
network for both key frames and intermediate frames. Our
extended evaluation on different datasets and resolutions
shows that the rate-distortion performance of our approach
is competitive with existing state-of-the-art codecs.

H264 - 0.02bpp

H265 - 0.02bpp

Ours - 0.02bpp

GTruth

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Learning based video compression. Compared
to existing video codecs, our method achieves better results
at a similar or lower bit rate. Less visual artifacts are present
and colors are closer to the original (best viewed on screen).

In 2017 video content already represented 75% of the
total internet traffic and it is projected to reach 82% by
2022 [7]. This is due to an expected increase in subscribers
to streaming services, higher resolution, frame rate, and dynamic range. As a result, video compression techniques
are challenged in handling this data efficiently and with low
loss of visual quality.
Although important progress has been made with the different generations of video codecs through thorough testing and exploration of variations [24, 31], they all follow
similar strategies. However, very recently some fundamentally different directions to video coding that rely on deep
learning have been proposed [11, 14, 23, 32]. For example Wu et al. [32] propose a recurrent strategy for interpolation based compression but optical flow is still encoded

with a traditional method [10]. The variational approach of
Han et al. [11] considers video compression from the variational inference perspective but focuses on small resolution
videos. The most recent works [23, 14] target the low latency setup that aims at reducing the amount of delay in
encoding by only considering frames from the past during
motion compensation. These methods require a complex
spatial adaptation of the bit-rate [23] or more computation
on the decoder side with a refinement network during motion compensation [14].
In this work, we propose a framework for interpolation
based video compression that is compatible with neural image compression methods [4, 17, 15]. The key element is an
inter-frame compression method that can seamlessly build
16421

