VideoBERT: A Joint Model for Video and Language Representation Learning

Chen Sun, Austin Myers, Carl Vondrick, Kevin Murphy, and Cordelia Schmid
Google Research
input text

Season the steak with
salt and pepper.

Carefully place the steak
to the pan.

Flip the steak to the
other side.

Now let it rest and enjoy
the delicious steak.

VideoBERT
output video
output
video
futures

input
video

VideoBERT

Figure 1: VideoBERT text-to-video generation and future forecasting. (Above) Given some recipe text divided into
sentences, y = y1:T , we generate a sequence of video tokens x = x1:T by computing x∗t = arg maxk p(xt = k|y) using
VideoBERT. (Below) Given a video token, we show the top three future tokens forecasted by VideoBERT at different time
scales. In this case, VideoBERT predicts that a bowl of flour and cocoa powder may be baked in an oven, and may become a
brownie or cupcake. We visualize video tokens using the images from the training set closest to centroids in feature space.

Abstract
Self-supervised learning has become increasingly important to leverage the abundance of unlabeled data available on platforms like YouTube. Whereas most existing
approaches learn low-level representations, we propose a
joint visual-linguistic model to learn high-level features
without any explicit supervision. In particular, inspired
by its recent success in language modeling, we build upon
the BERT model to learn bidirectional joint distributions
over sequences of visual and linguistic tokens, derived from
vector quantization of video data and off-the-shelf speech
recognition outputs, respectively. We use VideoBERT in numerous tasks, including action classification and video captioning. We show that it can be applied directly to openvocabulary classification, and confirm that large amounts
of training data and cross-modal information are critical to
performance. Furthermore, we outperform the state-of-theart on video captioning, and quantitative results verify that
the model learns high-level semantic features.

1. Introduction
Deep learning can benefit a lot from labeled data [24],
but this is hard to acquire at scale. Consequently there has
been a lot of recent interest in “self supervised learning”,
where we train a model on various “proxy tasks”, which we
hope will result in the discovery of features or representations that can be used in downstream tasks. A wide variety
of such proxy tasks have been proposed in the image and
video domains. However, most of these methods focus on
low level features (e.g., textures) and short temporal scales
(e.g., motion patterns that last a second or less). We are interested in discovering high-level semantic features which
correspond to actions and events that unfold over longer
time scales (e.g. minutes), since such representations would
be useful for various video understanding tasks.
In this paper, we exploit the key insight that human
language has evolved words to describe high-level objects
and events, and thus provides a natural source of “self”
supervision. In particular, we present a simple way to
model the relationship between the visual domain and the
17464

