Instance-Level Future Motion Estimation in a Single Image
Based on Ordinal Regression
Kyung-Rae Kim1 Whan Choi1 Yeong Jun Koh2 Seong-Gyun Jeong3 Chang-Su Kim1
1
Korea University 2 Chungnam National University 3 CODE42.ai

Abstract
A novel algorithm to estimate instance-level future motion in a single image is proposed in this paper. We first
represent the future motion of an instance with its direction,
speed, and action classes. Then, we develop a deep neural network that exploits different levels of semantic information to perform the future motion estimation. For effective future motion classification, we adopt ordinal regression. Especially, we develop the cyclic ordinal regression
scheme using binary classifiers. Experiments demonstrate
that the proposed algorithm provides reliable performance
and thus can be used effectively for vision applications, including single and multi object tracking. Furthermore, we
release the future motion (FM) dataset, collected from diverse sources and annotated manually, as a benchmark for
single-image future motion estimation.

1. Introduction
Motion understanding is critical in various vision tasks,
such as optical flow [23, 38, 46], action recognition [55],
future frame prediction [36], and video compression [50].
Most prior arts estimate motions by analyzing the differences between consecutive frames. In contrast, a human being is often capable of anticipating motions precisely even
from a single still image, as illustrated in Figure 1. Such innate perceptual capabilities enable us to take desired actions
and avoid dangerous situations. If computer vision attains a
similar level of motion understanding, we would be able to
build more secure artificial intelligent systems, e.g. robots
and self-driving cars.
We propose a pioneering algorithm to estimate instancelevel FM in a single image. The proposed algorithm attempts to challenge humans in single-image motion understanding. Even though there are some methods [16, 26, 37,
40, 52] for predicting FM, they need additional information
or are effective in limited environments only. As shown in
Figure 2, Yagi et al. [52] require a cumulative trajectory of
an instance from past frames, while the proposed algorithm
uses only a present frame. Also, [26,37] estimate object tra-

Figure 1. Above annotations are automatically generated from the
single image by the proposed algorithm.

jectories in a scene. Given starting and end points in a scene,
they estimate trajectories connecting those points. Mottaghi
et al. [40] estimate motion scenarios by classifying objects
in images into one of pre-defined scenarios as in Figure 2.
They focus on the scene understanding task rather than on
object FMs, such as motion directions and magnitudes. Gao
et al.’s algorithm [16] is the most similar to ours, but it estimates pixel-level optical flow and works only for highly
similar action scenes to the ones in the training data.
Even unaware of the exact physics, humans can predict
next motions of instances based on their experience. Based
on this observation, we use a deep neural network [22]
to implement such perceptual capabilities regarding FM.
Deep neural networks can perform high-level understanding of images, if reliable examples are provided sufficiently
[17,20,24,29–31,53]. Hence, another objective of this work
is to construct a reliable dataset for single-image FM estimation. First, we focus on pedestrian instances, which
are objects of the most interest in many applications. We
construct the FM dataset by collecting images, containing
pedestrians. After detecting bounding boxes for pedestrians, we manually assign three attributes of FM (i.e. direction, speed, and action) to each pedestrian. Later, we extend
the FM dataset to include car and animal instances.
When we see a moving object, we perceive visual information of the object and its surroundings simultaneously.
Similarly, to exploit scene contexts for FM estimation, we
propose the multi-context pooling (MCP) layer that inte1273

