STD: Sparse-to-Dense 3D Object Detector for Point Cloud
Zetong Yang†
†

Yanan Sun†

YouTu Lab, Tencent

Shu Liu†
‡

Xiaoyong Shen†

Jiaya Jia†,‡

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

{tomztyang, now.syn, liushuhust, Goodshenxy}@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a two-stage 3D object detection framework,
named sparse-to-dense 3D Object Detector (STD). The first
stage is a bottom-up proposal generation network that uses
raw point clouds as input to generate accurate proposals
by seeding each point with a new spherical anchor. It
achieves a higher recall with less computation compared
with prior works. Then, PointsPool is applied for proposal
feature generation by transforming interior point features
from sparse expression to compact representation, which
saves even more computation. In box prediction, which
is the second stage, we implement a parallel intersectionover-union (IoU) branch to increase awareness of localization accuracy, resulting in further improved performance.
We conduct experiments on KITTI dataset, and evaluate our
method on 3D object and Bird’s Eye View (BEV) detection.
Our method outperforms other methods by a large margin,
especially on the hard set, with 10+ FPS inference speed.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding from point clouds is a very important topic in computer vision, since it benefits many applications, such as autonomous driving [8] and augmented
reality [24]. In this work, we focus on one essential 3D
scene recognition task, i.e., object detection based on point
clouds that predicts the 3D bounding box and class label for
each object in the scene.
Compared to RGB images, LiDAR 3D points are special. On the one hand, they provide structural and spatial
information of relative location and precise depth. On the
other hand, they are unordered, sparse and locality sensitive,
which brings difficulties in parsing raw LiDAR data.
Most existing work transforms sparse point clouds to
compact representation by projecting them to images [4, 14,
9, 25, 7] or subdividing them into equally distributed voxels [23, 32, 37, 35]. CNNs can be applied to parsing the
point cloud. It is noted that hand-crafted representations
may not be optimal. Instead of converting irregular point
clouds to voxels, Qi et al. proposed PointNet [27, 28] to

leojia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

directly operate on raw LiDAR data for classification and
semantic segmentation.
There are two streams of methods for 3D object detection. One is based on voxels, e.g., VoxelNet [37] and SECOND [34], where voxelization is conducted on the entire
point cloud. Then PointNet is applied to each voxel for
feature extraction and CNNs are used for final boundingbox prediction. Albeit efficient, information loss degrades
localization quality. The other stream is point-based, like
F-PointNet [26] and PointRCNN [30]. They take raw point
cloud data as input, and generate final prediction by PointNet++ [28]. These methods achieve better performance.
The limitation is on uncontrollable receptive fields and large
computation cost.
Our Contributions Different from all previous methods,
we propose a two-stage 3D object detection framework. In
the first stage, we take each point in the point cloud as an
element, and seed them with appropriate spherical anchors,
aiming to preserve accurate location information. Then a
PointNet++ backbone is applied to extracting semantic context feature for each point as well as generating objectness
score to filter anchors.
To generate feature for each proposal, we propose the
PointsPool layer by gathering canonical coordinates and semantic features of their interior points, retaining accurate
localization and context information. This layer transforms
sparse and unordered point-wise expression to more compact features, enabling utilization of efficient CNNs and
end-to-end training. Final prediction is achieved in the second stage. Instead of predicting the box location and class
label with a simple head, we propose augmenting a novel
3D IoU branch for predicting 3D IoU between predictions
and ground-truth bounding boxes to alleviate inappropriate
removal during post-processing.
We evaluate our model on KITTI dataset [1]. Experiments show that our model outperforms other state-of-thearts for both BEV and 3D object detection tasks, especially
for difficult examples. Our contribution is manifold.
• We propose a point-based proposal generation
paradigm for object detection on point clouds with
spherical anchors. It is generic to achieve high recall.
11951

