Learning Local Descriptors With a CDF-Based Dynamic Soft Margin

Linguang Zhang

Szymon Rusinkiewicz

Princeton University

Abstract
The triplet loss is adopted by a variety of learning tasks,
such as local feature descriptor learning. However, its standard formulation with a hard margin only leverages part of
the training data in each mini-batch. Moreover, the margin
is often empirically chosen or determined through computationally expensive validation, and stays unchanged during the entire training session. In this work, we propose
a simple yet effective method to overcome the above limitations. The core idea is to replace the hard margin with
a non-parametric soft margin, which is dynamically updated. The major observation is that the difficulty of a triplet
can be inferred from the cumulative distribution function of
the triplets’ signed distances to the decision boundary. We
demonstrate through experiments on both real-valued and
binary local feature descriptors that our method leads to
state-of-the-art performance on popular benchmarks, while
eliminating the need to determine the best margin.

1. Introduction
Efficient image matching is a fundamental problem in
computer vision, robotics, and graphics. Generally, image
matching is a two-step procedure consisting of extracting repeatable local keypoints using an interest point detector, followed by matching of feature descriptors corresponding to
those points. Traditional pipelines use handcrafted descriptors such as SIFT [15], which has proven successful in a variety of applications. With the development of deep-learning
techniques, however, recent advancements to feature descriptors have been mainly learning-based. These learned
descriptors often achieve higher matching performance than
handcrafted ones, at the same length (e.g., 128 floats, as with
SIFT). Further reduction in storage and matching costs can
be achieved by binary descriptors, which are interpreted
as bit vectors and are compared using Hamming distance
instead of Euclidean distance.
In this paper, we demonstrate that a common architecture (based on L2-Net [29]) and training procedure (based

on HardNet [19]) can be modified to learn not only floatingpoint but also binary descriptors. The modified network advances the state of the art in descriptor performance, but
it also highlights a frequently-encountered problem: the
matching accuracy depends on hyperparameter tuning.
In particular, many well-performing learned descriptors
are trained using the same loss function: a triplet loss that
encourages the distance between a negative pair to exceed
the distance between a positive pair by some margin. The
purpose of the margin is to force the network to update its
weights using the gradients computed from “harder” triplets,
while excluding training samples classified as “easy” by the
margin. While modern approaches improve performance
by incorporating hard negative mining [3, 19] or regularization [13, 38], the effectiveness of training fundamentally
depends on the setting of the margin. Because the optimal
margin is problem- and often dataset-dependent, in practice
the margin is either specified by hand based on an educated
guess or exhaustively tuned at great computational expense.
In this work, we propose a novel triplet loss function
that has three major features: 1) We use a soft instead of
hard margin to fully utilize each mini-batch. 2) The soft
margin dynamically adapts to the current state of training.
3) The method is parameter-free: the two goals above are
accomplished without the need for any user-tunable hyperparameters. In short, as opposed to the Static Hard Margin
used in the traditional triplet loss, we think of our method as
an instance of a Dynamic Soft Margin strategy that could
be applied to a variety of learning problems.
The traditional triplet loss makes a binary decision of
whether a triplet should contribute to the gradient, using the
hard margin as a constant threshold. We instead make the
margin soft by using all the triplets in each mini-batch, while
following the simple intuition that “difficult” triplets should
receive greater weight than “easy” ones. In contrast to previous approaches that use soft margins (such as SVMs with
slack variables), our formulation does not require a separate
user-tunable parameter for the “softness” of the margin. The
dynamic nature of our method is obtained by maintaining
a moving Probability Density Function (PDF) of the differ-

2969

