ERL-Net: Entangled Representation Learning for Single Image De-Raining
Guoqing Wang1,2 , Changming Sun2,1 and Arcot Sowmya1
1
University of New South Wales, Australia, 2 CSIRO Data61, Australia
{guoqing.wang,changming.sun}@csiro.au, a.sowmya@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
Despite the significant progress achieved in image deraining by training an encoder-decoder network within the
image-to-image translation formulation, blurry results with
missing details indicate the deficiency of the existing models.
By interpreting the de-raining encoder-decoder network as
a conditional generator, within which the decoder acts as
a generator conditioned on the embedding learned by the
encoder, the unsatisfactory output can be attributed to the
low-quality embedding learned by the encoder. In this paper,
we hypothesize that there exists an inherent mapping from the
low-quality embedding to a latent optimal one, with which
the generator (decoder) can produce much better results.
To improve the de-raining results significantly over existing
models, we propose to learn this mapping by formulating
a residual learning branch, that is capable of adaptively
adding residuals to the original low-quality embedding in a
representation entanglement manner. Using an embedding
learned this way, the decoder is able to generate much more
satisfactory de-raining results with better detail recovery and
rain artefacts removal, providing new state-of-the-art results
on four benchmark datasets with considerable improvements
(i.e., on the challenging Rain100H data, an improvement
of 4.19dB on PSNR and 5% on SSIM is obtained). The entanglement can be easily adopted into any encoder-decoder
based image restoration networks. Besides, we propose a
series of evaluation metrics to investigate the specific contribution of the proposed entangled representation learning
mechanism. Codes are available at hhttps://github.com/
RobinCSIRO/ERL-Net-for-Single-Image-Derainingi.

1. Introduction
To improve the utility of advanced outdoor computer
vision systems, such as smart video surveillance and autonomous driving cars, they have to be designed to deal
with challenging weather conditions including rain, snow or
haze [22, 26, 17, 10]. Recently, benefiting from the invention of convolutional neural networks, especially the design
of the pix2pix network architecture [15] and the adversarial training strategy [8], the performance of single image

de-raining has experienced significant progress. By training a rainy-to-clean image translation model with synthetic
rain streak or raindrop datasets, a rainy image can be well
restored removing the artefacts despite the existence of rain
streaks or raindrops with different scales, shapes, and densities. However, the blurry results with missing detail (as
shown in Fig. 1) resulted from existing network formulations [22, 26, 27] leave room for possible improvement with
better formulations or network architectures.

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed entangled representation
learning mechanism. By combining the embeddings from both
MEN and REN, a better conditional embedding is formed and used
by the MDE to generate a much better de-raining result. ‘REN’,
‘MEN’, and ‘MDE’ denote residual encoder, main encoder, and
main decoder respectively as shown in Fig. 2.

Consider this experiment: Given a rainy dataset (e.g., the
raindrop data from [22]), and an image-to-image translation
network (e.g., U-Net [24]), a comparative experiment was
conducted by training the network for two tasks (rainy-toclean translation and clean-to-clean translation) with the ℓ1
reconstruction loss. When calculating the PSNR and SSIM
of these two tasks, the result of the clean-to-clean translation model (with PSNR=49.51dB and SSIM=0.9948) was
unsurprisingly far better than that of the rainy-to-clean translation model (with PSNR=31.67dB and SSIM=0.9195) due
to the difference in the input images. By interpreting the
image-to-image translation model as a conditional generator
with the decoder acting as a generator conditioned on the
embedding learned by the encoder, the difference in inputs
can be further interpreted as the difference in the learned
embeddings. For the conditional generator (decoder) which

5644

