Human-Aware Motion Deblurring
Ziyi Shen1,2∗, Wenguan Wang1,2∗ , Xiankai Lu1 , Jianbing Shen1,2†, Haibin Ling3 , Tingfa Xu2 , Ling Shao1
1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 2 Beijing Institute of Technology, China 3 Stony Brook University, USA
https://github.com/joanshen0508/HA_deblur

Abstract
This paper proposes a human-aware deblurring model
that disentangles the motion blur between foreground (FG)
humans and background (BG). The proposed model is
based on a triple-branch encoder-decoder architecture. The
first two branches are learned for sharpening FG humans
and BG details, respectively; while the third one produces global, harmonious results by comprehensively fusing multi-scale deblurring information from the two domains. The proposed model is further endowed with a supervised, human-aware attention mechanism in an end-toend fashion. It learns a soft mask that encodes FG human information and explicitly drives the FG/BG decoderbranches to focus on their specific domains. To further benefit the research towards Human-aware Image Deblurring,
we introduce a large-scale dataset, named HIDE, which
consists of 8,422 blurry and sharp image pairs with 65,784
densely annotated FG human bounding boxes. HIDE is
specifically built to span a broad range of scenes, human
object sizes, motion patterns, and background complexities. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks and
our dataset demonstrate that our model performs favorably
against the state-of-the-art motion deblurring methods, especially in capturing semantic details.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring, i.e. recovering a sharp latent image
with significant details from a single degraded image, has
long been an active research area in computer vision. With
the increasing use of handheld devices, such as cell-phones
and onboard cameras, motion blur has become a ubiquitous
problem to confront with. In this work, we focus on the
dynamic scene deblurring problem and propose a humanaware deblurring model by explicitly discriminating between the blurred FG humans and BG. Basically, due to the
relative motion between a camera and objects, FG and BG
often undergo different types of image degradation [29, 27].
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.

(a) Blurred image

(b) Sun et al. [38]

(c) Nah et al. [27]

(d) Kupyn et al. [21]

(e) Tao et al. [40]

(f) Ours

Figure 1: A challenging blurred image undergoes heterogeneous
blur caused by camera motion and human movement.

In addition, according to the imaging mechanism, each independent object experiences a varied motion blur as well,
due to the specific distance between the object and image
plane. Among different objects, human beings are the most
common and essential in our daily lives. Humans are often accompanied by unpredictable perturbations, thus providing a representative example for the in-depth study of
the dynamic deblurring problem. In addition, restoring humans in a scene has broad application prospects in tasks
such as pedestrian detection. Furthermore, with the dramatic increase in popularity of live shows and hand-held devices, massive amounts of human-focused photos and short
videos have been created (since humans in these setting often draw viewer attention [3]). A specially designed and
human-aware deblurring approach would be highly beneficial for processing and editing human-focused visual data.
Most existing non-uniform deblurring models [27] attempt to deblur the FG and BG simultaneously. However,
this leads to inferior performance and potential artifacts due
to the neglection of the multiple motion patterns. Only a

5572

