Integral Object Mining via Online Attention Accumulation
Peng-Tao Jiang1

Qibin Hou1
Yunchao Wei2
1
TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University

Yang Cao1 Ming-Ming Cheng1∗
Hong-Kai Xiong3
2
UTS 3 Shanghai Jiaotong University

pt.jiang@mail.nankai.edu.cn cmm@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Object attention maps generated by image classifiers are
usually used as priors for weakly-supervised segmentation
approaches. However, normal image classifiers produce attention only at the most discriminative object parts, which
limits the performance of weakly-supervised segmentation
task. Therefore, how to effectively identify entire object regions in a weakly-supervised manner has always been a
challenging and meaningful problem. We observe that the
attention maps produced by a classification network continuously focus on different object parts during training. In
order to accumulate the discovered different object parts,
we propose an online attention accumulation (OAA) strategy which maintains a cumulative attention map for each
target category in each training image so that the integral
object regions can be gradually promoted as the training
goes. These cumulative attention maps, in turn, serve as the
pixel-level supervision, which can further assist the network
in discovering more integral object regions. Our method
(OAA) can be plugged into any classification network and
progressively accumulate the discriminative regions into
integral objects as the training process goes. Despite its
simplicity, when applying the resulting attention maps to
the weakly-supervised semantic segmentation task, our approach improves the existing state-of-the-art methods on the
PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation benchmark, achieving a
mIoU score of 66.4% on the test set. Code is available at
https://mmcheng.net/oaa/.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the large-scale pixel-level training data
and advanced convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures, fully-supervised semantic segmentation approaches,
such as [4, 20, 22, 42, 38], have made great progress recently. However, constructing a large-scale pixel-accurate
dataset is fairly expensive and requires considerable human
∗ M.M. Cheng is the corresponding author.

bird

cat

bus

person

sofa
Figure 1. Observation of our proposed approach. (a) Source images; (b-d) Intermediate attention maps produced by a classification
network at different training stages; (e) Cumulative attention maps
produced by combining attention maps in (b), (c), and (d) through a
simple element-wise maximum operation. It can be easily observed
that the discriminative regions continuously shift over different
parts of the semantic objects. The fused attention maps in (e) can
record most of semantic regions compared to (b), (c), and (d). Best
viewed in color.

efforts and time cost. In order to economize human labors,
researchers propose to learn semantic segmentation using
weak supervision, such as bounding boxes [27], points [2],
and even image-level annotations [26]. Among these weak
supervisions, image-level annotations can be more easily obtained than other annotations. Thus, in this paper, we focus
on semantic segmentation under image-level supervision.
Because of the ability to discover discriminative attention regions, classification models [43, 29] have been widely
used in the weakly-supervised semantic segmentation task
for generating initial class-specific seeds. However, the discovered regions often focus on small parts of the semantic
objects, which limits the capability of segmentation networks
to learn rich pixel-level semantic knowledge. Later methods
consider leveraging the adversarial erasing strategy [35, 40]

2070

