Re-ID Driven Localization Refinement for Person Search
Chuchu Han1∗, Jiacheng Ye2∗, Yunshan Zhong2 , Xin Tan3 , Chi Zhang4 , Changxin Gao1†, Nong Sang1
1

Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Peking University 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Megvii Technology
{hcc, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn {yejiacheng, Zhongyunshan}@pku.edu.cn
tanxin2017@sjtu.edu.cn zhangchi@megvii.com

Abstract
Person search aims at localizing and identifying a query
person from a gallery of uncropped scene images. Different from person re-identification (re-ID), its performance
also depends on the localization accuracy of a pedestrian
detector. The state-of-the-art methods train the detector individually, and the detected bounding boxes may be suboptimal for the following re-ID task. To alleviate this issue,
we propose a re-ID driven localization refinement framework for providing the refined detection boxes for person
search. Specifically, we develop a differentiable ROI transform layer to effectively transform the bounding boxes from
the original images. Thus, the box coordinates can be supervised by the re-ID training other than the original detection task. With this supervision, the detector can generate
more reliable bounding boxes, and the downstream re-ID
model can produce more discriminative embeddings based
on the refined person localizations. Extensive experimental results on the widely used benchmarks demonstrate that
our proposed method performs favorably against the stateof-the-art person search methods.

1. Introduction
Although person re-ID has achieved remarkable retrieval
performance [40, 4, 31], it still has major limitations for
practical applications since it lacks person detection stage.
Towards further exploring the pedestrian recognition in
real-world applications, researchers have proposed the person search task [34, 41, 3, 17, 11, 33] whose objective is
to simultaneously localize and recognize a person from raw
images. Instead of only matching the manually cropped or
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: cgao@hust.edu.cn

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Detection results for person search. (a) is the ground
truth, (b) is detected by a general detector, and (c) is refined by
the proposed method. We can see that the general detector trained
individually cannot favor the following re-ID well actually. It involves more noise and lacks some important details. By comparison, our method can refine the localization by removing excessive
background and increasing useful attributes, which can produce
more discriminative embeddings for the person search task.

pre-detected pedestrians, person search aims to combine the
task of pedestrian detection and person re-ID into a unified
system.
Current state-of-the-art methods [3, 17] train the detector and re-ID model independently, which separate the person search task into two individual stages. However, the
purpose of the detection stage is to detect the person. It

9814

