Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation with Maximum Squares Loss
Minghao Chen, Hongyang Xue, Deng Cai∗
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, Hangzhou, China
minghaochen01@gmail.com, hyxue@outlook.com, dengcai@cad.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks for semantic segmentation always
require a large number of samples with pixel-level labels,
which becomes the major difficulty in their real-world applications. To reduce the labeling cost, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) approaches are proposed to transfer knowledge from labeled synthesized datasets to unlabeled real-world datasets. Recently, some semi-supervised
learning methods have been applied to UDA and achieved
state-of-the-art performance. One of the most popular approaches in semi-supervised learning is the entropy minimization method. However, when applying the entropy
minimization to UDA for semantic segmentation, the gradient of the entropy is biased towards samples that are easy
to transfer. To balance the gradient of well-classified target samples, we propose the maximum squares loss. Our
maximum squares loss prevents the training process being dominated by easy-to-transfer samples in the target domain. Besides, we introduce the image-wise weighting ratio to alleviate the class imbalance in the unlabeled target
domain. Both synthetic-to-real and cross-city adaptation
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach. The code is released at https://github.
com/ZJULearning/MaxSquareLoss.

1. Introduction
In the last few decades, deep learning has achieved great
success in the semantic segmentation task [2, 3, 4, 19, 35].
Researchers have made remarkable progress in promoting
the performance of deep models on current datasets, such
as PASCAL VOC-2012 [8] and Cityscapes [6]. However,
these real-world datasets with pixel-wise semantic labels
demand an enormous amount of manual annotation work.
For annotating Cityscapes, it takes 90 minutes to label one
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1: In UDA, the gradient of the entropy minimization method (H) is focused on well-classified samples in
the target domain. Consequently, we propose the maximum
squares loss (M S), which is the negative sum of squared
probabilities. The gradient of the maximum squares loss is
linearly increasing, which reduces the gradient magnitude
of samples that are easy to transfer and makes difficult samples be trained more efficiently.
image accurately [25]. Because of this “curse of dataset
annotation”, real-world datasets for semantic segmentation
often contain only a small number of samples, which inhibits the model’s generalization to various real-world situations. One possible way to overcome this limitation is
to utilize synthetic datasets, such as the Grand Theft Auto
V (GTA5) [25] and SYNTHIA [26], which take much less
time to label and own more samples containing various situations. However, the model trained on the synthetic dataset
cannot generalize well to real-world examples via direct
transfer, due to the large appearance gap between the two
datasets.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for semantic
segmentation [13, 28, 36] is a task aiming at solving the
above transfer problem. In UDA, the labeled synthetic

2090

