View-consistent 4D Light Field Superpixel Segmentation
Numair Khan

Qian Zhang Lucas Kasser Henry Stone Min H. Kim∗
∗
Brown University
KAIST

James Tompkin

Abstract
Many 4D light field processing methods and applications
rely on superpixel segmentation, for which occlusion-aware view
consistency is important. Yet, existing methods often enforce
consistency by propagating clusters from a central view only,
which can lead to inconsistent superpixels for non-central views.
Our proposed approach combines an occlusion-aware angular
segmentation in horizontal and vertical epipolar plane image
(EPI) spaces with a clustering and propagation step across all
views. Qualitative video demonstrations show that this helps
to remove flickering and inconsistent boundary shapes versus
the state-of-the-art light field superpixel approach (LFSP [25]),
and quantitative metrics reflect these findings with greater self
similarity and fewer numbers of labels per view-dependent pixel.

1. Introduction
Superpixel segmentation attempts to simplify a 2D image into
small regions to lessen future computation, e.g., for later graph
inference in interactive object selection. Desirable superpixel
qualities vary between applications [18], but generally we wish
for them to be accurate, i.e., to adhere to image edges; to
otherwise be compact in shape, and to be efficient to compute
(see Stutz et al. for a review [17]).
Light fields represent small view changes onto a scene, e.g.,
an array of 9×9 2D image views (‘4D’). Processing light fields
is computationally harder due to the increased number of pixels,
but many of these pixels are similar because the view change is
small. As such, we have much to gain from simplifying light field
images into superpixels. This introduces a new desirable property
for our light field superpixels: we wish them to be view consistent,
e.g., they do not drift, swim, or flicker as the view changes, and
we wish superpixels to include all similar pixels across views
such that they respect occlusions. This is particularly important
for applications which will use every light field view, such as
editing a light field photograph for output to a light field display.
It is difficult to achieve the four properties of accuracy, compactness, efficiency, and view consistency. Existing approaches often propagate superpixel labels into other views via a central-view
disparity map. However, this can cause inconsistency for regions
occluded in the central view, e.g., the recent light field superpixel
(LFSP) method [25] does not always maintain view consistency.

Figure 1: Light field superpixel comparison for the central view.
Top left: Input scene. Top right: Our method. Bottom left: k-means
on (x, y, d, L∗, a∗, b∗) with disparity maps computed by Wang
et al. [20, 21]. Bottom right: LFSP [25] computed with Wang et
al. disparity map. Please refer to our supplemental material for
high-quality video results animating through all light field views.
We can attempt to estimate per-view disparity maps, but this can
be difficult for small occluded regions in off-central views.
We propose a method for accurate and view-consistent superpixel segmentation on 4D light fields which implicitly computes
disparity per view and explicitly handles occlusion (Fig. 2). First,
we robustly segment horizontal and vertical epipolar plane images
(EPIs) of the 4D light field. This provides view consistency in an
occlusion-aware way by explicit line estimation, depth ordering,
and bipartite graph matching. Then, we combine the angular segmentations in horizontal and vertical EPIs via a view-consistent
clustering step. Qualitative results (Fig. 1) show that this reduces
flickering from inconsistent boundary shapes when compared to
the state-of-the-art LFSP approach [25], and quantitative metrics
reflect these findings with improved view consistency scores.
Code: https://github.com/brownvc/lightfieldsuperpixels.
17811

