Improved Techniques for Training Adaptive Deep Networks
Hao Li1∗

Hong Zhang2∗
1

Xiaojuan Qi3

Tsinghua University

2

Baidu Inc.

Ruigang Yang2
3

Gao Huang1†

University of Oxford

{lihaothu,fykalviny,qxj0125}@gmail.com
yangruigang@baidu.com

Abstract
Adaptive inference is a promising technique to improve
the computational efficiency of deep models at test time. In
contrast to static models which use the same computation
graph for all instances, adaptive networks can dynamically
adjust their structure conditioned on each input. While
existing research on adaptive inference mainly focuses on
designing more advanced architectures, this paper investigates how to train such networks more effectively. Specifically, we consider a typical adaptive deep network with
multiple intermediate classifiers. We present three techniques to improve its training efficacy from two aspects:
1) a Gradient Equilibrium algorithm to resolve the conflict of learning of different classifiers; 2) an Inline Subnetwork Collaboration approach and a One-for-all Knowledge
Distillation algorithm to enhance the collaboration among
classifiers. On multiple datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100
and ImageNet), we show that the proposed approach consistently leads to further improved efficiency on top of stateof-the-art adaptive deep networks.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have gained remarkable success on a variety of visual recognition tasks
[21, 10, 27, 9]. Modern CNNs such as GoogleNet [32],
ResNet [10] and DenseNet [16] are endowed with unprecedented network depth to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy.
However, very deep models usually come along with high
computational cost, which prevents them from performing
real-time inference on resource-constrained platforms like
smart phones, wearable devices and drones.
Extensive efforts have been made to improve the inference efficiency of deep CNNs in recent years. Popular approaches include efficient architecture design [30,
28, 15, 40], network pruning [8, 23, 26], weight quantiza∗ First two authors contributed equally
† Corresponding author

gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

tion [4, 8, 17] and adaptive inference [7, 14, 2, 35, 6, 34].
Among them, adaptive inference is gaining increasing attention recently, due to its remarkable advantages. First, it is
compatible with almost all the other approaches, i.e., adaptive inference can be performed on highly optimized architectures like MobileNets [30] and ShuffleNets [28], and can
also benefit from model pruning and weight quantization.
Second, by conditioning the computation of a deep model
on its inputs, adaptive inference can save a considerable
amount of computational cost on “easy” samples and/or
less important regions, drastically reducing the average inference time. Third, adaptive inference algorithms usually
have a set of tunable parameters that dynamically control
the accuracy-speed tradeoff. This is a valuable property
in many scenarios, where the computational budget may
change over time or vary across different devices. In contrast to static models which have a fixed computational cost,
adaptive models are able to trade accuracy for speed or vise
verse on-the-fly, to meet the dynamically changing demand.
Existing works on adaptive inference in the context of
deep learning mainly focus on designing more specialized
network architectures [14, 33, 34] or better inference algorithms [2]. In comparison, less effort has been made to
improve the training process. But in fact, adaptive CNNs
usually have quite different architectures as conventional
deep models, and training strategies optimized for the later
may not be optimal for adaptive models. In this paper, we
consider a representative type of adaptive models that have
multiple intermediate classifiers at different depths of the
network. With this architecture, adaptive computation can
be performed by early exiting “easy” samples to speed up
the inference. The multi-scale dense network (MSDNet)
proposed in [14] represents the state-of-the-art of this type
of models. We aim to improve the training efficacy of such
multi-exits networks from the following two perspectives.
First, we need to resolve the conflict while jointly optimizing all the classifiers. It has been observed in [14]
that the individual classifiers in the network tend to negatively affect the learning of one other, and [31] discussed
that the backbone network may not converge well due to
11891

