Identity from here, Pose from there: Self-supervised Disentanglement and
Generation of Objects using Unlabeled Videos
Fanyi Xiao, Haotian Liu, and Yong Jae Lee
University of California, Davis

Abstract
We propose a novel approach that disentangles the identity and pose of objects for image generation. Our model
takes as input an ID image and a pose image, and generates
an output image with the identity of the ID image and the
pose of the pose image. Unlike most previous unsupervised
work which rely on cyclic constraints, which can often be
brittle, we instead propose to learn this in a self-supervised
way. Specifically, we leverage unlabeled videos to automatically construct pseudo ground-truth targets to directly supervise our model. To enforce disentanglement, we propose
a novel disentanglement loss, and to improve realism, we
propose a pixel-verification loss in which the generated image’s pixels must trace back to the ID input. We conduct
extensive experiments on both synthetic and real images to
demonstrate improved realism, diversity, and ID/pose disentanglement compared to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Consider the NYC street scene shown in Fig. 1 (left).
As a human, it is not difficult to imagine what a red sedan
would look like in place of the yellow taxis. This is likely
because we have been exposed to thousands of different cars
in various poses in our lifetime, and have learned how to
disentangle a car’s identity from its pose. In this paper, we
propose to learn a model to perform this task – specifically,
synthesizing a novel pose of an object instance conditioned
on the pose of a different reference object (see Fig. 1, right),
without any labels.
This task requires the model to disentangle the object’s
identity and pose. For example, in Fig. 1, in order to encode
the ID information of the red sedan, the model needs to capture the appearance and shape that is unique to that specific
car instance, independent of pose. Meanwhile, the model
also needs to encode the pose information specified by the
taxis (the pose reference image), independent of identity. It
can then combine the identity of the red sedan with the pose
of the taxis to create a new image with the desired pose.
Disentangled representations, in which e.g., one latent

Figure 1. Our self-supervised model learns to disentangle identity
(red sedan) and pose (taxis) of objects for image generation.

subspace controls one factor of variation, can provide robustness to complex variations in the data and be useful
for downstream visual recognition tasks [5]. There has
been a long line of research on learning disentangled representations for images [51, 43, 55, 10, 46, 15, 20, 21, 21].
Early works like Tenenbaum and Freeman [51] operate in
a fully-supervised setting in which the factors of interest
(e.g., content and style) are annotated for each training image. We instead aim to solve this task with a self-supervised
approach, without using any pose or identity annotations.
Self-supervised disentanglement of identity and pose is an
extremely challenging problem, since the two factors are
highly intertwined. For example, shape constitutes an important part of an object’s identity – to distinguish a sideview van from a side-view sedan, we need to analyze their
specific shape differences. On the other hand, the difference
between pose and shape is often subtle and interdependent
– as the pose of the car changes, so does its perceived shape.
To tackle this, recent image generation methods either
introduce cyclic constraints [35, 20, 15, 21, 25] (similar in
spirit to cycleGAN [60]) or inject priors on the representation based on domain knowledge [46, 27]. Though promising, these methods typically only work well when there is
no large pose change in the objects. The reason is quite intuitive: due to the lack of direct supervision (i.e., ground-truth
target images), the supervisory signals provided by either
the proposed constraints or the prior on the representation
are often insufficient to induce disentangled representations.
We take a different approach. We utilize unlabeled
videos to automatically construct training triplets, each consisting of an identity reference image, a pose reference im-

7013

