Attract or Distract: Exploit the Margin of Open Set
∗

Qianyu Feng1 , Guoliang Kang2 , Hehe Fan1,3 , Yi Yang1
1
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
2
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University 3 Baidu Research
{qianyu.feng,hehe.fan}@student.uts.edu.au, yi.yang@uts.edu.au, kgl.prml@gmail.com

𝑀𝑗

Abstract
Open set domain adaptation aims to diminish the domain shift across domains, with partially shared classes.
There exist unknown target samples out of the knowledge
of source domain. Compared to the close set setting, how
to separate the unknown (unshared) class from the known
(shared) ones plays a key role. Whereas, previous methods did not emphasize the semantic structure of the open
set data, which may introduce bias into the domain alignment and confuse the classifier around the decision boundary. In this paper, we exploit the semantic structure of
open set data from two aspects: 1) Semantic Categorical
Alignment, which aims to achieve good separability of target known classes by categorically aligning the centroid
of target with the source. 2) Semantic Contrastive Mapping, which aims to push the unknown class away from
the decision boundary. Empirically, we demonstrate that
our method performs favourably against the state-of-the-art
methods on representative benchmarks, e.g. Digit datasets
and Office-31 datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent days have witnessed the advancement in many
computer vision tasks [19, 37, 38, 13, 29, 21, 14, 43]. The
success achieved can be largely attributed to the sufficient
amount of labeled in-domain data. However, it is common
that test data comes from a different distribution against the
training data. Such so-called domain shift may degenerate
the model performance heavily. Domain adaptation deals
with this issue by diminishing the discrepancy across two
domains. The widely considered close set setting assumes
that both domains share the same set of underlying categories. However, in practice, it is common that some unshared (unknown) classes exist in the target. The methods
∗ Part of this work was done when Hehe Fan was an intern at
Baidu Research. The code is publicly available at https://github.com/qyfeng/margin-openset.git

unknown

Source sample
Attraction
Distraction

Target sample
Adaptive margin

𝑀𝑖

Figure 1. Visualization of data distribution with the proposed
method. Left: Data before the adaptation with the existence of
domain shift and unknown samples. Middle: Neighbors from the
same class are pulled closer, while samples from unknown class
are pushed away. Right: With the proposed method, representations become more discriminative. Samples from target domain
can be better aligned within the corresponding neighborhood or
distracted away from the known classes.

developed for close set domain adaptation may not be trivially transferred to such open set setting.
In this paper, we focus on the open set visual domain
adaptation which aims to deal with the domain shift and
the identification of unknown objects simultaneously, in the
absence of target domain labels. Compared to the close set
domain adaptation, how to separate the unknown class from
the known ones plays a key role. Up to now, the open set
recognition still remains as a pending issue. First raised by
Busto et al. [27], they proposed to deal with open-set domain adaptation as an assignment task. [1] separated the
unknown according to whether the sample can be reconstructed with the shared feature or not. While the above
methods use part of labeled data from uninteresting classes
as unknown samples, it is not possible to represent all the
unknown categories in the wild. Another setting has been
raised by Saito et al. [34] where unknown samples only exist in the target domain, which is closer to a realistic scenario. Saito et al. regarded the unknown samples as a
separate class together with an adversarial loss to distinguish them. It is worth noting that the existence of unknown samples hinders the alignment across domain. In

7990

