A Neural Network for Detailed Human Depth Estimation from a Single Image
Sicong Tang1,∗ Feitong Tan1,∗ Kelvin Cheng1 Zhaoyang Li1 Siyu Zhu2 Ping Tan1
1
Simon Fraser University 2 Alibaba A.I Labs
{sta105, feitongt, kelvinz, zla143, pingtan}@sfu.ca, siting.zsy@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
This paper presents a neural network to estimate a detailed depth map of the foreground human in a single RGB
image. The result captures geometry details such as cloth
wrinkles, which are important in visualization applications.
To achieve this goal, we separate the depth map into a
smooth base shape and a residual detail shape and design
a network with two branches to regress them respectively.
We design a training strategy to ensure both base and detail shapes can be faithfully learned by the corresponding
network branches. Furthermore, we introduce a novel network layer to fuse a rough depth map and surface normals
to further improve the final result. Quantitative comparison
with fused ‘ground truth’ captured by real depth cameras
and qualitative examples on unconstrained Internet images
demonstrate the strength of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Understanding human images is an important problem
in computer vision with many applications ranging from
human-computer-interaction and surveillance to telecommunication. Many works [25, 22, 34, 33, 21, 18] have been
developed to recover 2D or 3D skeleton joints from a RGB
image. Since the skeleton only captures sparse information of the human body, DensePose [2] estimates a dense
UV map (i.e. a correspondence map between the input image and a 3D template model). But this UV map can not
recover 3D shape without additional 3D pose information,
which limits its application.
On the other hand, there are many works [3, 19, 7, 31, 13,
17, 4, 10, 27] to recover a dense 3D deformable model of the
human body from a single image, e.g. the SCAPE [3] and
SMPL [19] models, which are learned from a large dataset
of scanned body shapes. While generating 3D models, these
methods only inference the naked body shape without capturing the clothes details.
This paper aims at recovering a detailed depth map for
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

the foreground human object from a single RGB image.
This problem has been studied in the earlier work [36] with
synthetic human images. Another recent work [35] recovers a volumetric 3D model of the imaged person. Results
from both methods are too coarse for many applications. In
comparison, we design a neural network to estimate highly
detailed depth maps that are fine enough to capture cloth
wrinkles, which might potentially be exploited for telepresence applications like the Microsoft Holoportation [8].
Our network is designed with two novel insights. Firstly,
we argue it is important to separate the depth to a smooth
base shape and a residual detail shape and regress them respectively. The base shape captures the large overall geometry layout, while the detail shape captures small bumps such
as cloth wrinkles. The value range of the base shape is at the
scale of one meter, while that of the detail shape is at a few
centimeters. Thus, we design a network with two branches
for the base and detail shapes respectively to facilitate the
training process. Specifically, we propose a 2-stage training strategy to ensure the effectiveness of this separation.
These two branches are trained respectively in the 1st stage
and then finetuned together in the 2nd stage. Secondly, we
follow the intuition in [40] to estimate surface normals to
facilitate depth map estimation. Specifically, we generalize the algorithm in [23] that fuses surface normals and a
coarse depth to an iterative formulation. In this way, we
build a parameter-free network layer to fuse the estimated
normals and a coarse depth map for improved results.
Our final network captures visually appealing detailed
depth images from a single RGB image. The evaluation on
our own captured real data and some unconstrained online
images demonstrate its effectiveness. We will publish our
dataset and source code with the paper to facilitate further
research.

2. Related works
3D Human Pose Estimation. With the recent development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), there
are significant improvements on 3D human pose estimation [21, 33, 18, 22]. Despite the differences in network
architectures, many works [25, 28, 22, 33, 35] use a like17750

