Sharpen Focus: Learning with Attention Separability and Consistency
Lezi Wang1 , Ziyan Wu2 , Srikrishna Karanam2 , Kuan-Chuan Peng2 ,
Rajat Vikram Singh2 , Bo Liu1 , and Dimitris N. Metaxas1
1
Rutgers University, New Brunswick NJ
2
Siemens Corporate Technology, Princeton NJ
{lw462, lb507, dnm}@cs.rutgers.edu, {ziyan.wu, srikrishna.karanam, kuanchuan.peng, singh.rajat}@siemens.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual recognition has seen tremendous progress in the
last few years, driven by recent advances in convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [13, 17]. Understanding their
predictions can help interpret models and provide cues to
design improved algorithms.
Recently, class-specific attention has emerged as a
powerful tool for interpreting CNNs [5, 31, 45]. The bigpicture intuition that drives these techniques is to answer
the following question- where is the target object in the
image? Some recent extensions [20] make attention end-toend trainable, producing attention maps with better localizability. While these methods consider the localization
problem, this is insufficient for image classification, where
the model needs to be able to tell various object classes
apart. Specifically, existing methods produce attention
maps corresponding to an individual class of interest that

Image Label:

basketball hoop

basketball hoop

basketball hoop

1.0

tripod

0.8

Probability

treadmill

Testing Stage

Image Label:

0.6
0.4
0.2

0.0

Attention Separability

treadmill Basketball tripod
hoop
Improved Classification

1.0

treadmill

basketball hoop

tripod

0.8

Probability

Recent developments in gradient-based attention
modeling have seen attention maps emerge as a powerful
tool for interpreting convolutional neural networks. Despite
good localization for an individual class of interest, these
techniques produce attention maps with substantially
overlapping responses among different classes, leading to
the problem of visual confusion and the need for discriminative attention. In this paper, we address this problem by
means of a new framework that makes class-discriminative
attention a principled part of the learning process. Our key
innovations include new learning objectives for attention
separability and cross-layer consistency, which result in
improved attention discriminability and reduced visual
confusion. Extensive experiments on image classification
benchmarks show the effectiveness of our approach in terms
of improved classification accuracy, including CIFAR-100
(+3.33%), Caltech-256 (+1.64%), ILSVRC2012 (+0.92%),
CUB-200-2011 (+4.8%) and PASCAL VOC2012 (+5.73%).

Training Stage

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

treadmill Basketball tripod
hoop

Figure 1. The baseline CNN attends to similar regions, i.e. the
central areas, when it comes to the relevant pixels for classes
“treadmill,” “basketball hoop,” and “tripod.” The CNN with our
proposed framework is able to tell the three classes apart and has
high confidence to classify the input as “basketball hoop.”

may not be discriminative across classes. Our intuition,
shown in Figure 1, is that such separable attention maps can
lead to improved classification performance. Furthermore,
we contend that false classifications stem from patterns
across classes which confuse the model, and that eliminating these confusions can lead to better model discriminability. To illustrate this, consider Figure 2 (a), where
we use the VGG-19 model [33] to perform classification
on the ILSVRC2012 [30] dataset, we collect failure cases
and generate the attention maps via Grad-CAM [31] and
we show the top-5 predictions. Figure 2 (a) depicts that,
while the attention maps of the last feature layer are reasonably well localized, there are large overlapping regions
between the attention of the ground-truth class (marked by
red bounding boxes) and the false positives, demonstrating
the problem, and the need for discriminative attention.
To overcome the above attention-map limitations, we
need to address two key questions: (a) can we reduce
visual confusion, i.e., make class-specific attention maps

512

