Deep Head Pose Estimation Using Synthetic Images and Partial Adversarial
Domain Adaption for Continuous Label Spaces
Felix Kuhnke, Jörn Ostermann
Institut für Informationsverarbeitung
Leibniz University Hannover, Germany
kuhnke@tnt.uni-hannover.de

Abstract
Head pose estimation aims at predicting an accurate
pose from an image. Current approaches rely on supervised
deep learning, which typically requires large amounts of labeled data. Manual or sensor-based annotations of head
poses are prone to errors. A solution is to generate synthetic training data by rendering 3D face models. However,
the differences (domain gap) between rendered (sourcedomain) and real-world (target-domain) images can cause
low performance. Advances in visual domain adaptation allow reducing the influence of domain differences using adversarial neural networks, which match the feature spaces
between domains by enforcing domain-invariant features.
While previous work on visual domain adaptation generally assumes discrete and shared label spaces, these assumptions are both invalid for pose estimation tasks. We are
the first to present domain adaptation for head pose estimation with a focus on partially shared and continuous label
spaces. More precisely, we adapt the predominant weighting approaches to continuous label spaces by applying a
weighted resampling of the source domain during training.
To evaluate our approach, we revise and extend existing
datasets resulting in a new benchmark for visual domain
adaption. Our experiments show that our method improves
the accuracy of head pose estimation for real-world images
despite using only labels from synthetic images.

1. Introduction
Knowing the pose of the human head in an image provides important information in human-computer interaction. Head pose estimation (HPE) can be used to estimate
the focus of attention, a key indicator of human behavior.
Estimating attention can be useful in driver assistance systems or to analyze social interaction. Head pose information can also be used to produce better face alignments for
pose-invariant face or expression recognition.

Figure 1. Exemplary continuous label space of two head pose
datasets [15, 10]: Synthetically rendered (red) and real-world
(blue). Note the difference in distribution shape and density. Images from source and target domain are shown on the left and right,
respectively. Our goal is to transfer knowledge from source to target domain in an unsupervised manner.

HPE is commonly formulated as a regression problem,
where the task is to predict the continuous orientation in
3D space (e.g., Euler angles). Deep learning approaches
have become the state of the art in head pose estimation outperforming most traditional approaches. Producing enough
accurately labeled training data, required for deep learning, is a very challenging task. Recording real-world head
images with pose measurements comes with a number of
challenges. Measurements can be based on sensor data like
depth images [10], or inertial measurement unit (IMU) sensors [3], which are both prone to sensor noise. The Biwi
dataset [10], a common benchmark for HPE, has an average
error of 1 degree [15]. Another approach based on manually labeled keypoints yields similarly inaccurate results
due to unknown 3D model and camera parameters. Rendering synthetic face images provides inexpensive and virtually
unlimited quantities of accurately labeled data. However,
training solely on synthetic data (source) can cause poor
performance when testing on real-world data (target) due to

10164

