3C-Net: Category Count and Center Loss for Weakly-Supervised Action
Localization
Sanath Narayan, Hisham Cholakkal, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, Ling Shao
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
firstname.lastname@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
Temporal action localization is a challenging computer
vision problem with numerous real-world applications.
Most existing methods require laborious frame-level supervision to train action localization models. In this work, we
propose a framework, called 3C-Net, which only requires
video-level supervision (weak supervision) in the form of
action category labels and the corresponding count. We introduce a novel formulation to learn discriminative action
features with enhanced localization capabilities. Our joint
formulation has three terms: a classification term to ensure the separability of learned action features, an adapted
multi-label center loss term to enhance the action feature
discriminability and a counting loss term to delineate adjacent action sequences, leading to improved localization.
Comprehensive experiments are performed on two challenging benchmarks: THUMOS14 and ActivityNet 1.2. Our
approach sets a new state-of-the-art for weakly-supervised
temporal action localization on both datasets. On the THUMOS14 dataset, the proposed method achieves an absolute
gain of 4.6% in terms of mean average precision (mAP),
compared to the state-of-the-art [16]. Source code is available at https://github.com/naraysa/3c-net.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization in untrimmed videos is a
challenging problem due to intra-class variations, cluttered
background, variations in video duration, and changes in
viewpoints. In temporal action localization, the task is to
find the start and end time (temporal boundaries or extent)
of actions in a video. Most existing action localization approaches are based on strong supervision [15, 5, 21, 33,
23, 31], requiring manually annotated ground-truth temporal boundaries of actions during training. However, framelevel action boundary annotations are expensive compared
to video-level action label annotations. Further, unlike object boundary annotations in images, manual annotations of
temporal action boundaries are more subjective and prone
to large variations [20, 18]. Here, we focus on learning to

temporally localize actions using only video-level supervision, commonly referred to as weakly-supervised learning.
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization has been
investigated using different types of weak labels, e.g., action categories [25, 28, 14], movie scripts [12, 1] and sparse
spatio-temporal points [13]. Recently, Paul et al. [16] proposed an action localization approach, demonstrating stateof-the-art results, using video-level category labels as the
weak supervision. In their approach [16], a formulation
based on co-activity similarity loss is introduced which distinguishes similar and dissimilar temporal segments (regions) in paired videos containing same action categories.
This leads to improved action localization results. However,
the formulation in [16] puts a constraint on the mini-batch,
used for training, to mostly contain paired videos with actions belonging to the same category. In this work, we look
into an alternative formulation that allows the mini-batch to
contain diverse action samples during training.
We propose a framework, called 3C-Net, using a novel
formulation to learn discriminative action features with enhanced localization capabilities using video-level supervision. As in [14, 16], our formulation contains a classification loss term that ensures the inter-class separability of
learned features, for video-level action classification. However, this separability at the global video-level alone is insufficient for accurate action localization, which is generally a local temporal-context classification. This can be observed in Fig. 1, where the network trained with classification loss alone, denoted as ’CLS’, localizes multiple instances of an action (central portion of the timeline) as a
single instance. We therefore introduce two additional loss
terms in our formulation that ensure both the discriminability of action categories at the global-level and separability
of instances at the local-level.
The first additional term in our formulation is the center loss [30], introduced here for multi-label action classification. Originally designed for the face recognition problem [30], the objective of the center loss term is to reduce
the intra-class variations in the feature representation of the
training samples. This is achieved by learning the classspecific centers and penalizing the distance between the fea-

8679

