Joint Group Feature Selection and Discriminative Filter Learning for Robust
Visual Object Tracking
Tianyang Xu1,2 Zhen-Hua Feng2 Xiao-Jun Wu1∗ Josef Kittler2
School of Internet of Things Engineering, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China
2
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP), University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
1

tianyang xu@163.com, z.feng@surrey.ac.uk, wu xiaojun@jiangnan.edu.cn, j.kittler@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
To consistently and accurately track an arbitrary object
in video sequences is a very challenging task. The difficulties are posed by a wide spectrum of appearance variations of an object in unconstrained scenarios. Among ex-

frame t

multi-channel features

...

desired response map
discriminative filter learning

learned filters

...
...
...

We propose a new Group Feature Selection method for
Discriminative Correlation Filters (GFS-DCF) based visual object tracking. The key innovation of the proposed
method is to perform group feature selection across both
channel and spatial dimensions, thus to pinpoint the structural relevance of multi-channel features to the filtering system. In contrast to the widely used spatial regularisation
or feature selection methods, to the best of our knowledge,
this is the first time that channel selection has been advocated for DCF-based tracking. We demonstrate that our
GFS-DCF method is able to significantly improve the performance of a DCF tracker equipped with deep neural network features. In addition, our GFS-DCF enables joint feature selection and filter learning, achieving enhanced discrimination and interpretability of the learned filters.
To further improve the performance, we adaptively integrate historical information by constraining filters to be
smooth across temporal frames, using an efficient lowrank approximation. By design, specific temporal-spatialchannel configurations are dynamically learned in the
tracking process, highlighting the relevant features, and
alleviating the performance degrading impact of less discriminative representations and reducing information redundancy. The experimental results obtained on OTB2013,
OTB2015, VOT2017, VOT2018 and TrackingNet demonstrate the merits of our GFS-DCF and its superiority
over the state-of-the-art trackers. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/XU-TIANYANG/
GFS-DCF.

learning

group spatial
attributes across
channels

group spatial
regularisation

group channel
attributes across
spatial dimensions

group channel
regularisation

low-rank
temporal
smoothness

Figure 1. In contrast to the classical DCF paradigm, our GFSDCF performs channel and spatial group feature selection for the
learning of correlation filters. Group sparsity is enforced in the
channel and spatial dimensions to highlight relevant features with
enhanced discrimination and interpretability. Additionally, a lowrank temporal smoothness constraint is employed across temporal
frames to improve the stability of the learned filters.

isting tracking algorithms, Discriminative Correlation Filters (DCF-) based trackers [27] have exhibited promising
results in recent benchmarks [81, 82, 53, 43] and competitions such as the Visual Object Tracking (VOT) challenges [36, 32, 33, 34].
The success of high-performance DCF trackers is attributed to three aspects: spatial regularisation, temporal
smoothness and robust image feature representation. Regarding the first point, as natural images and videos are
projections from a 3D space into a 2D plane, spatial regularisation directly improves the tracking accuracy by potentially endowing the learned filters with a specific attention mechanism, enhancing the discrimination by focusing
on less ambiguous regions [15, 49, 31, 87]. Second, based
on the fact that video sequences are formed by discrete image sampling of continuous dynamic scenes, reflecting the

7950

