Deep Mesh Reconstruction from Single RGB Images
via Topology Modification Networks
Junyi Pan1 , Xiaoguang Han2 , Weikai Chen3 , Jiapeng Tang1 , and Kui Jia∗1
1
2

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, the Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
3
USC Institute for Creative Technologies

Abstract
Reconstructing the 3D mesh of a general object from a
single image is now possible thanks to the latest advances of
deep learning technologies. However, due to the nontrivial
difficulty of generating a feasible mesh structure, the stateof-the-art approaches [16, 32] often simplify the problem by
learning the displacements of a template mesh that deforms
it to the target surface. Though reconstructing a 3D shape
with complex topology can be achieved by deforming multiple mesh patches, it remains difficult to stitch the results
to ensure a high meshing quality. In this paper, we present
an end-to-end single-view mesh reconstruction framework
that is able to generate high-quality meshes with complex
topologies from a single genus-0 template mesh. The key to
our approach is a novel progressive shaping framework that
alternates between mesh deformation and topology modification. While a deformation network predicts the per-vertex
translations that reduce the gap between the reconstructed
mesh and the ground truth, a novel topology modification
network is employed to prune the error-prone faces, enabling the evolution of topology. By iterating over the two
procedures, one can progressively modify the mesh topology
while achieving higher reconstruction accuracy. Moreover,
a boundary refinement network is designed to refine the
boundary conditions to further improve the visual quality of
the reconstructed mesh. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our approach outperforms the current state-of-the-art
methods both qualitatively and quantitatively, especially for
the shapes with complex topologies.

1. Introduction
Image-based 3D reconstruction plays a fundamental role
in a variety of tasks in computer vision and computer
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Given a single image of an object (a) as input, the existing mesh-deformation based learning approaches [9] can not well
capture the complex topology, regardless of a single (b) or multiple
template meshes (c). In contrast, our proposed method is capable
of updating the topologies dynamically by removing faces in the
initial sphere mesh and achieves better reconstruction results (d).

graphics, such as robot perception, autonomous driving,
virtual/augmented reality, etc. Conventional approaches
mainly leverage the stereo correspondence based on multiview geometry but are restricted to the coverage provided
by the input views. Such requirement renders single-view
reconstruction particularly difficult due to the lack of correspondence and large occlusions. With the availability of
large-scale 3D shape dataset [3], shape priors can be efficiently encoded in a deep neural network, enabling faithful 3D reconstruction even from a single image. While a
variety of 3D representations, e.g. voxels [6, 30, 34] and
point cloud [7, 35], have been explored for single-view reconstruction, triangular mesh receives the most attentions
as it is more desirable for a wide range of real applications
and capable of modeling geometric details.
Recent progresses in single-view mesh reconstruction [32, 9] propose to reconstruct a 3D mesh by deforming
a template model based on the perceptual features extracted
from the input image. Though promising results have been

9964

