GarNet: A Two-Stream Network for Fast and Accurate 3D Cloth Draping
Erhan Gundogdu1 , Victor Constantin1 , Amrollah Seifoddini2
Minh Dang2 , Mathieu Salzmann1 , Pascal Fua1
1

2

CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
Fision Technologies, Zurich, Switzerland

{erhan.gundogdu, victor.constantin, mathieu.salzmann, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch
{amrollah.seifoddini, minh.dang}@fision-technologies.com

Abstract
While Physics-Based Simulation (PBS) can accurately
drape a 3D garment on a 3D body, it remains too costly
for real-time applications, such as virtual try-on. By contrast, inference in a deep network, requiring a single forward pass, is much faster. Taking advantage of this, we
propose a novel architecture to fit a 3D garment template to
a 3D body. Specifically, we build upon the recent progress
in 3D point cloud processing with deep networks to extract
garment features at varying levels of detail, including pointwise, patch-wise and global features. We fuse these features
with those extracted in parallel from the 3D body, so as to
model the cloth-body interactions. The resulting two-stream
architecture, which we call as GarNet, is trained using a
loss function inspired by physics-based modeling, and delivers visually plausible garment shapes whose 3D points
are, on average, less than 1 cm away from those of a PBS
method, while running 100 times faster. Moreover, the proposed method can model various garment types with different cutting patterns when parameters of those patterns are
given as input to the network.

1. Introduction
Garment simulation is useful for many purposes such as
virtual try-on, online shopping, gaming, and virtual reality.
Physics-Based Simulation (PBS) can deliver highly realistic
results, but at the cost of heavy computation, which makes
it unsuitable for real-time and web-based applications. As
shown in Fig. 1, in this paper, we propose to train a deep
network to produce visually plausible 3D draping results,
as achieved by PBS, but much faster.
Realistic simulation of cloth draping over the human
body requires accounting for the global 3D pose of the perThis work was supported in part by the CTI Project 26455.1 PFES-ES.

GarNet

Physics-Based Simulation

Figure 1: Draping a sweater and a T-shirt. Our method produces
results as plausible as those of a PBS method, but runs 100x faster.

son and for the local interactions between skin and cloth
caused by the body shape. To this end, we introduce the architecture depicted by Fig. 2. It consists of a garment stream
and a body stream. The body stream uses a PointNet [36]
inspired architecture to extract local and global information
about the 3D body. The garment stream exploits the global
body features to compute point-wise, patch-wise and global
features for the garment mesh. These features, along with
the global ones obtained from the body, are then fed to a fusion subnetwork to predict the shape of the fitted garment.
In one implementation of our approach, shown in Fig. 2a,
the local body features are only used implicitly to compute
the global ones. In a more sophisticated implementation,
we explicitly take them into account to further model the
skin-cloth interactions. To this end, we introduce an auxiliary stream that first computes the K nearest body vertices
for each garment vertex, performs feature pooling on pointwise body features and finally feeds them to the fusion subnetwork. This process is depicted by Fig. 2b. We will see
that it performs better than the simpler one, indicating that
local feature pooling is valuable.

8739

