Few-Shot Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation
Ming-Yu Liu1 , Xun Huang1,2 , Arun Mallya1 , Tero Karras1 , Timo Aila1 , Jaakko Lehtinen1,3 , Jan Kautz1
1
NVIDIA, 2 Cornell University, 3 Aalto University
{mingyul, xunh, amallya, tkarras, taila, jlehtinen, jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Unsupervised image-to-image translation methods learn
to map images in a given class to an analogous image in
a different class, drawing on unstructured (non-registered)
datasets of images. While remarkably successful, current
methods require access to many images in both source and
destination classes at training time. We argue this greatly
limits their use. Drawing inspiration from the human capability of picking up the essence of a novel object from a
small number of examples and generalizing from there, we
seek a few-shot, unsupervised image-to-image translation
algorithm that works on previously unseen target classes
that are specified, at test time, only by a few example images. Our model achieves this few-shot generation capability by coupling an adversarial training scheme with a novel
network design. Through extensive experimental validation
and comparisons to several baseline methods on benchmark
datasets, we verify the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Our implementation and datasets are available at
https://github.com/NVlabs/FUNIT.

1. Introduction
Humans are remarkably good at generalization. When
given a picture of a previously unseen exotic animal, say,
we can form a vivid mental picture of the same animal in
a different pose, especially when we have encountered (images of) similar but different animals in that pose before.
For example, a person seeing a standing tiger for the first
time will have no trouble imagining what it will look lying
down, given a lifetime of experience of other animals.
While recent unsupervised image-to-image translation
algorithms are remarkably successful in transferring complex appearance changes across image classes [28, 43, 26,
23, 51, 48], the capability to generalize from few samples
of a new class based on prior knowledge is entirely beyond
their reach. Concretely, they need large training sets over
all classes of images they are to perform translation on, i.e.,
they do not support few-shot generalization.
As an attempt to bridge the gap between human and machine imagination capability, we propose the Few-shot UN-

supervised Image-to-image Translation (FUNIT) framework, aiming at learning an image-to-image translation
model for mapping an image of a source class to an analogous image of a target class by leveraging few images of
the target class given at test time. The model is never shown
images of the target class during training but is asked to
generate some of them at test time. To proceed, we first hypothesize that the few-shot generation capability of humans
develops from their past visual experiences—a person can
better imagine views of a new object if the person has seen
many more different object classes in the past. Based on
the hypothesis, we train our FUNIT model using a dataset
containing images of many different object classes for simulating the past visual experiences. Specifically, we train the
model to translate images from one class to another class
by leveraging few example images of the another class.
We hypothesize that by learning to extract appearance patterns from the few example images for the translation task,
the model learns a generalizable appearance pattern extractor that can be applied to images of unseen classes at test
time for the few-shot image-to-image translation task. In
the experiment section, we give empirical evidence that the
few-shot translation performance improves as the number
of classes in the training set increases.
Our framework is based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [13]. We show that by coupling an adversarial training scheme with a novel network design we achieve
the desired few-shot unsupervised image-to-image translation capability. Through extensive experimental validation
on three datasets, including comparisons to several baseline
methods using a variety of performance metrics, we verify
the effectiveness of our proposed framework. In addition,
we show the proposed framework can be applied to the fewshot image classification task. By training a classifier on the
images generated by our model for the few-shot classes, we
are able to outperform a state-of-the-art few-shot classification method that is based on feature hallucination.

2. Related Work
Unsupervised/unpaired image-to-image translation aims
at learning a conditional image generation function that
can map an input image of a source class to an ana110551

