Gaussian Affinity for Max-margin Class Imbalanced Learning
Munawar Hayat∗† Salman Khan∗‡ Syed Waqas Zamir∗ Jianbing Shen∗⋆ Ling Shao∗
∗
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, † University of Canberra,
‡
Australian National University, ⋆ Beijing Institute of Technology
firstname.lastname@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
Real-world object classes appear in imbalanced ratios.
This poses a significant challenge for classifiers which get
biased towards frequent classes. We hypothesize that improving the generalization capability of a classifier should
improve learning on imbalanced datasets. Here, we introduce the first hybrid loss function that jointly performs classification and clustering in a single formulation. Our approach is based on an ‘affinity measure’ in Euclidean space
that leads to the following benefits: (1) direct enforcement
of maximum margin constraints on classification boundaries, (2) a tractable way to ensure uniformly spaced and
equidistant cluster centers, (3) flexibility to learn multiple
class prototypes to support diversity and discriminability in
feature space. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the
significant performance improvements on multiple imbalanced datasets belonging to visual classification and verification tasks. The proposed loss can easily be plugged in
any deep architecture as a differentiable block and demonstrates robustness against different levels of data imbalance
and corrupted labels.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are data hungry in nature and require large amounts of data for successful training. For
imbalanced datasets, where several (potentially important)
classes have a scarce representation, the learned models are
biased towards highly abundant classes. This is because
the scarce classes have less representations during training
which results in a mismatch between the joint distribution
model for training p(x, y) and test sets p(x′ , y ′ ). This leads
to lower recall rates for rare classes, which are otherwise
critically desirable in numerous scenarios. As an example, a malignant lesion is rare compared to benign ones, but
should not be miss-classified.
The first two authors contributed equally

𝐰𝑪

𝑑𝐴,𝐶

𝐰𝑨

𝑑𝐵,𝐶
𝐰𝑩

𝑑𝐴,𝐵

λ

𝜎

Figure 1. Affinity Loss integrates classification and clustering in
a single objective. It’s flexible formulation in Euclidean space allows enforcing margin between classes, control over learned clusters, number of class-prototypes and the distance between classprototypes. Such max-margin learning greatly helps in overcoming class imbalance by learning balanced classification regions and
generalizable class boundaries.

The soft-max loss is a popular choice for conventional
recognition tasks. However, through extensive experiments,
we show that it is less suitable to handle mismatch between
train and test distributions. This is partly due to no direct enforcement of margins in the classification space and the lack
of a principled approach to control intra-class variations and
inter-class separation. Here, we propose that max-margin
learning can improve generalization which can help mitigate classifier bias towards more frequent classes by learning balanced representations for all classes. Remarkably,
some recent efforts focus on introducing max-margin constraints within the soft-max loss function [10, 34, 33]. Since
soft-max loss computes similarities in the angular domain
(vector dot-product or cosine similarity), direct enforcement of angular margins is ill-posed and existing works
either involve approximations or make restricting assumptions (e.g., points lying on a hypersphere).
This paper proposes a novel loss formulation that en16469

