Learning Robust Facial Landmark Detection via
Hierarchical Structured Ensemble
Xu Zou1,3 ,
1

Sheng Zhong2,3 ,

Xiangyun Zhao4 ,

Jiahuan Zhou4,* ,

Ying Wu4

College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science & Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China
2

3

Luxin Yan2,3 ,

School of Aritiﬁcial Intelligence and Automation, HUST, Wuhan, China

National Key Laboratory of Science & Technology on Multi-Spectral Information Processing, HUST, Wuhan, China
4

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northwestern University, IL, USA

{xutsou,zhongsheng,yanluxin}@hust.edu.cn, zhaoxiangyun915@gmail.com, jzt011@eecs.northwestetn.edu, yingwu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Heatmap regression-based models have significantly advanced the progress of facial landmark detection. However,
the lack of structural constraints always generates inaccurate heatmaps resulting in poor landmark detection performance. While hierarchical structure modeling methods
have been proposed to tackle this issue, they all heavily rely
on manually designed tree structures. The designed hierarchical structure is likely to be completely corrupted due to
the missing or inaccurate prediction of landmarks. To the
best of our knowledge, in the context of deep learning, no
work before has investigated how to automatically model
proper structures for facial landmarks, by discovering their
inherent relations. In this paper, we propose a novel Hierarchical Structured Landmark Ensemble (HSLE) model
for learning robust facial landmark detection, by using it
as the structural constraints. Different from existing approaches of manually designing structures, our proposed
HSLE model is constructed automatically via discovering
the most robust patterns so HSLE has the ability to robustly
depict both local and holistic landmark structures simultaneously. Our proposed HSLE can be readily plugged into
any existing facial landmark detection baselines for further performance improvement. Extensive experimental results demonstrate our approach significantly outperforms
the baseline by a large margin to achieve a state-of-the-art
performance.

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection, known as face alignment, is
essential to many facial analysis tasks including face recognition [35, 64, 30], face modeling [17, 24]. Due to the large
variability of face shapes, head poses, lighting conditions,
and background occlusions, facial landmark detection still
*Jiahuan Zhou is the corresponding author.

Figure 1: Two examples of abnormal situations. Left: a
lip landmark in a facial image with exaggerated expression. Right: a cheek landmark in a facial image with occlusion. Row.1 results are from a landmark detector without
structural constraints, Row.2 results are from a landmark
detector with manually designed structural constraints and
Row.3 results are from a landmark detector with our proposed HSLE structural constraints. Red and Green dots represent predictions and groundtruth respectively.
remains challenging.
Recently, the heatmap regression-based models [49, 57,
36, 52, 51] advance the progress of facial landmark detection. The success of heatmap regression-based models owes
to the utilization of likelihood heatmaps to represent the
probability distributions of landmark locations. However,
inaccurate heatmaps (e.g. heatmaps with deviations or distractions) would be generated if abnormal situations occur
(e.g. occlusion, illumination, noise, or unconstrained
pose/expression variations, and etc.) which result in inaccurate or even incorrect localizations of facial landmarks
(Figure 1.Row1) due to their low reliability or insufﬁcient
discrimination. To address this issue, structure modeling

141

