AMASS: Archive of Motion Capture as Surface Shapes
Naureen Mahmood1 Nima Ghorbani2 Nikolaus F. Troje3
Gerard Pons-Moll4 Michael J. Black2
2
1
Meshcapade MPI for Intelligent Systems 3 York University 4 MPI for Informatics
nmahmood@meshcapade.com, {nghorbani, black}@tue.mpg.de
troje@yorku.ca, gpons@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Large datasets are the cornerstone of recent advances
in computer vision using deep learning. In contrast, existing human motion capture (mocap) datasets are small
and the motions limited, hampering progress on learning
models of human motion. While there are many different
datasets available, they each use a different parameterization of the body, making it difficult to integrate them into a
single meta dataset. To address this, we introduce AMASS,
a large and varied database of human motion that unifies
15 different optical marker-based mocap datasets by representing them within a common framework and parameterization. We achieve this using a new method, MoSh++, that
converts mocap data into realistic 3D human meshes represented by a rigged body model. Here we use SMPL [26],
which is widely used and provides a standard skeletal representation as well as a fully rigged surface mesh. The method
works for arbitrary markersets, while recovering soft-tissue
dynamics and realistic hand motion. We evaluate MoSh++
and tune its hyperparameters using a new dataset of 4D
body scans that are jointly recorded with marker-based
mocap. The consistent representation of AMASS makes it
readily useful for animation, visualization, and generating training data for deep learning. Our dataset is significantly richer than previous human motion collections,
having more than 40 hours of motion data, spanning over
300 subjects, more than 11000 motions, and is available for
research at https://amass.is.tue.mpg.de/.

Figure 1: We unify a large corpus of archival marker-based
optical human mocap datasets by representing them within
a common framework and parameterization. A sampling of
shapes and poses from a few datasets in AMASS is shown,
from left to right: CMU [9], MPI-HDM05 [30, 31], MPIPose Limits [3], KIT [27], BMLrub [42], TCD [21] and
ACCAD [34] datasets. The input is sparse markers and the
output is SMPL body models.

1. Introduction

in both these directions, existing mocap databases are insufficient in terms of size and complexity to exploit the full
power of existing deep learning tools. There are many different mocap datasets available, but pulling them together
into a coherent formulation is challenging due to the use
of widely varying markersets and laboratory-specific procedures [16]. We achieve this by extending MoSh [25] in several important ways, enabling us to collect a large and varied dataset of human motions in a consistent format (Fig. 1).

This paper addresses two interrelated goals. First, we develop a method to accurately recover the shape and pose of
a person in motion from standard motion capture (mocap)
marker data. This enables the second goal, which is to create the largest publicly available database of human motions
that can enable machine learning for applications in animation and computer vision. While there have been attempts

MoSh employs a generative model of the body, learned
from a large number of 3D body scans, to compute the
full 3D body shape and pose from a sparse set of motion
capture markers. The results are realistic, but the method
has several important limitations, which make it inappropriate for our task. First, MoSh relies on a formulation of
the SCAPE body model [8], which is not compatible with

5442

