DMM-Net: Differentiable Mask-Matching Network
for Video Object Segmentation
Xiaohui Zeng1, 2∗

Renjie Liao1, 2, 3*
Li Gu1
Yuwen Xiong1, 2, 3
1, 2, 4
1, 2, 3, 5
Sanja Fidler
Raquel Urtasun
1
University of Toronto
Vector Institute2 Uber ATG Toronto3
4
NVIDIA
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research5

{xiaohui, rjliao, yuwen, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

li.gu@mail.utoronto.ca

urtasun@uber.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose the differentiable maskmatching network (DMM-Net) for solving the video object
segmentation problem where the initial object masks are
provided. Relying on the Mask R-CNN backbone, we extract mask proposals per frame and formulate the matching
between object templates and proposals at one time step
as a linear assignment problem where the cost matrix is
predicted by a CNN. We propose a differentiable matching layer by unrolling a projected gradient descent algorithm in which the projection exploits the Dykstra’s algorithm. We prove that under mild conditions, the matching
is guaranteed to converge to the optimum. In practice, it
performs similarly to the Hungarian algorithm during inference. Meanwhile, we can back-propagate through it to
learn the cost matrix. After matching, a refinement head
is leveraged to improve the quality of the matched mask.
Our DMM-Net achieves competitive results on the largest
video object segmentation dataset YouTube-VOS. On DAVIS
2017, DMM-Net achieves the best performance without online learning on the first frames. Without any fine-tuning,
DMM-Net performs comparably to state-of-the-art methods
on SegTrack v2 dataset. At last, our matching layer is very
simple to implement; we attach the PyTorch code (< 50
lines) in the supplementary material. Our code is released
at https://github.com/ZENGXH/DMM_Net.

1. Introduction
Video object and instance segmentation problems have
received significant attention [1, 35, 25] attributed to the
recent availability of high-quality datasets, e.g., YouTubeVOS [45], DAVIS [29, 30]. Given an input video, the aim is
to separate the objects or instances from the background at
the pixel-level. This is a fundamental computer vision task
∗ Equal contribution.

(a) RGMP [43]

(b) CINM [2]

(c) PReMVOS [24]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Visual comparison with some competitive methods on
the last frame of the soapbox sequence of DAVIS 2017 dataset.
Even though video segmentation quality generally degrades as
time goes on, our model still provides better details.

due to its wide range of applications including autonomous
driving, video surveillance, and video editing.
Two main setups of this problem are unsupervised and
semi-supervised which differ from each other in whether the
ground-truth annotated masks of the object instances in the
first frame of the video are provided [29, 30] during inference. In this paper, we focus on the semi-supervised setting,
i.e., the instance masks are provided for the first frames of
the test videos. However, even with some annotated information at test time, this task is still very challenging. For
example, the algorithm needs to deal with not only the dramatic appearance changes, occlusion and deformation but
also potentially with large camera and object motion. Furthermore, the expectation from a good video instance segmentation model is to produce temporally cohesive and stable predictions, which presents an additional challenge.
Existing algorithms typically leverage pretrained deep
neural networks to predict object instance masks. Some
of them, e.g., [25], directly predict the masks in a frameindependent way and achieve surprisingly good perfor13929

