Understanding Deep Networks via Extremal Perturbations and Smooth Masks
Ruth Fong†
University of Oxford∗

Mandela Patrick†
University of Oxford

Abstract
The problem of attribution is concerned with identifying
the parts of an input that are responsible for a model’s output. An important family of attribution methods is based
on measuring the effect of perturbations applied to the input.In this paper, we discuss some of the shortcomings of
existing approaches to perturbation analysis and address
them by introducing the concept of extremal perturbations,
which are theoretically grounded and interpretable. We also
introduce a number of technical innovations to compute extremal perturbations, including a new area constraint and
a parametric family of smooth perturbations, which allow
us to remove all tunable hyper-parameters from the optimization problem. We analyze the effect of perturbations as
a function of their area, demonstrating excellent sensitivity
to the spatial properties of the deep neural network under
stimulation. We also extend perturbation analysis to the intermediate layers of a network. This application allows us
to identify the salient channels necessary for classification,
which, when visualized using feature inversion, can be used
to elucidate model behavior.

1. Introduction
Deep networks often have excellent prediction accuracy,
but the basis of their predictions is usually difficult to understand. Attribution aims at characterising the response
of neural networks by finding which parts of the network’s
input are the most responsible for determining its output.
Most attribution methods are based on backtracking the
network’s activations from the output back to the input,
usually via a modification of the backpropagation algorithm [22, 30, 25, 31, 21, 2]. When applied to computer
vision models, these methods result in saliency maps that
highlight important regions in the input image.
However, most attribution methods do not start from a
definition of what makes an input region important for the
neural network. Instead, most saliency maps are validated
a-posteriori by either showing that they correlate with the
∗ Work done as a contractor in FAIR. † denotes equal contributions.

5%

Andrea Vedaldi
Facebook AI Research
10%

20%

Figure 1: Extremal perturbations are regions of an image
that, for a given area (boxed), maximally affect the activation of a certain neuron in a neural network (i.e., “mousetrap” class score). As the area of the perturbation is increased, the method reveals more of the image, in order of
decreasing importance. For clarity, we black out the masked
regions; in practice, the network sees blurred regions.
image content (e.g., by highlighting relevant object categories), or that they find image regions that, if perturbed,
have a large effect on the network’s output (see Sec. 2).
Some attribution methods, on the other hand, directly
perform an analysis of the effect of perturbing the network’s
input on its output [30, 19, 6, 4]. This usually amounts to
selectively deleting (or preserving) parts of the input and
observing the effect of that change to the model’s output.
The advantage is that the meaning of such an analysis is
clear from the outset. However, this is not as straightforward as it may seem on a first glance. First, since it
is not possible to visualise all possible perturbations, one
must find representative ones. Since larger perturbations
will have, on average, a larger effect on the network, one
is usually interested in small perturbations with a large effect (or large perturbations with a small effect). Second,
Fong and Vedaldi [6] show that searching for perturbations
with a large effect on the network’s output usually results
in pathological perturbations that trigger adversarial effects
in the network. Characterizing instead the typical behavior
of the model requires restricting the search to more representative perturbations via regularization terms. This results
in an optimization problem that trades off maximizing the
effect of the perturbation with its smoothness and size. In
practice, this trade off is difficult to control numerically and
somewhat obscures the meaning of the analysis.
In this paper, we make three contributions. First, instead
of mixing several effects in a single energy term to optimize
12950

