Intrinsic Benefits of Categorical Distributional Loss:
Uncertainty-aware Regularized Exploration in
Reinforcement Learning

Ke Sun1 , Yingnan Zhao2 , Enze Shi1 , Yafei Wang1 , Xiaodong Yan3 , Bei Jiang1 , Linglong Kong1∗
1
University of Alberta, Canada
2
Harbin Engineering University, China
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
{ksun6,eshi,yafei2,bei1,lkong}@ualberta.ca
zhaoyingnan@hrbeu.edu.cn
yanxiaodong@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The remarkable empirical performance of distributional reinforcement learning (RL) has garnered increasing attention to understanding its theoretical advantages over classical RL. By decomposing the categorical distributional loss
commonly employed in distributional RL, we find that the potential superiority
of distributional RL can be attributed to a derived distribution-matching entropy
regularization. This less-studied entropy regularization aims to capture additional
knowledge of return distribution beyond only its expectation, contributing to an
augmented reward signal in policy optimization. In contrast to the vanilla entropy regularization in MaxEnt RL, which explicitly encourages exploration by
promoting diverse actions, the novel entropy regularization derived from categorical distributional loss implicitly updates policies to align the learned policy with
(estimated) environmental uncertainty. Finally, extensive experiments verify the
significance of this uncertainty-aware regularization from distributional RL on the
empirical benefits over classical RL. Our study offers an innovative exploration
perspective to explain the intrinsic benefits of distributional learning in RL.

1

Introduction

The fundamental characteristics of classical reinforcement learning (RL) [57], such as Q-learning [62],
rely on estimating the expectation of discounted cumulative rewards that an agent observes while interacting with the environment. In contrast to the expectation-based RL, a novel branch of algorithms,
termed distributional RL, seeks to estimate the entire distribution of total returns and has achieved
state-of-the-art performance across a diverse array of environments [5, 11, 10, 68, 71, 43, 63, 56, 52].
Meanwhile, discussions of distributional RL have increasingly extended into a broader range of fields,
such as risk-sensitive control [10, 31, 8], offline learning [35, 67], policy exploration [36, 49, 9, 25], robustness [55, 53, 51], optimization [51, 28, 54], statistical inference [69], multivariate rewards [70, 66],
and continuous-time setting [65].
Motivation: Understanding the Benefits of Employing (Categorical) Distributional Loss in RL.
Despite the impressive empirical success of distributional RL algorithms, our comprehension of their
advantages over classical RL remains incomplete, especially for the general function approximation
setting and practical implementations. Early work [33] demonstrated that in many realizations of
tabular and linear approximation settings, distributional RL behaves similarly to classic RL, suggesting
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

