Adaptive Cannistraci-Hebb Network Automata
Modelling of Complex Networks for Path-based Link
Prediction
Jialin Zhao1,2

Alessandro Muscoloni1,3,4

Umberto Michieli5,6

Yingtao Zhang1,2

Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci1,2,3,4 ∗
Center for Complex Network Intelligence (CCNI) †
Dept. of Computer Science & Technology, 3 School of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University
4
Biomedical Cybernetics Group, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany ‡
5
University of Padova, Italy, 6 Canva Research
1

2

Abstract
Many complex networks have partially observed or evolving connectivity, making
link prediction a fundamental task. Topological link prediction infers missing
links using only network topology, with applications in social, biological, and
technological systems. The Cannistraci-Hebb (CH) theory provides a topological
formulation of Hebbian learning, grounded on two pillars: (1) the minimization
of external links within local communities, and (2) the path-based definition
of local communities that capture homophilic (similarity-driven) interactions via
paths of length 2 and synergetic (diversity-driven) interactions via paths of length
3. Building on this, we introduce the Cannistraci-Hebb Adaptive (CHA) network
automata, an adaptive learning machine that automatically selects the optimal CH
rule and path length to model each network. CHA unifies theoretical interpretability
and data-driven adaptivity, bridging physics-inspired network science and machine
intelligence. Across 1,269 networks from 14 domains, CHA consistently surpasses
state-of-the-art methods—including SPM, SBM, graph embedding methods, and
message-passing graph neural networks—while revealing the mechanistic principles governing link formation. Our code is available at https://github.com/
biomedical-cybernetics/Cannistraci_Hebb_network_automata.

1

Introduction

Many complex networks have a connectivity that might be only partially detected or that tends to grow
over time, hence the prediction of non-observed links is a fundamental problem in network science.
The aim of topological link prediction is to forecast these non-observed links by only exploiting
features intrinsic to the network topology. It has a wide range of real applications, like suggesting
friendships in social networks or predicting interactions in biological networks [1–3]. A plethora of
methods based on different methodological principles have been developed in recent years, and in this
∗

Corresponding author, kalokagathos.agon@gmail.com
Research center in Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence (THBI), Department of Psychological
and Cognitive Sciences
‡
Past affiliation of the research group in Biotechnology Center (BIOTEC), Center for Molecular and Cellular
Bioengineering (CMCB), Center for Systems Biology Dresden (CSBD), Cluster of Excellence Physics of Life
(PoL), Department of Physics, Technische Universität Dresden, Tatzberg 47/49, 01307 Dresden, Germany
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

