Bit-swapping Oriented Twin-memory Multi-view
Clustering in Lifelong Incomplete Scenarios

Shengju Yu1 , Pei Zhang1 , Siwei Wang2∗, Suyuan Liu1 , Xinhang Wan1 ,
Zhibin Dong1 , Tiejun Li1∗, Xinwang Liu1∗
1
National University of Defense Technology, 2 Intelligent Game and Decision Lab
yu-shengju@foxmail.com, {wangsiwei13,tjli,xinwangliu}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Although receiving notable improvements, current multi-view clustering (MVC)
techniques generally rely on feature library mechanisms to propagate accumulated
knowledge from historical views to newly-arrived data, which overlooks the information pertaining to basis embedding within each view. Moreover, the mapping
paradigm inevitably alters the values of learned landmarks and built affinities due to
the uninterruption nature, accordingly disarraying the hierarchical cluster structures.
To mitigate these two issues, we in the paper provide a named BSTM algorithm.
Concretely, we firstly synchronize with the distinct dimensions by introducing a
group of specialized projectors, and then establish unified anchors for all views
collected so far to capture intrinsic patterns. Afterwards, departing from per-view
architectures, we devise a shared bipartite graph construction via indicators to quantify similarity, which not only avoids redundant data-recalculations but alleviates
the representation distortion caused by fusion. Crucially, there two components
are optimized within an integrated framework, and collectively facilitate knowledge transfer upon encountering incoming views. Subsequently, to flexibly do
transformation on anchors and meanwhile maintain numerical consistency, we
develop a bit-swapping scheme operating exclusively on 0 and 1. It harmonizes
anchors on current view and that on previous views through one-hot encoded row
and column attributes, and the graph structures are correspondingly reordered to
reach a matched configuration. Furthermore, a computationally efficient four-step
updating strategy with linear complexity is designed to minimize the associated
loss. Extensive experiments organized on publicly-available benchmark datasets
with varying missing percentages confirm the superior effectiveness of our BSTM.

1

Introduction

As information technology advances, multi-view data, typically referring to the characterization of the
same object derived from diverse domains, is becoming increasingly ubiquitous [35, 83, 55, 52, 42].
Naturally, extracting meaningful patterns from these data has sparked substantial research interest
[12, 41, 73, 46, 78, 5]. Owing to the superior heterogeneous data integration capability, multiview clustering (MVC) is generally recognized as an effective methodology for tackling multiview data and is deployed in various fields like financial analysis, community recommendation,
intelligent diagnosis, etc [37, 16, 60, 84, 51, 28]. It seeks to partition samples without requiring any
labels into distinct groups such that the intra-group similarity is maximized while the inter-group
dissimilarity is maintained, thereby uncovering potential data relationships [91, 47, 9, 19, 82, 80, 8].
To enhance the partition quality, recently researchers have developed numerous innovative methods
[53, 58, 43, 92, 79, 85]. For sample, Chen et al. [2] learn hybridized representations to build a fused
∗

Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

