Self-Adapting Language Models

Adam Zweiger∗ Jyothish Pari∗† Han Guo Yoon Kim Pulkit Agrawal†
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{adamz, jyop, hanguo, yoonkim, pulkitag}@mit.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are powerful but static; they lack mechanisms to
adapt their weights in response to new tasks, knowledge, or examples. We introduce
Self-Adapting LLMs (SEAL), a framework that enables LLMs to self-adapt by
generating their own finetuning data and update directives. Given a new input,
the model produces a self-edit—a generation that may restructure the information
in different ways, specify optimization hyperparameters, or invoke tools for data
augmentation and gradient-based updates. Through supervised finetuning (SFT),
these self-edits result in persistent weight updates, enabling lasting adaptation. To
train the model to produce effective self-edits, we use a reinforcement learning
loop, using the downstream performance of the updated model as the reward signal.
Unlike prior approaches that rely on separate adaptation modules or auxiliary
networks, SEAL directly uses the model’s generation to parameterize and control
its own adaptation process. Experiments on knowledge incorporation and fewshot generalization show that SEAL is a promising step toward language models
capable of self-directed adaptation in response to new data. Our website and code
is available at https://jyopari.github.io/posts/seal.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) pretrained on vast text corpora exhibit remarkable abilities in language
understanding and generation [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, adapting these powerful models for specific
tasks [6], integrating new information [7], or mastering novel reasoning skills [8] remains challenging
due to the limited availability of task-specific data. In this paper, we explore an intriguing hypothesis:
can an LLM self-adapt by transforming or generating its own training data and learning procedure?
As an analogy, consider a human student preparing for the final exam of a machine learning class.
Many students rely on their notes to prepare for the exam. These notes are often derived from the
lecture content, textbooks, or information available on the internet. Instead of relying on the raw
content, assimilating and rewriting the information in the form of notes often improves the ability of
students to understand the content and answer exam questions. This phenomenon of reinterpreting
and augmenting external knowledge in a way that is easier to understand is not limited to just taking
exams, but seems to be universally true of human learning across tasks. Furthermore, different
humans assimilate information in different ways—some might condense the information into a visual
diagram, some into text, or some might rely more on concrete mathematical descriptions.
Such assimilation, restructuring, or rewriting of data as part of the learning process is in contrast
with how large language models (LLMs) are typically trained and deployed. Given a new task,
current LLMs consume and learn from the task data “as-is” via finetuning or in-context learning
[9, 10, 11, 12]. However, such data may not be in an optimal format (or volume) for learning, and
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Improbable AI Lab, CSAIL MIT

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

