Blindfolded Experts Generalize Better:
Insights from Robotic Manipulation and Videogames

Ev Zisselman∗, Mirco Mutti, Shelly Francis-Meretzki, Elisei Shafer, Aviv Tamar
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract
Behavioral cloning is a simple yet effective technique for learning sequential
decision-making from demonstrations. Recently, it has gained prominence as
the core of foundation models for the physical world, where achieving generalization requires countless demonstrations of a multitude of tasks. Typically,
a human expert with full information on the task demonstrates a (nearly) optimal behavior. In this paper, we propose to hide some of the task’s information
from the demonstrator. This “blindfolded” expert is compelled to employ nontrivial exploration to solve the task. We show that cloning the blindfolded expert
generalizes better to unseen tasks than its fully-informed counterpart. We conduct experiments of real-world robot peg insertion tasks with (limited) human
demonstrations, alongside videogames from the Procgen benchmark. Additionally, we support our findings with
ptheoretical analysis, which confirms that the
generalization error scales with I/m, where I measures the amount of task
information available to the demonstrator, and m is the number of demonstrated
tasks. Both theory and practice indicate that cloning blindfolded experts generalizes better with fewer demonstrated tasks. Project page with videos and code:
https://sites.google.com/view/blindfoldedexperts/home.

1

Introduction

Behavioral cloning (BC) is a simple yet effective method for training policies in sequential decisionmaking problems [32, 6]. In BC, an expert demonstrates how to perform a task, and the sequence of
observation-action data is input to a supervised learning algorithm for training a policy.
A key question in BC is generalization—how many demonstrations are required to train an effective
policy. For single tasks, a well-investigated challenge is compounding errors—small mistakes in the
trained policy may lead to visit states that the expert did not visit, further increasing the prediction
errors [43]. However, recent results show that using appropriate neural-network architectures, BC can
learn to solve complex tasks even with a modest number of demonstrations [6, 59], and these results
are reinforced by recent theory [13]. For multiple tasks (or significant variations of a single task), on
the other hand, BC still requires abundant data, and recent methods for mitigating data requirements
include augmentations [26], simulation [52], and fine tuning foundation models trained on large scale
demonstration data [30, 49, 21]. In this work, we hence focus on generalization to task variations.
While various works study how to improve generalization via the BC algorithm [43], the policy
representation [6], and the data diversity [23], one aspect that remains unexplored is the experts
themselves. Many tasks can be solved in various ways—can some behaviors generalize better than
others? Recently, in the context of zero-shot reinforcement learning, Zisselman et al. [61] showed
that certain exploratory behaviors generalize better than goal-oriented, reward-maximizing behavior.
Intuitively, since exploratory behavior is less goal-oriented, it is less dependent on any particular task
∗

Correspondence E-mail: ev_zis@campus.technion.ac.il

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

