Learning Shared Representations from Unpaired Data

Amitai Yacobi∗†
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel
amitaiyacobi@gmail.com

Nir Ben-Ari∗
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel
nirnirba@gmail.com

Ronen Talmon
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion
Haifa, Israel
ronen@ee.technion.ac.il

Uri Shaham
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel
uri.shaham@biu.ac.il

Abstract
Learning shared representations is a primary area of multimodal representation
learning. The current approaches to achieve a shared embedding space rely heavily
on paired samples from each modality, which are significantly harder to obtain than
unpaired ones. In this work, we demonstrate that shared representations can be
learned almost exclusively from unpaired data. Our arguments are grounded in the
spectral embeddings of the random walk matrices constructed independently from
each unimodal representation. Empirical results in computer vision and natural
language processing domains support its potential, revealing the effectiveness of
unpaired data in capturing meaningful cross-modal relations, demonstrating high
capabilities in retrieval tasks, generation, arithmetics, zero-shot, and cross-domain
classification. This work, to the best of our knowledge, is the first to demonstrate
these capabilities almost exclusively from unpaired samples, giving rise to a crossmodal embedding that could be viewed as universal, i.e., independent of the specific
modalities of the data. Our project page: https://shaham-lab.github.io/
SUE_page.

1

Introduction

The great success of unimodal models [19, 51, 62, 11, 9, 2] in the last decade, and the increasing
demand for multimodal applications, have shifted large research attention into the cross-modal
domain. Multimodal models present impressive performance on various cross-modal tasks, including
image-text [60, 46, 47], speech-text [22], video-text [80] and medical-image-text [84], to name a few.
A primary task in multimodal representation learning is the learning of shared representations, i.e.,
representation spaces to which instances from different modalities can be mapped, and in which such
multimodal instances can be compared. Currently, models learning shared representations typically
rely on vast amounts of paired data for training. For example, CLIP [60] was trained on 400 million
pairs of images and their captions (i.e., corresponding texts). This kind of supervision (i.e., pairing)
is often costly, difficult, and might be even impossible to obtain in many domains and applications.
In medical domains, for instance, obtaining a large number of samples is often challenging, as it
typically depends on expert annotations. This supervision becomes both costly and time-intensive,
∗
†

Equal contribution, random order.
Also at Moodify.ai, Kefar Saba, Israel

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

