Towards Generalizable Multi-Policy Optimization with
Self-Evolution for Job Scheduling

Inguk Choi, Woo-Jin Shin, Sang-Hyun Cho, Hyun-Jung Kim∗
Manufacturing and Service Systems Lab
Dept. of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{inguk0826, wjshin, ie02002, hyunjungkim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown promising results in solving Job Scheduling Problems (JSPs), automatically deriving powerful dispatching rules from data
without relying on expert knowledge. However, most RL-based methods train only
a single decision-maker, which limits exploration capability and leaves significant
room for performance improvement. Moreover, designing reward functions for
different JSP variants remains a challenging and labor-intensive task. To address
these limitations, we introduce a novel and generic learning framework that optimizes multiple policies sharing a common objective and a single neural network,
while enabling each policy to learn specialized and diverse strategies. The model
optimization process is fully guided by a self-labeling manner, eliminating the need
for reward functions. In addition, we develop a training scheme that adaptively
controls the imitation intensity to reflect the quality of self-labels. Experimental
results show that our method effectively addresses the aforementioned challenges
and significantly outperforms state-of-the-art RL methods across six JSP variants. Furthermore, our approach also demonstrates strong performance on other
combinatorial optimization problems, highlighting its versatility beyond JSPs.

1

Introduction

Job Scheduling Problems (JSPs) are fundamental Combinatorial Optimization Problems (COPs) with
significant practical importance across various industries such as manufacturing [1], logistics [2],
and data centers [3]. Solving a JSP involves assigning jobs to machines (e.g., limited resources) and
sequencing them on each machine. The goal is to find a schedule from a combinatorial solution space
that minimizes (or maximizes) the objective function under problem-specific constraints. Traditionally,
JSPs have been solved using exact methods or handcrafted heuristic algorithms. However, exact
methods are computationally intractable for large-size problems [4], and designing effective heuristics
for each JSP variant requires deep domain knowledge and significant manual effort [5].
Beyond expert-designed heuristics, Neural Combinatorial Optimization (NCO) methods, as variants
of Hyper-Heuristics (HH) [6], have recently emerged to automate the heuristic design process
[7, 8]. In particular, neural constructive heuristics, which sequentially build solutions from scratch
using Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), have attracted significant attention due to their simplicity
and flexibility [9, 10, 11, 12]. These methods leverage DNNs to model decision-making policies
(traditionally represented by Priority Dispatching Rules (PDRs)) and learn state-to-action mappings
from data via Supervised Learning (SL) or Reinforcement Learning (RL). However, due to the
NP-hardness of most JSPs, SL approaches struggle to obtain sufficiently high-quality solutions for
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

