Wisdom is Knowing What not to Say:
Hallucination-Free LLMs Unlearning via Attention
Shifting
Chenchen Tan1 , Youyang Qu2,3 , Xinghao Li1 , Hui Zhang4 , Shujie Cui1 , Cunjian Chen1 ,
Longxiang Gao2,3∗
1
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia
2
Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of Education,
Shandong Computer Science Center,
Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan, China
3
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computing Power Internet and Service Computing,
Shandong Fundamental Research Center for Computer Science, Jinan, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
<chenchen.tan@monash.edu>, <gaolx@sdas.org>

Abstract
The increase in computing power and the necessity of AI-assisted decision-making
boost the growing application of Large Language Models (LLMs). Along with this,
the potential retention of sensitive data of LLMs has spurred increasing research
into machine unlearning. However, existing unlearning approaches face a critical
dilemma: Aggressive unlearning compromises model utility, while conservative
strategies preserve utility but risk hallucinated responses. This significantly limits LLMs’ reliability in knowledge-intensive applications. To address this, we
introduce a novel Attention-Shifting (AS) framework for selective unlearning.
AS is driven by two design objectives: (1) context-preserving suppression that
attenuates attention to fact-bearing tokens without disrupting LLMs’ linguistic
structure; and (2) hallucination-resistant response shaping that discourages fabricated completions when queried about unlearning content. AS realizes these
objectives through two attention-level interventions, which are importance-aware
suppression applied to the unlearning set to reduce reliance on memorized knowledge and attention-guided retention enhancement that reinforces attention toward
semantically essential tokens in the retained dataset to mitigate unintended degradation. These two components are jointly optimized via a dual-loss objective,
which forms a soft boundary that localizes unlearning while preserving unrelated
knowledge under representation superposition. Experimental results show that AS
improves performance preservation over the state-of-the-art unlearning methods,
achieving up to 15% higher accuracy on the ToFU benchmark 2 and 10% on the
TDEC benchmark 3 , while maintaining competitive hallucination-free unlearning
effectiveness. Compared to existing methods, AS demonstrates a superior balance
between unlearning effectiveness, generalization, and response reliability.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently achieved substantial advancements in natural language
understanding and generation [1]. However, despite their achievements, a growing concern is the
∗

Corresponding Author
https://locuslab.github.io/tofu/
3
https://github.com/google-research/lm-extraction-benchmark
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

