Transformers Provably Learn Chain-of-Thought
Reasoning with Length Generalization

Yu Huang∗
Upenn

Zixin Wen∗
CMU

Aarti Singh
CMU

Yuejie Chi
Yale

Yuxin Chen
Upenn

Abstract
The ability to reason lies at the core of artificial intelligence (AI), and challenging
problems usually call for deeper and longer reasoning to tackle. A crucial question
about AI reasoning is whether models can extrapolate learned reasoning patterns to
solve harder tasks with a longer chain-of-thought (CoT). In this work, we present
a theoretical analysis of transformers learning on synthetic state-tracking tasks
with gradient descent. Specifically: 1). We prove how the algebraic structure of
state-tracking problems governs the length generalization of learned reasoning in
transformers. In doing so, we formulate the attention concentration mechanism,
linking the retrieval robustness of the attention layer to the task structure of longcontext state tracking problems. 2). Moreover, we prove that a transformer can
provably self-improve via a recursive self-training scheme that progressively
extends the range of solvable problem lengths. We show that the model can achieve
abilities outside the coverage of the base model in recursive training, different
from prior theoretical works on self-improvement. To our knowledge, we provide
the first optimization guarantee that constant-depth transformers provably learn
NC1 -complete problems with CoT, significantly going beyond prior art confined
in TC0 , unless the widely held conjecture TC0 ̸= NC1 fails. Finally, we present a
broad set of experiments supporting our theoretical results, confirming the length
generalization behaviors and the mechanism of attention concentration.

1

Introduction

Reasoning is a central theme of artificial intelligence [1, 2, 3]. Transformer-based [4] large language
models (LLMs) achieve state-of-the-art results on complex reasoning tasks via chain-of-thought
(CoT) reasoning [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], where the model generates intermediate steps before
delivering a final answer. Recent frontier models such as OpenAI-o1 [1] and DeepSeek-R1 [2]
typically produce long CoT traces at inference time, often elicited via reinforcement learning and/or
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) that distills from longer chains [13, 14]. These advances have enabled
improved performance on more challenging problems [15, 16, 17, 18, 19], yet the mechanisms and
limitations underlying CoT reasoning remain poorly understood, posing fundamental theoretical
challenges.
Theoretical studies on transformers with CoT have recently advanced along two fronts: expressiveness [20, 21, 22, 23, 24] and statistical learnability [25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31]. On the expressiveness
front, seminal work [20, 21, 22] showed that constant-depth transformers without CoT behave as
shallow circuits and are restricted to express the circuit complexity class TC0 of constant computation
depth, whereas with O(L) CoT steps on inputs of length L, they can express log-depth circuits
in NC1 , which is a problem class conjectured to require inherently serial computation.1 These
∗

1

The authors contributed equally, and the author order was determined by a coin flip. Given the density of
results, we recommend the full version for readability: arXiv:2511.07378
For background on circuit complexity and a detailed review of expressiveness results, see Section 2 and
[32, 33].

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

