DGSolver: Diffusion Generalist Solver with Universal
Posterior Sampling for Image Restoration

Hebaixu Wang1,3 , Jing Zhang2† , Haonan Guo3,4 , Di Wang2,3 , Jiayi Ma1,3† , and Bo Du2,3†
1
School of Electronic Information, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
3
Zhongguancun Academy, Beijing, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{wanghebaixu,jingzhang.cv,jyma2010}@gmail.com;{haonan.guo,d_wang,dubo}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable progress in universal image restoration.
However, existing methods perform naive inference in the reverse process, which
leads to cumulative errors under limited sampling steps and large step intervals.
Moreover, they struggle to balance the commonality of degradation representations
with restoration quality, often depending on complex compensation mechanisms
that enhance fidelity at the expense of efficiency. To address these challenges, we
introduce DGSolver, a diffusion generalist solver with universal posterior sampling.
We first derive the exact ordinary differential equations for generalist diffusion
models to unify degradation representations and design tailored high-order solvers
with a queue-based accelerated sampling strategy to improve both accuracy and
efficiency. We then integrate universal posterior sampling to better approximate
manifold-constrained gradients, yielding a more accurate noise estimation and
correcting errors in inverse inference. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
DGSolver outperforms state-of-the-art methods in restoration accuracy, stability,
and scalability, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Code and models are publicly
available at https://github.com/MiliLab/DGSolver.

1

Introduction

Universal image restoration (UIR) strives to achieve a versatile model capable of discerning and
mitigating various degradation types. Capitalizing on the superior attributes of the restored details with
high fidelity, it has emerged as a promising approach for enabling applications such as autonomous
driving [37], remote sensing [44], and other related fields [73, 26, 58, 59, 71, 68, 54, 55, 56].
Owing to the substantial advancements in deep learning, a surge of universal image restoration
frameworks has emerged. Typically, the existing methods can be delineated into two categories based
on the dependency of representations across varied degradation distributions [64, 74, 9], namely
blend-representation-based methods and distinct-representation-based methods, as displayed in Fig. 1.
The former approaches promote the commonality among degradation representations by projecting
diverse degradation distributions into a shared representation space, where the commonality measures the degradation-agnostic extent of representations within the shared representation space [34].
However, the complexity of restoration escalates as the commonality of degradation representations
intensifies [10, 28, 29]. DiffUIR [75] reaches a compromise by projecting the disparate distributions
onto an impure Gaussian distribution, retaining partial degradation conditions. FoundIR [23] further
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

