N EEDLE I N ATABLE: Exploring Long-Context
Capability of Large Language Models towards
Long-Structured Tables

Lanrui Wang1∗†, Mingyu Zheng1,2∗, Hongyin Tang3∗†, Zheng Lin1,2‡,
Yanan Cao1,2 , Jingang Wang3†, Xunliang Cai3†, Weiping Wang1
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Meituan
oliveerwang@tencent.com
{zhengmingyu,linzheng}@iie.ac.cn tanghongyin@meituan.com

Abstract
Processing structured tabular data, particularly large and lengthy tables, constitutes
a fundamental yet challenging task for large language models (LLMs). However,
existing long-context benchmarks like Needle-in-a-Haystack primarily focus on
unstructured text, neglecting the challenge of diverse structured tables. Meanwhile,
previous tabular benchmarks mainly consider downstream tasks that require highlevel reasoning abilities, and overlook models’ underlying fine-grained perception
of individual table cells, which is crucial for practical and robust LLM-based table
applications. To address this gap, we introduce N EEDLE I NATABLE (NIAT), a
new long-context tabular benchmark that treats each table cell as a “needle” and
requires models to extract the target cell based on cell locations or lookup questions.
Our comprehensive evaluation of various LLMs and multimodal LLMs reveals a
substantial performance gap between popular downstream tabular tasks and the
simpler NIAT task, suggesting that they may rely on dataset-specific correlations
or shortcuts to obtain better benchmark results but lack truly robust long-context
understanding towards structured tables. Furthermore, we demonstrate that using
synthesized NIAT training data can effectively improve performance on both
NIAT task and downstream tabular tasks, which validates the importance of NIAT
capability for LLMs’ genuine table understanding ability. 4 .

1

Introduction

The long-context modeling ability has laid the foundation for a wide range of LLM-based applications,
such as lifelong conversational chatbots, document analysis tools, and advanced agent-based systems
[1–4]. Correspondingly, lots of effort has been dedicated to scaling up the context window of
LLMs, improving their proficiency in handling extremely long input texts [5–9]. In parallel, various
benchmarks like Needle-in-a-Haystack (NIAH) [10] have been developed to evaluate the long-context
capabilities of LLMs from diverse perspectives, such as extracting key information from long texts,
answering questions about extended passages or multiple documents [11–15].
∗

Equal contribution. Work was done when Lanrui Wang was a graduate student of IIE, CAS.
Joint work with Meituan
‡
Zheng Lin is the corresponding author.
4
Our code and data are available at: https://github.com/wlr737/NeedleInATable
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

