Precise Asymptotics and Refined Regret of
Variance-Aware UCB
Yingying Fan
University of Southern California
fanyingy@marshall.usc.edu
Jinchi Lv
University of Southern California
jinchilv@marshall.usc.edu

Yuxuan Han
New York University
yh6061@stern.nyu.edu
Xiaocong Xu
University of Southern California
xuxiaoco@marshall.usc.edu

Zhengyuan Zhou
New York University
zzhou@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the behavior of the Upper Confidence Bound-Variance
(UCB-V) algorithm for the Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problems, a variant of the
canonical Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) algorithm that incorporates variance
estimates into its decision-making process. More precisely, we provide an asymptotic characterization of the arm-pulling rates for UCB-V, extending recent results
for the canonical UCB in [21] and [23]. In an interesting contrast to the canonical UCB, our analysis reveals that the behavior of UCB-V can exhibit instability,
meaning that the arm-pulling rates may not always be asymptotically deterministic.
Besides the asymptotic characterization, we also provide non-asymptotic bounds
for the arm-pulling rates in the high probability regime, offering insights into the
regret analysis. As an application of this high probability result, we establish that
UCB-V can achieve a more refined regret bound, previously unknown even for
more complicate and advanced variance-aware online decision-making algorithms.
A matching regret lower bound is also established, demonstrating the optimality of
our result.

1

Introduction

The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem is a fundamental framework capturing the explorationexploitation trade-off in sequential decision-making. Over decades, it has been rigorously studied and
widely applied across fields like dynamic pricing, clinical trials, and online advertising [32, 35, 27].
In the classic K-armed MAB problem, a learner is faced with K arms, each associated with an
unknown reward distribution Pa for a ∈ [K], supported on [0, 1] with mean µa and variance σa2 . At
each time step t ∈ [T ], the learner selects an arm at and observes a reward Xt drawn independently
from Pat . The learner’s goal is to maximize the cumulative reward by striking an optimal balance
between exploration (sampling less-known arms to improve estimates) and exploitation (selecting
arms with high estimated rewards). This objective is commonly framed as a regret minimization
PT
problem, where the regret over a time horizon T is defined as Reg(T ) ≡ t=1 (µa⋆ − µat ) with
⋆
a ≡ arg maxa∈[K] µa the optimal arm with the highest expected reward.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

