Flexible inference for animal learning rules using
neural networks
Yuhan Helena Liu1,* , Victor Geadah1 , and Jonathan Pillow1,*
*

1
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
Correspondence: hl7582@princeton.edu, pillow@princeton.edu

Abstract
Understanding how animals learn is a central challenge in neuroscience, with
growing relevance to the development of animal- or human-aligned artificial intelligence. However, existing approaches tend to assume fixed parametric forms
for the learning rule (e.g., Q-learning, policy gradient), which may not accurately
describe the complex forms of learning employed by animals in realistic settings.
Here we address this gap by developing a framework to infer learning rules directly from behavioral data collected during de novo task learning. We assume
that animals follow a decision policy parameterized by a generalized linear model
(GLM), and we model their learning rule—the mapping from task covariates to
per-trial weight updates—using a deep neural network (DNN). This formulation
allows flexible, data-driven inference of learning rules while maintaining an interpretable form of the decision policy itself. To capture more complex learning
dynamics, we introduce a recurrent neural network (RNN) variant that relaxes the
Markovian assumption that learning depends solely on covariates of the current
trial, allowing for learning rules that integrate information over multiple trials.
Simulations demonstrate that the framework can recover ground-truth learning
rules. We applied our DNN and RNN-based methods to a large behavioral dataset
from mice learning to perform a sensory decision-making task and found that they
outperformed traditional RL learning rules at predicting the learning trajectories
of held-out mice. The inferred learning rules exhibited reward-history–dependent
learning dynamics, with larger updates following sequences of rewarded trials.
Overall, these methods provide a flexible framework for inferring learning rules
from behavioral data in de novo learning tasks, setting the stage for improved
animal training protocols and the development of behavioral digital twins.

1

Introduction

The study of animal learning has a long history, beginning with foundational work such as Pavlov’s
classical conditioning and the Rescorla–Wagner model of associative learning [1, 2]. Uncovering the
mechanisms that underlie learning and decision-making is crucial for understanding and predicting
animal behavior [3]. This knowledge has wide-reaching applications, including benefits for human
health and medicine [4–7], informing conservation efforts by anticipating how animals respond to
environmental change [8–12], and potentially guiding the development of biologically aligned AI
systems, which have garnered increasing interest in recent years [13, 14].
While inference of learning rules is gaining traction, prior studies have key limitations. For example,
many leverage reinforcement learning (RL) paradigms with normative approaches that assume reward
maximization [15–17] or weight update under a parametric learning rule (e.g., Q-learning [18],
REINFORCE [19, 20]). Although these approaches have provided clear insights into animal learning,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

