Cross-Domain Graph Data Scaling:
A Showcase with Diffusion Models
Wenzhuo Tang1 , Haitao Mao2∗, Danial Dervovic3 , Ivan Brugere3 , Saumitra Mishra3 ,
Yuying Xie1 , Jiliang Tang1
1
Michigan State University 2 Amazon 3 J.P. Morgan AI Research
{tangwen2, xyy, tangjili}@msu.edu, maoht@amazon.com
{danial.dervovic, ivan.brugere, saumitra.mishra}@jpmchase.com

Abstract
Models for natural language and images benefit from data scaling behavior: the
more data fed into the model, the better they perform. This ’better with more’
phenomenon enables the effectiveness of large-scale pre-training on vast amounts
of data. However, current graph pre-training methods struggle to scale up data
due to heterogeneity across graphs. To achieve effective data scaling, we aim to
develop a general model that is able to capture diverse data patterns of graphs and
can be utilized to adaptively help the downstream tasks. To this end, we propose
UniAug, a universal graph structure augmentor built on a diffusion model. We
first pre-train a discrete diffusion model on thousands of graphs across domains to
learn the graph structural patterns. In the downstream phase, we provide adaptive
enhancement by conducting graph structure augmentation with the help of the
pre-trained diffusion model via guided generation. By leveraging the pre-trained
diffusion model for structure augmentation, we consistently achieve performance
improvements across various downstream tasks in a plug-and-play manner. To the
best of our knowledge, this study represents the first demonstration of a data-scaling
graph structure augmentor on graphs across domains.

1

Introduction

The effectiveness of existing foundation models [1, 2, 3] heavily relies on the availability of substantial
amounts of data, where the relationship manifests as a scaling behavior between model performance
and data scale [4]. Consistent performance gain has been observed with the increasing scale of
pre-training data in both Natural Language Processing [4, 5] and Computer Vision [6, 7] domains.
This data scaling phenomenon facilitates the development of general models endowed with extensive
knowledge and effective data pattern recognition capabilities. In downstream applications, these
models are capable of adaptively achieving performance gains across tasks.
In the context of graphs, the availability of large-scale graph databases [8, 9, 10] enables possible data
scaling across datasets and domains. Existing works have demonstrated graph data scaling following
two limited settings: in-domain pre-training [11, 12] and task-specific selection for pre-training
data [13]. During the pre-training process, each graph in the pre-training pool must be validated
as in-domain or relevant to the downstream dataset. Given a specific domain or task, the crucial
discriminative data patterns are likely confined to a fixed set [14], leaving other potential patterns in
diverse graph data distribution as noisy input. In terms of structure, graphs from different domains are
particularly composed of varied patterns [15], making it hard to transfer across domains. For example,
considering the building blocks of the graphs, the motifs shared by the World Wide Web hyperlinks
∗
This work was conducted while H.M. was a Ph.D. student at Michigan State University and is independent
of H.M.’s current position at Amazon.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

