Composing Linear Layers from Irreducibles

Travis Pence

Daisuke Yamada

Vikas Singh

University of Wisconsin-Madison
{tnpence, dyamada2}@wisc.edu, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
Contemporary large models often exhibit behaviors suggesting the presence of
low-level primitives that compose into modules with richer functionality, but these
fundamental building blocks remain poorly understood. We investigate this compositional structure in linear layers by asking: can we identify/synthesize linear transformations from a minimal set of geometric primitives? Using Clifford algebra, we
show that linear layers can be expressed as compositions of bivectors—geometric
objects encoding oriented planes—and introduce a differentiable algorithm that
decomposes them into products of rotors. This construction uses only O log2 d
parameters, versus O(d2 ) required by dense matrices. Applied to the key, query,
and value projections in LLM attention layers, rotor-based layers match the performance of strong baselines such as block-Hadamard and low-rank approximations.
Our findings provide an algebraic perspective on how these geometric primitives
can compose into higher-level functions within deep models.

1

Introduction

There is growing consensus [Kozachkov et al., 2023] that, like biological systems, modern models
may internally rely on low-level primitives that compose to form modules with more complex
functionality [Weiss et al., 2021]. This compositional perspective was one motivation behind capsule
networks [Sabour et al., 2017], which explicitly modeled part-whole relationships through vectorbased capsules. But the task of localizing and characterizing such primitives remains challenging
albeit interesting. A general capability to compose pre-trained modules in a prescribed way could,
in principle, lead to a larger model with predictable and more controllable functionality [Zou et al.,
2025, Schug et al., 2024, Ghazi et al., 2019, Abnar et al., 2023, Press et al., 2023], with potential
applications ranging from safety guardrails to interpretability.
Some recent results suggest some progress in this direction. In mixture-of-experts architectures
[Masoudnia and Ebrahimpour, 2014, Riquelme et al., 2021], specialized sub-networks are conditionally activated and composed via routing [Büchel et al., 2025]. Model merging has evolved from
simple parameter averaging to more sophisticated alignment of different model latent representations
[Lähner and Moeller, 2024]. Fine-tuning methods like LoRA [Hu et al., 2021] implicitly assume that
low-dimensional adjustment of a base network should suffice—essentially a two-level composition.
Each approach offers a distinct perspective on composition (e.g., see Chytas et al. [2024]) but are not
focused on addressing how the mechanistic composition of low-level primitives gives more complex
behavior. To this end, mechanistic interpretability [Rai et al., 2024] and neurosymbolic methods
[Yang and Chaudhuri, 2022] explore this space, but are still in a nascent stage of development.
Scope of this paper. Consider a core module—with millions of parameters—in a large model. Can
we synthesize its functionality from its most basic primitives? How many such objects would we need?
This casts our broader interest in composition into a concrete problem: identifying a minimal set of
irreducibles that combine in specific ways to realize the full functionality of the module. We study this
problem for linear layers—noting that linear layers make up a large portion of parameters in large
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

