A Theory for Worst-Case vs. Average-Case
Guarantees for LLMs
Noga Amit∗
UC Berkeley

Shafi Goldwasser∗
UC Berkeley

Orr Paradise∗
UC Berkeley

Guy N. Rothblum∗
Apple

Abstract
How can we trust the correctness of a learned model on a particular input of interest? Model accuracy is typically measured on average over a distribution of inputs, giving no guarantee for any fixed input. This paper proposes a theoreticallyfounded solution to this problem: to train Self-Proving models that prove the correctness of their output to a verification algorithm V via an Interactive Proof. SelfProving models satisfy that, with high probability over an input sampled from a
given distribution, the model generates a correct output and successfully proves
its correctness to V. The soundness property of V guarantees that, for every input, no model can convince V of the correctness of an incorrect output. Thus, a
Self-Proving model proves correctness of most of its outputs, while all incorrect
outputs (of any model) are detected by V . We devise and analyze two generic
methods for learning Self-Proving models: Transcript Learning (TL) which relies
on access to transcripts of accepting interactions, and Reinforcement Learning
from Verifier Feedback (RLVF) which trains a model by emulating interactions
with the verifier.

1

Introduction

Bob is studying for his algebra exam and stumbles upon a question Q that he cannot solve. He
queries a Large Language Model (LLM) for the answer, and it responds with a number: 42. Bob
is aware of recent research showing that the LLM attains a 90% score on algebra benchmarks (cf.
Frieder et al. 2023), but should he trust that the answer to his particular question Q is indeed 42?
Bob could ask the LLM to explain its answer in natural language. Though he must proceed with caution, as the LLM might try to convince him of an incorrect answer [Turpin et al., 2023]. Moreover,
even if 42 is the correct answer, the LLM may fail to produce a convincing proof [Wang et al., 2023].
If only the LLM could formally prove its answer, Bob would verify the proof and be convinced.
This paper initiates the study of Self-Proving models (Fig. 1) that prove the correctness of their
answers via an Interactive Proof system [Goldwasser et al., 1985]. Self-Proving models successfully
convince a verification algorithm V with worst-case soundness guarantees: for any question, V
rejects all incorrect answers with high probability over the interaction. This guarantee holds even
against provers that have access to V ’s specification, and unbounded computational power.
Our contributions are as follows.
• We define Self-Proving models (Section 2).
• We propose two methods for learning Self-Proving models (Section 3). The first, Transcript Learning (TL), relies on access to transcripts of accepting interactions. The second
method, Reinforcement Learning from Verifier Feedback (RLVF), trains a model by emulating interactions with the verifier.
∗

Authors listed alphabetically.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

