Synthetic Series-Symbol Data Generation for
Time Series Foundation Models
Wenxuan Wang
School of Telecommunications Engineering
Xidian University
whenxuan@ieee.org
Yujian Betterest Li
School of Artificial Intelligence
Xidian University
bebetterest@outlook.com

Kai Wu∗
School of Artificial Intelligence
Xidian Univeristy
kwu@xidian.edu.cn

Dan Wang∗
School of Telecommunications Engineering
Xidian University
danwang@xidian.edu.cn

Xiaoyu Zhang
School of Cyber Engineering
Xidian University
xiaoyuzhang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Foundation models for time series analysis (TSA) have attracted significant attention. However, challenges such as training data scarcity and imbalance continue to
hinder their development. Inspired by complex dynamic system theories, we design
a series-symbol data generation mechanism, enabling the unrestricted creation of
high-quality time series data paired with corresponding symbolic expressions. To
leverage series-symbol data pairs with strong correlations, we develop SymTime,
a pre-trained foundation model for enhancing time series representation using
symbolic information. SymTime demonstrates competitive performance across
five major TSA tasks when fine-tunes with downstream tasks, rivaling foundation models pre-trained on real-world datasets. This approach underscores the
potential of series-symbol data generation and pretraining mechanisms in overcoming data scarcity and enhancing task performance. The code is available at
https://github.com/wwhenxuan/SymTime.

1

Introduction

In recent years, with the rapid advancement of deep learning, foundation models for time series
analysis (TSA) have garnered widespread attention due to their superior generalization capabilities,
scalability and advantages in few-shot learning [1, 2]. Coupled with issues of data privacy [3, 4],
existing time series datasets are smaller compared to those in the fields of computer vision (CV) and
natural language processing (NLP). Besides, current large-scale time series datasets face significant
data imbalance issues, with certain types such as finance and healthcare still being relatively scarce
(see Appendix B.4). According to scaling laws [5], this can lead to performance bias in the time
series foundation models, reducing their generalization capabilities on out-of-distribution data [6, 7].
To mitigate the issue of training data scarcity and imbalance, this paper, starting from Takens’ theorem
[8, 9], posits that time series are representations of complex dynamical systems [10, 11, 12]. Based on
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

