Learning World Models for Interactive Video
Generation

1

Taiye Chen1∗ Xun Hu2∗ Zihan Ding3∗ Chi Jin3†
Peking University 2 University of Oxford 3 Princeton University
yeyutaihan@stu.pku.edu.cn
{xh4421,zihand,chij}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Foundational world models must be both interactive and preserve spatiotemporal
coherence for effective future planning with action choices. However, present models for long video generation have limited inherent world modeling capabilities due
to two main challenges: compounding errors and insufficient memory mechanisms.
We enhance image-to-video models with interactive capabilities through additional
action conditioning and autoregressive framework, and reveal that compounding
error is inherently irreducible in autoregressive video generation, while insufficient
memory mechanism leads to incoherence of world models. We propose video
retrieval augmented generation (VRAG) with explicit global state conditioning,
which significantly reduces long-term compounding errors and increases spatiotemporal consistency of world models. In contrast, naive autoregressive generation
with extended context windows and retrieval-augmented generation prove less
effective for video generation, primarily due to the limited in-context learning capabilities of current video models. Our work illuminates the fundamental challenges
in video world models and establishes a comprehensive benchmark for improving
video generation models with internal world modeling capabilities.
Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/vrag.

1

Introduction

Foundational world models capable of simulating future outcomes based on different actions
are crucial for effective planning and decisionmaking [1, 2, 3]. To achieve this, these models must exhibit both interactivity, allowing for
action conditioning, and spatiotemporal consistency over long horizons. While recent advancements in video generation, particularly diffusion models [4, 5, 6, 7], have shown promise,
extending them to generate long, interactive,
and consistent videos remains a significant challenge [8, 9, 10].

Figure 1: A world model possesses memory capaAutoregressive approaches [11, 12, 13, 14], bilities and enables faithful long-term future predicwhich generate videos frame by frame or chunk tion by maintaining awareness of its environment
by chunk conditioned on previous outputs, are a and generating predictions based on the current
state and actions. Example is in Minecraft game.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

