Self-Challenging Language Model Agents

Yifei Zhou∗
UC Berkeley

Sergey Levine
UC Berkeley

Jason Weston
FAIR, Meta

Xian Li†
FAIR, Meta

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar†
FAIR, Meta

Abstract
Large language models are quickly becoming the foundation for intelligent agents
that are capable of using tools. However, training such agents is challenging
because it requires human creation and annotation of a diverse set of tasks, tools,
and evaluation criteria. In this paper, we propose the Self-Challenging framework
for training an agent on high-quality tasks that are generated by itself. The agent
first plays the role of challenger and generates a task after interacting with the
given tools. The tasks take the form of a novel general class of problems termed
Code-as-Task, which are defined by an instruction, a verification function and
solution and failure cases which serve as tests, allowing to filter only for highquality tasks. The agent then takes an executor role and trains on those tasks with
reinforcement learning using the evaluation feedback as a reward. Evaluation on
two existing multi-turn tool-use agent benchmarks, M3 ToolEval and TauBench,
shows the Self-Challenging framework achieves over a two-fold improvement in
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, despite using only self-generated training data.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide array of
complex tasks [20, 14, 43], positioning them as promising agents for autonomous decision-making
in open-ended environments, such as multi-turn tool use [46, 35] and GUI navigation [1, 41, 50].
Reinforcement learning (RL), which is already an integral part of post-training of LLMs, has emerged
as a powerful tool for enhancing multi-turn agentic capabilities for LLMs by directly optimizing the
final objective through interaction-based feedback [52, 53, 1, 24, 51].
An essential ingredient for applying RL to train a generally capable LLM agent is a large pool of highquality tasks for agents to learn by trial and error [51, 22]. However, relying on human annotators
for task creation is inherently costly, labor-intensive, and ultimately not scalable [51, 38, 47], thus
underscoring the need for an automatic and reliable pipeline for synthesizing tasks. While prior works
have built environment-specific pipelines for synthesizing tasks to perform RL, such as collaborative
designs [53], web navigation [51], and fixing Github issues [22, 14], a general task synthesis pipeline
for multi-turn LLM agents [37] in open-ended and tool-rich environments is still missing.
To come up with a synthetic task generation pipeline for general multi-turn tool-use LLM agents, we
can start by reflecting on how human annotators design tasks given access to a set of tools and the
environment. They will first try the tools and interact with the environment to see what kinds of goals
are possible to achieve and what would happen if these goals were achieved. The tasks would then be
sent to the LLM agent to see if it can achieve the goals set by the human annotators.
Motivated by this intuition, we propose a Self-Challenging Agent framework to construct synthetic
tasks for training general multi-turn LLM agents at scale. In this framework, shown in Figure 1,
the agent performs two distinct roles. In the challenger role, the agent first interacts in an unknown
environment with tools to gather information and generate possible tasks. Subsequently, these
∗
†

Work done at FAIR, Meta. Correspondance to yifei_zhou@berkeley.edu.
Equal advising.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

