Time-Evolving Dynamical System for Learning Latent
Representations of Mouse Visual Neural Activity

Liwei Huang1,2 , Zhengyu Ma2∗, Liutao Yu2 , Huihui Zhou2 , Yonghong Tian1,2,3
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
huanglw20@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{mazhy, yult, zhouhh}@pcl.ac.cn, yhtian@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Seeking high-quality representations with latent variable models (LVMs) to reveal
the intrinsic correlation between neural activity and behavior or sensory stimuli has
attracted much interest. In the study of the biological visual system, naturalistic
visual stimuli are inherently high-dimensional and time-dependent, leading to intricate dynamics within visual neural activity. However, most work on LVMs has not
explicitly considered neural temporal relationships. To cope with such conditions,
we propose Time-Evolving Visual Dynamical System (TE-ViDS), a sequential
LVM that decomposes neural activity into low-dimensional latent representations
that evolve over time. To better align the model with the characteristics of visual
neural activity, we split latent representations into two parts and apply contrastive
learning to shape them. Extensive experiments on synthetic datasets and real neural
datasets from the mouse visual cortex demonstrate that TE-ViDS achieves the
best decoding performance on naturalistic scenes/movies, extracts interpretable
latent trajectories that uncover clear underlying neural dynamics, and provides
new insights into differences in visual information processing between subjects
and between cortical regions. In summary, TE-ViDS is markedly competent in
extracting stimulus-relevant embeddings from visual neural activity and contributes
to the understanding of visual processing mechanisms. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/Grasshlw/Time-Evolving-Visual-Dynamical-System.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of neural recording technologies, researchers are able to simultaneously
record the spiking activity of large populations of neurons, opening up new avenues for exploring
the brain [55]. For high-dimensional neural data analysis, an important scientific problem is how to
account for the intrinsic correlation between neural activity and behavioral patterns or sensory stimuli.
One influential approach is latent variable models (LVMs), which construct low-dimensional latent
representations that bridge to behavior or stimuli and explain neural activity well [47, 5, 56, 26, 34].
To deal with the increasing scale of neural population activity, LVMs have evolved from simple
mathematical models early on, such as principal component analysis and factor analysis [9, 61, 44],
to complex artificial neural networks. More recently, advanced deep learning algorithms have enabled
LVMs to extract high-quality representations from neural activity without knowledge of experimental
labels [59, 42, 22, 36], or to incorporate behavioral information into models to constrain the shaping
of latent variables [37, 25, 45, 52, 2, 23]. These approaches have contributed to the analysis of neural
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

