Online Learning of Pure States is as Hard as Mixed
States
Maxime Meyer
Department of Mathematics & IPAL, IRL2955
National University of Singapore
Singapore
maxime.meyer@u.nus.edu
Naixu Guo
Centre for Quantum Technologies
National University of Singapore
Singapore
naixug@u.nus.edu

Soumik Adhikary
Centre for Quantum Technologies
National University of Singapore
Singapore
soumik@nus.edu.sg

Patrick Rebentrost
Centre for Quantum Technologies & School of Computing
National University of Singapore
Singapore
cqtfpr@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Quantum state tomography, the task of learning an unknown quantum state, is a
fundamental problem in quantum information. In standard settings, the complexity
of this problem depends significantly on the type of quantum state that one is trying
to learn, with pure states being substantially easier to learn than general mixed
states. A natural question is whether this separation holds for any quantum state
learning setting. In this work, we consider the online learning framework and prove
the surprising result that learning pure states in this setting is as hard as learning
mixed states. More specifically, we show that both classes share almost the same
sequential fat-shattering dimension, leading to identical regret scaling. We also
generalize previous results on full quantum state tomography in the online setting
to (i) the ϵ-realizable setting and (ii) learning the density matrix only partially,
using smoothed analysis.

1

Introduction

Learning information from an unknown quantum state is a fundamental task in quantum physics.
An N -dimensional quantum state ρ is represented as an N × N positive semi-definite Hermitian
matrix with unit trace. Given several perfect copies of ρ, full quantum state tomography seeks to
reconstruct the complete matrix representation of ρ via measurements. It has a wide range of practical
applications, including tasks such as characterizing qubit states for superconducting circuits [Lucero
et al., 2008], nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in diamond [Neumann et al., 2010], and verifying
successful quantum teleportation [Bouwmeester et al., 1997]. The ease of learning a quantum state is
often characterized by the sample complexity, i.e. the number of independent copies of the quantum
state required for an accurate reconstruction. For a general state ρ, the sample complexity scales
as Θ̃(N 3 ) for incoherent measurements. However, if the state is known to be pure, the sample
complexity can be improved to Θ̃(N ) [Kueng et al., 2017, Haah et al., 2016, Chen et al., 2023] .
Nevertheless, for n-qubit states, where N = 2n , this scaling implies an exponential dependence on
the number of qubits.
However, for many practical problems, such as certification of a quantum device [Gross et al., 2010,
Flammia and Liu, 2011, Eisert et al., 2020] and property estimation for quantum chemistry [Huang
et al., 2021, Wu et al., 2023, Guo et al., 2024, Raza et al., 2024, Miller et al., 2024], only partial
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

