Localizing Knowledge in Diffusion Transformers

Arman Zarei1∗ , Samyadeep Basu3 , Keivan Rezaei1 , Zihao Lin2 , Sayan Nag3 , Soheil Feizi1
1
2
3
University of Maryland
University of California, Davis
Adobe

Abstract
Understanding how knowledge is distributed across the layers of generative models
is crucial for improving interpretability, controllability, and adaptation. While prior
work has explored knowledge localization in UNet-based architectures, Diffusion
Transformer (DiT)-based models remain underexplored in this context. In this
paper, we propose a model- and knowledge-agnostic method to localize where
specific types of knowledge are encoded within the DiT blocks. We evaluate our
method on state-of-the-art DiT-based models, including PixArt-α, FLUX, and
SANA, across six diverse knowledge categories. We show that the identified
blocks are both interpretable and causally linked to the expression of knowledge in
generated outputs. Building on these insights, we apply our localization framework
to two key applications: model personalization and knowledge unlearning. In
both settings, our localized fine-tuning approach enables efficient and targeted
updates, reducing computational cost, improving task-specific performance, and
better preserving general model behavior with minimal interference to unrelated
or surrounding content. Overall, our findings offer new insights into the internal
structure of DiTs and introduce a practical pathway for more interpretable, efficient,
and controllable model editing. 1

1

Introduction

Diffusion and flow models [14, 26, 22, 13, 17, 8, 19] have rapidly become the leading paradigm for
a wide range of generative tasks, particularly text-to-image (T2I) synthesis. With access to such
powerful pretrained models, it is crucial to explore their potential for applications beyond mere
generation. A growing body of work [11, 32, 16, 37] has focused on localizing different types of
knowledge and capabilities within these models, enabling more targeted usage. For example, [11]
showed that cross-attention layers are key to incorporating prompt compositional information, while
[32, 20] demonstrated that structural information is often concentrated in the self-attention modules
of UNet-based architectures. These insights have been applied to tasks such as image editing and
structure-preserving generation [11, 4, 20].
Localizing where specific knowledge resides within models is essential for interpretability, targeted
interventions, and understanding model behavior. In generative models, it plays a critical role in
applications such as model unlearning and personalization. Several works [16, 29, 9, 36] have shown
that generative models often memorize unsafe or unwanted content (e.g., copyrighted or NSFW
content) and proposed methods to selectively erase such concepts. In model personalization, the goal
is to generate novel renditions of a subject using only a few reference photos across diverse scenes
and poses. In both cases, localizing knowledge within the model is crucial for enabling targeted
interventions that make fine-tuning more efficient and effective, while better preserving the model’s
prior capabilities and overall generation quality.
∗
1

Correspondence to: azarei@umd.edu
Project page is available at: https://armanzarei.github.io/Localizing-Knowledge-in-DiTs

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

