Optimal Best Arm Identification under Differential
Privacy

Marc Jourdan∗
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
marc.jourdan@epfl.ch

Achraf Azize∗
FairPlay Joint Team, CREST, ENSAE Paris
achraf.azize@ensae.fr

Abstract
Best Arm Identification (BAI) algorithms are deployed in data-sensitive applications, such as adaptive clinical trials or user studies. Driven by the privacy concerns
of these applications, we study the problem of fixed-confidence BAI under global
Differential Privacy (DP) for Bernoulli distributions. While numerous asymptotically optimal BAI algorithms exist in the non-private setting, a significant gap
remains between the best lower and upper bounds in the global DP setting. This
work reduces this gap to a small multiplicative constant, for any privacy budget ϵ.
First, we provide a tighter lower bound on the expected sample complexity of any
δ-correct and ϵ-global DP strategy. Our lower bound replaces the Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence in the transportation cost used by the non-private characteristic
time with a new information-theoretic quantity that optimally trades off between
the KL divergence and the Total Variation distance scaled by ϵ. Second, we introduce a stopping rule based on these transportation costs and a private estimator
of the means computed using an arm-dependent geometric batching. En route to
proving the correctness of our stopping rule, we derive concentration results of
independent interest for the Laplace distribution and for the sum of Bernoulli and
Laplace distributions. Third, we propose a Top Two sampling rule based on these
transportation costs. For any budget ϵ, we show an asymptotic upper bound on
its expected sample complexity that matches our lower bound to a multiplicative
constant smaller than 8. Our algorithm outperforms existing δ-correct and ϵ-global
DP BAI algorithms for different values of ϵ.

1

Introduction

The stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) is an interactive sequential decision-making
model [Bubeck et al., 2012; Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020], introduced by William R. Thompson [Thompson, 1933]. Thompson’s motivation for studying MABs is to design clinical trials that
adapt treatment allocations on the fly as the medicines appear more or less effective. Specifically, in
MABs, a learner interacts with K ∈ N unknown probability distributions, referred to as arms. In
clinical trials, the arms are the candidate medicines, while the observations are patient reactions, 1 if
the patient is cured and 0 otherwise. The learner aims to identify the arm with the highest average
efficiency, i.e., the medicine that cures most patients in expectation. Given a fixed error δ ∈ (0, 1),
Best Arm Identification (BAI) [Audibert and Bubeck, 2010b; Jamieson and Nowak, 2014] algorithms
in the fixed confidence setting [Even-Dar et al., 2006; Gabillon et al., 2012; Garivier and Kaufmann,
2016] suggest a candidate answer that coincides with the optimal arm with probability more than
1 − δ, while using as few samples as possible.
BAI algorithms have been increasingly deployed in data-sensitive applications, such as adaptive clinical trials [Thompson, 1933; Robbins, 1952; Aziz et al., 2021], pandemic mitigation [Libin et al., 2019],
∗

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

