Incentivizing Reasoning for Advanced
Instruction-Following of Large Language Models
1

Yulei Qin

1

Gang Li
1,2

Zhekai Lin
1

Tencent Youtu Lab

2

1

1

Zongyi Li
Xiao Cui

3

Zihan Xu
Ke Li

1

1

Yuchen Shi

Xing Sun

1

3

Xiamen University The Chinese University of Hong Kong
yuleiqin@tencent.com
Codes & Datasets
Model Checkpoints

Abstract
Existing large language models (LLMs) face challenges of following complex
instructions, especially when multiple constraints are present and organized in
paralleling, chaining, and branching structures. One intuitive solution, namely
chain-of-thought (CoT), is expected to universally improve capabilities of LLMs.
However, we find that the vanilla CoT exerts a negative impact on performance
due to its superficial reasoning pattern of simply paraphrasing the instructions.
It fails to peel back the compositions of constraints for identifying their relationship across hierarchies of types and dimensions. To this end, we propose RAIF,
a systematic method to boost LLMs in dealing with complex instructions via
incentivizing reasoning for test-time compute scaling. First, we stem from the
decomposition of complex instructions under existing taxonomies and propose a
reproducible data acquisition method. Second, we exploit reinforcement learning
(RL) with verifiable rule-centric reward signals to cultivate reasoning specifically
for instruction following. We address the shallow, non-essential nature of reasoning
under complex instructions via sample-wise contrast for superior CoT enforcement.
We also exploit behavior cloning of experts to facilitate steady distribution shift
from fast-thinking LLMs to skillful reasoners. Extensive evaluations on seven
comprehensive benchmarks confirm the validity of the proposed method, where
a 1.5B LLM achieves 11.74% gains with performance comparable to a 8B LLM.
Evaluation on OOD constraints also confirms the generalizability of our RAIF.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) exhibited remarkable performance on real-world tasks [1, 2, 3, 4].
Such generalizability is built upon the instruction-following capabilities of LLMs [5, 6, 7]. To benchmark whether LLMs can produce the desired outputs under complex instructions, existing studies
predominantly focus on modeling various types of constraints and rules where all requirements are
expected to be satisfied simultaneously [8, 9, 10, 7]. Recently, the compositions of constraints (And,
Chain, Selection, and Nested) have been systemized [11] to enhance the complexity of instructions
and demonstrate that LLMs still fail to meet expectations under intricate structures. These complex
instructions, which are often composed of multiple sub-instructions, enforce various constraints
on the expected responses. Existing LLMs either ignore certain constraints in And structures or
misinterpret the instruction to respond to the wrong sub-instructions in Selection structures.
To improve LLMs in solving complex instructions, most prior methods leverage two kinds of techniques: 1) supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [12, 13], and 2) template-guided inference [14, 15]. Despite
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

