Convergence of Shallow ReLU Networks
on Weakly Interacting Data

Léo Dana ∗
Sierra, INRIA
Paris

Loucas Pillaud-Vivien †
CERMICS, Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées
Champs-sur-Marne

Francis Bach ‡
Sierra, INRIA
Paris

Abstract
We analyse the convergence of one-hidden-layer ReLU networks trained by gradient flow on n data points. Our main contribution leverages the high dimensionality of the ambient space, which implies low correlation of the input samples, to
demonstrate that a network with width of order log(n) neurons suffices for global
convergence with high probability. Our analysis uses a Polyak–Łojasiewicz viewpoint along the gradient-flow trajectory, which provides an exponential rate of
convergence of n1 . When the data are exactly orthogonal, we give further refined
characterizations of the convergence speed, proving its asymptotic behavior lies
between the orders n1 and √1n , and exhibiting a phase-transition phenomenon in
the convergence rate, during which it evolves from the lower bound to the upper,
1
and in a relative time of order log(n)
.

1

Introduction

Understanding the properties of models used in machine learning is crucial for providing guarantees to downstream users. Of particular importance, the convergence of the training process under
gradient methods stands as one of the first issues to address in order to comprehend them. If, on the
one hand, such a question for linear models and convex optimization problems [Bottou et al., 2018,
Bach, 2024] are well understood, this is not the case for neural networks, which are the most used
models in large-scale machine learning. This paper focuses on providing quantitative convergence
guarantees for a one-hidden-layer neural network.
Theoretically, such global convergence analysis of neural networks has seen two main achievements
in the past years: (i) the identification of the lazy regime, due to a particular initialization, where
convergence is always guaranteed at the cost of being essentially a linear model [Jacot et al., 2018,
Arora et al., 2019, Chizat et al., 2019], and (ii) the proof that with an infinite amount of hidden units
a two-layer neural network converges towards the global minimizer of the loss [Mei et al., 2018,
Chizat and Bach, 2018, Rotskoff and Vanden-Eijnden, 2018]. However, neural networks are trained
in practice outside of these regimes, as neural networks are known to perform feature learning, and
experimentally reach global minimum with a large but finite number of neurons. Quantifying in
which regimes neural networks converge to a global minimum of their loss is still an important open
question.
We identify a regime—marked by low-correlated inputs—where the training dynamics of shallow
neural networks via gradient flow can be rigorously understood. Unlike prior analyses that hinged
on finely tuned initialization scales [Chizat et al., 2019, Boursier et al., 2022], an infinite number of
neurons [Jacot et al., 2018, Chizat and Bach, 2018], or the unrealistic orthogonality of data [Boursier
∗

leo.dana@inria.fr
loucas.pillaud-vivien@enpc.fr
‡
francis.bach@inria.fr
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

