Tight Asymptotics of Extreme Order Statistics

José R. Correa
Universidad de Chile
correa@uchile.cl

Frederik Mallmann-Trenn
King’s College London
frederik.mallmann-trenn@kcl.ac.uk
Matías Romero
Columbia University
mer2262@columbia.edu

Abstract
A classic statistical problem is to study the asymptotic behavior of the order
statistics of a large number of independent samples taken from a distribution with
finite expectation. This behavior has implications for several core problems in
machine learning and economics — including robust learning under adversarial
noise, best-arm identification in bandit algorithms, revenue estimation in secondprice auctions, and the analysis of tail-sensitive statistics used in out-of-distribution
detection.
The research question we tackle in this paper is: How large can the expectation
of the ℓ-th maximum of the n samples be? For ℓ = 1, i.e., the maximum, this
expectation is known to grow as o(n), which can be shown to be tight. We show
that there is a sharp contrast when considering any fixed ℓ > 1. Surprisingly, in
n
this case, the largest possible growth rate for all fixed ℓ > 1 is O( log(n) log
log(n) )
n
and Ω( log(n)(log log(n))1.01 ). Our result is actually finer than the latter and provides
a sharp characterization of the largest achievable growth rate for the expectation of
the ℓ-th maximum of n i.i.d. samples.
Beyond the theoretical analysis, we support our findings with extensive simulations.
These empirical results highlight a notable phenomenon: although the multiplicative gap between the maximum and the second maximum grows quickly with
n, the ratio remains approximately constant in 99% of trials. This suggests that
while worst-case growth is sharp and meaningful, typical-case behavior may be
significantly more stable.

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem in applied probability and statistics is to estimate the distribution of the
maxima and minima of a set of independent and identically distributed random variables. Specifically,
the setting we study in this paper is the following. Let X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn be non-negative independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables drawn from a distribution F . The corresponding
order statistics are:
min Xi = X1:n ≤ X2:n ≤ · · · ≤ Xn:n = max Xi .
i∈[n]

i∈[n]

Our object of interest is Mℓ (n) = MℓF (n) = E [Xn−ℓ+1:n ].1 Our goal is to study the asymptotics of
Mℓ (n). In particular, we are interested in the largest possible rate at which Mℓ (n) can grow.
1

When clear from context we will drop the dependence on F .

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

