Value-Guided Decision Transformer: A Unified
Reinforcement Learning Framework for Online and
Offline Settings

Hongling Zheng1

Li Shen2† Yong Luo1† Deheng Ye3 Shuhan Xu1 Bo Du1
Jialie Shen4 Dacheng Tao5
1
School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center of Multimedia Software
and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China 3 Tencent Inc., Shenzhen, China
4
City St George’s, University of London, UK 5 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{hlzheng, luoyong, xushuhan, dubo}@whu.edu.cn dericye@tencent.com
{mathshenli, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com jerry.shen@citystgeorges.ac.uk

Abstract
The Conditional Sequence Modeling (CSM) paradigm, benefiting from the transformer’s powerful distribution modeling capabilities, has demonstrated considerable promise in Reinforcement Learning (RL) tasks. However, much of the work
has focused on applying CSM to single online or offline settings, with the general
architecture rarely explored. Additionally, existing methods primarily focus on
deterministic trajectory modeling, overlooking the randomness of state transitions
and the diversity of future trajectory distributions. Fortunately, value-based methods offer a viable solution for CSM, further bridging the potential gap between
offline and online RL. In this paper, we propose Value-Guided Decision Transformer (VDT), which leverages value functions to perform advantage-weighting
and behavior regularization on the Decision Transformer (DT), guiding the policy
toward upper-bound optimal decisions during the offline training phase. In the
online tuning phase, VDT further integrates value-based policy improvement with
behavior cloning under the CSM architecture through limited interaction and data
collection, achieving performance improvement within minimal timesteps. The
predictive capability of value functions for future returns is also incorporated into
the sampling process. Our method achieves competitive performance on various standard RL benchmarks, providing a feasible solution for developing CSM
architectures in general scenarios. Code is available at here.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (Offline RL) [1] aims to develop a reward-maximizing RL strategy
using offline data. This approach is highly valuable in real-world scenarios where online data
collection is expensive, time-consuming, or impractical. Transformer [2] is widely regarded for
its capacity to capture complex data distributions and long-term temporal dependencies, becoming
a foundational architecture in fields such as Natural Language Processing [3, 4] and Computer
Vision [5, 6]. Inspired by this success, Decision Transformer (DT) [7] and its variants [8, 9] introduce
the transformer to the field of offline RL, demonstrating its powerful capabilities in Conditional
Sequence Modeling (CSM) [10]. Specifically, DT integrates cumulative rewards, states, and actions
†

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

