A-Mem: Agentic Memory for LLM Agents
1

2

1

1

1

1,3

Wujiang Xu , Zujie Liang , Kai Mei , Hang Gao , Juntao Tan , Yongfeng Zhang
1
2
3
Rutgers University
Independent Researcher
AIOS Foundation
wujiang.xu@rutgers.edu

Abstract
While large language model (LLM) agents can effectively use external tools for
complex real-world tasks, they require memory systems to leverage historical
experiences. Current memory systems enable basic storage and retrieval but lack
sophisticated memory organization, despite recent attempts to incorporate graph
databases. Moreover, these systems’ fixed operations and structures limit their
adaptability across diverse tasks. To address this limitation, this paper proposes
a novel agentic memory system for LLM agents that can dynamically organize
memories in an agentic way. Following the basic principles of the Zettelkasten
method, we designed our memory system to create interconnected knowledge
networks through dynamic indexing and linking. When a new memory is added, we
generate a comprehensive note containing multiple structured attributes, including
contextual descriptions, keywords, and tags. The system then analyzes historical
memories to identify relevant connections, establishing links where meaningful
similarities exist. Additionally, this process enables memory evolution – as new
memories are integrated, they can trigger updates to the contextual representations
and attributes of existing historical memories, allowing the memory network to
continuously refine its understanding. Our approach combines the structured
organization principles of Zettelkasten with the flexibility of agent-driven decision
making, allowing for more adaptive and context-aware memory management.
Empirical experiments on six foundation models show superior improvement
against existing SOTA baselines.
Code for Benchmark Evaluation:
https://github.com/WujiangXu/AgenticMemory
Code for Production-ready Agentic Memory:
https://github.com/WujiangXu/A-mem-sys

1

Introduction

Large Language Model (LLM) agents have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in various tasks,
with recent advances enabling them to interact with environments, execute tasks, and make decisions
autonomously [23, 33, 7]. They integrate LLMs with external tools and delicate workflows to improve
reasoning and planning abilities. Though LLM agent has strong reasoning performance, it still needs
a memory system to provide long-term interaction ability with the external environment [35].
Existing memory systems [25, 39, 28, 21] for LLM agents provide basic memory storage functionality.
These systems require agent developers to predefine memory storage structures, specify storage
points within the workflow, and establish retrieval timing. Meanwhile, to improve structured memory
organization, Mem0 [8], following the principles of RAG [9, 18, 30], incorporates graph databases for
storage and retrieval processes. While graph databases provide structured organization for memory
systems, their reliance on predefined schemas and relationships fundamentally limits their adaptability.
This limitation manifests clearly in practical scenarios - when an agent learns a novel mathematical
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

