Neptune-X: Active X-to-Maritime Generation for
Universal Maritime Object Detection

Yu Guo1,3 , Shengfeng He2,∗, Yuxu Lu4 , Haonan An1 , Yihang Tao1 ,
Huilin Zhu5 , Jingxian Liu3 , Yuguang Fang1
1
Hong Kong JC STEM Lab of Smart City and Department of Computer Science,
City University of Hong Kong 2 Singapore Management University
3
State Key Laboratory of Maritime Technology and Safety, Wuhan University of Technology
4
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 5 Wuhan University of Science and Technology
https://github.com/gy65896/Neptune-X

Abstract
Maritime object detection is essential for navigation safety, surveillance, and
autonomous operations, yet constrained by two key challenges: the scarcity of
annotated maritime data and poor generalization across various maritime attributes
(e.g., object category, viewpoint, location, and imaging environment). To address
these challenges, we propose Neptune-X, a data-centric generative-selection framework that enhances training effectiveness by leveraging synthetic data generation
with task-aware sample selection. From the generation perspective, we develop
X-to-Maritime, a multi-modality-conditioned generative model that synthesizes
diverse and realistic maritime scenes. A key component is the Bidirectional ObjectWater Attention module, which captures boundary interactions between objects
and their aquatic surroundings to improve visual fidelity. To further improve downstream tasking performance, we propose Attribute-correlated Active Sampling,
which dynamically selects synthetic samples based on their task relevance. To
support robust benchmarking, we construct the Maritime Generation Dataset, the
first dataset tailored for generative maritime learning, encompassing a wide range
of semantic conditions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach sets
a new benchmark in maritime scene synthesis, significantly improving detection
accuracy, particularly in challenging and previously underrepresented settings.

1

Introduction

Object detection is a fundamental technology for maritime environmental perception, enabling the
identification of object categories and the localization of bounding boxes in images captured by
imaging systems deployed on various facilities, such as surface vessels, coastal infrastructure, and
aerial platforms. It plays a key role in a variety of maritime applications, including autonomous or
assisted navigation for surface ships [43], intelligent video surveillance for coastal facilities [40], and
autonomous inspection using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) [44].
Despite rapid advances in deep learning-based object detection [39, 37, 23], the generalization
capability of these models remains heavily dependent on the scale and diversity of annotated training
data. Specifically, maritime-specific object detection datasets face two core limitations. First, the
acquisition and annotation process is costly and labor-intensive. Different from land scenarios, data
collection from heterogeneous platforms such as ships, UAVs, and stationary coastal cameras requires
significant operational resources. In addition, the manual annotation of bounding boxes limits dataset
scalability. Second, existing datasets exhibit large disparities in training difficulty across multiple
∗

Corresponding author: shengfenghe@smu.edu.sg.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

