Wukong’s 72 Transformations: High-fidelity Textured
3D Morphing via Flow Models

1

Minghao Yin1
Yukang Cao2
Kai Han1∗
2
Visual AI Lab, The University of Hong Kong
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
yinmh@connect.hku.hk

yukang.cao@ntu.edu.sg

kaihanx@hku.hk

…

…

source

target gallery

Figure 1: High-fidelity textured 3D morphing of Wukong. Taking an image of Wukong (bottom
left) as the source and an image of another character (bottom right) as the target, we demonstrate two
types of textured 3D morphing by our method: (i) Purple arrows indicate texture-controlled morphing,
where the geometric structure changes while preserving detailed textures from the source; (ii) Green
arrows indicate textured 3D morphing guided by the target prompt.

Abstract
We present W UKONG, a novel training-free framework for high-fidelity textured
3D morphing that takes a pair of source and target prompts (image or text) as input.
Unlike conventional methods—which rely on manual correspondence matching
and deformation trajectory estimation (limiting generalization and requiring costly
preprocessing)—W UKONG leverages the generative prior of flow-based transformers to produce high-fidelity 3D transitions with rich texture details. To ensure
smooth shape transitions, we exploit the inherent continuity of flow-based generative processes and formulate morphing as an optimal transport barycenter problem.
We further introduce a sequential initialization strategy to prevent abrupt geometric
distortions and preserve identity coherence. For faithful texture preservation, we
propose a similarity-guided semantic consistency mechanism that selectively retains high-frequency details and enables precise control over blending dynamics.
This empowers W UKONG to support both global texture transitions and identitypreserving texture morphing, catering to diverse generation needs. Extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate that W UKONG significantly outper∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

