WebDancer:
Towards Autonomous Information Seeking Agency

Jialong Wu∗¶, Baixuan Li∗ , Runnan Fang∗ , Wenbiao Yin∗¶, Liwen Zhang,
Zhenglin Wang, Zhengwei Tao, Dingchu Zhang, Zekun Xi, Xiangru Tang,
Yong Jiang¶, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Jingren Zhou
Tongyi Lab

, Alibaba Group

Correspondence to: wujialongml@gmail.com
{yinwenbiao.ywb,yongjiang.jy}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Addressing intricate real-world problems necessitates in-depth information seeking
and multi-step reasoning. Recent progress in agentic systems, exemplified by Deep
Research, underscores the potential for autonomous multi-step research. In this
work, we present a cohesive paradigm for building end-to-end agentic information
seeking agents from a data-centric and training-stage perspective. Our approach
consists of four key stages: (1) agentic data synthesis, (2) trajectory sampling,
(3) supervised fine-tuning for effective cold start, and (4) agentic reinforcement
learning for enhanced generalization. We instantiate this framework in a web
agent based on the ReAct, WebDancer. Empirical evaluations on the challenging
information-seeking benchmarks, GAIA and WebWalkerQA, demonstrate the
strong performance of WebDancer, achieving considerable results and highlighting
the efficacy of our training paradigm. Further analysis of agent training provides
valuable insights and actionable, systematic pathways for developing more capable
agentic models. 2

1

Introduction

Web agents are autonomous systems that perceive their real-world web environment, make decisions,
and take actions to accomplish specific and human-like tasks. Recent systems, such as ChatGPT
Deep Research [1] and Grok DeepSearch [2], have demonstrated strong deep information-seeking
capabilities through end-to-end reinforcement learning (RL) training.
The community’s previous approaches for information seeking by agentic systems can be categorized
into two types: (i) Directly leveraging prompting engineering techniques to guide Large Language
Models (LLMs) or Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) [3–5] to execute complex tasks. (ii) Incorporating search or browser capabilities into the web agents through supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
or RL [6, 5, 7–10]. The first training-free methods are unable to effectively leverage the reasoning capabilities enabled by the reasoning model. Although the latter methods internalize certain
information-seeking capabilities through SFT or RL training, both the training and evaluation datasets
are relatively simple and do not capture the real-world challenges, for instance, performance on the
2Wiki dataset has already reached over 80%. Moreover, the current SFT or RL training paradigm does
not fully and efficiently exploit the potential of information-seeking behavior. Building autonomous
information seeking agency involves addressing a set of challenges that span web environment
perception and decision-making: (1) acquiring high-quality, fine-grained browsing data that reflects
∗
2

Equal contribution. ¶ Correspondence.
The codes and demo are released in https://github.com/Alibaba-NLP/DeepResearch.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

