Deep Learning with Plausible Deniability
Wenxuan Bao1∗ Shan Jin2 Hadi Abdullah2 Anderson C. A. Nascimento2
Vincent Bindschaedler1 Yiwei Cai2
1
2
University of Florida
Visa Research

Abstract
Deep learning models are vulnerable to privacy attacks due to their tendency to
memorize individual training examples. Theoretically-sound defenses such as
differential privacy can defend against this threat, but model performance often
suffers. Empirical defenses may thwart existing attacks while maintaining model
performance but do not offer any robust theoretical guarantees.
In this paper, we explore a new strategy based on the concept of plausible deniability.
We introduce a training algorithm called Plausibly Deniable Stochastic Gradient
Descent (PD-SGD). The core of this approach is a rejection sampling technique,
which probabilistically prevents updating model parameters whenever a mini-batch
cannot be plausibly denied. We provide theoretical results showing that PD-SGD
effectively mitigates privacy leakage from individual data points. Experiments
demonstrate the scalability of PD-SGD and the favorable privacy-utility trade-off it
offers compared to existing defense methods.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are susceptible to privacy attacks such as membership inference [38, 45, 7, 4,
50, 14, 22, 41] that compromise the confidentiality of training data. Although mitigation strategies
exist, the current state of affairs forces practitioners to choose between strong privacy guarantees
and high-quality performant models. Differential privacy (DP)-based approaches [16] such as DPSGD [1] offer strong mathematical privacy guarantees but often substantially degrade model quality.
Empirical defenses [29, 40, 9] better preserve model quality but come without any mathematical
guarantees and thus may ultimately prove vulnerable to future (yet-to-be-discovered) attacks.
This paper introduces a new approach for model training inspired by the concept of plausible
deniability. The central privacy goal is to ensure that the trained model could be obtained from
different data instead (and therefore model developers can plausibly deny using specific data subsets).
To satisfy this privacy desideratum, we propose Plausibly Deniable Stochastic Gradient Descent (PDSGD), a new gradient-based learning algorithm that leverages an efficient privacy test in each learning
iteration that scrutinizes mini-batch gradients before they are used to update model parameters. The
test discards anomalous gradients — that are not consistent with the desired deniability level —
thereby mitigating potential adverse privacy consequences from such updates (as illustrated in Fig. 2).
We formalize batch-level plausible deniability as a privacy game focused on a single learning
iteration. We prove that achieving batch PD also protects individual examples’ privacy in the sense of
membership inference. With proper instantiation of the privacy test, PD-SGD satisfies batch PD and
(ε, δ)-differential privacy. Through composition, we obtain a guarantee for the entire training process.
In summary, we provide a new way to conceptualize privacy for model training through plausible
deniability and a new algorithm for it that uses rejection-sampling based privacy testing. Compared
to DP-SGD, our approach does not require per-example clipping (which reduces computational and
∗

Work partially done during internship at Visa Research

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

