Metritocracy:
Representative Metrics for Lite Benchmarks

Ariel D. Procaccia

Benjamin Schiffer

Serena Wang

Shirley Zhang

Harvard University

Harvard University

Harvard University

Harvard University

Abstract
A common problem in LLM evaluation is how to choose a subset of metrics from
a full suite of possible metrics. Subset selection is usually done for efficiency or
interpretability reasons, and the goal is often to select a “representative” subset
of metrics. However, “representative” is rarely clearly defined. In this work, we
use ideas from social choice theory to formalize two notions of representation for
the selection of a subset of evaluation metrics. We first introduce positional representation, which guarantees every alternative is sufficiently represented at every
position cutoff. We then introduce positional proportionality, which guarantees
no alternative is proportionally over- or under-represented by more than a small
error at any position. We prove upper and lower bounds on the smallest number of
metrics needed to guarantee either of these properties in the worst case. We also
study a generalized form of each property that allows for additional input on groups
of metrics that must be represented. Finally, we tie theory to practice through
real-world case studies on both LLM evaluation and hospital quality evaluation.

1

Introduction

The last few years have seen an explosion in metrics to evaluate large language models (LLMs).
While this has improved our ability to understand the capabilities of LLMs, it is also increasingly
computationally expensive to evaluate all of these measures. This challenge is directly felt by
platforms like BIG-bench [Srivastava et al., 2022] and HELM [Liang et al., 2022] that aggregate
numerous metrics to provide as complete a picture as possible of LLM performance.
A common approach that evaluation platforms take to mitigate these growing computational difficulties is to create a “lite” version of the full evaluation suite, which consists of a subset of the original
measures. For example, BIG-bench Lite contains a subset of 24 JSON metrics from the full collection
of over 200 metrics, which is “designed to provide a canonical measure of model performance, while
being far cheaper to evaluate than the full set.” HELM Lite also contains a subset of scenarios from
HELM Classic (in addition to some others), constructed to have a lighter computational overhead.
The problem of selecting a subset of evaluation metrics is actually quite general beyond LLM
evaluation, and is also common in public policy and business operations. For example, Cal Hospital
Compare awards Patient Safety Honor Roll status to hospitals using a subset of 12 measures from a
full set of hundreds of hospital quality measures collected by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services [Cal Hospital Compare, 2025]. This subset is carefully hand-selected, but Cal Hospital
Compare still acknowledges that “measurement of patient safety is complex and there is no single
validated method for measuring the overall safety of care provided in a given health care setting.”
Beyond computational considerations, an additional reason for selecting a subset of metrics is
understandability for stakeholders.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

