Differentially Private High-dimensional Variable
Selection via Integer Programming

Petros Prastakos
Operations Research Center
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
pprastak@mit.edu

Kayhan Behdin
LinkedIn
Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA
kbehdin@linkedin.com

Rahul Mazumder
Operations Research Center
Sloan School of Management
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
rahulmaz@mit.edu

Abstract
Sparse variable selection improves interpretability and generalization in highdimensional learning by selecting a small subset of informative features. Recent advances in Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) have enabled solving large-scale nonprivate sparse regression—known as Best Subset Selection (BSS)—with millions of
variables in minutes. However, extending these algorithmic advances to the setting
of Differential Privacy (DP) has remained largely unexplored. In this paper, we introduce two new pure differentially private estimators for sparse variable selection,
levering modern MIP techniques. Our framework is general and applies broadly to
problems like sparse regression or classification, and we provide theoretical support
recovery guarantees in the case of BSS. Inspired by the exponential mechanism,
we develop structured sampling procedures that efficiently explore the non-convex
objective landscape, avoiding the exhaustive combinatorial search in the exponential mechanism. We complement our theoretical findings with extensive numerical
experiments, using both least squares and hinge loss for our objective function, and
demonstrate that our methods achieve state-of-the-art empirical support recovery,
outperforming competing algorithms in settings with up to p = 104 . Code is available at https://github.com/petrosprastakos/DP-variable-selection.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional datasets are increasingly common, but extracting meaningful models is challenging
due to overfitting and lack of interpretability. Statistical regularizations that encourage model
simplicity from certain perspectives have been successful in addressing such challenges, becoming
a staple of high-dimensional statistics and machine learning. One such common regularization is
sparsity [16, 15], where one seeks to choose a small subset of features in the data to form the statistical
model.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of sparse variable selection. Given the data matrix X ∈ Rn×p
and the observations y ∈ Rn , we seek to obtain an estimator β that describes the data well with only
a few coordinates of β being nonzero. A natural first formulation for this problem is
minp

β∈R

n
X

ℓ(yi , xTi β) s.t. ∥β∥0 ≤ s, ∥β∥22 ≤ r2

(1)

i=1

where ∥ · ∥0 counts the number of nonzero coordinates of a vector. In the case where ℓ(yi , xTi β) =
(yi − xTi β)2 , the objective becomes least squares, and the problem is referred to as Best Subset
Selection (BSS, Miller [27]). The constraint ∥β∥0 ≤ s enforces sparsity via the sparsity budget
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

