Efficient and Near-Optimal Algorithm for Contextual
Dueling Bandits with Offline Regression Oracles

Aadirupa Saha∗
University of Illinois, Chicago
aadirupa.saha@gmail.com

Robert E. Schapire
Microsoft Research
schapire@microsoft.com

Abstract
The problem of contextual dueling bandits is central to reinforcement learning with
human feedback (RLHF), a widely used approach in AI alignment for incorporating human preferences into learning systems. Despite its importance, existing
methods are constrained either by strong preference modeling assumptions or by
applicability only to finite action spaces. Moreover, prior algorithms typically rely
on online optimization oracles, which are computationally infeasible for complex
function classes, limiting their practical effectiveness. In this work, we present
the first fundamental theoretical study of general contextual dueling bandits over
continuous action spaces. Our key contribution is a novel algorithm based on
a regularized
min-max optimization framework that achieves a regret bound of
√
Õ( dT )—the first such guarantee for this general setting. By leveraging offline
oracles instead of online ones, our method further improves computational efficiency. Empirical evaluations validate our theoretical findings, with our approach
significantly outperforming existing baselines in terms of regret.

1

Introduction

Preference-based feedback is widely used in applications like online retail, prediction markets,
tournament ranking, recommender systems, search optimization, robotics, and multiplayer games.
Compared to ordinal or absolute rewards, it often provides more reliable insights, such as in book
summarization [36], training language models like ChatGPT and LLAMA [9], and designing robotic
reward functions via trajectory preferences [12]. A well-studied variant of the multi-armed bandit
model [4, 21], the dueling bandit problem, addresses decision-making under pairwise preference
feedback with noise and limitations. It has been a key research area for over a decade [43, 3, 29, 7, 26],
aiming to identify ‘good’ arms by actively gathering preference feedback from chosen item pairs.
With the success of reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) [12, 38, 37], a key tool for
aligning language models with human values and designing AI behavior, interest in the theoretical
foundations of personalized learning with preference feedback has grown, particularly in contextual
dueling bandits. The fundamentals of dueling bandits and their generalizations have been widely
studied in the bandit and learning theory literature [41, 3, 43, 44]. A major limitation of dueling
bandits is the assumption of a fixed preference relation P, whereas real-world preferences vary
with context (e.g., user demographics, search queries, seasonal trends). Studies on non-stationary
preferences often benchmark against the best single item in hindsight, as in adversarial dueling
bandits [29, 18], which is often unrealistic. Some approaches mitigate this with a dynamic regret
objective, competing with the best action per round [28, 19], but these require impractical knowledge
of non-stationary complexity measures [10]. Moreover, such measures can be large, potentially
linear in O(T ), and fail to leverage contextual information effectively. A development of the line of
contextual dueling bandit research is given in Table 1.
In the study of contextual bandits [1, 32, 16], the primary focus has been on value or reward feedback.
However, there is a notable scarcity of research concentrating on preference or relative feedback (i.e.
in the dueling bandits framework). Some recent attempts address the problem of linear contextual
∗

corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

