Physics-informed machine learning with domain
decomposition and global dynamics for
three-dimensional intersecting flows

Leslie K. Hwang ∗
School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287
lkhwang@asu.edu

Abstract
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have emerged as a promising framework to develop complex scientific surrogate models, yet their scalability and
accuracy often degrade in non-canonical geometries, such as non-rectangular domains or three-dimensional (3D) domains with high aspect ratios. These limitations
hinder the broader adoption of vanilla PINNs in real-world, practical systems. In
this work, we introduce a multi-domain PINN (MDPINN) framework designed to
address the scalability and generalization challenges inherent in 3D non-rectangular
domains governed by nonlinear fluid dynamics. The target domain consists of
intersecting 3D fluid channels with a high aspect ratio, inducing complex flow
features such as deflections, mixing, and recirculations. Our approach is grounded
in two key innovations: 1) domain decomposition, which partitions the channel
volumes into multiple cubic-like subdomains, each modeled by an individual PINN,
2) enforcement of global dynamics (MDPINN-GD), which ensures that the total
mass flow rate entering the domain equals that exiting. These innovations reduce
the complexity of the problem imposed on individual PINNs and guide effective
network optimization toward physically consistent solutions throughout the domain.
We demonstrate that our method achieves: 1) 74.8% accuracy improvement over a
single-network PINN, and 2) 52.9% accuracy improvement over MDPINN that do
not enforce global mass conservation. Furthermore, the MDPINN-GD framework
exhibits accurate prediction even in highly complex regions-such as the channel
intersecting zone and the outlet zone characterized by intense flow mixing and large
velocity gradients-achieving maximum normalized mean absolute errors below
14.9% for velocity predictions compared to simulation results. This work establishes a path towards scalable, physically grounded surrogate modeling approach
that is extensible to multiphysics and high-dimensional scientific problems.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in scientific machine learning have garnered much attention for their potential
to bridge modern machine learning methods with traditional scientific computing. This integration is
particularly appealing to the engineering design community, where conventional simulation methods
such as computational fluid dynamics (CFD) can be computationally expensive for their applications.
For instance, CFD-based design optimization of fluidic networks-such as microchannels used for
electronic cooling-often involves simulations across a wide range of geometric and physical parameters. Major bottlenecks in these simulations lie in the generation and refinement of computational
meshes for large geometric variations, as well as in the computational cost of iterative design searches.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

