Multiplication-Free Parallelizable Spiking Neurons
with Efficient Spatio-Temporal Dynamics

Peng Xue1,2,6 Wei Fang3∗ Zhengyu Ma1 Zihan Huang4 Zhaokun Zhou1,3
Yonghong Tian1,3,4 Timothée Masquelier5 Huihui Zhou1∗
1

Peng Cheng Laboratory
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
4
School of Computer Science, Peking University
5
Centre de Recherche Cerveau et Cognition (CERCO), UMR5549 CNRS–Université Toulouse 3
6
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are distinguished from Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) for their complex neuronal dynamics and sparse binary activations
(spikes) inspired by the biological neural system. Traditional neuron models use
iterative step-by-step dynamics, resulting in serial computation and slow training
speed of SNNs. Recently, parallelizable spiking neuron models have been proposed
to fully utilize the massive parallel computing ability of graphics processing units
to accelerate the training of SNNs. However, existing parallelizable spiking neuron
models involve dense floating operations and can only achieve high long-term
dependencies learning ability with a large order at the cost of huge computational
and memory costs. To solve the dilemma of performance and costs, we propose the
mul-free channel-wise Parallel Spiking Neuron, which is hardware-friendly and
suitable for SNNs’ resource-restricted application scenarios. The proposed neuron
imports the channel-wise convolution to enhance the learning ability, induces the
sawtooth dilations to reduce the neuron order, and employs the bit-shift operation to
avoid multiplications. The algorithm for the design and implementation of acceleration methods is discussed extensively. Our methods are validated in neuromorphic
Spiking Heidelberg Digits voices, sequential CIFAR images, and neuromorphic
DVS-Lip vision datasets, achieving superior performance over SOTA spiking neurons. Training speed results demonstrate the effectiveness of our acceleration
methods, providing a practical reference for future research. Our code is available
at Github.

1

Introduction

Inspired by the biological neural system, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are regarded as the
third-generation neural network models [1]. By emulating neuronal dynamics and spike-based
communication characteristics in the brain [2], SNNs effectively capture temporal information and
achieve event-driven efficient computation, providing a novel paradigm for building the spike-based
machine intelligence [3].
Spiking neurons are the key component that distinguishes SNNs from Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs) [4]. They integrate input currents from synapses to membrane potentials by complex neuronal
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

