Practical Kernel Selection for Kernel-based
Conditional Independence Test

Wenjie Wang1
1

Mingming Gong1,5 Biwei Huang2 James Bailey1
Bo Han3 Kun Zhang4,5 Feng Liu1∗

The University of Melbourne 2 University of California, San Diego 3 Hong Kong Baptist University
4
Carnegie Mellon University 5 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
wenjie.wang3@student.unimelb.edu.au

{mingming.gong, feng.liu1}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Conditional independence (CI) testing is a fundamental yet challenging task in
modern statistics and machine learning. One pivotal class of methods for assessing conditional independence encompasses kernel-based approaches, known for
assessing CI by detecting general conditional dependence without imposing strict
assumptions on relationships or data distributions. As with any method utilizing
kernels, selecting appropriate kernels is crucial for precise identification. However,
it remains underexplored in kernel-based CI methods, where the kernels are often
determined manually or heuristically. In this paper, we analyze and propose a
kernel parameter selection approach for the kernel-based conditional independence
test (KCI). The kernel parameters are selected based on the ratio of the statistic
to the asymptotic variance, which approximates the test power for the given parameters at large sample sizes. The search procedure is grid-based, allowing for
parallelization with manageable additional computation time. We theoretically
demonstrate the consistency of the proposed criterion while explicitly accounting
for model estimation bias, which is a distinctive challenge specific to CI testing task.
Furthermore, we conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets to empirically validate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Conditional independence (CI) test is a cornerstone of statistics and machine learning. Let X, Y and
Z be the random variables, then the conditional independence relationship between X and Y given
Z, denoted by X ⊥⊥ Y ∣ Z, indicates that knowing the values of Z, the knowledge of X does not
yield any extra information about Y . This conditional independence relationship enables the removal
of redundant variables when constructing probabilistic models for a given variable set. Therefore, the
utilization of CI has expanded across diverse domains, including causality [Spirtes et al., 2000, 1995,
Pearl et al., 2000, Huang et al., 2020, Chi et al., 2024], fairness representation learning [Mehrabi
et al., 2021, Han et al., 2025], feature selection [Fukumizu et al., 2009, Song et al., 2012].
Traditional CI testing methods either address the discrete case [Margaritis, 2005] or rely on simplifying
assumptions to handle the continuous case [Lawrance, 1976, Linton and Gozalo, 1996]. These
assumptions can be restrictive, and when violated or when data are limited, these methods often
yield biased estimates and erroneous inferences, leading to unreliable conclusions. Daudin [1980]
extended the concept of partial correlation to general scenarios involving nonlinear and non-Gaussian
noise, redefining conditional independence as the zero correlation of any regression residual functions
∗

Corresponding to Feng Liu. The code is available at: https://github.com/wenjiewang3/PowerKCI

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

