On the Sample Complexity of Differentially Private
Policy Optimization

Yi He
Wayne State University
yihe@wayne.edu

Xingyu Zhou
Wayne State University
xingyu.zhou@wayne.edu

Abstract
Policy optimization (PO) is a cornerstone of modern reinforcement learning (RL),
with diverse applications spanning robotics, healthcare, and large language model
training. The increasing deployment of PO in sensitive domains, however, raises
significant privacy concerns. In this paper, we initiate a theoretical study of differentially private policy optimization, focusing explicitly on its sample complexity.
We first formalize an appropriate definition of differential privacy (DP) tailored to
PO, addressing the inherent challenges arising from on-policy learning dynamics
and the subtlety involved in defining the unit of privacy. We then systematically
analyze the sample complexity of widely-used PO algorithms, including policy
gradient (PG), natural policy gradient (NPG) and more, under DP constraints and
various settings, via a unified framework. Our theoretical results demonstrate that
privacy costs can often manifest as lower-order terms in the sample complexity,
while also highlighting subtle yet important observations in private PO settings.
These offer valuable practical insights for privacy-preserving PO algorithms.

1

Introduction

Policy Optimization (PO) such as REINFORCE [1, 2], proximal policy optimization (PPO) [3]
and group relative policy optimization (GRPO) [4] has gained increasing interest recently across
various applications. Due to its popularity, there is a rich literature that provides various theoretical
understandings of different PO methods (e.g., iteration or sample complexity [5–8]).
As PO becomes increasingly prevalent in real-world applications, privacy concerns are emerging
as a critical challenge. For instance, in personalized medical care, patient interactions—where the
state represents medical history, the action corresponds to prescribed medication, and the reward
reflects treatment effectiveness—constitute sensitive data that must be protected. Similarly, in RLbased training of large language models (LLMs), user prompts may contain private information that
requires protection. In fact, recent empirical work has shown that standard GRPO indeed has privacy
leakage issues [9]. Hence, addressing these privacy concerns is essential for ensuring the responsible
deployment of PO methods in sensitive domains.
Contribution. In this paper, we initiate the theoretical study of differentially private policy optimization, focusing on the central question: What’s the sample complexity cost induced by differential
privacy in PO? To this end, we first carefully define a suitable notion of differential privacy (DP) [10]
for PO, highlighting its distinctions from the standard DP definitions used in supervised learning.
These differences stem from the unique learning dynamics and the notion of the privacy unit in PO.
Then, we propose a meta algorithm for private PO, which enables us to study private policy gradient
with REINFORCE (DP-PG), private natural policy gradient (NPG) [11] (DP-NPG), and private version
of REBEL recently proposed in [12] (DP-REBEL) in a unified perspective. Moreover, for DP-NPG and
DP-REBEL, we further reduce PO to a sequence of private regression problems, thus allowing us to
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

