Simple and Optimal Sublinear Algorithms for Mean
Estimation
Beatrice Bertolotti
University of Pavia, Italy
beatrice.bertolotti02@universitadipavia.it
Chris Schwiegelshohn
Aarhus University, Denmark
schwiegelshohn@cs.au.dk

Matteo Russo
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
mrusso@diag.uniroma1.it
Sudarshan Shyam
Aarhus University, Denmark
shyam@cs.au.dk

Abstract
We study the sublinear multivariate mean estimation problem in d-dimensional
Euclidean space. Specifically, we aim to find the mean µ of a ground point set
A, which minimizes the sum of squared Euclidean distances of the points in A to
µ. We first show that a multiplicative (1 + ε) approximation to µ can be found
with probability 1 − δ using O(ε−1 log δ −1 ) many independent uniform random
samples, and provide a matching lower bound. Furthermore, we give two estimators
with optimal sample complexity that can be computed in optimal running time for
extracting a suitable approximate mean:
1. The coordinate-wise median of log δ −1 sample means of sample size ε−1 . As
a corollary, we also show improved convergence rates for this estimator for
estimating means of multivariate distributions.
2. The geometric median of log δ −1 sample means of sample size ε−1 . To
compute a solution efficiently, we design a novel and simple gradient descent
algorithm that is significantly faster for our specific setting than all other
known algorithms for computing geometric medians.
In addition, we propose an order statistics approach that is empirically competitive
with these algorithms, has an optimal sample complexity and matches the running
time up to lower order terms.
We finally provide an extensive experimental evaluation among several estimators
which concludes that the geometric-median-of-means-based approach is typically
the most competitive in practice.

1

Introduction

An extremely simple algorithmic paradigm is to sample a subset of the input independently and
uniformly at random and solve a problem on the sample. Such algorithms are called sublinear
algorithms and form a staple of large data analysis. The most desirable property of a sublinear
algorithm is that the query of sample complexity is as small as possible. For most problems, it
is rare for a sublinear algorithm with only constant queries to produce multiplicative guarantees.
Remarkably, finding the multivariate mean of a point set A in Euclidean space is one of the cases
where not only can we obtain a multiplicative error with constant queries, but can do so with arbitrary
precision. Specifically, we are interested in the objective
X
min
∥p − c∥2 ,
c∈Rd

p∈A

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

