Real-DRL: Teach and Learn at Runtime
Yanbing Mao∗
Engineering Technology Division
Wayne State University
Detroit, MI 48202
hm9062@wayne.edu

Yihao Cai∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Wayne State University
Detroit, MI 48202
yihao.cai@wayne.edu

Lui Sha
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
lrs@illinois.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces the Real-DRL framework for safety-critical autonomous
systems, enabling runtime learning of a deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
agent to develop safe and high-performance action policies in real plants (i.e.,
real physical systems to be controlled), while prioritizing safety! The Real-DRL
consists of three interactive components: a DRL-Student, a PHY-Teacher, and a
Trigger. The DRL-Student is a DRL agent that innovates in the dual self-learning
and teaching-to-learn paradigm and the real-time safety-informed batch sampling.
On the other hand, PHY-Teacher is a physics-model-based design of action policies
that focuses solely on safety-critical functions. PHY-Teacher is novel in its realtime patch for two key missions: i) fostering the teaching-to-learn paradigm for
DRL-Student and ii) backing up the safety of real plants. The Trigger manages the
interaction between the DRL-Student and the PHY-Teacher. Powered by the three
interactive components, the Real-DRL can effectively address safety challenges
that arise from the unknown unknowns and the Sim2Real gap. Additionally,
Real-DRL notably features i) assured safety, ii) automatic hierarchy learning (i.e.,
safety-first learning and then high-performance learning), and iii) safety-informed
batch sampling to address the learning experience imbalance caused by corner
cases. Experiments with a real quadruped robot, a quadruped robot in NVIDIA
Isaac Gym, and a cart-pole system, along with comparisons and ablation studies,
demonstrate the Real-DRL’s effectiveness and unique features.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has been incorporated into many autonomous systems and has
shown significant advancements in making sequential and complex decisions in various fields, such as
autonomous driving [32, 33] and robot locomotion [28, 34]. However, the AI incident database2 has
revealed that machine learning (ML) techniques, including DRL, can achieve remarkable performance
but without a safety guarantee [60]. Therefore, ensuring high-performance DRL with verifiable safety
is more crucial than ever, aligning with the growing market demand for safe ML techniques.
∗
2

Equal contribution.
AIID: https://incidentdatabase.ai

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

