Fast MRI for All: Bridging Access Gaps by Training
without Raw Data
Yaşar Utku Alçalar
University of Minnesota
alcal029@umn.edu

Merve Gülle
University of Minnesota
glle0001@umn.edu

Mehmet Akçakaya∗
University of Minnesota
akcakaya@umn.edu

Abstract
Physics-driven deep learning (PD-DL) approaches have become popular for improved reconstruction of fast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. Though
PD-DL offers higher acceleration rates than existing clinical fast MRI techniques,
their use has been limited outside specialized MRI centers. A key challenge is generalization to rare pathologies or different populations, noted in multiple studies, with
fine-tuning on target populations suggested for improvement. However, current
approaches for PD-DL training require access to raw k-space measurements, which
is typically only available at specialized MRI centers that have research agreements
for such data access. This is especially an issue for rural and under-resourced areas,
where commercial MRI scanners only provide access to a final reconstructed image.
To tackle these challenges, we propose Compressibility-inspired Unsupervised
Learning via Parallel Imaging Fidelity (CUPID) for high-quality PD-DL training
using only routine clinical reconstructed images exported from an MRI scanner.
CUPID evaluates output quality with a compressibility-based approach while ensuring that the output stays consistent with the clinical parallel imaging reconstruction
through well-designed perturbations. Our results show CUPID achieves similar
quality to established PD-DL training that requires k-space data while outperforming compressed sensing (CS) and diffusion-based generative methods. We further
demonstrate its effectiveness in a zero-shot training setup for retrospectively and
prospectively sub-sampled acquisitions, attesting to its minimal training burden.
As an approach that radically deviates from existing strategies, CUPID presents
an opportunity to provide broader access to fast MRI for remote and rural populations in an attempt to reduce the obstacles associated with this expensive imaging
modality. Code is available at https://github.com/ualcalar17/CUPID.

1

Introduction

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a central tool in modern medicine, offering multiple soft tissue
contrasts and high diagnostic sensitivity for numerous diseases. However, MRI is among the most
expensive medical imaging modalities, in part due to its long scan times. Demand for MRI scans
has shown an annual growth rate of 2.5%, while the number of MRI units per capita has increased
by 1.8% in a similar time frame [55]. This mismatch has further increased the wait times for MRI
exams [14, 42], particularly in rural areas and under-resourced/remote communities [17], shown in
Fig. 1. Thus, techniques for fast MRI scans that can reduce overall scan times without compromising diagnostic quality [6] are critical for improving the throughput of MRI. Computational MRI
approaches, including partial Fourier imaging [56], parallel imaging [61, 34], compressed sensing
(CS) [53], and more recently deep learning (DL) [38, 63] have been developed for accelerating MRI.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

