Spotlight Attention: Towards Efficient LLM
Generation via Non-linear Hashing-based KV Cache
Retrieval
Wenhao Li
Xiamen University

Yuxin Zhang
Xiamen University

Ziyang Gong
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Gen Luo
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Haiyuan Wan
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Fei Chao
Xiamen University

Rongrong Ji∗
Xiamen University

Abstract
Reducing the key-value (KV) cache burden in Large Language Models (LLMs)
significantly accelerates inference. Dynamically selecting critical KV caches
during decoding helps maintain performance. Existing methods use random linear
hashing to identify important tokens, but this approach is inefficient due to the
orthogonal distribution of queries and keys within two narrow cones in LLMs. We
introduce Spotlight Attention, a novel method that employs non-linear hashing
functions to optimize the embedding distribution of queries and keys, enhancing
coding efficiency and robustness. We also developed a lightweight, stable training
framework using a Bradley-Terry ranking-based loss, enabling optimization of the
non-linear hashing module on GPUs with 16GB memory in 8 hours. Experimental
results show that Spotlight Attention drastically improves retrieval precision while
shortening the length of the hash code at least 5× compared to traditional linear
hashing. Finally, we exploit the computational advantages of bitwise operations
by implementing specialized CUDA kernels, achieving hashing retrieval for 512K
tokens in under 100µs on a single A100 GPU, with end-to-end throughput up to
3× higher than vanilla decoding. All the training and evaluation stuff can be found
at https://github.com/wenhaoli-xmu/spotlight.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are propelling groundbreaking advancements in various natural
language tasks, significantly enhancing applications such as content creation and chat assistance.
Generally, the inference process of LLMs can be divided into (1) the pre-filling phase calculates the
key-value (KV) cache for input tokens in the prompt prior to autoregressive generation, and (2) the
decoding phase auto-regressively generates tokens, producing one token per forward pass based on
the KV cache. Among them, the decoding phase serves as the primary inference bottleneck due to
the frequent exchanges between on-board and on-chip memory for model parameters and KV cache,
which limits GPU scalability [3] more so than the pre-filling phase that processes input prompts in
parallel. For example, deploying LLaMA2-7B [21] on an A100 GPU for a single request achieves
nearly 100% GPU utilization during the pre-filling phase but drops to below 10% on average during
decoding, which largely restrains the inference efficiency of LLMs.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

