Distributed Multi-Agent Bandits Over Erdős-Rényi
Random Networks
Jingyuan Liu∗
Nanjing University
jingyuanliu@smail.nju.edu.cn

Hao Qiu∗
Università degli Studi di Milano
hao.qiu@unimi.it

Lin Yang
Nanjing University
linyang@nju.edu.cn

Mengfan Xu†
University of Massachusetts Amherst
mengfanxu@umass.edu

Abstract
We study the distributed multi-agent multi-armed bandit problem with heterogeneous rewards over random communication graphs. Uniquely, at each time step t
agents communicate over a time-varying random graph Gt generated by applying
the Erdős–Rényi model to a fixed connected base graph G (for classical ErdosRényi graphs, G is a complete graph), where each potential edge in G is randomly
and independently present with the link probability p. Notably, the resulting random graph is not necessarily connected at each time step. Each agent’s arm rewards
follow time-invariant distributions, and the reward distribution for the same arm
may differ across agents. The goal is to minimize the cumulative expected regret
relative to the global mean reward of each arm, defined as the average of that arm’s
mean rewards across all agents. To this end, we propose a fully distributed algorithm that integrates the arm elimination strategy with the random gossip algorithm.
We theoretically show that the regret upper bound is of order log T and is highly
interpretable,
reP where T is
 the2 optimal centralized
 the time horizon. It includes

log T
N log T
KN 2 log T
gret O
and
an
additional
term
O
+
k:∆k >0 ∆k
pλN −1 (Lap(G))
p
where N and K denote the total number of agents and arms, respectively. This
term reflects the impact of G’s algebraic connectivity λN −1 (Lap(G)) and the link
probability p, and thus highlights a fundamental trade-off between communication
efficiency and regret. As a by-product, we show a nearly optimal regret lower
bound. Finally, our numerical experiments not only show the superiority of our
algorithm over existing benchmarks, but also validate the theoretical regret scaling
with problem complexity.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a widely studied framework for sequential decision-making under
uncertainty [Auer et al., 2002]. In this setting, an agent selects an arm from multiple options
in each round, observes the reward from the chosen arm, and aims to maximize the cumulative
expected reward. The emergence of large-scale cooperative systems holds true in various applications
ranging from sensor networks [Ganesan et al., 2004, Zhu et al., 2016] to federated learning [Ye
et al., 2023, McMahan et al., 2017] and edge computing [Wang et al., 2022a, Ghoorchian and
Maghsudi, 2020]. It has naturally motivated interest in distributed multi-agent multi-armed bandit
∗
†

Equal contribution, in alphabetical order.
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

