R1-ShareVL: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability of
Multimodal Large Language Models via Share-GRPO

Huanjin Yao2,3* , Qixiang Yin4* , Jingyi Zhang1 , Min Yang2 , Yibo Wang3 , Wenhao Wu5
Fei Su4 , Li Shen6 , Minghui Qiu2 , Dacheng Tao1 , Jiaxing Huang1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 ByteDance 3 Tsinghua University
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
5
The University of Sydney 6 Sun Yat-sen University
∗

Equal Contribution

Corresponding Author

Abstract
In this work, we aim to incentivize the reasoning ability of Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) via reinforcement learning (RL) and develop an effective approach that mitigates the sparse reward and advantage vanishing issues
during RL. To this end, we propose Share-GRPO, a novel RL approach that tackle
these issues by exploring and sharing diverse reasoning trajectories over expanded
question space. Specifically, Share-GRPO first expands the question space for a
given question via data transformation techniques, and then encourages MLLM to
effectively explore diverse reasoning trajectories over the expanded question space
and shares the discovered reasoning trajectories across the expanded questions during RL. In addition, Share-GRPO also shares reward information during advantage
computation, which estimates solution advantages hierarchically across and within
question variants, allowing more accurate estimation of relative advantages and
improving the stability of policy training. Extensive evaluations over 6 widely-used
reasoning benchmarks showcase the superior performance of our method. Code is
available at https://github.com/HJYao00/R1-ShareVL.

1

Introduction

The recent success of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in Large Language Models (LLMs), such as
Kimi-K1.5 [1] and DeepSeek-R1 [2], shows its promise in incentivizing model’s long-chain reasoning
capability, enabling LLMs to tackle complex tasks such as mathematical and scientific reasoning. The
core design of these advances (e.g., GRPO [3] in Deepseek-R1) lies in online reinforcement learning
without the need of reward models, which encourages an LLM to generate a group of reasoning paths
and iteratively refine its reasoning process with a group relative advantage estimation mechanism
based on rule-based reward functions. Typically, a simple reward strategy is adopted: reasoning
paths leading to correct answers receive higher rewards, while those leading to incorrect answers
receive lower ones, where the model is optimized via the group relative advantages estimated from
the rewards.
Inspired by these advancements, we aim to develop a simple and effective reinforcement learning
method for Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) to incentivize their long-chain reasoning ability. A simple
way is to directly apply these LLM online reinforcement learning methods like GRPO on MLLMs.
However, we empirically observe that directly applying GRPO on MLLMs suffers from sparse reward
and advantage vanishing issues, leading to degraded performance in enhancing MLLM’s reasoning
capability [4, 5, 6]:
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

