What Makes a Reward Model a Good Teacher?
An Optimization Perspective

Noam Razin, Zixuan Wang, Hubert Strauss, Stanley Wei,
Jason D. Lee, Sanjeev Arora
Princeton Language and Intelligence, Princeton University

Abstract
The success of Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) critically
depends on the quality of the reward model. However, while this quality is primarily evaluated through accuracy, it remains unclear whether accuracy fully captures
what makes a reward model an effective teacher. We address this question from an
optimization perspective. First, we prove that regardless of how accurate a reward
model is, if it induces low reward variance, then the RLHF objective suffers from
a flat landscape. Consequently, even a perfectly accurate reward model can lead to
extremely slow optimization, underperforming less accurate models that induce
higher reward variance. We additionally show that a reward model that works well
for one language model can induce low reward variance, and thus a flat objective
landscape, for another. These results establish a fundamental limitation of evaluating reward models solely based on accuracy or independently of the language
model they guide. Experiments using models of up to 8B parameters corroborate
our theory, demonstrating the interplay between reward variance, accuracy, and
reward maximization rate. Overall, our findings highlight that beyond accuracy, a
reward model needs to induce sufficient variance for efficient optimization.

1

Introduction

Training safe and helpful language models requires aligning them with desirable traits that are
difficult to specify explicitly, be it through examples or hand-crafted reward functions. The widely
adopted Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) pipeline [11, 95, 55, 6] circumvents
this difficulty through a two-step approach. It first trains a reward model rRM based on access to
preference data, under the assumption that this data reflects an unknown ground truth reward rG ,
which encodes said desirable traits. Then, the language model πθ (referred to as a policy) is aligned
by maximizing rRM via policy gradient methods such as PPO [68], RLOO [42, 2], and GRPO [69].
Although the success of RLHF depends heavily on the quality of the reward model, it remains unclear
how this quality should be measured. Current benchmarks for evaluating reward models focus mostly
on accuracy [44, 93, 25, 47]. Namely, for a dataset of prompts, each associated with outputs ranked
according to human (or AI) preferences, accuracy measures the proportion of output pairs that the
reward model ranks correctly. Accuracy is a natural yardstick. It quantifies the extent to which
maximizing the proxy reward rRM is likely to increase the ground truth reward rG (given that rG
underlies the preference rankings in the dataset). However, recent empirical evidence suggests that,
by itself, accuracy may not be indicative of how good a reward model is: [37, 10, 80] observed that
more accurate reward models do not necessarily yield stronger language models after RLHF. So,
what makes a reward model a good teacher for RLHF?
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

