Sign-In to the Lottery:
Reparameterized Sparse Training

Advait Gadhikar∗ Tom Jacobs∗ Chao Zhou Rebekka Burkholz
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany
{advait.gadhikar, tom.jacobs, chao.zhou, burkholz}@cispa.de

Abstract
The performance gap between training sparse neural networks from scratch (PaI)
and dense-to-sparse training, presents a major roadblock for efficient deep learning. According to the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis, PaI hinges on finding a problem
specific parameter initialization, given a sparse mask. As we show, to this end,
determining correct parameter signs is sufficient. Yet, they remain elusive to PaI. To
address this issue, we propose Sign-In, which employs a dynamic reparameterization that provably induces sign flips. Such sign flips are complementary to the ones
that dense-to-sparse training can accomplish, rendering Sign-In as an orthogonal
method. While our experiments and theory suggest performance improvements of
PaI, they also carve out the main open challenge to close the gap between PaI and
dense-to-sparse training.

1

Introduction

As neural network sizes scale to billions of parameters, building efficient training pipelines is of
paramount importance. Sparsification plays a pivotal role in enabling such efficient pipelines (Frantar
& Alistarh, 2023). State-of-the-art sparsification methods rely on eliminating parameters during
training (Kuznedelev et al., 2024). The success of these methods can be attributed to finding an
optimal combination of parameters and sparse masks (Paul et al., 2023). However, identifying them
requires training a dense network before it can be sparsified such that information from the dense
network can be inherited by the subsequent sparse network (Gadhikar & Burkholz, 2024).
It is then no surprise that the most successful sparsification methods rely on dense training phases.
Dense-to-sparse methods like gradual pruning (Han et al., 2015) or continuous sparsification (Kusupati et al., 2020) explicitly start from a dense network. However, this comes at the cost of high
computational and memory demands during the dense training phase. Moreover, the benefits of
sparsification become mostly available towards the end of training or during inference.
Is there a way to train sparse networks from the start, given a sparse mask? The Lottery Ticket (LT)
Hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2019) posits that there exist sparse networks at random initialization
which enjoy optimal parameter-mask coupling and can achieve the same performance as their dense
counterpart. Finding such sparse networks at initialization would unlock the benefits of sparse training
from scratch. A plethora of pruning at initialization (PaI) methods have attempted to find such sparse
networks at initialization (Lee et al., 2019; Tanaka et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020), however, they
struggle to match the generalization performance of dense-to-sparse training methods.
Understanding and overcoming the limitations of PaI remains an open research problem and is the
focus of our work. The main challenge for PaI methods is to find highly performant parameter-mask
combinations by leveraging task-specific information efficiently (Kumar et al., 2024; Frankle et al.,
2021). The problem is thus comprised of two parts: a) learning a mask and b) optimizing the
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

