The Graphon Limit Hypothesis: Understanding
Neural Network Pruning via Infinite Width Analysis

1

Hoang Pham1 , The-Anh Ta2 , Tom Jacobs3 , Rebekka Burkholz3 , Long Tran-Thanh1
University of Warwick, 2 CSIRO’s Data61, 3 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
hoang.pham@warwick.ac.uk, theanh.ta@csiro.au, tom.jacobs@cispa.de,
burkholz@cispa.de, long.tran-thanh@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Sparse neural networks promise efficiency, yet training them effectively remains a
fundamental challenge. Despite advances in pruning methods that create sparse
architectures, understanding why some sparse structures are better trainable than
others with the same level of sparsity remains poorly understood. Aiming to develop a systematic approach to this fundamental problem, we propose a novel
theoretical framework based on the theory of graph limits, particularly graphons,
that characterizes sparse neural networks in the infinite-width regime. Our key
insight is that connectivity patterns of sparse neural networks induced by pruning
methods converge to specific graphons as networks’ width tends to infinity, which
encodes implicit structural biases of different pruning methods. We postulate the
Graphon Limit Hypothesis and provide empirical evidence to support it. Leveraging
this graphon representation, we derive a Graphon Neural Tangent Kernel (Graphon
NTK) to study the training dynamics of sparse networks in the infinite width limit.
Graphon NTK provides a general framework for the theoretical analysis of sparse
networks. We empirically show that the spectral analysis of Graphon NTK correlates with observed training dynamics of sparse networks, explaining the varying
convergence behaviours of different pruning methods. Our framework provides
theoretical insights into the impact of connectivity patterns on the trainability of
various sparse network architectures.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in a wide range of machine learning tasks,
including computer vision [33, 18], natural language processing [63, 17], and scientific modeling [38].
A key ingredient in this success is overparameterisation [4, 9, 37, 5], networks are often trained with
many more parameters than are strictly necessary, which facilitates optimization and generalization.
However, this overparameterisation introduces substantial computational and memory overheads
[25, 61, 56, 69], hindering deployment in resource-constrained environments such as mobile/edge
devices, embedded systems, or real-time applications.
To address these challenges, network pruning has emerged as a fundamental approach for compressing
deep networks by removing redundant weights [41, 31, 23, 25]. By identifying and eliminating
parameters that contribute little to the model’s output, pruning can produce sparse subnetworks
that retain high performance while offering significant efficiency gains. Empirically, the Lottery
Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) [23] demonstrates that randomly initialised dense networks contain sparse
subnetworks (winning tickets) that, when trained in isolation, can match or exceed the performance
of the original network. This observation has sparked significant research efforts including iterative
pruning methods for finding such winning tickets [24, 14, 13, 28], post-training pruning approaches
[29], various Pruning at Initialisation (PaI) techniques [43, 62, 66, 56, 69], and dynamic sparse
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

