PASS: Path-selective State Space Model for
Event-based Recognition

Jiazhou Zhou
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) ∗
International Digital Economy Academy
jzhou297@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
Lei Zhang
International Digital Economy Academy
leizhang@idea.edu.cn

Kanghao Chen
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ)
kchen879@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

Lin Wang†
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University
linwang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that capture intensity changes asynchronously with distinct advantages, such as high temporal resolution. Existing
methods for event-based object/action recognition predominantly sample and convert event representation at every fixed temporal interval (or frequency). However,
they are constrained to processing a limited number of event lengths and show poor
frequency generalization, thus not fully leveraging the event’s high temporal resolution. In this paper, we present our PASS framework, exhibiting superior capacity for
spatiotemporal event modeling towards a larger number of event lengths and generalization across varying inference temporal frequencies. Our key insight is to learn
adaptively encoded event features via the state space models (SSMs), whose linear
complexity and generalization on input frequency make them ideal for processing
high temporal resolution events. Specifically, we propose a Path-selective Event
Aggregation and Scan (PEAS) module to encode events into features with fixed
dimensions by adaptively scanning and selecting aggregated event presentations.
On top of it, we introduce a novel Multi-faceted Selection Guiding (MSG) loss to
minimize the randomness and redundancy of the encoded features during the PEAS
selection process. Our method outperforms prior methods on five public datasets
and shows strong generalization across varying inference frequencies with less
accuracy drop (ours -8.62% v.s. -20.69% for the baseline). Overall, PASS exhibits
strong long spatiotemporal modeling for a broader distribution of event length
(1-109 ), precise temporal perception, and generalization for real-world scenarios.

1

Introduction

Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that trigger signals when the relative intensity change exceeds
a threshold, adapting to scene brightness, motion, and texture. Compared with standard cameras,
event cameras output asynchronous event streams, instead of fixed frame rates. They offer distinct
advantages, such as high dynamic range, microsecond temporal resolution, and low latency [20, 15,
73, 6]. Due to these merits, event cameras have been applied to address various vision tasks, such as
object/action recognition [9, 4, 31, 74, 76, 77, 54, 7, 17, 16, 35, 56, 55, 48, 1].
∗
†

Project page: https://github.com/jiazhou-garland/PASS_Homepage.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

