Dyn-O: Building Structured World Models with
Object-Centric Representations

Zizhao Wang1,2∗ Kaixin Wang2 Li Zhao2 Peter Stone1,3 Jiang Bian2
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Sony AI
zizhao.wang@utexas.edu,pstone@cs.utexas.edu
{kaixwang,lizo,jiang.bian}@microsoft.com

Abstract
World models aim to capture the dynamics of the environment, enabling agents to
predict and plan for future states. In most scenarios of interest, the dynamics are
highly centered on interactions among objects within the environment. This motivates the development of world models that operate on object-centric rather than
monolithic representations, with the goal of more effectively capturing environment
dynamics and enhancing compositional generalization. However, the development
of object-centric world models has largely been explored in environments with
limited visual complexity (such as basic geometries). It remains underexplored
whether such models can be effective in more challenging settings. In this paper, we
fill this gap by introducing Dyn-O, an enhanced structured world model built upon
object-centric representations. Compared to prior work in object-centric representations, Dyn-O improves in both learning representations and modeling dynamics. On
the challenging Procgen games, we demonstrate that our method can learn objectcentric world models directly from pixel observations, outperforming DreamerV3
in rollout prediction accuracy. Furthermore, by decoupling object-centric features
into dynamic-agnostic and dynamic-aware components, we enable finer-grained
manipulation of these features and generate more diverse imagined trajectories. The
code of Dyn-O can be found at: https://github.com/wangzizhao/dyn-O.

1

Introduction

World models have emerged as powerful tools for simulating environment dynamics, enabling agents
to predict and plan for the future [16, 17, 20, 21, 39]. A common design in these models is to map
high-dimensional observations (e.g., images) into latent features and then model the environment’s
dynamics in this latent space. However, these latent features are typically monolithic, encoding the
entire scene as a whole without accounting for its internal compositional structure. Yet, interactions
in most environments are inherently object-centric. This observation motivates the development of
object-centric world models, which can offer improved efficiency, interpretability, and compositional
generalization.
Building object-centric world models involves two key steps: 1) learning object-centric representations and 2) modeling dynamics on top of them, as illustrated in Figure 1. For the former, the
goal is to encode features associated with each object present in the observation. For the latter, the
dynamics model should account for the different representation space, in contrast to a monolithic
representation, the input and the prediction target is a set of object-centric representations. While
several prior approaches have explored object-centric world models, they primarily focus on simple
environments consisting of basic shapes [2, 13, 32, 42], or rely on externally provided compositional
∗

work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

