TITAN: A Trajectory-Informed Technique for
Adaptive Parameter Freezing in Large-Scale VQE
Yifeng Peng1,† , Xinyi Li1 , Samuel Yen-Chi Chen2 , Kaining Zhang3 , Zhiding
Liang4 , Ying Wang1,∗ , Yuxuan Du3,‡
1

2
3
Stevens Institute of Technology
Wells Fargo
Nanyang Technological University
4
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
ypeng21@stevens.edu, xli215@stevens.edu, ycchen1989@ieee.org,
kaining.zhang@ntu.edu.sg, zlianghahaha@gmail.com, ywang6@stevens.edu,
yuxuan.du@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Variational quantum Eigensolver (VQE) is a leading candidate for harnessing quantum computers to advance quantum chemistry and materials simulations, yet its
training efficiency deteriorates rapidly for large Hamiltonians. Two issues underlie
this bottleneck: (i) the no-cloning theorem imposes a linear growth in circuit evaluations with the number of parameters per gradient step; and (ii) deeper circuits
encounter barren plateaus (BPs), leading to exponentially increasing measurement
overheads. To address these challenges, here we propose a deep learning framework, dubbed T ITAN, which identifies and freezes inactive parameters of a given
ansätze at initialization for a specific class of Hamiltonians, reducing the optimization overhead without sacrificing accuracy. The motivation of T ITAN starts with our
empirical findings that a subset of parameters consistently has negligible influence
on training dynamics. Its design combines a theoretically grounded data construction strategy, ensuring each training example is informative and BP-resilient, with
an adaptive neural architecture that generalizes across ansätze of varying sizes.
Across benchmark transverse-field Ising models, Heisenberg models, and multiple
molecule systems up to 30 qubits, T ITAN achieves up to 3× faster convergence and
40–60% fewer circuit evaluations than state-of-the-art baselines, while matching or
surpassing their estimation accuracy. By proactively trimming parameter space,
T ITAN lowers hardware demands and offers a scalable path toward utilizing VQE
to advance practical quantum chemistry and materials science.

1

Introduction

Quantum computing [1, 2] is widely believed to provide computational advantages in electronicstructure calculations (ESCs) [3], a pivotal task in catalyst discovery [4], drug design [5], and materials
innovation [6–9]. The flagship protocol that leverages the power of quantum computers to advance
ESCs is the variational quantum Eigensolver (VQE) [10–12], which estimates molecular ground-state
energies by iteratively adjusting a parameterized ansätze to lower the expectation value of a fermionic
Hamiltonian mapped onto qubits. Recent experiments have verified the potential of VQE in solving
ESCs for small-scale systems [13–16]. Despite the progress, scaling VQE from pedagogical circuits
to chemically relevant systems confronts two intertwined training bottlenecks, i.e., (i) barren plateaus
* † ‡ Corresponding Author. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not
represent the views of Wells Fargo. This article is for informational purposes only. Nothing contained in this
article should be construed as investment advice. Wells Fargo makes no express or implied warranties and
expressly disclaims all legal, tax, and accounting implications related to this article. Appendix is available at
https://github.com/Yifengml/TITAN-Appendix
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

