Domain Adaptive Hashing Retrieval via VLM
Assisted Pseudo-Labeling and Dual Space Adaptation

Jingyao Li1,2 , Zhanshan Li1,2 , Shuai Lü1,2∗
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China
2
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering (Jilin University),
Ministry of Education, Changchun 130012, China
Email addresses: jingyao@jlu.edu.cn, lizs@jlu.edu.cn, lus@jlu.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptive hashing has emerged as a promising approach
for efficient and memory-friendly cross-domain retrieval. It leverages the model
learned on labeled source domains to generate compact binary codes for unlabeled
target domain samples, ensuring that semantically similar samples are mapped
to nearby points in the Hamming space. Existing methods typically apply domain adaptation techniques to the feature space or the Hamming space, especially
pseudo-labeling and feature alignment. However, the inherent noise of pseudolabels and the insufficient exploration of complementary knowledge across spaces
hinder the ability of the adapted model. To address these challenges, we propose a Vision-language model assisted Pseudo-labeling and Dual Space adaptation
(VPDS) method. Motivated by the strong zero-shot generalization capabilities of
pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs), VPDS leverages VLMs to calibrate
pseudo-labels, thereby mitigating pseudo-label bias. Furthermore, to simultaneously utilize the semantic richness of high-dimensional feature space and preserve
discriminative efficiency of low-dimensional Hamming space, we introduce a dual
space adaptation approach that performs independent alignment within each space.
Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that VPDS consistently outperforms existing methods in both cross-domain and single-domain
retrieval tasks, highlighting its effectiveness and superiority.

1 Introduction
Hashing retrieval aims to map samples into compact low-dimensional binary codes, enabling fast
and memory-efficient retrieval via lightweight bit-wise operations in the Hamming space [12, 52,
53, 57, 65]. Existing hashing methods are typically categorized into supervised and unsupervised
approaches. Supervised hashing methods [38, 59, 63] benefit from rich label information and enable
the learning of highly discriminative representations, but they require large-scale labeled training
data and assume that training and query data are drawn from the same distribution, which are difficult
to be satisfied in real-world applications. Unsupervised hashing methods [24, 26, 46] eliminate the
dependency on labeled training data, but their performance is limited by the absence of reliable
supervision and they still struggle with the distribution shift between training and query data.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [2, 5, 10, 34, 44, 45, 60] is developed to transfer knowledge
from the labeled source domain to the unlabeled target domain, releasing the need for distribution
consistency across domains. This makes UDA a compelling solution for addressing the challenges
in both supervised and unsupervised hashing. As a result, domain adaptive hashing retrieval [3, 14,
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

