SaFiRe: Saccade-Fixation Reiteration with Mamba for
Referring Image Segmentation

Zhenjie Mao1 Yuhuan Yang1 Chaofan Ma1 Dongsheng Jiang4
Jiangchao Yao1† Ya Zhang2,3† Yanfeng Wang2
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence for Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
4
Huawei Inc.
{zhenjmao, yangyuhuan, chaofanma, sunarker, ya_zhang, wangyanfeng622}@sjtu.edu.cn
dongsheng_jiang@outlook.com

Abstract
Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) aims to segment the target object in an image
given a natural language expression. While recent methods leverage pre-trained
vision backbones and more training corpus to achieve impressive results, they
predominantly focus on simple expressions—short, clear noun phrases like “red
car” or “left girl”. This simplification often reduces RIS to a key word/concept
matching problem, limiting the model’s ability to handle referential ambiguity
in expressions. In this work, we identify two challenging real-world scenarios:
object-distracting expressions, which involve multiple entities with contextual cues,
and category-implicit expressions, where the object class is not explicitly stated.
To address the challenges, we propose a novel framework, SaFiRe, which mimics
the human two-phase cognitive process—first forming a global understanding,
then refining it through detail-oriented inspection. This is naturally supported by
Mamba’s scan-then-update property, which aligns with our phased design and
enables efficient multi-cycle refinement with linear complexity. We further introduce aRefCOCO, a new benchmark designed to evaluate RIS models under
ambiguous referring expressions. Extensive experiments on both standard and proposed datasets demonstrate the superiority of SaFiRe over state-of-the-art baselines.
Project page: https://zhenjiemao.github.io/SaFiRe/.

1

Introduction

Referring Image Segmentation (RIS), aiming to segment the target object in an image based on
the textual description, is a fundamental task in multi-modal understanding. Most studies solve the
RIS task by designing image-text alignment modules to bridge the modality gap [1–3]. With the
success of image foundation models [4–6], recent works further improved the performance of RIS by
leveraging the pre-trained image features [7–9] and introducing more training corpus [10–12].
Despite significant process, current RIS methods primarily focus on a narrow scenario, where most
of the referring expressions consist of a single, simple noun phrase that clearly identifies the target
object, e.g., “left girl” [13], “red car” [13], etc. We summarize this as the simple expression pattern.
Under this paradigm, the RIS task is often over-simplified and modeled as a “key word/concept
matching problem”. The model only needs to extract the key words or concepts from the given
text, then matches them with the image patches. Most existing RIS methods adopt this simplified
†

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

