Improving Decision Trees through the Lens of
Parameterized Local Search
Juha Harviainen∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
Helsinki, Finland
juha.harviainen@helsinki.fi

Frank Sommer∗
Institute of Computer Science
Friedrich-Schiller Universität Jena
Jena, Germany
frank.sommer@uni-jena.de

Manuel Sorge∗
Institute of Logic and Computation
TU Wien
Vienna, Austria
manuel.sorge@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
Algorithms for learning decision trees often include heuristic local-search operations such as (1) adjusting the threshold of a cut or (2) also exchanging the feature
of that cut. We study minimizing the number of classification errors by performing
a fixed number of a single type of these operations. Although we discover that the
corresponding problems are NP-complete in general, we provide a comprehensive
parameterized-complexity analysis with the aim of determining those properties of
the problems that explain the hardness and those that make the problems tractable.
For instance, we show that the problems remain hard for a small number d of
features or small domain size D but the combination of both yields fixed-parameter
tractability. That is, the problems are solvable in (D + 1)2d · |I|O(1) time, where
|I| is the size of the input. We also provide a proof-of-concept implementation of
this algorithm and report on empirical results.

1

Introduction

Decision trees classify and explain data by associating labels with subsets of the feature space,
characterized by a set of inequalities [30, 31, 35]. Not only are the models simple and efficient but
also relevant for explainable AI because of their interpretability [15, 39]. Many prominent algorithms
for learning decision trees like CART [2], C4.5 [36], C5.0, and J48 [43] utilize heuristics to decide
when and where in the tree to add new internal nodes that cut the data based on some chosen feature
and a threshold value. To mitigate overfitting, one may afterwards remove cuts from the decision tree
by performing different types of pruning operations such as replacing some subtree by a leaf node
[2, 36, 43]. Typically, when and where these are applied is also chosen heuristically.
After finding an initial solution a common and effective technique for optimization problems is to then
perform local search, that is, searching for a better solution within some local neighborhood under
some distance metric. Local search for decision trees is prevalent in the literature, in particular in
simulated annealing approaches [6, 8], genetic algorithms as a mutator [20, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 29, 40],
and SAT-based local search has recently shown strong performance for finding near-optimal decision
trees [41]. However, local search is not applied in the standard decision-tree heuristics [2, 36, 43],
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

