Streaming Stochastic Submodular Maximization with
On-Demand User Requests

Honglian Wang
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Digital Futures
Stockholm, Sweden
Lutz Oettershagen
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK

Sijing Tu
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Digital Futures
Stockholm, Sweden
Aristides Gionis
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Digital Futures
Stockholm, Sweden

Abstract
We explore a novel problem in streaming submodular maximization, inspired by
the dynamics of news-recommendation platforms. We consider a setting where
users can visit a news website at any time, and upon each visit, the website must
display up to k news items. User interactions are inherently stochastic: each news
item presented to the user is consumed with a certain acceptance probability by the
user, and each news item covers certain topics. Our goal is to design a streaming
algorithm that maximizes the expected total topic coverage. To address this problem, we establish a connection to submodular maximization subject to a matroid
constraint. We show that we can effectively adapt previous methods to address our
problem when the number of user visits is known in advance or linear-size memory
in the stream length is available. However, in more realistic scenarios where only
an upper bound on the visits and sublinear memory is available, the algorithms
fail to guarantee any bounded performance. To overcome these limitations, we
introduce a new online streaming algorithm that achieves a competitive ratio of
1/(8δ), where δ controls the approximation quality. Moreover, it requires only a
single pass over the stream, and uses memory independent of the stream length.
Empirically, our algorithms consistently outperform the baselines.

1

Introduction

Streaming submodular maximization has been extensively studied under various feasibility constraints, including matchoid [7, 8, 10], matroid [9], knapsack [21, 22] and k-set [20] constraints. In
the classical setting, the goal is to select a single subset of items from a data stream and output it when
the stream ends. However, this classical framework falls short in many real-world scenarios, for example, when seeking to maximize content coverage in online news recommendation. In such a setting,
users visit a news website multiple times and expect to receive a relevant set of articles on each visit.
Meanwhile, new articles continuously arrive at the content-provider’s server in a stream fashion. The
long-term objective is to maximize the total content coverage across user visits. Existing streaming
submodular maximization algorithms are ill-suited for this use case, as they are designed to produce
a single solution and do not support multiple or on-demand user interactions during the stream.
Motivated by this limitation, we introduce a novel problem called Streaming Stochastic Submodular
Maximization with On-demand Requests (S3MOR). While the setting is broadly applicable to
streaming submodular maximization tasks with multiple output requirements, we focus on the news
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

