Proximalized Preference Optimization for Diverse
Feedback Types: A Decomposed Perspective on DPO

Kaiyang Guo∗
Yinchuan Li
Zhitang Chen
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Direct alignment methods typically train large language models (LLMs) by contrasting the likelihoods of preferred and dispreferred responses. While effective
at capturing relative preferences, these methods are widely observed to suppress
the absolute likelihoods of example responses. As a result, aligned models can
deviate from expected patterns, exhibiting reward-hacking effect even without
an explicit reward model. This fundamental limitation of contrastive alignment,
termed likelihood underdetermination, motivates us to revisit direct preference
optimization (DPO)—the seminal direct alignment method. Interestingly, we show
that the DPO loss admits a principled decomposition. The reformulated loss not
only extends naturally to a broader range of feedback types, but also unveils the
root cause of likelihood underdetermination. Specifically, we identify that standard
DPO implicitly oversimplifies a regularizer in the reformulated loss; restoring this
full term effectively resolves the underdetermination. Building on these insights,
we introduce PRoximalized PReference Optimization (PRO), a unified alignment
method that accommodates diverse feedback types while eliminating likelihood
underdetermination through an efficient approximation of the full regularizer. Empirical evaluations demonstrate the consistent superiority of PRO over existing
methods across pairwise, binary and scalar feedback.

1

Introduction

The subtlety and complexity of human values make curating supervised datasets for large language
model (LLM) alignment a formidable challenge. To overcome this difficulty, learning from feedback leverages preference signals to guide models in distinguishing desirable from undesirable
outputs. This methodological shift facilitates scalable data acquisition for efficient alignment, while
concurrently propelling the evolution of techniques beyond traditional supervised fine-tuning.
Initially, reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) converts pairwise preference feedback
into continuous rewards, which are then used to train LLM via reinforcement learning algorithms
[1, 2]. RLHF has shown empirical success. However, it introduces significant computational overhead,
due to the need for an auxiliary reward model and on-policy sampling during training. Moreover,
as an imperfect proxy, the reward model may yield unreliable evaluations when confronted with
responses outside its training distribution, making RLHF vulnerable to reward hacking [3–7].
Direct preference optimization (DPO) sidesteps the explicit reward modeling, and learns directly
from offline preference data [8]. Its core methodology involves constructing a contrastive loss,
that maximizes the likelihood differences between preferred and dispreferred responses. Owing
to the simplicity, DPO has inspired the development of numerous contrastive approaches [9–11].
However, an unanticipated phenomenon frequently arises in DPO: the likelihoods of both preferred
and dispreferred responses decrease after alignment [12–15]. This decline inadvertently encourages
∗

Corresponding to: guokaiyang@huawei.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

