The Gaussian Mixing Mechanism:
Rényi Differential Privacy via
Gaussian Sketches
Omri Lev1∗ Vishwak Srinivasan1,†

Moshe Shenfeld2,†

Katrina Ligett2

Ashia C. Wilson1

Ayush Sekhari3

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem 3 Boston University
1

2

Abstract
Gaussian sketching, which consists of pre-multiplying the data with a random
Gaussian matrix, is a widely used technique in data science and machine
learning. Beyond computational benefits, this operation also provides
differential privacy guarantees due to its inherent randomness. In this work,
we revisit this operation through the lens of Rényi Differential Privacy
(RDP), providing a refined privacy analysis that yields significantly tighter
bounds than prior results. We then demonstrate how this improved analysis
leads to performance improvement in different linear regression settings,
establishing theoretical utility guarantees. Empirically, our methods improve
performance across multiple datasets and, in several cases, reduce runtime.

1

Introduction

Advances in data collection and storage have enabled the creation of massive datasets, which
have necessitated the design of scalable algorithms for efficient processing, analysis, and
inference. With the formation of such large datasets, there has also been an increased focus
on privacy-preserving analyses in a bid to protect private attributes [Apple Research, 2017,
Facebook Research, 2020, Snap Security, 2022, Ponomareva et al., 2023]. For instance,
census data consists of a variety of private information about individuals recorded, and the
United States Census Bureau has been taking various measures to ensure confidentiality in
the data, and has adopted more modern methods since the late 1900s [Bureau, 2019].
A popular mathematical notion of privacy is given by Differential Privacy (DP) [Dwork, 2006,
McSherry and Talwar, 2007, Dwork et al., 2014], which is currently the de facto standard for
privacy-preserving mechanisms. A private mechanism is a (randomized) function M which
takes as input a dataset X, and the key challenge in designing a “good” private mechanism
is balancing the tradeoff between the loss in utility with the increase in privacy-preserving
nature of the algorithm; it is possible to obtain complete privacy by simply returning noise
regardless of the input, but this clearly does not have good utility.
With regard to designing scalable algorithms to handle massive datasets, sketching as a
technique [Sarlos, 2006] has led to more computationally scalable algorithms relative to
naïvely working with the full dataset; see Woodruff [2014] for a review. Given a data matrix
X ∈ Rn×d , a sketch constructs a compressed representation SX ∈ Rk×d with k ≪ n, where
S ∈ Rk×n is a random matrix. For the case where S is comprised of i.i.d. Gaussian elements,
∗
†

Correspondence: omrilev@mit.edu. Code: https://github.com/omrilev1/GaussMix.
Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

