Diffusion Models Meet Contextual Bandits
Imad Aouali
Criteo AI Lab
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
i.aouali@criteo.com

Abstract
Efficient online decision-making in contextual bandits is challenging, as methods
without informative priors often suffer from computational or statistical inefficiencies. In this work, we leverage pre-trained diffusion models as expressive priors
to capture complex action dependencies and develop a practical algorithm that
efficiently approximates posteriors under such priors, enabling both fast updates
and sampling. Empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness and versatility of
our approach across diverse contextual bandit settings.

1

Introduction

A contextual bandit models online decision-making under uncertainty [49]. At each round, an agent
observes a context, selects an action, and receives a reward, aiming to maximize cumulative reward by
balancing exploitation of high-reward actions and exploration of uncertain ones. However, in largescale settings (e.g, the number of actions K is large), standard exploration strategies (e.g., LinUCB
[11] or LinTS [60]) often become computationally expensive or statistically inefficient. Fortunately,
actions in many real-world problems exhibit correlations, enabling more efficient exploration since
observing one action can inform the agent about others. Thompson sampling is particularly wellsuited for this, as it naturally incorporates informative priors [33] that capture complex action
dependencies. Inspired by the success of diffusion models [62, 30], which excel at approximating
complex high-dimensional distributions [23, 58], this work leverages pre-trained diffusion models as
priors in contextual Thompson sampling.
Precisely, we introduce a framework for contextual bandits with a diffusion-derived prior, and
develop diffusion Thompson sampling (dTS) that is both computationally and statistically efficient.
dTS achieves fast posterior updates and sampling through an efficient approximation that becomes
exact when the diffusion prior and the likelihood are linear. A key contribution, beyond applying
pre-trained diffusion models in contextual bandits, is the efficient computation and sampling of the
posterior distribution of a d-dimensional parameter θ | D, with D representing the data, when using
a pre-trained diffusion model prior on θ. This is relevant not only to bandits and RL but also to a
broader range of applications [19]. Our approximations are motivated by exact closed-form solutions
obtained in cases where both the pre-trained diffusion model and the likelihood are linear. These
solutions form the basis for our approximations for the non-linear case, demonstrating both strong
empirical performance and computational efficiency. Our approach avoids the computational burden
of heavy approximate sampling algorithms required for each latent parameter.
Diffusion models have been applied to offline decision-making [6, 36, 65], but their use in online
learning has only recently been explored by Hsieh et al. [34] who studied the multi-armed bandit
setting, and Kveton et al. [44] who explored a similar direction, with their preprint appearing shortly
after the first version of this work. An earlier, deliberately simplified version of our approach,
restricted to a linear diffusion model prior, was introduced in Aouali [7]. Here, we extend that
formulation to the more realistic and expressive non-linear case. A detailed discussion of related
work is provided in Appendix A.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

