Learning Memory-Enhanced Improvement Heuristics
for Flexible Job Shop Scheduling

Jiaqi Wang1,2 , Zhiguang Cao4 , Peng Zhao1,3∗, Rui Cao1,3 ,
Yubin Xiao1,3 , Yuan Jiang5∗, You Zhou1,2,3∗
1
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge
Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University
2
College of Software, Jilin University
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
4
Singapore Management University 5 Nanyang Technological University
{jqwang24, pengzhao23, ruicao24, xiaoyb21}@mails.jlu.edu.cn
zhiguangcao@outlook.com, yuan005@e.ntu.edu.sg, zyou@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract
The rise of smart manufacturing under Industry 4.0 introduces mass customization
and dynamic production, demanding more advanced and flexible scheduling techniques. The flexible job-shop scheduling problem (FJSP) has attracted significant
attention due to its complex constraints and strong alignment with real-world production scenarios. Current deep reinforcement learning (DRL)-based approaches to
FJSP predominantly employ constructive methods. While effective, they often fall
short of reaching (near-)optimal solutions. In contrast, improvement-based methods iteratively explore the neighborhood of initial solutions and are more effective
in approaching optimality. However, the flexible machine allocation in FJSP poses
significant challenges to the application of this framework, including accurate state
representation, effective policy learning, and efficient search strategies. To address
these challenges, this paper proposes a Memory-enhanced Improvement Search
framework with heterogeneous graph representation—MIStar. It employs a novel
heterogeneous disjunctive graph that explicitly models the operation sequences
on machines to accurately represent scheduling solutions. Moreover, a memoryenhanced heterogeneous graph neural network (MHGNN) is designed for feature
extraction, leveraging historical trajectories to enhance the decision-making capability of the policy network. Finally, a parallel greedy search strategy is adopted to
explore the solution space, enabling superior solutions with fewer iterations. Extensive experiments on synthetic data and public benchmarks demonstrate that MIStar
significantly outperforms both traditional handcrafted improvement heuristics and
state-of-the-art DRL-based constructive methods.

1

Introduction

As an emerging paradigm integrating advanced manufacturing and digital technologies, Industry 4.0
is transforming production toward dynamic, large-scale, and customized manufacturing [1, 2]. The
job-shop scheduling problem (JSP) [3], a classic NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem (COP),
has been widely studied and plays a critical role in manufacturing systems [4]. As an extension of
JSP [5, 6], the flexible job-shop scheduling problem (FJSP) allows each operation to be assigned to
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

