Data-Dependent Regret Bounds
for Constrained MABs
Gianmarco Genalti∗
Politecnico di Milano
gianmarco.genalti@polimi.it

Francesco Emanuele Stradi∗
Politecnico di Milano
francescoemanuele.stradi@polimi.it

Matteo Castiglioni
Politecnico di Milano
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it

Alberto Marchesi
Politecnico di Milano
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it

Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Abstract
This paper initiates the study of data-dependent regret bounds in constrained
MAB settings. These are bounds that depend on the sequence of losses that
characterize the problem
instance. Thus, in principle they can be much smaller
√
e T ) regret bounds, while being equivalent to them in the worst
than classical O(
case. Despite this, data-dependent regret bounds have been completely overlooked
in constrained MABs. The goal of this paper is to answer the question: Can datadependent regret bounds be derived in the presence of constraints? We provide
an affirmative answer in constrained MABs with adversarial losses and stochastic
constraints. Specifically, our main focus is on the most challenging and natural
settings with hard constraints, where the learner must ensure that the constraints
are always satisfied with high probability. We design an algorithm with a regret
bound consisting of two data-dependent terms. The first one captures the difficulty
of satisfying the constraints, while the second one encodes the complexity of
learning independently of their presence. We also prove a lower bound showing
that these two terms are not artifacts of our specific approach and analysis, but rather
the fundamental components that inherently characterize the problem complexity.
Finally, in designing our algorithm, we also derive some novel results in the related
(and easier) soft constraints settings, which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, constrained multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems have gained increasing
popularity in learning theory (see, e.g., [Liakopoulos et al., 2019, Pacchiano et al., 2021, Castiglioni
et al., 2022a, Chen et al., 2022]). In unconstrained MAB problems, the learner is evaluated solely in
terms of regret, which measures the difference between the learner’s performance and the performance
of an optimal-in-hindsight decision. Constrained settings introduce additional challenges, as the
learner must also ensure that certain constraints are not violated excessively while learning.
A growing trend in unconstrained MAB research is the derivation of data-dependent regret bounds
(see, e.g., [Neu, 2015a, Lee et al., 2020a]). These bounds depend on the sequence of losses that
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

