The Illusion of Thinking:
Understanding the Strengths and Limitations of
Reasoning Models via the Lens of Problem Complexity

Parshin Shojaee∗†

Iman Mirzadeh∗

Keivan Alizadeh Vahid

Maxwell Horton

Samy Bengio

Mehrdad Farajtabar

Apple

Abstract
Recent generations of frontier language models have introduced Large Reasoning
Models (LRMs) that generate detailed thinking processes before providing answers.
While these models demonstrate improved performance on reasoning benchmarks,
their fundamental capabilities, scaling properties, and limitations remain insufficiently understood. Current evaluations primarily focus on established mathematical and coding benchmarks, emphasizing final answer accuracy. However, this evaluation paradigm often suffers from data contamination and does not provide insights
into the reasoning traces’ structure and quality. In this work, we systematically
investigate these gaps with the help of controllable puzzle environments that allow
precise manipulation of compositional complexity while maintaining consistent
logical structures. This setup enables the analysis of not only final answers but also
the internal reasoning traces, offering insights into how LRMs “think”. Through
extensive experimentation across diverse puzzles, we show that frontier LRMs face
a complete accuracy collapse beyond certain complexities. Moreover, they exhibit
a counterintuitive scaling limit: their reasoning effort increases with problem complexity up to a point, then declines despite having an adequate token budget. By
comparing LRMs with their standard LLM counterparts under equivalent inference compute, we identify three performance regimes: (1) low-complexity tasks
where standard models surprisingly outperform LRMs, (2) medium-complexity
tasks where additional thinking in LRMs demonstrates advantage, and (3) highcomplexity tasks where both models experience complete collapse. We found that
LRMs have limitations in exact computation: they fail to use explicit algorithms and
reason inconsistently across scales and problems. We also investigate the reasoning
traces in more depth, studying the patterns of explored solutions and analyzing the
models’ computational behavior, shedding light on their strengths, limitations, and
ultimately raising questions about the nature for their reasoning capabilities.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently evolved to include specialized variants explicitly
designed for reasoning tasks—Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) such as OpenAI’s o1/o3 [1, 2],
DeepSeek-R1 [3], Claude Sonnet Thinking [4], and Gemini Thinking [5]. These models are new
artifacts, characterized by their “thinking” mechanisms such as long Chain-of-Thought (CoT) with
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done during an internship at Apple.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

