Aligning Transformers with Continuous Feedback via
Energy Rank Alignment

Shriram Chennakesavalu
Department of Chemistry
Stanford University
Stanford CA, 94305
shriramc@stanford.edu

Frank Hu
Department of Chemistry
Stanford University
Stanford CA, 94305
frankhu@stanford.edu

Sebastian Ibarraran
Department of Chemistry
Stanford University
Stanford CA, 94305
sebastian.ibarraran@stanford.edu

Grant M. Rotskoff
Department of Chemistry
Stanford University
Stanford CA, 94305
rotskoff@stanford.edu

Abstract
Searching through chemical space is an exceptionally challenging problem
because the number of possible molecules grows combinatorially with the
number of atoms. Large, autoregressive models trained on databases of chemical compounds have yielded powerful generators, but we still lack robust
strategies for generating molecules with desired properties. This molecular
search problem closely resembles the "alignment" problem for large language models, though for many chemical tasks we have a specific and easily
evaluable reward function. Here, we introduce an algorithm called energy
rank alignment (ERA) that leverages an explicit reward function to produce
a gradient-based objective that we use to optimize autoregressive policies.
We show theoretically that this algorithm is closely related to proximal policy optimization (PPO) and direct preference optimization (DPO), but has a
minimizer that converges to an ideal Gibbs-Boltzmann distribution with the
reward playing the role of an energy function. Furthermore, this algorithm is
highly scalable, does not require reinforcement learning, and performs well
relative to DPO when the number of preference observations per pairing is
small. We deploy this approach to align molecular transformers and protein
language models to generate molecules and protein sequences, respectively,
with externally specified properties and find that it does so robustly, searching
through diverse parts of chemical space.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are trained on large corpora of text to autoregressively generate
outputs. These models strongly reflect the distribution of the data on which they are trained Ouyang
et al. [2022], and controlling the outputs to reflect externally imposed preferences is an increasingly
important challenge for deployment. The aforementioned task, often called “alignment”, requires
either careful curation of training data or large sets of human preference data—both options are
labor-intensive Casper et al. [2023]. Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), a family
of algorithms that employs these human preference datasets, has been widely employed to align
instruction and chat models Ouyang et al. [2022], Bai et al. [2022], but it is both expensive to
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

