Statistical Inference under Performativity

Xiang Li*
Independent Researcher
xiangli0233@gmail.com

Yunai Li*
Northwestern University
yunaili2030@u.northwestern.edu

Lihua Lei
Stanford University
lihualei@stanford.edu

Huiying Zhong*
MIT
zhong826@mit.edu

Zhun Deng
UNC at Chapel Hill
zhundeng@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Performativity of predictions refers to the phenomenon where prediction-informed
decisions influence the very targets they aim to predict—a dynamic commonly
observed in policy-making, social sciences, and economics. In this paper, we
initiate an end-to-end framework of statistical inference under performativity. Our
contributions are twofold. First, we establish a central limit theorem for estimation
and inference in the performative setting, enabling standard inferential tasks such as
constructing confidence intervals and conducting hypothesis tests in policy-making
contexts. Second, we leverage this central limit theorem to study predictionpowered inference (PPI) under performativity. This approach yields more precise
estimates and tighter confidence regions for the model parameters (i.e., policies) of
interest in performative prediction. We validate the effectiveness of our framework
through numerical experiments. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
to establish a complete statistical inference under performativity, introducing new
challenges and inference settings that we believe will provide substantial value to
policy-making, statistics, and machine learning.

1

Introduction

Prediction-informed decisions are ubiquitous in nearly all areas and play important roles in our daily
lives. An important and commonly observed phenomenon is that prediction-informed decisions can
impact the targets they aim to predict, which is called performativity of predictions. For instance,
policies about loans based on default risk prediction can alter consumption habits of the population
that will further have an impact on their ability to pay off their loans.
To characterize performativity of predictions, a rich line of work on performative prediction [25]
have been formalizing and investigating this idea that predictive models used to support decisions
can impact the data-generating process. Mathematically, given a parameterized loss function ℓ, the
aim of performative prediction is to optimize the performative risk:
PR(θ) := Ez∼D(θ) ℓ(z; θ)

(1)

where z = (x, y) ∈ X × Y is the input and output pair drawn from a distribution D(θ) that is
dependent on the loss parameter θ. Typically, D(θ) is unknown and the optimization objective
PR(θ) can be non-convex even if ℓ(z; θ) is convex in θ. Thus, finding a performative optimal
point θPO ∈ arg minθ PR(θ) (there might exist multiple optimizers due to non-convexity) can
be theoretically intractable unless we impose very strong distributional assumptions [20]. As an
*

for equal contribution, listed in alphabetical order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

