Scaling RL to Long Videos
Yukang Chen1∗
Ligeng Zhu1

Wei Huang1,3∗ Baifeng Shi1,4† Qinghao Hu2† Hanrong Ye1†
Zhijian Liu1 Pavlo Molchanov1 Jan Kautz1 Xiaojuan Qi3
Sifei Liu1 Hongxu Yin1 Yao Lu1 Song Han1,2
1

NVIDIA

2

MIT

3

HKU

4

UC Berkeley

Abstract
We introduce a full-stack framework that scales up reasoning in vision-language
models (VLMs) to long videos, leveraging reinforcement learning. We address the
unique challenges of long video reasoning by integrating three critical components:
(1) a large-scale dataset, LongVideo-Reason, comprising 104K long video QA
pairs with high-quality reasoning annotations across diverse domains such as sports,
games, and vlogs; (2) a two-stage training pipeline that extends VLMs with chainof-thought supervised fine-tuning (CoT-SFT) and reinforcement learning (RL); and
(3) a training infrastructure for long video RL, named Multi-modal Reinforcement
Sequence Parallelism (MR-SP), which incorporates sequence parallelism and a
vLLM-based engine tailored for long video, using cached video embeddings for
efficient rollout and prefilling. In our experiments, LongVILA-R1-7B achieves
strong performance on video benchmarks, reaching 65.1% and 71.1% accuracy on
VideoMME without and with subtitles, respectively, and consistently outperforming
LongVILA-7B across multiple benchmarks. Moreover, LongVILA-R1-7B supports
processing up to 8,192 video frames per video, and configurable FPS settings.
Notably, our MR-SP system achieves up to 2.1× speedup on long video RL
training. In addition, we release our training system for public availability that
supports RL training on various modalities (video, text, and audio), various models
(VILA and Qwen series), and even image and video generation models. On a single
A100 node (8 GPUs), it supports RL training on hour-long videos (e.g., 3,600
frames). Code and models are available at https://github.com/NVlabs/Long-RL
and https://huggingface.co/Efficient-Large-Model/LongVILA-R1-7B.

1

Introduction

Understanding long videos requires more than simple recognition—it demands reasoning from
temporal, spatial, goal-oriented, and narrative perspectives [51]. As illustrated in Figure 1, answering
high-level questions often hinges on a model’s ability to integrate clues distributed across time, infer
hidden goals or strategies, track entities spatially, and comprehend the evolving plot. For instance,
predicting the winner of a football penalty shootout involves assessing emotional cues and tactical
behavior (temporal and goal reasoning), while determining the final location of a hidden ball requires
precise spatial tracking. Likewise, evaluating a poker player’s decision demands interpreting implicit
strategies beyond surface actions (goal reasoning) and understanding a character’s development or
match trajectory reflects the need for plot reasoning. These examples underscore that reasoning is
indispensable for long video understanding that goes beyond recognition alone. Despite the clear
importance of reasoning in long video understanding, enabling such capabilities in long video VLMs
poses significant challenges [8, 43, 47, 12, 37]. First, the collection of high quality long video
reasoning datasets is inherently difficult. Unlike domains such as math or code reasoning, where
∗

Equal contribution

†

Core contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

