Sample complexity of data-driven tuning of model
hyperparameters in neural networks with structured
parameter-dependent dual function

Maria-Florina Balcan
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Anh Tuan Nguyen
Carnegie Mellon University
atnguyen@cs.cmu.edu

Dravyansh Sharma
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
dravy@ttic.edu

Abstract
Modern machine learning algorithms, especially deep learning-based techniques,
typically involve careful hyperparameter tuning to achieve the best performance.
Despite the surge of intense interest in practical techniques like Bayesian optimization and random search-based approaches to automating this laborious and
compute-intensive task, the fundamental learning-theoretic complexity of tuning
hyperparameters for deep neural networks is poorly understood. Inspired by this
glaring gap, we initiate the formal study of hyperparameter tuning complexity in
deep learning through a recently introduced data-driven setting. We assume that we
have a series of learning tasks, and we have to tune hyperparameters to do well on
average over the distribution of tasks. A major difficulty is that the utility function
as a function of the hyperparameter is very volatile and furthermore, it is given
implicitly by an optimization problem over the model parameters. To tackle this
challenge, we introduce a new technique to characterize the discontinuities and
oscillations of the utility function on any fixed problem instance as we vary the
hyperparameter; our analysis relies on subtle concepts including tools from algebraic geometry, differential geometry and constrained optimization. We use this to
show that the learning-theoretic complexity of the corresponding family of utility
functions is bounded. We instantiate our results and provide sample complexity
bounds for concrete applications—tuning a hyperparameter that interpolates neural
activation functions and setting the kernel parameter in graph neural networks.

1

Introduction

Developing deep neural networks that work best for a given application typically corresponds to a
tedious selection of hyperparameters and architectures over extremely large search spaces. This process of adapting a deep learning algorithm or model to a new application domain takes up significant
engineering and research resources, and often involves unprincipled techniques with limited or no
theoretical guarantees on their effectiveness. While the success of pre-trained (foundation) models
have shown the usefulness of transferring effective parameters (weights) of learned deep models
across tasks [1, 2], it is less clear how to leverage prior experience of “good” hyperparameters to new
tasks. In this work, we develop a principled framework for tuning continuous hyperparameters in
deep networks by leveraging similar problem instances and obtain sample complexity guarantees for
learning provably good hyperparameter values.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

