Turning Sand to Gold: Recycling Data to Bridge
On-Policy and Off-Policy Learning via Causal Bound

Tal Fiskus
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat Gan, Israel
fiskust@biu.ac.il

Uri Shaham
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat Gan, Israel
uri.shaham@biu.ac.il

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) agents excel in solving complex decisionmaking tasks across various domains. However, they often require a substantial
number of training steps and a vast experience replay buffer, leading to significant
computational and resource demands. To address these challenges, we introduce
a novel theoretical result that leverages the Neyman-Rubin potential outcomes
framework into DRL. Unlike most methods that focus on bounding the counterfactual loss, we establish a causal bound on the factual loss, which is analogous to
the on-policy loss in DRL. This bound is computed by storing past value network
outputs in the experience replay buffer, effectively utilizing data that is usually
discarded. Extensive experiments across the Atari 2600 and MuJoCo domains
on various agents, such as DQN and SAC, achieve up to 383% higher reward
ratio, outperforming the same agents without our proposed term, and reducing
the experience replay buffer size by up to 96%, significantly improving sample
efficiency at a negligible cost1 .

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning agents have demonstrated remarkable success in solving complex
decision-making tasks across various areas of interest, such as gaming [1–5], robotics [6–8], healthcare [9–11], and autonomous driving [12–14]. It also has a vital role in enhancing large language
models [15, 16]. Despite these achievements, DRL is still challenging due to its high computational
and resource demands. For example, AlphaGo Zero was trained for 29 million self-play games
[17], and the training experience for OpenAI’s Rubik’s Cube robotic hand is roughly equated to 13
thousand years [18].
In DRL, we can categorize agents into two types: on-policy agents, like A3C and PPO [19, 20], and
off-policy agents, such as DQN and SAC [21, 22]. On-policy agents are generally simpler and often
considered first. They interact with the environment, collect experiences using a behavior policy, and
once they optimize the target policy, discard all previously collected experiences to ensure that the
behavior and target policies remain identical. This consistency leads to more stable convergence but at
the cost of sample inefficiency, as each optimization iteration requires collecting new data. Off-policy
agents, on the other hand, allow the agent to learn from previously collected experiences, meaning it
can have different behavior and target policies. This methodology improves sample efficiency by
leveraging past experiences stored in a replay buffer. While this improves sample efficiency, it can
also lead to reduced learning stability due to the mismatch between the behavior and target policies.
As a result, improving the learning stability typically requires a substantial number of training steps
and a vast experience replay buffer, leading to significant computational and resource demands.
1

Our code is available at https://shaham-lab.github.io/TurningSandToGold/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

