Each Complexity Deserves a Pruning Policy
Hanshi Wang1,2,3,5∗, Yuhao Xu3 , Zekun Xu1,2 , Jin Gao1,2,5† ,
Yufan Liu1,2,5 , Weiming Hu1,2,5,6 , Ke Wang7 , Zhipeng Zhang3,4†
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), CASIA
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
AutoLab, School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Anyverse Intelligence
5
Beijing Key Laboratory of Super Intelligent Security of Multi-Modal Information
6
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University 7 KargoBot
{hanshi.wang.cv, zhipeng.zhang.cv}@outlook.com; jin.gao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The established redundancy in visual tokens within large vision–language models
(LVLMs) allows for pruning to effectively reduce their substantial computational
demands. Empirical evidence from previous works indicates that visual tokens in
later decoder stages receive less attention than shallow layers. Then, previous methods typically employ heuristics layer-specific pruning strategies where, although
the number of tokens removed may differ across decoder layers, the overall pruning
schedule is fixed and applied uniformly to all input samples and tasks, failing to
align token elimination with the model’s holistic reasoning trajectory. Cognitive
science indicates that human visual processing often begins with broad exploration
to accumulate evidence before narrowing focus as the target becomes distinct. Our
experiments reveal an analogous pattern in LVLMs. This observation strongly suggests that neither a fixed pruning schedule nor a heuristics layer-wise strategy can
optimally accommodate the diverse complexities inherent in different inputs. To
overcome this limitation, we introduce Complexity-Adaptive Pruning (AutoPrune),
which is a training-free, plug-and-play framework that tailors pruning policies
to varying sample and task complexities. Specifically, AutoPrune quantifies the
mutual information between visual and textual tokens, and then projects this signal
to a budget-constrained logistic retention curve. Each such logistic curve, defined
by its unique shape, is shown to effectively correspond with the specific complexity
of different tasks, and can easily guarantee adherence to a pre-defined computational constraints. We evaluate AutoPrune not only on standard vision-language
tasks but also on Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models for autonomous driving.
Notably, when applied to LLaVA-1.5-7B, our method prunes 89% of visual tokens
and reduces inference FLOPs by 76.8%, but still retaining 96.7% of the original
accuracy averaged over all tasks. This corresponds to a 9.1% improvement over
the recent work PDrop (CVPR’2025), demonstrating the effectivenes. Code is
available at https://github.com/AutoLab-SAI-SJTU/AutoPrune.

1

Introduction

Vision and Language Models (VLMs) have rapidly emerged as the backbone of modern multimodal
systems, powering tasks such as image captioning [1, 2, 3], visual question answering (VQA) [4, 5]
and multimodal dialogue [6, 7]. Recent extensions to embodied intelligence like the wildly deployed
autonomous driving system, exemplified by Vision–Language Action frameworks [8, 9, 10], further
couple these perceptual capabilities with driving control, permitting end-to-end reasoning. However,
∗

This work was completed during Hanshi’s remote internship at SJTU and co-mentored by Prof. Zhipeng
†
Zhang.
Corresponding author.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

