CSPCL: Category Semantic Prior Contrastive
Learning for Deformable DETR-Based Prohibited
Item Detectors
Mingyuan Li1 Tong Jia1,2∗ Hao Wang1 Bowen Ma1
Hui Lu1 Shiyi Guo1 Da Cai1 Dongyue Chen1
1
College of Information Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Synthetical Automation for Process Industries, Northeastern University
542027743@qq.com, jiatong@ise.neu.edu.cn, ddsywh@yeah.net,
2010285@stu.neu.edu.cn, 2603813543@qq.com, guoshiyi@ise.neu.edu.cn,
2210329@stu.neu.edu.cn, chendongyue@ise.neu.edu.cn

Abstract
Prohibited item detection based on X-ray images is one of the most effective security inspection methods. However, the foreground-background feature coupling
caused by the overlapping phenomenon specific to X-ray images makes general
detectors designed for natural images perform poorly. To address this issue, we
propose a Category Semantic Prior Contrastive Learning (CSPCL) mechanism,
which aligns the class prototypes perceived by the classifier with the content queries
to correct and supplement the missing semantic information responsible for classification, thereby enhancing the model sensitivity to foreground features. To achieve
this alignment, we design a specific contrastive loss, CSP loss, which comprises
the Intra-Class Truncated Attraction (ITA) loss and the Inter-Class Adaptive Repulsion (IAR) loss, and outperforms classic contrastive losses. Specifically, the ITA
loss leverages class prototypes to attract intra-class content queries and preserves
essential intra-class diversity via a gradient truncation function. The IAR loss
employs class prototypes to adaptively repel inter-class content queries, with the
repulsion strength scaled by prototype-prototype similarity, thereby improving
inter-class discriminability, especially among similar categories. CSPCL is general
and can be easily integrated into Deformable DETR-based models. Extensive
experiments on the PIXray, OPIXray, PIDray, and CLCXray datasets demonstrate
that CSPCL significantly enhances the performance of various state-of-the-art
models without increasing inference complexity. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Limingyuan001/CSPCL.

1

Introduction

Prohibited item detection based on X-ray images is an important security inspection measure,
widely used in airports, postal services, government agencies, and border control areas. With the
development of computer vision technologies, researchers have started using techniques such as
image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation to assist security personnel in
examining packages imaged by security screening machines for prohibited items, thereby reducing
the potential risks caused by work fatigue. However, as shown in Figure 1, X-ray images differ from
natural light images in that they exhibit unique overlapping phenomena, which cause coupling of
foreground and background features. This leads to the detection results of general object detection
models being easily affected by background noise.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

