Best-of-N Jailbreaking

John Hughes∗
Anthropic
Rylan Schaeffer
Stanford University
Henry Sleight
Constellation

Sara Price∗
Anthropic

Fazl Barez
University of Oxford
Erik Jones
Anthropic

Aengus Lynch∗
UCL

Arushi Somani
Anthropic

Ethan Perez+
Anthropic

Sanmi Koyejo
Stanford University
Mrinank Sharma+
Anthropic

Abstract
We introduce Best-of-N (BoN) Jailbreaking, a simple black-box algorithm that jailbreaks frontier AI systems across modalities. BoN Jailbreaking works by repeatedly
sampling variations of a prompt with a combination of augmentations—such as
random shuffling or capitalization for textual prompts—until a harmful response is
elicited. We find that BoN Jailbreaking achieves high attack success rates (ASRs)
on closed-source language models, such as 89% on GPT-4o and 78% on Claude 3.5
Sonnet when sampling 10,000 augmented prompts. Further, it is similarly effective
at circumventing state-of-the-art open-source defenses like circuit breakers and
reasoning models like o1. BoN also seamlessly extends to other modalities: it jailbreaks vision language models (VLMs) such as GPT-4o and audio language models
(ALMs) like Gemini 1.5 Pro, using modality-specific augmentations. BoN reliably
improves when we sample more augmented prompts. Across all modalities, ASR,
as a function of the number of samples (N ), empirically follows power-law-like behavior for many orders of magnitude. BoN Jailbreaking can also be composed with
other black-box algorithms for even more effective attacks—combining BoN with
an optimized prefix attack achieves up to a 35% increase in ASR. Overall, our work
indicates that, despite their capability, language models are sensitive to seemingly
innocuous changes to inputs, which attackers can exploit across modalities.

1

Introduction

As AI model capabilities continue to improve and models support additional input modalities,
defending against misuse is critical. Without adequate guardrails, more capable systems could be
used to commit cybercrime, build biological weapons, or spread harmful misinformation, among
other threats (Phuong et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2023b; Anthropic, 2023b). Jailbreaks, which are model
inputs designed to circumvent safety measures, can carry substantial consequences (Ramesh et al.,
2024; Kim et al., 2024; Mehrotra et al., 2023; Chao et al., 2023). Therefore, rigorously evaluating
model safeguards is critical, motivating a search for automated red-teaming methods that seamlessly
apply to multiple input modalities.
In this work, we introduce Best-of-N (BoN) Jailbreaking† , a simple, scalable black-box automated
red-teaming method that supports multiple modalities. BoN Jailbreaking repeatedly samples augmentations to prompts until one produces a harmful response (Figure 1, top). The algorithm is entirely
*
Equal contribution. + Equal advising. First and last authors are core contributors. Correspondence to
{johnh,sara}@anthropic.com
†
See our website https://jplhughes.github.io/bon-jailbreaking

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

