Geometric Algorithms for Neural Combinatorial
Optimization with Constraints

Nikolaos Karalias∗
MIT
stalence@mit.edu
Behrooz Tahmasebi
MIT
bzt@mit.edu

Akbar Rafiey∗
NYU
ar9530@nyu.edu

Yifei Xu
NYU
yx3590@nyu.edu

Connie Jiang
MIT
conniej@mit.edu

Zhishang Luo
UCSD
zluo@ucsd.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
TUM and MIT
stefje@mit.edu

Abstract
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) for Combinatorial Optimization (CO) is an emerging paradigm for solving combinatorial problems using neural networks. In this
paper, we address a central challenge of SSL for CO: solving problems with
discrete constraints. We design an end-to-end differentiable framework that enables us to solve discrete constrained optimization problems with neural networks.
Concretely, we leverage algorithmic techniques from the literature on convex geometry and Carathéodory’s theorem to decompose neural network outputs into
convex combinations of polytope corners that correspond to feasible sets. This
decomposition-based approach enables self-supervised training but also ensures
efficient quality-preserving rounding of the neural net output into feasible solutions. Extensive experiments in cardinality-constrained optimization show that our
approach can consistently outperform neural baselines. We further provide workedout examples of how our method can be applied beyond cardinality-constrained
problems to a diverse set of combinatorial optimization tasks, including finding
independent sets in graphs, and solving matroid-constrained problems.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial Optimization (CO) encompasses a broad category of optimization problems where the
objective is to find a configuration of discrete objects that satisfies specific constraints and is optimal
given a prescribed criterion. It has a wide range of real-world applications [64, 58, 31, 7, 94, 73]
while also being of central importance in complexity theory and algorithm design. These problems
are often non-convex, and solving them involves exploring large-scale discrete combinatorial spaces
of configurations. To that end, neural networks have emerged as a powerful tool for designing CO
algorithms as they can learn to exploit patterns in real-world data and discover high-quality solutions
efficiently. A compelling proposal in that direction is self-supervised CO because it eschews the need
to acquire labeled data, which can be computationally expensive for those problems. This usually
involves training a neural network to produce solutions to input instances by minimizing a continuous
proxy for the discrete objective of the problem [35, 84, 1, 36, 90]. While the efficiency and scalability
of this approach are appealing, it also harbors significant challenges.
Enforcing constraints on the output of the neural network is one of the primary obstacles. When
training, this is often done by including a weighted term in the loss function that penalizes solutions
that do not comply with the constraints. There are two key considerations when doing this. Having
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

