BrainODE: Neural Shape Dynamics for Age- and
Disease-aware Brain Trajectories

Wonjung Park∗
KAIST
fabiola@kaist.ac.kr
Maria C. Valdes Hernandez
The University of Edinburgh
m.valdes-hernan@ed.ac.uk

Suhyun Ahn∗
KAIST
ahn.ssu@kaist.ac.kr

Susana Muñoz Maniega
The University of Edinburgh
s.m.maniega@ed.ac.uk

Jinah Park
KAIST
jinahpark@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We present BrainODE, a neural ordinary differential equation (ODE)-based
framework for modeling continuous longitudinal deformations of brain shapes.
BrainODE learns a deformation space over anatomically meaningful brain regions
to facilitate early prediction of neurodegenerative disease progression. Addressing
inherent challenges of longitudinal neuroimaging data—such as limited sample
sizes, irregular temporal sampling, and substantial inter-subject variability—we
propose a conditional neural ODE architecture that models shape dynamics with
subject-specific age and cognitive status. To enable autoregressive forecasting
of brain morphology from a single observation, we propose a pseudo-cognitive
status embedding that allows progressive shape prediction across intermediate
time points with predicted cognitive decline. Experiments show that BrainODE
outperforms time-aware baselines in predicting future brain shapes, demonstrating
strong generalization across longitudinal datasets with both regular and irregular
time intervals.

1

Introduction

Precise modeling of disease progression in neurodegenerative disorders, particularly Alzheimer’s
disease (AD), is imperative for enabling early diagnosis and effective intervention [2, 28, 29]. The
progressive and heterogeneous nature of these disorders poses significant challenges for longitudinal
modeling [4, 22]. Besides, many studies have shown that the hippocampus, a key brain region
implicated in AD, plays a critical role in accurate diagnosis and monitoring of disease trajectories.
These highlight the potential of longitudinal models to support emerging therapeutic advancements
toward targeted and personalized strategies [19]. Consequently, developing robust longitudinal
modeling approaches has become important in improving clinical outcomes in AD.
To model neurodegenerative progression, directly learning from 3D brain MRI data is an intuitive
approach. However, this strategy is often impractical due to the severe scarcity of longitudinal medical
imaging data [5] and the inherently high dimensionality of MRI scans. Recent studies on the biological
trustworthiness of generative models for brain imaging report that these limitations hinder the ability
to capture complex brain changes driven by both aging and disease processes [1]. Furthermore,
the hippocampus—a key brain region for diagnosing cognitive status—has only 1.7% of the full
brain MRI volume. Although autoencoder architectures have been used to manage high-dimensional
images in latent spaces to alleviate unaffordable GPU memory consumption, auto-encoded inputs are
∗

equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

