Dense Backpropagation Improves Training
for Sparse Mixture-of-Experts

Ashwinee Panda1∗ Vatsal Baherwani1∗ Zain Sarwar2,3 Benjamin Therien2,4
Sambit Sahu2 Tom Goldstein1 Supriyo Chakraborty2
1
University of Maryland 2 Capital One 3 University of Chicago 4 Mila – Quebec AI Institute

Abstract
Mixture of Experts (MoE) pretraining is more scalable than dense Transformer
pretraining, because MoEs learn to route inputs to a sparse set of their feedforward
parameters. However, this means that MoEs only receive a sparse backward
update, leading to training instability and suboptimal performance. We present
a lightweight approximation method that gives the MoE router a dense gradient
update while continuing to sparsely activate its parameters. Our method, which we
refer to as Default MoE, substitutes missing expert activations with default outputs
consisting of an exponential moving average of expert outputs previously seen over
the course of training. This allows the router to receive signals from every expert
for each token, leading to significant improvements in training performance. Our
Default MoE outperforms standard TopK routing in a variety of settings without
requiring significant computational overhead.

1

Introduction

The sparsely activated Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) Transformer architecture [Shazeer et al., 2017] has
been used by many industry deployments [DeepSeek-AI Team, 2024b, xAI, 2024, Databricks, 2024,
Mistral Team, 2024, Snowflake, 2024, DeepSeek-AI Team, 2024a] because MoEs have been shown
to scale even better than dense Transformers [Clark et al., 2022, Du et al., 2022, Lepikhin et al., 2020,
Fedus et al., 2022]. MoEs learn a routing function that selectively activates the Top-K subset of their
modules, or experts, most relevant to a given input. This conditionally sparse activation [Jacobs
et al., 1991, Jordan and Jacobs, 1994] allows us to multiplicatively increase the model parameter
count without significantly increasing the cost of training or inference. At train time, the sparse router
enables very large MoEs to be trained with relatively little computation per token, but it also presents
a challenge. The router does not receive a gradient update from experts that it does not activate. This
may slow down learning, as the gradient update is unable to adjust the router to promote the optimal
expert for each token. This can be corrected by activating all experts during training, enabling all
experts and routing directions to be optimized at once, although this requires much more compute.
In this work we propose DefaultMoE: a new method that strikes a middle ground between dense
and sparse routing; our proposed router can receive and differentiate contributions from all experts,
while the computational cost remains virtually identical to a standard Top-K router. In our proposed
method, the router receives contributions from all experts for every token. However, a forward pass is
only computed on the Top-K experts for each token, while other experts contribute a “default vector"
that represents the expected output of a typical token. Our method adds minimal computational
overhead compared to a standard Top-K router while improving performance on a range of standard
benchmarks for 2 billion total parameter MoEs trained on 160 billion tokens.
∗

* denotes equal contribution. Correspondence to: ashwinee@umd.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

