Block-Biased Mamba for
Long-Range Sequence Processing

Annan Yu
Center for Applied Mathematics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
ay262@cornell.edu

N. Benjamin Erichson
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
International Computer Science Institute
Berkeley, CA 94720
erichson@icsi.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Mamba extends earlier state space models (SSMs) by introducing input-dependent
dynamics, and has demonstrated strong empirical performance across a range of
domains, including language modeling, computer vision, and foundation models.
However, a surprising weakness remains: despite being built on architectures
designed for long-range dependencies, Mamba performs poorly on long-range
sequential tasks. Understanding and addressing this gap is important for improving
Mamba’s universality and versatility. In this work, we analyze Mamba’s limitations
through three perspectives: expressiveness, inductive bias, and training stability.
Our theoretical results show how Mamba falls short in each of these aspects
compared to earlier SSMs such as S4D. To address these issues, we propose
B2 S6 , a simple extension of Mamba’s S6 unit that combines block-wise selective
dynamics with a channel-specific bias. We prove that these changes equip the
model with a better-suited inductive bias and improve its expressiveness and
stability. Empirically, B2 S6 outperforms S4 and S4D on Long-Range Arena (LRA)
tasks while maintaining Mamba’s performance on language modeling benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Mamba [25] has recently emerged as an exciting alternative to Transformers, demonstrating strong
empirical performance not only in language tasks [84, 45], but also in a variety of domains, including
vision [107, 103], audio [43], time series forecasting [43], and operator learning [33]. Based on the
state-space model (SSM) framework of S4 and S4D, Mamba replaces attention with a selective state
space mechanism. Unlike attention, which computes pairwise interactions across the sequence, this
approach uses data-dependent weights in a recurrent structure, aligning with the temporal nature
of sequential data. Despite its success as a general-purpose sequence modeling tool [51], Mamba
consistently underperforms on benchmarks such as the Long-Range Arena (LRA) [3]. This limitation
is surprising, given that Mamba is derived from architectures specifically designed for modeling
long-range dependencies. This behavior raises an important question:
Why does Mamba struggle with long-range sequence modeling?
To address this question, we conduct a theoretical analysis of the S6 state-space unit that underlies the
Mamba architecture. Our goal is twofold: first, to explain why Mamba underperforms on long-range
sequence tasks, and second, to provide a principled remedy. Through a rigorous mathematical
analysis, we identify three key factors that limit Mamba’s ability to model long-range dependencies:
• Expressiveness. Unlike S4D, which allows each internal channel to learn an independent recurrent
unit, Mamba shares parameters across all channels. Therefore, one should not interpret Mamba as
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

