PandaPose:
3D Human Pose Lifting from a Single Image via
Propagating 2D Pose Prior to 3D Anchor Space
Jinghong Zheng1 Changlong Jiang1 Yang Xiao1,† Jiaqi Li 2
Haohong Kuang1 Hang Xu1 Ran Wang3,4 Zhiguo Cao2 Min Du 5 Joey Tianyi Zhou 6,7
1
National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430074, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
School of Journalism and Information Communication, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology
4
School of Future Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5
ByteDance Inc.
6
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
7
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
Singapore
†
Corresponding author
{deepzheng,changlongj,Yang_Xiao,lijiaqi_mail}@hust.edu.cn
{haohong_kuang,hang_xu,rex_wang,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn
bingwen.ai@bytedance.com
joey_zhou@a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
3D human pose lifting from a single RGB image is a challenging task in 3D vision.
Existing methods typically establish a direct joint-to-joint mapping from 2D to 3D
poses based on 2D features. This formulation suffers from two fundamental limitations: inevitable error propagation from input predicted 2D pose to 3D predictions
and inherent difficulties in handling self-occlusion cases. In this paper, we propose
PandaPose, a 3D human pose lifting approach via propagating 2D pose prior to
3D anchor space as the unified intermediate representation. Specifically, our 3D
anchor space comprises: (1) Joint-wise 3D anchors in the canonical coordinate
system, providing accurate and robust priors to mitigate 2D pose estimation inaccuracies. (2) Depth-aware joint-wise feature lifting that hierarchically integrates
depth information to resolve self-occlusion ambiguities. (3) The anchor-feature
interaction decoder that incorporates 3D anchors with lifted features to generate
unified anchor queries encapsulating joint-wise 3D anchor set, visual cues and
geometric depth information. The anchor queries are further employed to facilitate
anchor-to-joint ensemble prediction. Experiments on three well-established benchmarks (i.e., Human3.6M, MPI-INF-3DHP and 3DPW) demonstrate the superiority
of our proposition. The substantial reduction in error by 14.7% compared to SOTA
methods on the challenging conditions of Human3.6M and qualitative comparisons
further showcase the effectiveness and robustness of our approach.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

