Unfolding the Black Box of Recurrent Neural
Networks for Path Integration
Tianhao Chu1,† , Yuling Wu2,† , Neil Burgess3,4 , Zilong Ji1,3 , Si Wu1,2,5,*
1

School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry
of Education), Peking University, China.
2
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies,
Peking University, China.
3
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and Pharmacology,
University College London, UK
4
UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, UK
5
Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain
Research, Center of Quantitative Biology, Peking University, China.
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.
*
Correspondence: siwu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Path integration is essential for spatial navigation. Experimental studies have
identified neural correlates for path integration, but exactly how the neural system
accomplishes this computation remains unresolved. Here, we adopt recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) trained to perform a path integration task to explore this issue.
After training, we borrow neuroscience prior knowledge and methods to unfold the
black box of the trained model, including: clarifying neuron types based on their
receptive fields, dissecting information flows between neuron groups by pruning
their connections, and analyzing internal dynamics of neuron groups using the
attractor framework. Intriguingly, we uncover a hierarchical information processing
pathway embedded in the RNN model, along which velocity information of an
agent is first forwarded to band cells, band and grid cells then coordinate to carry
out path integration, and finally grid cells output the agent location. Inspired by the
RNN-based study, we construct a neural circuit model, in which band cells form
one-dimensional (1D) continuous attractor neural networks (CANNs) and serve as
upstream neurons to support downstream grid cells to carry out path integration in
the 2D space. Our study challenges the conventional view of considering grid cells
as the principal velocity integrator, and supports a neural circuit model with the
hierarchy of band and grid cells.

1

Introduction

Path integration refers to the process of computing the position of an agent by continuously integrating
self-motion information of the agent over time [1]. It is fundamental for spatial navigation in both
humans and rodents, and also plays an important role in robot control [2].
Experimental studies have shown that grid cells in the medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) are deeply
involved in path integration [3]. These cells exhibit periodic hexagonal firing patterns in the twodimensional space, providing a metric representation for implementing path integration [1, 4].
Disruption of grid cells through medial septal inactivation or entorhinal lesions impairs spatial
memory and navigation based on path integration [3, 5]. Despite these experimental evidence,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

