Do LVLMs Truly Understand Video Anomalies?
Revealing Hallucination via Co-Occurrence Patterns

Menghao Zhang1∗ Huazheng Wang1∗ Pengfei Ren1 Kangheng Lin1 Qi Qi1
Haifeng Sun1† Zirui Zhuang1 Lei Zhang2 Jianxin Liao1 Jingyu Wang1†
1
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
China Unicom, Beijing, China
{zhangmenghao, wanghz, rpf, linkangheng, qiqi8266, hfsun}@bupt.edu.cn
{zhuangzirui, liaojx, wangjingyu}@bupt.edu.cn; zhangl83@chinaunicom.cn

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) pretrained on large-scale multimodal data
have shown promising capabilities in Video Anomaly Detection (VAD). However,
their ability to reason about abnormal events based on scene semantics remains
underexplored. In this paper, we investigate LVLMs’ behavior in VAD from a
visual-textual co-occurrence perspective, focusing on whether their decisions are
driven by statistical shortcuts between visual instances and textual phrases. By analyzing visual-textual co-occurrence in pretraining data and conducting experiments
under different data settings, we reveal a hallucination phenomenon: LVLMs tend
to rely on co-occurrence patterns between visual instances and textual phrases
associated with either normality or abnormality, leading to incorrect predictions
when these high-frequency objects appear in semantically mismatched contexts.
To address this issue, we propose VAD-DPO, a direct preference optimization
method supervised with counter-example pairs. By constructing visually similar
but semantically contrasting video clips, VAD-DPO encourages the model to align
its predictions with the semantics of scene rather than relying on co-occurrence
patterns. Extensive experiments on six benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of VAD-DPO in enhancing both anomaly detection and reasoning
performance, particularly in scene-dependent scenarios.

1

Introduction

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) aims to automatically identify anomalous events in a given video,
and has been widely applied in surveillance systems and smart city applications. Anomalies are
typically defined as events or patterns that deviate from expected behaviors within a scene, meaning
that the same visual action may appear normal in one context but anomalous in another. However,
due to the limited availability of labeled anomaly data, most existing methods [35, 40, 46, 4, 41] tend
to overfit the normal patterns present in the training data, and thus fail to interpret scene context and
reason about anomalies.
With the rise of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) [17, 18, 1], several studies explore the
application of LVLMs to VAD, aiming to enhance their ability to reason about anomalies across
diverse scenes. Early attempts [37, 36, 42, 39] leverage the general visual-language alignment
capabilities of LVLMs to perform frame-level anomaly detection in a training-free manner. More
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

