Class-aware Domain Knowledge Fusion and Fission
for Continual Test-Time Adaptation

Jiahuan Zhou1 , Chao Zhu1 , Zhenyu Cui1 , Zichen Liu1 , Xu Zou2∗, Gang Hua3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
2
the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074,China
3
Amazon.com, Inc, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
jiahuanzhou@pku.edu.cn, zhuc2022@mail.sustech.edu.cn
{cuizhenyu,lzc20180720}@stu.pku.edu.cn, zx@zoux.me, ganghua@gmail.com

1

Abstract
Continual Test-Time Adaptation (CTTA) aims to quickly fine-tune the model during the test phase so that it can adapt to multiple unknown downstream domain
distributions without pre-acquiring downstream domain data. To this end, existing
advanced CTTA methods mainly reduce the catastrophic forgetting of historical
knowledge caused by irregular switching of downstream domain data by restoring
the initial model or reusing historical models. However, these methods are usually
accompanied by serious insufficient learning of new knowledge and interference
from potentially harmful historical knowledge, resulting in severe performance
degradation. To this end, we propose a class-aware domain Knowledge Fusion and
Fission method for continual test-time adaptation, called KFF, which adaptively
expands and merges class-aware domain knowledge in old and new domains according to the test-time data from different domains, where discriminative historical
knowledge can be dynamically accumulated. Specifically, considering the huge
domain gap within streaming data, a domain Knowledge FIssion (KFI) module
is designed to adaptively separate new domain knowledge from a paired classaware domain prompt pool, alleviating the impact of negative knowledge brought
by old domains that are distinct from the current domain. Besides, to avoid the
cumulative computation and storage overheads from continuously fissioning new
knowledge, a domain Knowledge FUsion (KFU) module is further designed to
merge the fissioned new knowledge into the existing knowledge pool with minimal
cost, where a greedy knowledge dynamic merging strategy is designed to improve
the compatibility of new and old knowledge while keeping the computational efficiency. Extensive experiments on the ImageNet-C dataset verify the effectiveness
of our proposed method against other methods. The source code is available at
https://github.com/zhoujiahuan1991/NeurIPS2025-KFF.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep neural networks have demonstrated powerful adaptation capabilities on various vision
tasks [10, 14, 62, 50], but still suffer from the well-known distributional shift problem [43, 15,
22, 51, 49] between training and test data. To address this problem, Test-Time Adaptation (TTA)
is proposed to adapt the test data in the target domain by using only unlabelled streaming test
data [46, 57, 29, 17, 1]. Existing TTA methods have shown promising capacity to improve the
generalizability of pre-trained models through self-supervised training methods [46, 39, 57, 58, 5, 55].
Despite some progress, most TTA methods merely focus on the generalizability within a single
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

