Multi-head Temporal Latent Attention

Keqi Deng, Philip C. Woodland
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge
Trumpington St., Cambridge, UK
kd502@cam.ac.uk, pw117@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
While Transformer self-attention offers strong parallelism, the Key-Value (KV)
cache grows linearly with sequence length and becomes a bottleneck for inference
efficiency. Multi-head latent attention was recently developed to compress the
KV cache into a low-rank latent space. This paper proposes Multi-head Temporal
Latent Attention (MTLA), which further reduces the KV cache size along the temporal dimension, greatly lowering the memory footprint of self-attention inference.
MTLA employs a hyper-network to dynamically merge temporally adjacent KV
cache vectors. To address the mismatch between the compressed KV cache and processed sequence lengths, a stride-aware causal mask is proposed to ensure efficient
parallel training and consistency with inference behaviour. Experiments across
tasks, including speech translation, speech recognition, speech understanding and
text summarisation, demonstrate that MTLA achieves competitive performance
compared to standard Multi-Head Attention (MHA), while greatly improving inference speed and GPU memory usage. For example, on a English-German speech
translation task, MTLA achieves a 5.3× speedup and a reduction in GPU memory
usage by a factor of 8.3 compared to MHA, while maintaining translation quality.

1

Introduction

The Transformer [44] decoder has become increasingly important, particularly with the success
of large language models (LLMs) [7, 42]. As LLMs have been extended to other modalities such
as speech [11, 40, 15], this decoder-only architecture is gradually becoming a unified framework
for handling many tasks. For example, by placing an input speech sequence before the text and
modelling causal dependencies auto-regressively via self-attention, decoder-only models can naturally
handle speech tasks such as speech recognition and speech translation [47, 43]. However, during
auto-regressive inference, each decoding step requires loading the cached attention keys and values
to avoid re-encoding the history. This repeated memory access has emerged as a bottleneck, limiting
inference speed and constraining both the decoding batch size and sequence length [38, 36, 22]. As
model scales and application demands increase, reducing this memory bandwidth overhead is crucial
for efficient deployment.
To alleviate the memory bottleneck associated with the Key-Value (KV) cache during incremental
inference, several attention variants have been proposed. Multi-Query Attention (MQA) [38] reduces
the number of KV heads by sharing a single head of keys and values across all query heads, greatly
decreasing memory usage. Given that MQA can lead to quality degradation and training instability,
Grouped-Query Attention (GQA) [1] was proposed, which partitions query heads into groups, each
sharing a distinct head of keys and values. Despite these advancements, both MQA and GQA primarily
focus on reducing the number of KV cache heads, which can lead to performance degradation due
to limited representational capacity [30]. Recently, Multi-Head Latent Attention (MLA) [26] has
emerged as a more advanced approach. MLA reduces the KV cache size by lowering the latent
dimension of the saved KV vectors. [26, 30] show that MLA achieves higher model accuracy than
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

