Efficient Training of Minimal and Maximal Low-Rank
Recurrent Neural Networks
Jonathan W. Pillow
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
pillow@princeton.edu

Anushri Arora
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
aa1698@princeton.edu

Abstract
Low-rank recurrent neural networks (RNNs) provide a powerful framework for
characterizing how neural systems solve complex cognitive tasks. However, fitting
and interpreting these networks remains an important open problem. In this paper,
we develop new methods for efficiently fitting low-rank RNNs in “teacher-training”
settings. In particular, we build upon the neural engineering framework (NEF), in
which RNNs are viewed as approximating an ordinary differential equation (ODE)
of interest using a set of random nonlinear basis functions. This view provides
geometric insight into how the choice of neural nonlinearity (e.g. tanh, ReLU) and
the distribution of model parameters affects an RNN’s representational capacity.
We show that this perspective leads to an online training method that achieves
higher accuracy with smaller networks than previous methods such as FORCE, and
outperform backprop-trained networks of similar size while requiring substantially
less training time. We then consider the problem of finding minimal and maximal
low-RNNs for approximating a target dynamical system. We show that a variant
of orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) can be used to find the smallest RNN for
a dynamical system of interest. At the other extreme, a dual space formulation
allows for efficient fitting of infinite low-rank RNNs, which provide a Gaussian
Process (GP) prior over dynamical systems. We use the resulting GP marginal
likelihood to optimize the hyperparameters governing neural activation functions,
which leads to improved training performance even for finite RNNs. Finally, we
describe active learning methods for low-rank RNNs, which speed up training
through the selection of maximally informative activity patterns.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are a popular tool for characterizing the computational properties
of neural populations and the dynamics underlying complex cognitive tasks [1–6]. Previous work has
proposed a variety of methods for training RNNs to implement a dynamical system or generate a
target signal of interest, including reservoir computing [7, 8], FORCE [9, 10], and back-propagation
[11–13]. However, trained RNNs remain difficult to interpret. Common approaches tend to use
search methods to identify fixed points or “slow points”, and then use dimensionality-reduction
methods to visualize projected flow fields around these points [12, 14]. However, fixed-point finding
algorithms are difficult to apply to high-dimensional systems, and it is often unclear how accurately
low-D projections reflect a network’s true dynamics [2, 15].
To overcome these difficulties, recent work has focused on “low-rank RNNs”, in which the recurrent
weight matrix is constrained to have low rank [3, 16, 6, 17]. This literature has shown that a wide
variety of tasks can be implemented in low-rank RNNs, which exhibit dynamics whose dimension is
limited by the rank of the recurrent weight matrix and number of input dimensions.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

