Enhancing Graph Classification Robustness with
Singular Pooling

Sofiane Ennadir∗
King AI Labs, Microsoft Gaming
sofiane.ennadir@king.com

Oleg Smirnov∗
King AI Labs, Microsoft Gaming
oleg.smirnov@microsoft.com

Yassine Abbahaddou
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
yassine.abbahaddou@polytechnique.edu

Lele Cao
King AI Labs, Microsoft Gaming
lelecao@microsoft.com

Johannes F. Lutzeyer
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
johannes.lutzeyer@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved strong performance across a range
of graph representation learning tasks, yet their adversarial robustness in graph
classification remains underexplored compared to node classification. While most
existing defenses focus on the message-passing component, this work investigates
the overlooked role of pooling operations in shaping robustness. We present a
theoretical analysis of standard flat pooling methods (sum, average and max),
deriving upper bounds on their adversarial risk and identifying their vulnerabilities
under different attack scenarios and graph structures. Motivated by these insights,
we propose Robust Singular Pooling (RS-Pool), a novel pooling strategy that
leverages the dominant singular vector of the node embedding matrix to construct
a robust graph-level representation. We theoretically investigate the robustness of
RS-Pool and interpret the resulting bound leading to improved understanding of
our proposed pooling operator. While our analysis centers on Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs), RS-Pool is model-agnostic and can be implemented efficiently
via power iteration. Empirical results on real-world benchmarks show that RS-Pool
provides better robustness than the considered pooling methods when subject to
state-of-the-art adversarial attacks while maintaining competitive clean accuracy.
Our code is publicly available at: https://github.com/king/rs-pool.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [24, 44, 38] have demonstrated strong performance on graphstructured data and are now a standard tool for learning node and graph representations. However,
recent studies reveal that GNNs are susceptible to adversarial perturbations – small, deliberately
designed changes to the adjacency matrix or node features that can drastically affect predictions [20].
This vulnerability raises concerns about their reliability and consequently, enhancing the adversarial
robustness of GNNs has become a key research focus. Efforts include the design of novel attack
methods [7, 49, 48, 17] and corresponding defense mechanisms [42, 46, 19]. However, prior work
primarily investigates node-classification tasks, with limited attention paid to adversarial robustness
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

