Learning to Steer: Input-dependent Steering for
Multimodal LLMs
Jayneel Parekh⋆1
Pegah Khayatan⋆1
Mustafa Shukor1
1
1
Arnaud Dapogny
Alasdair Newson
Matthieu Cord1,2
1
2
ISIR, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France
Valeo.ai, Paris, France
{jayneel.parekh, pegah.khayatan}@sorbonne-universite.fr

Abstract
Steering has emerged as a practical approach to enable post-hoc guidance of LLMs
towards enforcing a specific behavior. However, it remains largely underexplored
for multimodal LLMs (MLLMs); furthermore, existing steering techniques, such as
mean steering, rely on a single steering vector, applied independently of the input
query. This paradigm faces limitations when the desired behavior is dependent on
the example at hand. For example, a safe answer may consist in abstaining from
answering when asked for an illegal activity, or may point to external resources
or consultation with an expert when asked about medical advice. In this paper,
we investigate a fine-grained steering that uses an input-specific linear shift. This
shift is computed using contrastive input-specific prompting. However, the inputspecific prompts required for this approach are not known at test time. Therefore,
we propose to train a small auxiliary module to predict the input-specific steering
vector. Our approach, dubbed as L2S (Learn-to-Steer), demonstrates that it reduces
hallucinations and enforces safety in MLLMs, outperforming other static baselines.
Our code is publicly available.1, 2

1

Introduction

Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs [1, 14, 21, 33, 46, 48, 48, 50, 57]) have become ubiquitious in the
computer vision landscape. While most of the focus is on improving the performance of these
models, less attention is allocated to make them safer and reliable. Current MLLMs still suffer
from shortcomings w.r.t. a number of well-identified behaviors. A first immediate example of
such behavior is model hallucination [3, 13, 44, 47], i.e. when MLLMs output answers that are not
grounded in the inputs. Another example is model safety, when MLLMs provide harmful responses
or point to illegal contents. A straightforward, approach for correcting MLLMs w.r.t. such behaviors
is to fine-tune it; however, with the ever-growing size of the models, even efficient finetuning methods
become relatively costly [10, 11, 20, 37, 45, 46, 53]. Thus, designing cheaper post-hoc methods is a
much more appealing approach.
One computationally cheap alternative that has gained popularity in this regard is model steering
[25, 39, 52, 67]. The idea of intervening on internal representations through linear shifts to control the
generated output has been popular in the image editing literature for more than a decade [19, 43]. For
LLMs/MLLMs, this kind of approach is inspired from the linear representation hypothesis [38], which
supposes that latent representations are encoded as linear directions: thus, applying modifications
in the latent space via linear shift vectors (i.e., steering vectors) shall effectively push a model’s
⋆

First authors
Github page: https://github.com/jayneelparekh/learn-to-steer
2
Blog/Project page: https://jayneelparekh.github.io/learn-to-steer/

1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) Workshop: Mechanistic Interpretability.

