Learning Across the Gap: Hybrid Multi-armed
Bandits with Heterogeneous Offline and Online Data

Qijia He
Southern University of Science and Technology
heqj2021@mail.sustech.edu.cn
Minghan Wang
Southern University of Science and Technology
12532257@mail.sustech.edu.cn
Zhiyong Wang
The University of Edinburgh
zhiyongwangwzy@gmail.com

Xutong Liu
University of Washington
xutongl@uw.edu

Fang Kong∗
Southern University of Science and Technology
kongf@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a fundamental online decision-making framework that has been extensively studied over the past two decades. To mitigate
the high cost and slow convergence of purely online learning, modern MAB approaches have explored hybrid paradigms that leverage offline data to warm-start
online learning. However, existing approaches face a significant limitation by
assuming that the offline and online data are homogeneous—they share the same
feedback structure and are drawn from the same underlying distribution. This
assumption is often violated in practice, where offline data often originate from
diverse sources and evolving environments, resulting in feedback heterogeneity
and distributional shifts. In this work, we tackle the challenge of learning across
this offline-online gap by developing a general hybrid bandit framework that incorporates heterogeneous offline data to improve online performance. We study two
hybrid settings: (1) using reward-based offline data to accelerate online learning
in preference-based bandits (i.e., dueling bandits), and (2) using preference-based
offline data to improve online standard MAB algorithms. For both settings, we
design novel algorithms and derive tight regret bounds that match or improve upon
existing benchmarks despite heterogeneity. Empirical evaluations on both synthetic
and real-world datasets further show the superior performance of our proposed
methods over baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a fundamental online sequential decision-making framework that has been extensively studied over the past two decades (Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020).
In the standard MAB setting, a learning agent chooses one action (i.e., pulls one arm) at each round
and receives a stochastic reward (absolute value) as feedback. The goal of the agent is to maximize
the cumulative reward over time by balancing exploration and exploitation. This framework has been
widely applied in domains such as online advertising, recommendation systems, and information
retrieval (Bouneffouf and Rish, 2019).
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

