Time-Masked Transformers with Lightweight
Test-Time Adaptation for Neural Speech Decoding
Ebrahim Feghhi1,2⇤ Shreyas Kaasyap2

Nima Hadidi1,2

Jonathan C. Kao1,2,3

Neuroscience Interdepartmental Program
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
3
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
1

2

Abstract
Speech neuroprostheses aim to restore communication for people with severe paralysis by decoding speech directly from neural activity. To accelerate algorithmic
progress, a recent benchmark released intracranial recordings from a paralyzed
participant attempting to speak, along with a baseline decoding algorithm. Prior
work on the benchmark showed impressive accuracy gains. However, these gains
increased computational costs and were not demonstrated in a real-time decoding
setting. Here, we make three contributions that pave the way towards accurate,
efficient, and real-time neural speech decoding. First, we incorporate large amounts
of time-masking during training. On average, over 50% of each trial is masked.
Second, we replace the gated recurrent unit (GRU) architecture used in the baseline
algorithm with a compact Transformer. The Transformer architecture uses 83%
fewer parameters, cuts peak GPU memory usage by 52%, and is significantly
faster to calibrate relative to the GRU. Third, we design a lightweight variant of
an existing test-time adaptation method developed for decoding handwriting from
neural activity. Our variant adapts the model using multiple time-masked augmentations of a single trial and requires only one gradient step per trial. Together,
these contributions reduce word error rate by over 20% and effectively mitigate
performance degradations across held-out days in a real-time decoding setting
while substantially lowering computational costs.

1

Introduction

Conditions including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and brainstem stroke can lead to severe
paralysis, leaving individuals unable to speak or interact with the world. A promising path toward
restoring communication for these individuals is speech neuroprostheses, which bypass the vocal
apparatus and decode speech directly from neural activity (35). Speech neuroprostheses have made
significant strides in recent years, demonstrating the ability to decode speech with high accuracy over
large vocabularies (41; 30; 9; 25).
To be viable in real-world clinical settings, decoding algorithms for speech neuroprostheses should
ideally satisfy several key criteria beyond accuracy. First, they be able to operate in a real-time
"streaming" fashion, decoding speech with low-latency over short windows rather than waiting for the
entire utterance to finish (25). Second, they should have low computational requirements to enable
on-device inference and adaptation (8), minimizing reliance on external connections and preserving
user privacy. Finally, decoding algorithms should be easily integrated with test-time adaptation
methods that mitigate performance degradation across time (17).
⇤

Correspondence: ebrahimfeghhi@g.ucla.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

