Adversarial Locomotion and Motion Imitation for
Humanoid Policy Learning

Jiyuan Shi 1∗

Xinzhe Liu 1,2∗
Dewei Wang 1,3∗
Ouyang Lu 1,4
Sören Schwertfeger 2
1
5
1†
Chi Zhang
Fuchun Sun
Chenjia Bai
Xuelong Li 1†
1

2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
ShanghaiTech University 3 University of Science and Technology of China
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University 5 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Humans exhibit diverse and expressive whole-body movements. However, attaining
human-like whole-body coordination in humanoid robots remains challenging,
as conventional approaches that mimic whole-body motions often neglect the
distinct roles of upper and lower body. This oversight leads to computationally
intensive policy learning and frequently causes robot instability and falls during
real-world execution. To address these issues, we propose Adversarial Locomotion
and Motion Imitation (ALMI), a novel framework that enables adversarial policy
learning between upper and lower body. Specifically, the lower body aims to
provide robust locomotion capabilities to follow velocity commands while the
upper body tracks various motions. Conversely, the upper-body policy ensures
effective motion tracking when the robot executes velocity-based movements.
Through iterative updates, these policies achieve coordinated whole-body control,
which can be extended to loco-manipulation tasks with teleoperation systems.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves robust locomotion
and precise motion tracking in both simulation and on the full-size Unitree H1-2
robot. Additionally, we release a large-scale whole-body motion control dataset
featuring high-quality episodic trajectories from MuJoCo simulations. The project
page is https://almi-humanoid.github.io.

1

Introduction

Humans exhibit diverse and expressive whole-body movements in various activities [1, 2]. For
example, in dancing, humans depend on the lower body for stable movements and gait control, and
the upper body executes precise actions to accomplish specific movements. This coordination allows
for expressive and purposeful motions that are highly adaptable to different situations. However,
achieving human-like whole-body coordination remains a highly challenging task for humanoid
robots. Current methods employ motion re-targeting and Reinforcement Learning (RL) to learn
a whole-body policy that can track human motions by taking the tracking errors as rewards and
optimizing a whole-body policy to maximize such rewards [3, 4].
However, this kind of approach has significant limitations. First, due to the high number of Degrees
of Freedom (DoF) in the humanoid robot, directly learning a whole-body control policy demands a
complex reward structure and makes the training process highly expensive. Second, the differences
between various motions, along with some human movements beyond a robot’s physical capabilities,
make it difficult for the RL policy to converge. In practice, since such whole-body learning approaches
∗

Equal Contribution

†

Correspondence to: Chenjia Bai (baicj@chinatelecom.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

