R ETRO S YN F LOW: Discrete Flow Matching for
Accurate and Diverse Single-Step Retrosynthesis

Robin Yadav1
robiny12@student.ubc.ca

Qi Yan1,2
qi.yan@ece.ubc.ca

Avishek Joey Bose3,6
joey.bose@mail.mcgill.ca
1

Guy Wolf3,4,5
wolfguy@mila.quebec

Renjie Liao1,2,5
rjliao@ece.ubc.ca

UBC; 2 Vector Institute; 3 Mila; 4 Université de Montréal;
5
Canada CIFAR AI Chair; 6 University of Oxford

Abstract
A fundamental problem in organic chemistry is identifying and predicting the series
of reactions that synthesize a desired target product molecule. Due to the combinatorial nature of the chemical search space, single-step reactant prediction—i.e.
single-step retrosynthesis—remains challenging even for existing state-of-the-art
template-free generative approaches to produce an accurate yet diverse set of feasible reactions. In this paper, we model single-step retrosynthesis planning and
introduce R ETRO S YN F LOW (RSF) a discrete flow-matching framework that builds
a Markov bridge between the prescribed target product molecule and the reactant
molecule. In contrast to past approaches, RSF employs a reaction center identification step to produce intermediate structures known as synthons as a more informative source distribution for the discrete flow. To further enhance diversity and
feasibility of generated samples, we employ Feynman-Kac steering with Sequential
Monte Carlo based resampling to steer promising generations at inference using a
new reward oracle that relies on a forward-synthesis model. Empirically, we demonstrate RSF achieves 60.0% top-1 accuracy, which outperforms the previous SOTA
by 20%. We also substantiate the benefits of steering at inference and demonstrate
that FK-steering improves top-5 round-trip accuracy by 19% over prior templatefree SOTA methods, all while preserving competitive top-k accuracy results.

1

Introduction

Retrosynthesis planning is a fundamental problem in chemistry that involves decomposing a complex
target molecule (the product) into simpler, commercially available structures (the reactants) to
establish synthesis routes [8, 45]. This process is crucial for verifying the synthesizability of
proposed molecules with desirable properties, particularly in drug discovery [43]. For instance,
retrosynthesis is critical for lead optimization in medicinal chemistry, which requires designing
efficient synthetic routes to modify chemical structures to enhance a compound’s potency, selectivity,
and pharmacokinetic properties [25]. Traditionally, chemists manually identify and validate reactants
and pathways, a labor-intensive process exacerbated by the vast search space of transformations
from reactant to product molecules. This enduring challenge has driven decades of research in
computer-assisted retrosynthesis [8], with recent advances in machine learning (ML) enabling more
effective exploration of the combinatorial reactant space [3, 6, 48, 9]. Such methods are promising
in significantly accelerate the drug discovery pipeline.
The current dominant paradigm for ML-based retrosynthesis planning consists of two main components: a single-step retrosynthesis model and a multi-step planning algorithm. These ML-based
approaches can be broadly categorized as template-based and template-free methods. Template-based
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

