ADG: Ambient Diffusion-Guided Dataset Recovery
for Corruption-Robust Offline Reinforcement
Learning

Zeyuan Liu1∗, Zhihe Yang2∗, Jiawei Xu3∗, Rui Yang4 , Jiafei Lyu1 , Baoxiang Wang3 ,
Yunjian Xu2†, Xiu Li1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University,
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
4
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Real-world datasets collected from sensors or human inputs are prone to noise and
errors, posing significant challenges for applying offline reinforcement learning
(RL). While existing methods have made progress in addressing corrupted actions
and rewards, they remain insufficient for handling corruption in high-dimensional
state spaces and for cases where multiple elements in the dataset are corrupted
simultaneously. Diffusion models, known for their strong denoising capabilities,
offer a promising direction for this problem—but their tendency to overfit noisy
samples limits their direct applicability. To overcome this, we propose Ambient
Diffusion-Guided Dataset Recovery (ADG), a novel approach that pioneers the
use of diffusion models to tackle data corruption in offline RL. First, we introduce
Ambient Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) from approximated
distributions, which enable learning on partially corrupted datasets with theoretical guarantees. Second, we use the noise-prediction property of Ambient DDPM
to distinguish between clean and corrupted data, and then use the clean subset to
train a standard DDPM. Third, we employ the trained standard DDPM to refine the
previously identified corrupted data, enhancing data quality for subsequent offline
RL training. A notable strength of ADG is its versatility—it can be seamlessly
integrated with any offline RL algorithm. Experiments on a range of benchmarks,
including MuJoCo, Kitchen, and Adroit, demonstrate that ADG effectively mitigates the impact of corrupted data and improves the robustness of offline RL under various noise settings, achieving state-of-the-art results. Our code is available
at https://github.com/sand-nine/ADG.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a prominent paradigm for learning decisionmaking policies from offline datasets [20, 11]. Existing approaches can be broadly categorized
into MDP-based methods [11, 10, 18, 19, 4, 5, 12] and non-MDP methods [6, 16, 29]. However,
due to the data-dependent nature of offline RL, it encounters significant challenges when dealing
with offline data subjected to random noise or adversarial corruption [42, 41, 22, 36, 37]. Such
disturbances can cause substantial performance degradation or result in a pronounced deviation from
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

