Training a Scientific Reasoning Model for Chemistry

Siddharth M. Narayanan1 , James D. Braza1 , Ryan-Rhys Griffiths1 , Albert Bou1 ,
Geemi P. Wellawatte1 , Mayk Caldas Ramos1 , Ludovico Mitchener1 , Michael Martin Pieler1 ,
Samuel G. Rodriques1∗ , Andrew D. White1∗
∗

1
FutureHouse Inc., San Francisco, CA
These authors jointly supervise technical work at FutureHouse.
Correspondence: {sam,andrew}@futurehouse.org

Abstract
Reasoning models are large language models that emit a long chain-of-thought
before answering, providing both higher accuracy and explicit reasoning for their
response. A major question has been whether language model reasoning generalizes beyond mathematics, programming, and logic, where most previous work has
focused. We demonstrate that reasoning models can be post-trained for chemistry
without additional domain pretraining, and require substantially less data compared
to contemporary domain-specific models. We report ether0, a 24B parameter
LLM (based on Mistral-Small-24B) that can reason in natural language and
respond with chemical structures. This reasoning model was trained with reinforcement learning on 640,730 experimentally-grounded chemistry problems across 375
tasks ranging from synthesizability, to blood-brain barrier permeability, to human
receptor activity, to scent. Our model exceeds general-purpose chemistry models,
frontier models, and human experts on molecular design tasks. It is also more
data efficient relative to specialized models. We anticipate that this method can be
applied to train data-efficient language models specialized for tasks across a wide
variety of scientific domains.

1

Introduction

The dominant approach to improve the accuracy of large language models (LLMs) in recent years
has been to scale pre-training corpora size and pre-training compute budget [1, 2, 3, 4]. Partly
driven by the finite availability of pre-training data, however, attention has shifted towards alternative
scaling dimensions. Such dimensions include strategies such as majority voting [5, 6], “budgetforcing” [7], and test-time training [8], which attempt to scale inference compute. Broadly, reasoning
models attempt to improve performance emitting their thought process before arriving at an answer.
Early approaches in this vein attempted to elicit reasoning behavior through chain-of-thought (CoT)
prompting [9, 10]. More recently, however, reasoning behavior has been demonstrated to emerge
through reinforcement learning (RL) post-training, without the need for CoT-style prompting.
RL post-training represents a shift of focus from pre-training data to problems with verifiable rewards.
Solutions to such problems can be checked for correctness, allowing the model to generate new,
verifiable outputs during learning, explore the space of solutions, and overcome limits imposed by
fixed data resources. Multiple works have demonstrated the potential of this approach, particularly in
the domains of mathematics and programming. These include both closed-source models [11, 12],
and more recently, a large number of open-source models [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

