Transformers are almost optimal metalearners for
linear classification
Roey Magen
Weizmann Institute of Science
roey.magen@weizmann.ac.il

Gal Vardi
Weizmann Institute of Science
gal.vardi@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Transformers have demonstrated impressive in-context learning (ICL) capabilities,
raising the question of whether they can serve as metalearners that adapt to new
tasks using only a small number of in-context examples, without any further
training. While recent theoretical work has studied transformers’ ability to perform
ICL, most of these analyses do not address the formal metalearning setting, where
the objective is to solve a collection of related tasks more efficiently than would
be possible by solving each task individually. In this paper, we provide the first
theoretical analysis showing that a simplified transformer architecture trained via
gradient descent can act as a near-optimal metalearner in a linear classification
setting. We consider a natural family of tasks where each task corresponds to
a class-conditional Gaussian mixture model, with the mean vectors lying in a
shared k-dimensional subspace of Rd . After training on a sufficient number of
such tasks, we show that the transformer can generalize to a new task using only
e
e4 ) in-context examples, where R
e denotes the signal strength at test time.
O(k/R
This performance (almost) matches that of an optimal learner that knows exactly the
shared subspace and significantly outperforms any learner that only has access to
e4 ) examples to generalize. Importantly,
the in-context data, which requires Ω(d/R
our bounds on the number of training tasks and examples per task needed to achieve
this result are independent of the ambient dimension d.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based models are the dominant architecture in both natural language processing (NLP)
and computer vision. Since their introduction by Vaswani et al. [1], transformers have been scaled to
produce remarkable advances in language modeling [2], image classification [3], and multimodal
learning [4]. Their strength lies in their ability to model complex dependencies through attention
mechanisms and to generalize across diverse tasks with minimal task-specific supervision.
One of the most intriguing emergent capabilities of large transformer models is in-context learning
(ICL). In ICL, a model is given a short sequence of input-output pairs (called a prompt) from a
particular (possibly new) task, and is asked to make predictions on test examples from that task
without any explicit parameter updates. This ability to rapidly adapt to new tasks from a small number
of examples, solely by conditioning on the prompt, has been observed in large language models [5],
and is central to the ongoing shift toward prompt-based learning paradigms.
The ICL phenomenon is closely connected to the broader framework of metalearning, or “learning to
learn” [6–8], which has been widely studied before. In metalearning, a learner is trained to perform
well across a distribution of related tasks, thereby acquiring representations that allow for rapid
adaptation to new tasks. It is often helpful to think of tasks as corresponding to individual users. For
instance, generating personalized email completions. While each user provides limited task-specific
data, such as writing style and personal preferences, there is a rich shared structure across users that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

