Binding

Bisecle: Binding and Separation in Continual
Learning for Video Language Understanding

Separation

Continual Learning

23

Yue Tan
School of Computer Science
University of New South Wales
Sydney, Australia
yue.tan@unsw.edu.au

Xiaoqian Hu
School of Computer Science
University of New South Wales
Sydney, Australia
xiaoqian.hu@student.unsw.edu.au

Hao Xue
School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of New South Wales
Sydney, Australia
hao.xue1@unsw.edu.au

Celso De Melo
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory
USA
celso.miguel.de.melo@gmail.com

Flora D. Salim ∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of New South Wales
Sydney, Australia
flora.salim@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
Frontier vision-language models (VLMs) have made remarkable improvements in
video understanding tasks. However, real-world videos typically exist as continuously evolving data streams (e.g., dynamic scenes captured by wearable glasses),
necessitating models to continually adapt to shifting data distributions and novel
scenarios. Considering the prohibitive computational costs of fine-tuning models
on new tasks, usually, a small subset of parameters is updated while the bulk
of the model remains frozen. This poses new challenges to existing continual
learning frameworks in the context of large multimodal foundation models, i.e.,
catastrophic forgetting and update conflict. While the foundation models struggle with parameter-efficient continual learning, the hippocampus in the human
brain has evolved highly efficient mechanisms for memory formation and consolidation. Inspired by the rapid Binding and pattern separation mechanisms in
the hippocampus, in this work, we propose Bisecle for video-language continual
learning, where a multi-directional supervision module is used to capture more
cross-modal relationships and a contrastive prompt learning scheme is designed
to isolate task-specific knowledge to facilitate efficient memory storage. Binding
and separation processes further strengthen the ability of VLMs to retain complex
experiences, enabling robust and efficient continual learning in video understanding
tasks. We perform a thorough evaluation of the proposed Bisecle, demonstrating
its ability to mitigate forgetting and enhance cross-task generalization on several
VideoQA benchmarks.

∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

