Last-Iterate Convergence of Smooth Regret Matching+
Variants in Learning Nash Equilibria

Linjian Meng1 , Youzhi Zhang2† , Zhenxing Ge1 , Tianyu Ding3 ,
Shangdong Yang4 , Zheng Xu1 , Wenbin Li1 , Yang Gao1†
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation, CAS
3
Microsoft Corporation
4
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Big Data Security and Intelligent Processing, Nanjing
University of Posts and Telecommunications
menglinjian@smail.nju.edu.cn, youzhi.zhang@cair-cas.org.hk, zhenxingge@smail.nju.edu.cn,
tianyuding@microsoft.com, sdyang@njupt.edu.cn, xuzhengcs@smail.nju.edu.cn,
liwenbin@nju.edu.cn, gaoy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Regret Matching+ (RM+ ) variants are widely used to build superhuman Poker
AIs, yet few studies investigate their last-iterate convergence in learning a Nash
equilibrium (NE). Although their last-iterate convergence is established for games
satisfying the Minty Variational Inequality (MVI), no studies have demonstrated
that these algorithms achieve such convergence in the broader class of games
satisfying the weak MVI. A key challenge in proving last-iterate convergence
for RM+ variants in games satisfying the weak MVI is that even if the game’s
loss gradient satisfies the weak MVI, RM+ variants operate on a transformed loss
feedback which does not satisfy the weak MVI. To provide last-iterate convergence
for RM+ variants, we introduce a concise yet novel proof paradigm that involves:
(i) transforming an RM+ variant into an Online Mirror Descent (OMD) instance
that updates within the original strategy space of the game to recover the weak
MVI, and (ii) showing last-iterate convergence by proving the distance between
accumulated regrets converges to zero via the recovered weak MVI of the feedback.
Inspired by our proof paradigm, we propose Smooth Optimistic Gradient Based
RM+ (SOGRM+ ) and show that it achieves last-iterate and finite-time best-iterate
convergence in learning an NE of games satisfying the weak MVI, the weakest
condition among all known RM+ variants. Experiments show that SOGRM+
significantly outperforms other algorithms. Our code is available at https://github.
com/menglinjian/NeurIPS-2025-SOGRM.

1

Introduction

Nash Equilibrium (NE) is a fundamental concept in the field of game theory. Recent advancements in
superhuman game AI, are largely attributed to NE learning [Bowling et al., 2015, Moravčı́k et al.,
2017, Brown and Sandholm, 2018, 2019, Pérolat et al., 2022]. Despite these advancements, the most
popular algorithms for learning an NE—no-regret algorithms, typically achieve only average-iterate
convergence. Even in two-player zero-sum matrix games, they are prone to divergence or cyclic
behavior [Bailey and Piliouras, 2018, Mertikopoulos et al., 2018b, Pérolat et al., 2021]. Averageiterate convergence requires strategy averaging, which poses significant challenges in large-scale
games where function approximation is used to denote the strategy as a new function has to be trained
to represent the average strategy [Liu et al., 2023].
†

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

