TREND: Unsupervised 3D Representation Learning
via Temporal Forecasting for LiDAR Perception

Runjian Chen1

3

Hyoungseob Park2 Bo Zhang3
Ping Luo1,4∗ Alex Wong2∗

Wenqi Shao3

1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Yale University
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 HKU Shanghai Intelligent Computing Research Center

{rjchen, pluo}@cs.hku.hk

alex.wong@yale.edu

Abstract
Labeling LiDAR point clouds is notoriously time-and-energy-consuming, which
spurs recent unsupervised 3D representation learning methods to alleviate the
labeling burden in LiDAR perception via pretrained weights. Existing work focus
on either masked auto encoding or contrastive learning on LiDAR point clouds,
which neglects the temporal LiDAR sequence that naturally accounts for object
motion (and their semantics). Instead, we propose TREND, short for Temporal
REndering with Neural fielD, to learn 3D representation via forecasting the future
observation in an unsupervised manner. TREND integrates forecasting for 3D pretraining through a Recurrent Embedding scheme to generate 3D embeddings across
time and a Temporal LiDAR Neural Field specifically designed for LiDAR modality
to represent the 3D scene, with which we compute the loss using differentiable
rendering. We evaluate TREND on 3D object detection and LiDAR semantic
segmentation tasks on popular datasets, including Once, Waymo, NuScenes, and
SemanticKITTI. TREND generally improves from-scratch models across datasets
and tasks and brings gains of 1.77% mAP on Once and 2.11% mAP on NuScenes,
which are up to 400% more improvement compared to previous SOTA unsupervised
3D pre-training methods. Codes and models will be available here.

1

Introduction

Light-Detection-And-Ranging (LiDAR) is widely used in autonomous driving. By emitting laser
rays into the environment, it provides accurate measurements of the distance along each ray with
time-of-flight principle. There has been strong research interest on LiDAR-based perception like
3D object detection [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] and semantic segmentation [8, 9]. However, labeling for
LiDAR point clouds is notoriously time-and-energy-consuming. According to [10], it costs an expert
labeler at least 10 minutes to label one frame of LiDAR point cloud at a coarse-level and more
at finer granularity. Assuming sensor frequency at 20Hz, it could cost more than 1000 days of a
human expert to annotate a one-hour LiDAR sequence. To alleviate the labeling burden, unsupervised
3D representation learning [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21] pre-trains 3D backbone and
fine-tune on downstream tasks for performance improvement with the same number of labels.
Previous literature on unsupervised 3D representation learning for LiDAR perception can be divided
into two streams, as shown in Figure 1 (a) and (b). (a) Masked-autoencoder-based methods [17, 18,
19, 20, 21] randomly mask LiDAR point clouds and the pre-training entails reconstructing the masked
areas. (b) Contrastive-based methods [15, 16] construct two views from one frame (or adjacent
frames) of LiDAR point cloud and maximize the similarity among positive pairs while minimizing
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

