Constrained Optimization From a Control
Perspective via Feedback Linearization

Runyu Zhang
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
runyuzha@mit.edu

Arvind Raghunathan
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
raghunathan@merl.com

Jeff Shamma
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jshamma@illinois.edu

Na Li
Harvard University
nali@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Tools from control and dynamical systems have proven valuable for analyzing and
developing optimization methods. In this paper, we establish rigorous theoretical
foundations for using feedback linearization (FL)—a well-established nonlinear
control technique—to solve constrained optimization problems. For equalityconstrained optimization, we establish global convergence rates to first-order
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) points and uncover the close connection between the
FL method and the Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) algorithm. Building
on this relationship, we extend the FL approach to handle inequality-constrained
problems. Furthermore, we introduce a momentum-accelerated feedback linearization algorithm and provide a rigorous convergence guarantee.

1

Introduction

Constrained optimization, also known as nonlinear programming, has found vast applications in several domains including robotics [2], supply chains [30], and safe operations of power systems [23].
First-order iterative algorithms are widely used to solve such problems, particularly in optimization and machine learning settings with large-scale datasets. These algorithms can be interpreted as
discrete-time dynamical systems, while their continuous-time counterparts, derived by considering
infinitesimal step sizes, take the form of differential equations. Analyzing these continuous-time
systems can provide valuable theoretical insights, such as stability properties and convergence rates.
This perspective is well-developed for unconstrained optimization, exemplified by the gradient flow
ẋ = −∇f (x) [26, 6, 70, 31, 4], the continuous-time counterpart of gradient descent, as well as its
accelerated variants [75, 79, 51]. However, for constrained optimization, this approach remains less
thoroughly explored.
Recent studies (c.f. [15, 35, 1, 53, 17, 16, 29]) have explored the dynamical properties of continuous time constrained optimization algorithms. These works leverage a feedback control perspective
to design and analyze the performance of optimization methods. Specifically, they propose frameworks that model constrained optimization problems as control problems, where the iterations of
the optimization algorithm are represented by a dynamical system, and the Lagrange multipliers act
as control inputs. The objective in this framework is to drive the system to a feasible steady state
that satisfies the constraints. Within this framework, various control strategies can be employed to
design the update of Lagrange multipliers, resulting in different control-based first-order methods.
For example, it can be shown that Proportional-Integral (PI) control leads to Primal-Dual Gradient
Dynamics (PDGD), whose properties are well-studied [46, 66, 22]. However, most of the works
focuses on convergence for convex constrained problems.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

