One Token Embedding Is Enough to Deadlock Your
Large Reasoning Model

Mohan Zhang1∗ Yihua Zhang2∗ Jinghan Jia2 Zhangyang Wang3
Sijia Liu2 Tianlong Chen1
1

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
2
Michigan State University
3
University of Texas at Austin
https://github.com/UNITES-Lab/Deadlock-Attack

Abstract
Modern large reasoning models (LRMs) exhibit impressive multi-step problemsolving via chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning. However, this iterative thinking
mechanism introduces a new vulnerability surface. We present the Deadlock
Attack, a resource exhaustion method that hijacks an LRM’s generative control
flow by training a malicious adversarial embedding to induce perpetual reasoning
loops. Specifically, the optimized embedding encourages transitional tokens (e.g.,
“Wait”, “But”) after reasoning steps, preventing the model from concluding its
answer. A key challenge we identify is the continuous-to-discrete projection gap:
naïve projections of adversarial embeddings to token sequences nullify the attack.
To overcome this, we introduce a backdoor implantation strategy, enabling reliable
activation through specific trigger tokens. Our method achieves a 100% attack
success rate across four advanced LRMs (Phi-RM, Nemotron-Nano, R1-Qwen,
R1-Llama) and three math reasoning benchmarks, forcing models to generate up
to their maximum token limits. The attack is also stealthy (in terms of causing
negligible utility loss on benign user inputs) and remains robust against existing
strategies trying to mitigate the overthinking issue. Our findings expose a critical
and underexplored security vulnerability in LRMs from the perspective of reasoning
(in)efficiency.

1

Introduction

Reasoning-enhanced large language models (LLMs), or large reasoning models (LRMs), have shown
impressive capabilities in solving complex problems via multi-step chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning
trajectories [1–4]. This explicit reasoning, often encouraged through supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on
CoT-style data [5, 6] or reinforcement learning (RL) with rewards that favor thorough reasoning,
significantly enhances performance on math and coding tasks [7–9]. Although this design allows
allocating more test-time compute for reasoning [10, 11], it also inherently predisposes LRMs to
an “overthinking” phenomenon, where they generate excessively verbose reasoning even for simple
queries [12, 13]. This verbosity results in substantial computational overhead, latency and economic
cost, hindering the practical deployment of such models in resource-constrained settings [14, 15].
To mitigate the overthinking issue, research has focused on improving LRM efficiency, which can
be broadly categorized into the following approaches. Training-centered methods leverage RL with
novel reward functions encouraging brevity [16–18] or apply SFT on datasets curated to reduce
redundant reasoning steps [19–23]. Output-based strategies aim to compress reasoning trajectories in
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

