SHAP values via sparse Fourier representation

Ali Gorji ∗
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
ali.gorji@alumni.ethz.ch

Andisheh Amrollahi ∗
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
amrollaa@alumni.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) values are a widely used method for local
feature attribution in interpretable and explainable AI. We propose an efficient
two-stage algorithm for computing SHAP values in both black-box setting and
tree-based models. We assume the black-box predictor or tree model accepts
binary (zero-one) features. Motivated by spectral bias in real-world predictors, we
first approximate the predictor using compact Fourier representations, exactly for
trees and approximately for black-box models. In the second stage, we introduce
a closed-form formula for exactly computing SHAP values using the Fourier
representation, that “linearizes” the computation into a simple summation and is
amenable to parallelization. As the Fourier approximation is computed only once,
our method enables amortized SHAP value computation, achieving significant
speedups over existing methods and a tunable trade-off between efficiency and
precision.

1

Introduction

Interpretability of machine learning models is paramount, especially in high-stakes applications
in areas such as medicine, fraud detection, or credit scoring. This is crucial to the extent that in
Europe, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) mandates the legal right to an explanation
of algorithmic decisions [Voigt and Von dem Bussche, 2017]. Say we are given a predictor/model
h : X n → R which maps an input (data) instance x∗ ∈ X n to a prediction h(x∗ ). Instance-wise
a.k.a. local feature attribution methods assign “importances” to each of the features x∗i ∈ X of the
instance x∗ which quantify how influential that feature was in the model predicting the value h(x∗ ).
A widely used method for deriving attributions (importances) is the notion of SHapley Additive
exPlanations, commonly referred to simply as SHAP values. Originally, the notion of Shapley values
was introduced in the seminal work of Shapley [1952] in the context of cooperative game theory. The
Shapley value is a mathematically well-founded and “fair” way of distributing a reward among all
the members of a group playing a cooperative game and it is computed based on the rewards that
would be received for all possible coalitions. The Shapley value is the unique way of distributing
the reward that satisfies several reasonable mathematical properties that capture a notion of fairness
[Shapley, 1952]. In the context of machine learning and statistics, the players become features, the
reward is the prediction of the predictor h and the SHAP value is the “contribution” or “influence” of
that feature on the prediction. Shapley values are widely used due to their mathematical soundness
and desirable properties (Gromping [2007], Štrumbelj et al. [2009], Owen [2014], Datta et al. [2016],
Owen and Prieur [2017], Lundberg and Lee [2017], Lundberg et al. [2020] Aas et al. [2021]).
Despite their prevalence, computing SHAP values is challenging, as it involves an exponential
summation, i.e., a summation over exponentially many terms , see Equation 1. This is because
the formula accounts for a feature’s importance in the context of all possible “coalitions” of
other features, and therefore the formula covers all possible subsets of other features. Therefore,
approximating them and speeding up the computation has received attention in a variety of settings.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

