Who You Are Matters: Bridging Topics and Social
Roles via LLM-Enhanced Logical Recommendation
Qing Yu1,∗, Xiaobei Wang2 , Shuchang Liu2 , Yandong Bai2 , Xiaoyu Yang2 , Xueliang Wang2 , Chang
Meng2 , Shanshan Wu2 , Hailan Yang2 , Bin Wen2 , Huihui Xiao2 , Xiang Li2 , Fan Yang2 , Xiaoqiang
Feng2 , Lantao Hu2 , Han Li2 , Kun Gai2 , Lixin Zou1,†
1

Wuhan University 2 Kuaishou Technology

{yu_qing, zoulixin}@whu.edu.cn,
{wangxiaobei03,liushuchang,chengfeng05,yangxiaoyu,wangxueliang03,mengchang,
wushanshan03,yanghailan,wenbin,xiaohuihui, lixiang44,yangfan,fengxiaoqiang,
hulantao,lihan08}@kuaishou.com, gai.kun@qq.com

Abstract
Recommender systems filter contents/items valuable to users by inferring preferences from user features and historical behaviors. Mainstream approaches follow
the learning-to-rank paradigm, which focuses on discovering and modeling item
topics (e.g., categories) and capturing user preferences for these topics based on
historical interactions. However, this paradigm often neglects the modeling of user
characteristics and their social roles, which are logical confounders influencing
the correlated interests and user preference transition. To bridge this gap, we
introduce the user role identification task and the behavioral logic modeling task
that aim to explicitly model user roles and learn the logical relations between item
topics and user social roles. We show that it is possible to explicitly solve these
tasks through an efficient integration framework of Large Language Model (LLM)
and recommendation systems, for which we propose TagCF. On the one hand,
TagCF exploits the (Multi-modal) LLM’s world knowledge and logic inference
ability to extract realistic tag-based virtual logic graphs that reveal dynamic and
expressive knowledge of users, refining our understanding of user behaviors. On
the other hand, TagCF presents empirically effective integration modules that take
advantage of the extracted tag-logic information, augmenting the recommendation
performance. We conduct both online experiments with an industrial environment
and offline experiments on public datasets to verify TagCF’s effectiveness, and
we empirically show that the user role modeling strategy is potentially a better
choice than the modeling of item topics. Additionally, we provide evidence that
the extracted logic graphs are empirically a general and transferable knowledge
that can benefit a wide range of recommendation tasks. Our code is available in
https://github.com/Code2Q/TagCF.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have become an indispensable tool to mitigate information overload and are
commonly employed on various online platforms, from e-commerce to video streaming, assisting
users in finding personalized content. Traditional recommendation systems [43, 55, 24] typically
adhere to the learning-to-rank paradigm, which learns the representation vectors of user and item
∗
†

Work done during an internship at Kuaishou Technology.
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

