QiMeng-SALV: Signal-Aware Learning for Verilog
Code Generation
Yang Zhang1,2
Rui Zhang1
Jiaming Guo1
Lei Huang1,2
Di Huang1
1,3
1
1,2
Yunpu Zhao
Shuyao Cheng
Pengwei Jin
Chongxiao Li1,2
1
1
1
Zidong Du
Xing Hu
Qi Guo
Yunji Chen1,2∗
1

State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Science and Technology of China

https://qimeng-iprc.github.io/QiMeng-SALV/

Abstract
The remarkable progress of Large Language Models (LLMs) presents promising
opportunities for Verilog code generation which is significantly important for
automated circuit design. The lacking of meaningful functional rewards hinders
the preference optimization based on Reinforcement Learning (RL) for producing
functionally correct Verilog code. In this paper, we propose Signal-Aware Learning
for Verilog code generation (QiMeng-SALV) by leveraging code segments of
functionally correct output signal to optimize RL training. Considering Verilog
code specifies the structural interconnection of hardware gates and wires so that
different output signals are independent, the key insight of QiMeng-SALV is
to extract verified signal-aware implementations in partially incorrect modules,
so as to enhance the extraction of meaningful functional rewards. Roughly, we
verify the functional correctness of signals in generated module by comparing
with that of reference module in the training data. Then abstract syntax tree
(AST) is employed to identify signal-aware code segments which can provide
meaningful functional rewards from erroneous modules. Finally, we introduce
signal-aware DPO which is optimized on the correct signal-level code segments,
thereby preventing noise and interference from incorrect signals. The proposed
QiMeng-SALV underscores the paradigm shift from conventional module-level to
fine-grained signal-level optimization in Verilog code generation, addressing the
issue of insufficient functional rewards. Experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on VerilogEval and RTLLM, with a 7B
parameter model matching the performance of the DeepSeek v3 671B model and
significantly outperforming the leading open-source model CodeV trained on the
same dataset. Our code is available at https://github.com/QiMeng-IPRC/QiMengSALV.

1

Introduction

Circuit design is inherently complex and time-consuming, particularly with respect to Hardware
Description Language (HDL) such as Verilog. Automating the HDL coding process is of paramount
importance as it significantly enhances the efficiency of circuit design. The remarkable progress of
∗

Corresponding author. Contact: {zhangyang22s2,cyj}@ict.ac.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

