Are Large Reasoning Models Good Translation
Evaluators? Analysis and Performance Boost

Runzhe Zhan1 Zhihong Huang1 Xinyi Yang1
Lidia S. Chao1 Min Yang2 Derek F. Wong1B
1
NLP2 CT Lab, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
nlp2ct.{runzhe,zhihong,xinyi}@gmail.com
min.yang@siat.ac.cn,{derekfw,lidiasc}@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Recent advancements in large reasoning models (LRMs) have introduced an intermediate “thinking” process prior to generating final answers, improving their
reasoning capabilities on complex downstream tasks. However, the potential of
LRMs as evaluators for machine translation (MT) quality remains underexplored.
We provides the first systematic analysis of LRM-as-a-judge in MT evaluation.
We identify key challenges, revealing LRMs require tailored evaluation materials,
tend to “overthink” simpler instances and have issues with scoring mechanisms
leading to overestimation. To address these, we propose to calibrate LRM thinking
by training them on synthetic, human-like thinking trajectories. Our experiments
on WMT24 Metrics benchmarks demonstrate that this approach largely reduces
thinking budgets by ∼35x while concurrently improving evaluation performance
across different LRM scales from 7B to 32B (e.g., R1-Distill-Qwen-7B achieves
a +8.7 correlation point improvement). These findings highlight the potential of
efficiently calibrated LRMs to advance fine-grained automatic MT evaluation.
Code:

1

ThinMQM

Models:

ThinMQM Models

Introduction

The development of reliable automated metrics that accurately mimic human judgments of translation
quality is vital for advancing machine translation (MT) models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, modeling
the comprehensive and complex “evaluation process” inherent in human assessment is challenging.
Previous research has explored various paradigms to capture this process, from deterministic rulebased metrics [6, 7] and embedding-space similarities [8] to end-to-end neural networks [9, 10].
More recently, the rise of large language models (LLMs) as a judge [11, 12] has marked a substantial
leap forward. LLMs provide a convenient mechanism for customizing the evaluation process through
both natural language, marking a significant advancement in evaluation methodology [13, 14, 15].
Despite these advancements, assessing translation quality is rarely a simple “0-1” binary matching
task. It often requires a deliberate, analytical cognitive effort, which is akin to “System 2” thinking
[16], even for human annotators [17]. This suggests that emerging large reasoning models (LRMs)
[18], which enhance reasoning capabilities by generating intermediate “thoughts” before producing
final solutions, similar to human reflective thinking, may offer a stronger foundation for modeling the
complex process of MT evaluation. While LRMs have often demonstrated remarkable performance
boosts in solving mathematical and scientific challenges [19, 20], their potential as judges, i.e.,
LRM-as-a-judge in the specific context of MT evaluation remains largely unexplored.
B

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

