VAGEN: Reinforcing World Model Reasoning for
Multi-Turn VLM Agents
Kangrui Wang1∗ Pingyue Zhang1∗ Zihan Wang1∗ Yaning Gao5∗ Linjie Li2∗ Qineng Wang1
Hanyang Chen6 Chi Wan1 Yiping Lu1 Zhengyuan Yang4 Lijuan Wang4
Ranjay Krishna2 Jiajun Wu3 Li Fei-Fei3 Yejin Choi3 Manling Li1†
1

Northwestern University 2 University of Washington 3 Stanford University 4 Microsoft
5
University of Wisconsin-Madison 6 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
http://mll.lab.northwestern.edu/VAGEN
kangrui.wang@northwestern.edu, manling.li@northwestern.edu

Abstract
A major challenge in training VLM agents, compared to LLM agents, is that states
shift from simple texts to complex visual observations, which introduces partial
observability and demands robust world modeling. We ask: can VLM agents build
internal world models through explicit visual state reasoning? In this work, we
architecturally enforce and reward VLM agent’s reasoning process via reinforcement learning (RL), formulating the problem as a Partially Observable Markov
Decision Process (POMDP). We demonstrate that structuring agent’s reasoning
into StateEstimation (“what is the current state?”) and TransitionModeling
(“what is next?”) is critical by studying five reasoning strategies. Investigating how
agents should ground visual states and represent these internal beliefs, we reveal the
optimal representations are task-dependent: Natural Language excels at capturing
semantic relationships for general tasks, while Structured formats are essential
for high-precision manipulation. These insights motivate our approach to reward
shaping and credit assignment. We leverage a WorldModeling Reward to densely
rewards the agent’s turn-by-turn state predictions, while our Bi-Level General Advantage Estimation (Bi-Level GAE) enables turn-aware credit assignment. Through
such world model reasoning, we enable a 3B model to achieve performance of
0.82 on a set of five diverse agent tasks, nearly 3× improvement over its untrained
counterpart (0.21) and surpassing proprietary reasoning models like GPT-5 (0.75),
Gemini 2.5 Pro (0.67) and Claude 4.5 (0.62). All experiments are supported by our
VAGEN framework, a scalable system for training and analyzing multi-turn VLM
agents across diverse visual environments.

1

Introduction

The core challenge in multi-turn agentic tasks is accurate interpretation and tracking dynamic environments, which becomes significantly harder when the agents sense the world through vision rather than
text. Vision-language Model (VLM) agentic tasks are inherently complex due to the challenges in
understanding visual states, which often are partial and noisy Observations, fundamentally reframing
the problem from an Markov Decision Process (MDP) to a more challenging Partially Observable
Markov Decision Process (POMDP). Within a POMDP, the agent is no longer simply acting, but first
estimating the true state of the world from observations. The bridge connecting what an agent sees to
what it needs to know is the central focus of our work: the internal World Model [1]. It functions as
a cognitive engine, maintaining an internal belief over the true state based on visual observations.
While VLMs agents have been proposed for visual agentic such as like games [2–4], embodied
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

