PathVQ: Reforming Computational Pathology
Foundation Model for Whole Slide Image Analysis via
Vector Quantization

Honglin Li1,2∗ Zhongyi Shui1,2∗ Yunlong Zhang1,2
Chenglu Zhu2† Lin Yang2,3,4†
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Engineering, Westlake University
3
The Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study
4
Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Innovation, MuyuanLaboratory
{lihonglin,zhuchenglu,yanglin}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Pathology whole slide image (WSI) analysis is vital for disease diagnosis and
understanding. While foundation models (FMs) have driven recent advances, their
scalability in pathology remains a key challenge. In particular, vision-language
(VL) pathology FMs align visual features with language annotation for downstream
tasks, but they rely heavily on large-scale image-text paired data, which is scarce
thus limiting generalization. On the other hand, vision-only pathology FMs can
leverage abundant unlabeled data via self-supervised learning (SSL). However,
current approaches often use the [CLS] token from tile-level ViTs as slide-level
input for efficiency (a tile with 224×224 pixels composed of 196 patches with
16×16 pixels). This SSL pretrained [CLS] token lacks alignment with downstream
objectives, limiting effectiveness. We find that spatial patch tokens retain a wealth
of informative features beneficial for downstream tasks, but utilizing all of them
incurs up to 200× higher computation and storage costs compared [CLS] token
only (e.g., 196 tokens per ViT224 ). This highlights a fundamental trade-off between
efficiency and representational richness to build scalable pathology FMs. To address
this, we propose a feature distillation framework via vector-quantization (VQ) that
compresses patch tokens into discrete indices and reconstructs them via a decoder,
achieving 64× compression (1024 → 16 dimensions) while preserving fidelity. We
further introduce a multi-scale VQ (MSVQ) strategy, enhancing both reconstruction
and providing SSL supervision for slide-level pretraining. Built upon MSVQ
features and supervision signals, we design a progressive convolutional module and
a slide-level SSL objective to learn spatially rich representations for downstream
WSI tasks. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets demonstrate that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance, offering a scalable and effective
solution for high-performing pathology FMs in WSI analysis.

1

Introduction

Cancer remains one of the most challenging diseases to diagnose and prognosticate, with pathology
playing a pivotal role in understanding its complexities [28]. Traditional histopathological analysis
relies heavily on manual examination of tissue samples by pathologists, a process that is not only time∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

