Explainable Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback to Improve Alignment

Shicheng Liu1 , Siyuan Xu1 , Wenjie Qiu2 , Hangfan Zhang3 , Minghui Zhu1
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Pennsylvania State University
2
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
3
College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University
{sfl5539, spx5032, hbz5148, muz16}@psu.edu, wenjie.qiu@rutgers.edu

Abstract
A common and effective strategy for humans to improve an unsatisfactory outcome
in daily life is to find a cause of this outcome and correct the cause. In this paper, we
investigate whether this human improvement strategy can be applied to improving
reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) for alignment of language
models (LMs). In particular, it is observed in the literature that LMs tuned by
RLHF can still output unsatisfactory responses. This paper proposes a method to
improve the unsatisfactory responses by correcting their causes. Our method has
two parts. The first part proposes a post-hoc explanation method to explain why an
unsatisfactory response is generated to a prompt by identifying the training data
that lead to this response. We formulate this problem as a constrained combinatorial
optimization problem where the objective is to find a set of training data closest
to this prompt-response pair in a feature representation space, and the constraint
is that the prompt-response pair can be decomposed as a convex combination of
this set of training data in the feature space. We propose an efficient iterative data
selection algorithm to solve this problem. The second part proposes an unlearning
method that improves unsatisfactory responses to some prompts by unlearning the
training data that lead to these unsatisfactory responses and, meanwhile, does not
significantly degrade satisfactory responses to other prompts. Experimental results
demonstrate that our algorithm can improve RLHF.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [1, 2, 3] is a predominant approach to align
language models (LMs) with human preference. It learns a reward model from human preference
data and uses the reward model to tune an LM [4, 5, 6]. The tuned LM can be evaluated on a set of
(i) M
validation prompts {x̄(i) }M
i=1 to generate responses {ȳ }i=1 , thereby forming the validation data
(i) (i) M
D̄ = {(x̄ , ȳ )}i=1 . It is expected that all responses in D̄ should align with human preference.
However, it is observed in the literature that LMs tuned by RLHF can still generate unsatisfactory
responses, such as harmful [7, 8], inaccurate [9, 10] and redundant [11, 12] responses. We also include
an experiment (in Appendix D.1) to validate that RLHF can still generate unsatisfactory responses.
Therefore, we can partition the validation data D̄ into an unsatisfactory subset D̄u (with unsatisfactory
responses and associated validation prompts) and a satisfactory subset D̄ \ D̄u . These unsatisfactory
responses in D̄u can be due to various reasons, such as missing or misleading information in the
human preference data. In this paper, we study the case where the preference data includes misleading
information. This setting is common in practice. One example is that the preference data is usually
collected from diverse sources and thus some preference data can be useful for some prompts but
misleading to other prompts [1, 13]. Another example is that the preference data can be noisy, where
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

