Alias-Free ViT:
Fractional Shift Invariance via Linear Attention
Hagay Michaeli
Technion
Haifa, Israel
hagaymi@campus.technion.ac.il

Daniel Soudry
Technion
Haifa, Israel
daniel.soudry@gmail.com

Abstract
Transformers have emerged as a competitive alternative to convnets in vision
tasks, yet they lack the architectural inductive bias of convnets, which may hinder their potential performance. Specifically, Vision Transformers (ViTs) are not
translation-invariant and are more sensitive to minor image translations than standard convnets. Previous studies have shown, however, that convnets are also not
perfectly shift-invariant, due to aliasing in downsampling and nonlinear layers.
Consequently, anti-aliasing approaches have been proposed to certify convnets
translation robustness. Building on this line of work, we propose an Alias-Free
ViT, which combines two main components. First, it uses alias-free downsampling and nonlinearities. Second, it uses linear cross-covariance attention that
is shift-equivariant to both integer and fractional translations, enabling a shiftinvariant global representation. Our model maintains competitive performance in
image classification and outperforms similar-sized models in terms of robustness
to adversarial translations.1

1

Introduction

Transformers, primarily designed for language modeling [58], have become dominant in vision tasks
[26, 34]. Since they were originally designed for sequential data, their underlying attention mechanism
is not sensitive to the locality of information in visual data. As a result, Vision Transformers (ViTs)
exhibit a lack of shift-invariance, a shortcoming that becomes evident in cases where small image
translations lead to significant deviations in output [25, 51].
To mitigate this gap, many studies have been conducted on the integration of convolutional priors,
such as spatial hierarchy and shift-invariance, into ViT architectures. For example, approaches include
hierarchical patch merging [39], the incorporation of convolutional layers [61], and the design of
relative positional encodings [62]. Furthermore, some works have drawn parallels between selfattention and dynamic convolutions [1, 9, 27], motivating reinterpretations of the attention mechanism
through a convolutional lens.
Despite being more spatially aware than transformers, convnets are not perfectly shift-invariant
due to aliasing introduced by strided convolutions and pooling layers [4, 67]. This has led to
a line of research that aims to restore shift-invariance, by methods including anti-aliasing filters
[21, 23, 32, 40, 67, 71] and adaptive sampling techniques [6, 46]. Building on these advances, recent
works have adapted such methods for transformer architectures. For example, Adaptive Polyphase
Sampling (APS) has been employed to achieve cyclic shift-equivariance in ViTs [13, 47]. However,
despite the latter approach efficiently guaranteeing shift-invariance for integer pixel cyclic shifts, it
falls short in fractional (i.e., sub-pixel) shifts and “standard” shifts (i.e. imitating camera translation)
[11, 40, 51].
1

Our code is available at github.com/hmichaeli/alias_free_vit.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

