On Hierarchies of Fairness Notions in Cake Cutting:
From Proportionality to Super Envy-Freeness

Arnav Mehra
Capital One
mehraarn000@gmail.com

Alexandros Psomas
Purdue University
apsomas@purdue.edu

Abstract
We consider the classic cake-cutting problem of producing fair allocations for n
agents, in the Robertson–Webb query model. In this model, it is known that: (i)
proportional allocations can be computed using O(n log n) queries, and this is optimal for deterministic protocols; (ii) envy-free
allocations
(a subset of proportional


nn
nn
allocations) can be computed using O nn
queries, and the best known
lower bound is Ω(n2 ); (iii) perfect allocations (a subset of envy-free allocations)
cannot be computed using a bounded (in n) number of queries.
In this work, we introduce two hierarchies of new fairness notions: Harmonically
Coalition-Resistant (HCR) and Linearly Coalition-Resistant (LCR). An allocation
is HCR-k if the allocation is complete and, for any subset of agents S of size at
most k, every agent i ∈ S believes the value of all pieces allocated to agents in
1
S to be at least n−|S|+1
, making the union of all pieces allocated to agents not in
n−|S|
n−|S|
S at most n−|S|+1
; for LCR-k allocations, these bounds become |S|
n and
n ,
respectively. Intuitively, these notions of fairness ask that, for every agent i, the
collective value (from the perspective of agent i) that a group of agents receives
is limited. If the group includes i, its value is lower-bounded, and if the group
excludes i, it is upper-bounded, thus providing the agent some protection against
the formation of coalitions.
Our hierarchies bridge the gap between proportionality, envy-freeness, and super
envy-freeness. HCR-k and LCR-k coincide with proportionality for k = 1.
For all k ≤ n, HCR-k allocations are a superset of envy-free allocations (i.e.,
easier to find). On the other hand, for k ∈ [2, ⌈n/2⌉ − 1], LCR-k allocations are
incomparable to envy-free allocations. For k ≥ ⌈n/2⌉, LCR-k allocations are a
subset of envy-free allocations (i.e., harder to find), while LCR-n coincides with
super envy-freeness: the value of each agent for their piece is at least 1/n, and
their value for the piece allocated to any other agent is at most 1/n.
We prove that HCR-n allocations can be computed using O(n4 ) queries in the
Robertson–Webb model. On the flip side, finding HCR-2 (and therefore all HCR-k
for k ≥ 2) allocations requires Ω(n2 ) queries, while LCR-2 (and therefore all
LCR-k for k ≥ 2) allocations cannot be computed using a bounded (in n) number
of queries. Our results reveal that envy-free allocations occupy a curious middle
ground, between a computationally impossible notion of fairness, LCR-⌈n/2⌉, and
a computationally “easy” notion, HCR-n.

1

Introduction

We consider the classic problem of cake cutting, proposed by Hugo Steinhaus [Ste48], while in
hiding during World War II [Wik25]. In this problem, there is a heterogeneous resource, the “cake,”
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

