A Closer Look at Model Collapse:
From a Generalization-to-Memorization Perspective
Lianghe Shi∗
University of Michigan
United States
lhshi@umich.edu
Zekai Zhang
University of Michigan
United States
zzekai@umich.edu

Meng Wu∗
University of Michigan
United States
wymond@umich.edu

Huijie Zhang
University of Michigan
United States
huijiezh@umich.edu

Molei Tao
Georgia Institute of Technology
United States
mtao@gatech.edu

Qing Qu
University of Michigan
United States
qingqu@umich.edu

Abstract
The widespread use of diffusion models has led to an abundance of AI-generated
data, raising concerns about model collapse—a phenomenon in which recursive iterations of training on synthetic data lead to performance degradation.
Prior work primarily characterizes this collapse via variance shrinkage or distribution shift, but these perspectives miss practical manifestations of model collapse. This paper identiﬁes a transition from generalization to memorization
during model collapse in diffusion models, where models increasingly replicate
training data instead of generating novel content during iterative training on synthetic samples. This transition is directly driven by the declining entropy of
the synthetic training data produced in each training cycle, which serves as a
clear indicator of model degradation. Motivated by this insight, we propose
an entropy-based data selection strategy to mitigate the transition from generalization to memorization and alleviate model collapse. Empirical results show
that our approach signiﬁcantly enhances visual quality and diversity in recursive generation, effectively preventing collapse. The source code is available at
https://github.com/shilianghe007/Model_Collapse.git

1

Introduction

As generative models, such as diffusion models, become widely used for image synthesis and video
generation, a large volume of generated data has emerged on the Internet. Since state-of-the-art
diffusion models can generate realistic content that even humans cannot easily distinguish, the training datasets for next-generation models will inevitably contain a signiﬁcant proportion of synthetic
data. Figure 1 illustrates this self-consuming loop, where at each iteration2 , data generated by the
current model is subsequently used to train the new model for the next iteration. Unfortunately, several recent studies have demonstrated that recursively training models on datasets contaminated by
AI-generated data leads to performance degradation across these self-consuming iterations—even
when synthetic data comprises only a small fraction of the dataset [1]. This phenomenon, termed
model collapse in prior work, poses a signiﬁcant threat to the future development and effectiveness
of generative models.
∗
2

The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally.
This paper uses “iteration” to denote a full cycle of training and generation, rather than a gradient update.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

