SRHand: Super-Resolving Hand Images and 3D
Shapes via View/Pose-aware Neural Image
Representations and Explicit 3D Meshes

Minje Kim Tae-Kyun Kim
School of Computing, KAIST
{minjekim, kimtaekyun}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Reconstructing detailed hand avatars plays a crucial role in various applications.
While prior works have focused on capturing high-fidelity hand geometry, they
heavily rely on high-resolution multi-view image inputs and struggle to generalize
on low-resolution images. Multi-view image super-resolution methods have been
proposed to enforce 3D view consistency. These methods, however, are limited
to static objects/scenes with fixed resolutions and are not applicable to articulated
deformable hands. In this paper, we propose SRHand (Super-Resolution Hand), the
method for reconstructing detailed 3D geometry as well as textured images of hands
from low-resolution images. SRHand leverages the advantages of implicit image
representation with explicit hand meshes. Specifically, we introduce a geometricaware implicit image function (GIIF) that learns detailed hand prior by upsampling
the coarse input images. By jointly optimizing the implicit image function and
explicit 3D hand shapes, our method preserves multi-view and pose consistency
among upsampled hand images, and achieves fine-detailed 3D reconstruction
(wrinkles, nails). In experiments using the InterHand2.6M and Goliath datasets,
our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art image upsampling methods
adapted to hand datasets, and 3D hand reconstruction methods, quantitatively
and qualitatively. Project page: https://yunminjin2.github.io/projects/
srhand.

Low-resolution Images
[34 × 34]
Full-body Captured Multi-view
Images [334 × 512]

3D Hand Reconstruction from Low-res Images

High-resolution Animatable
Hand Avatar

Figure 1: From low-resolution multi-view RGB images, SRHand reconstructs highly detailed
animatable hand avatars by super-resolving both images and 3D geometry.

1

Introduction

Human avatars play a crucial role in immersive human-computer interaction within virtual and
augmented reality (VR/AR) environments. To provide realistic user experiences, it is essential to
reconstruct the full body with high fidelity, both in geometry and appearance [1, 14, 22]. Among
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

