LLM Meeting Decision Trees on Tabular Data

Hangting Ye1 , Jinmeng Li1 , He Zhao2 3 , Dandan Guo1 ∗ , Yi Chang1 4 5∗
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University1
2
CSIRO’s Data61 ; Monash University3 ; International Center of Future Science, Jilin University4
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, MOE, China5
{yeht2118,lijm9921}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, he.zhao@data61.csiro.au,
{guodandan,yichang}@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Tabular data have been playing a vital role in diverse real-world fields, including
healthcare, finance, etc. With the recent success of Large Language Models (LLMs),
early explorations of extending LLMs to the domain of tabular data have been
developed. Most of these LLM-based methods typically first serialize tabular data
into natural language descriptions, and then tune LLMs or directly infer on these
serialized data. However, these methods suffer from two key inherent issues: (i)
data perspective: existing data serialization methods lack universal applicability for
structured tabular data, and may pose privacy risks through direct textual exposure,
and (ii) model perspective: LLM fine-tuning methods struggle with tabular data, and
in-context learning scalability is bottle-necked by input length constraints (suitable
for few-shot learning). This work explores a novel direction of integrating LLMs
into tabular data through logical decision tree rules as intermediaries, proposing
a decision tree enhancer with LLM-derived rule for tabular prediction, DeLTa.
The proposed DeLTa avoids tabular data serialization, and can be applied to full
data learning setting without LLM fine-tuning. Specifically, we leverage the
reasoning ability of LLMs to redesign an improved rule given a set of decision
tree rules. Furthermore, we provide a calibration method for original decision
trees via new generated rule by LLM, which approximates the error correction
vector to steer the original decision tree predictions in the direction of “errors”
reducing. Finally, extensive experiments on diverse tabular benchmarks show that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance. The source code is available at
https://github.com/HangtingYe/DeLTa.

1

Introduction

Tabular data, typically organized in a structured table format within a relational database with rows and
columns standing for the data samples and heterogeneous features (e.g., categorical and numerical
features), is fundamental in various real-world fields, including healthcare [1], advertising [2],
finance [3], etc. Given the heterogeneity of features [4, 5, 6, 7], decision tree-based methods [8, 9, 10]
were found to be particularly suitable for tabular data [11, 12, 13]. While deep learning has led to
breakthroughs in computer vision [14] and natural language processing [15], decision tree-based
methods still outperform the majority of existing deep tabular methods on tabular prediction tasks
such as classification and regression. This superiority of decision tree-based methods is explained by
the feature heterogeneity for tabular data, where neural networks struggle to learn the irregular target
functions compared to decision tree-based methods [11, 16].
Recently, LLMs have exhibited remarkable capabilities in natural language understanding and
reasoning [17, 18], sparking growing interest in applying LLMs to structured tabular data tasks [19,
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

