PyraMotion: Attentional Pyramid-Structured Motion
Integration for Co-Speech Gesture Synthesis

Zhizhuo Yin1 , Yuk Hang Tsui2 , Pan Hui1,2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR
zyin190@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, yhtsui@connect.ust.hk, panhui@hkust-gz.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Generating full-body human gestures encompassing face, body, hands, and global
movements from audio is crucial yet challenging for virtual avatar creation. Existing systems tokenize gestures with fixed frame-count for each token, predicting
tokens of single scale from the input audio. However, expressive human gestures
consist of varied patterns with different frame lengths, and different body parts exhibit motion patterns of varying durations. Existing systems fail to capture motion
patterns across body parts and temporal scales due to the fixed frame-count setting
of their gesture tokens. Inspired by the success of the feature pyramid technique
in the multi-scale visual information extraction, we propose a novel framework
named PyraMotion and an adaptive multi-scale feature capturing model called
Attentive Pyramidal VQ-VAE (APVQ-VAE). Objective and subjective experiments
demonstrate that the PyraMotion outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of
generating natural and expressive full-body human gestures. Extensive ablation
experiments highlight that the self-adaptiveness integration through attention maps
contributes to performance.

1

Introduction

Among all human communication, the movements of all body gestures serve as an important
approach to conveying thoughts. Such non-verbal signals provide more information than voice
and context, enhancing the expressiveness and vividness of the speech, thus allowing listeners
to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the intentions, emotions, and motivations of the
speaker [32, 28]. Existing studies [35, 11] suggest that expressive gestures make avatars more intimate
and trustworthy. In the metaverse [17], the naturalness of the avatar’s full-body gestures, such as
face micro-expressions, intricate body gestures, and movement trajectory, could impact the sense of
realism, presence, and satisfaction. Therefore, generating natural full-body gestures is a valuable and
challenging task that serves as a critical component for creating realistic digital humans [29, 42].
The most recent co-speech gesture generation work [22, 1, 39] focuses on utilizing VQ-VAE [34], a
method that encodes continuous motion to a discrete latent space while preserving the original motion
information. However, in these VQ-VAE-based methods, one shared approach is that each motion
token exclusively represents a static human pose in a single scale with fixed frame count. Since natural
gestures convey semantic information through a series of motion patterns with varying durations,
shown in Figure 1, this assumption severely hampers the model’s ability to learn natural gestures
that express different intricate semantic information. This assumption also constrains the ability of
the token predictor model to capture expressive patterns of audio and transcript representations with
inconsistent durations and generate accurate corresponding motion tokens.
Inspired by a widespread pyramidal multiscale design exploited in computer vision [31, 20, 26]. We
propose the PyraMotion framework to address the above problem by adaptively capturing motion
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

