Contextual Tokenization for Graph Inverted Indices

Pritish Chakraborty
IIT Bombay

Indradyumna Roy
IIT Bombay

Soumen Chakrabarti
IIT Bombay

Abir De
IIT Bombay

Emails: {pritish, indraroy15, soumen, abir}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
Retrieving graphs from a large corpus, that contain a subgraph isomorphic to a
given query graph, is a core operation in many real-world applications. While
recent multi-vector graph representations and scores based on set alignment and
containment can provide accurate subgraph isomorphism tests, their use in retrieval
remains limited by their need to score corpus graphs exhaustively. We introduce
C O RGII (Contextual Representation of Graphs for Inverted Indexing), a graph
indexing framework in which, starting with a contextual dense graph representation,
a differentiable discretization module computes sparse binary codes over a learned
latent vocabulary. This text document-like representation allows us to leverage
classic, highly optimized inverted indices, while supporting soft (vector) set containment scores. Pushing this paradigm further, we replace the classical, fixed
impact weight of a ‘token’ on a graph (such as TFIDF or BM25) with a data-driven,
trainable impact weight. Finally, we explore token expansion to support multiprobing the index for smoother accuracy-efficiency tradeoffs. To our knowledge,
C O RGII is the first indexer of dense graph representations using discrete tokens
mapping to efficient inverted lists. Extensive experiments show that C O RGII
provides better trade-offs between accuracy and efficiency, compared to several
baselines. Code is in: https://github.com/structlearning/corgii.

1

Introduction

Given a query graph Gq , a common graph retrieval task is to find, from a large corpus of C graphs,
graphs Gc that each contain a subgraph isomorphic to Gq [1]. The ranking relaxation is to find
K graphs that ‘best’ contain Gq , under a suitable notion of approximate subgraph containment
score. This task has several applications, e.g., functional group search in molecular databases [2],
control-flow pattern detection in program analysis [3], semantic search in scene graphs [4], etc.
Graph retrieval faces two challenges. Locally, the exact subgraph isomorphism decision problem
is NP-complete [5] — but this can be circumvented via suitable score approximations, even if
heuristic in nature. The more pressing global challenge is that the best approximations need early
cross-interaction between Gq and Gc , leading to an impractical Ω(C) query time. Our goal is to
devise a novel indexing framework to attack the global bottleneck.
Single vs. multi-vector graph representation tradeoffs Approximate scores for graph containment
may be computed by two families of neural networks. Early methods [6, 7, 8] use a single vector to
represent a whole graph, enabling efficient relevance computation in (hashable/indexable) Euclidean
space, but miss fine-grained structural details. Later methods [9, 10, 11] represent a graph as a set
of node embedding vectors and solve a form of optimal transport [9, 10] between them to get better
score approximations. This parallels the shift in dense text retrieval from late-interaction or “dual
encoder” or “bi-encoder” style that pools a passage into a single vector [12, 13, 14] to multi-vector
representations [15, ColBERT].
Lessons from text retrieval Classical text retrieval used inverted indices keyed on discrete tokens or
words [16, 17, 18] mapping to posting lists of document IDs, with highly optimized implementations
[19, 20, 21] that are still widely used. When word embeddings and neural text encoders became
popular, first-generation dense retrieval systems used single vectors to represent queries and passage,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

