Improved Approximation Algorithms for Chromatic
and Pseudometric-Weighted Correlation Clustering

Chenglin Fan
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Seoul National University
Seoul, 08826, South Korea
fanchenglin@snu.ac.kr

Dahoon Lee
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Seoul National University
Seoul, 08826, South Korea
dahoon46@snu.ac.kr

Euiwoong Lee
Computer Science and Engineering Division
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
euiwoong@umich.edu ∗

Abstract
Correlation Clustering (CC) is a foundational problem in unsupervised learning
that models binary similarity relations using labeled graphs. While classical CC
has been widely studied, many real-world applications involve more nuanced
relationships, either multi-class categorical interactions or varying confidence
levels in edge labels. To address these, two natural generalizations have been
proposed: Chromatic Correlation Clustering, which assigns semantic colors to
edge labels, and pseudometric-weighted Correlation Clustering, which allows edge
weights satisfying the triangle inequality. In this paper, we develop improved
approximation algorithms for both settings. Our approach leverages LP-based
pivoting techniques combined with problem-specific rounding functions. For
the pseudometric-weighted correlation clustering problem, we present a tight 10
3 approximation algorithm, matching the best possible bound achievable within the
framework of standard LP relaxation combined with specialized rounding. For the
Chromatic Correlation Clustering (CCC) problem, we improve the approximation
ratio from the previous best of 2.5 to 2.15, and we establish a lower bound of
2.11 within the same analytical framework, highlighting the near-optimality of our
result.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental task in unsupervised learning, where the goal is to partition a set of
objects into groups based on their pairwise relationships. One prominent problem in this domain is
Correlation Clustering (CC) [5], which models binary similarity/dissimilarity between items using
an edge-labeled graph: similar pairs are marked with a ‘+’ label and dissimilar pairs with a ‘−’.
The objective is to partition the nodes to minimize disagreements—i.e., cases where the partitioning
contradicts the edge labels. Due to its flexibility in not requiring a predefined number of clusters, CC
has been widely utilized in various areas such as detecting communities in networks [17], inferring
labels from user interactions [1, 13] and resolving ambiguous entities [28].
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

