Large Language Models for Lossless Image
Compression: Next-Pixel Prediction in Language
Space is All You Need

Kecheng Chen1 Pingping Zhang1 Hui Liu1 Jie Liu1
Yibing Liu2 Jiaxin Huang3 Shiqi Wang1 Hong Yan1 Haoliang Li1∗
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Baidu Inc. 3 MBZUAI
cs.ckc96@gmail.com; haoliang.li@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
We have recently witnessed that “Intelligence” and “ Compression” are the two
sides of the same coin, where the language large model (LLM) with unprecedented
intelligence is a general-purpose lossless compressor for various data modalities.
This attribute particularly appeals to the lossless image compression community,
given the increasing need to compress high-resolution images in the current streaming media era. Consequently, a spontaneous envision emerges: Can the compression performance of the LLM elevate lossless image compression to new heights?
However, our findings indicate that the naive application of LLM-based lossless
image compressors suffers from a considerable performance gap compared with
existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) codecs on common benchmark datasets. In light
of this, we are dedicated to fulfilling the unprecedented intelligence (compression)
capacity of the LLM for lossless image compression tasks, thereby bridging the
gap between theoretical and practical compression performance. Specifically, we
propose P2 -LLM, a next-pixel prediction-based LLM, which integrates various
elaborated insights and methodologies, e.g., pixel-level priors, the in-context ability
of LLM, and a pixel-level semantic preservation strategy, to enhance the understanding capacity of pixel sequences for better next-pixel predictions. Extensive
experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that P2 -LLM can beat SOTA
classical and learned codecs.

1

Introduction

Recently, Delétang et al. (2024) have uncovered that a large language model (LLM), pre-trained
on massive text corpora, can achieve competitive lossless compression rates across text, audio,
and image modalities. This perspective derives from the so-called philosophy, “Intelligence” and
“Compression” are two sides of the same coin (MacKay, 2003). Theoretically, minimizing log-loss
for next-token prediction in the LLM is equivalent to optimizing a lossless compression objective, positioning the LLM as a general-purpose compressor for any modality (Heurtel-Depeiges
et al., 2024). This insight is particularly compelling for the lossless image compression community, where the need for more effective compression methods has become increasingly critical
in the era of streaming media (Rahman and Hamada, 2019). As advanced LLMs’ intelligence
gradually outperforms humans in various applications (Hu et al., 2024), a spontaneous envision
emerges, i.e., Can the compression performance of the LLM elevate lossless image compression
to new heights? If the answer is affirmative, the lossless image compression community will
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

