Siegel Neural Networks

Xuan Son Nguyen Aymeric Histace Nistor Grozavu
ETIS, UMR 8051, CY Cergy Paris University, ENSEA, CNRS
{xuan-son.nguyen,aymeric.histace}@ensea.fr
nistor.grozavu@cyu.fr

Abstract
Riemannian symmetric spaces (RSS) such as hyperbolic spaces and symmetric
positive definite (SPD) manifolds have become popular spaces for representation
learning. In this paper, we propose a novel approach for building discriminative
neural networks on Siegel spaces, a family of RSS that is largely unexplored in
machine learning tasks. For classification applications, one focus of recent works
is the construction of multiclass logistic regression (MLR) and fully-connected
(FC) layers for hyperbolic and SPD neural networks. Here we show how to
build such layers for Siegel neural networks. Our approach relies on the quotient
structure of those spaces and the notation of vector-valued distance on RSS. We
demonstrate the relevance of our approach on two applications, i.e., radar clutter
classification and node classification. Our results successfully demonstrate state-ofthe-art performance across all datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are generally built upon the assumption that the data or features at hand exhibit
Euclidean latent structure. Unfortunately, this assumption does not hold in many applications [1, 16]
where the data or features lie on a multidimensional curved surface which is locally Euclidean. For
such applications, those models often produce unsatisfactory results because their building blocks
based on Euclidean geometry break the geometric stability principle that plays a crucial role in
geometric deep learning architectures [8]. To deal with this issue, many Riemannian neural networks
have been developed for solving a wide variety of machine learning problems [16, 22, 25, 29, 30, 32].
In this paper, we restrict our attention to discriminative neural networks with manifold-valued output.
Early works focus either on hyperbolic spaces [16, 38] or on matrix manifolds [20, 21, 22]. In
an attempt to develop a unified framework for a more general setting, the authors of [31, 33, 34]
leverage the gyro-structure of certain Riemannian manifolds. However, in the general case, their
methods cannot provide an explicit form for the point-to-hyperplane distance which is at the heart
of their proposed network building blocks [38] since the distance must be derived with respect to
a specific Riemannian metric. The work in [35] alleviates this issue by deriving a closed form for
the point-to-hyperplane distance associated with G-invariant Riemannian metrics on RSS. Although
this work is applicable to Siegel spaces, the construction of the MLR and FC layers [35] from the
derived distance is heavily based on the maximal abelian subspaces of those spaces. This can affect
the ability of the resulting networks to learn rich representations and complex decision boundaries.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for building neural networks on Siegel spaces. Those are
among the most versatile RSS [27] and have many attractive theoretical properties. The two wellestablished models of Siegel spaces, i.e., the Siegel upper space and the Siegel disk [39] generalize
the complex Poincaré upper plane and the complex Poincaré disk [18] to spaces of symmetric
complex matrices [36]. SPD manifolds associated with affine-invariant Riemannian metrics [37]
are also special cases of Siegel spaces associated with Siegel metrics [39]. Despite the potential
of Siegel spaces in capturing rich geometrical structures, they are much less studied in the context
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

