AdaReasoner: Adaptive Reasoning Enables More
Flexible Thinking
Xiangqi Wang1∗ Yue Huang1∗ Yanbo Wang2 Xiaonan Luo1 Kehan Guo1
Yujun Zhou1 Xiangliang Zhang1†
1
University of Notre Dame 2 MBZUAI
{xwang76, yhuang37, xluo6, kguo2, yzhou25, xzhang33}@nd.edu
yanbo.wang@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
LLMs often need effective configurations, like temperature and reasoning steps,
to handle tasks requiring sophisticated reasoning and problem-solving, ranging
from joke generation to mathematical reasoning. Existing prompting approaches
usually adopt general-purpose, fixed configurations that work “well enough” across
tasks but seldom achieve task-specific optimality. To address this gap, we introduce
AdaReasoner, an LLM-agnostic plugin designed for any LLM to automate adaptive
reasoning configurations for tasks requiring different types of thinking. AdaReasoner is trained using a reinforcement learning (RL) framework, combining a
factorized action space with a targeted exploration strategy, along with a pretrained
reward model to optimize the policy model for reasoning configurations with only a
few-shot guide. AdaReasoner is backed by theoretical guarantees and experiments
of fast convergence and a sublinear policy gap. Across six different LLMs and
a variety of reasoning tasks, it consistently outperforms standard baselines, preserves out-of-distribution robustness, and yield gains on knowledge-intensive tasks
through tailored prompts. Introduction of this paper can also be viewed publicly at
https://mine-lab-nd.github.io/project/adareasoner.html.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved impressive advancements across a wide range of natural language processing tasks, including syntactic parsing [26], complex scientific reasoning [52], and
commonsense knowledge answering [59]. As the model size and training data scale up, LLMs have
demonstrated the ability to surpass human-level accuracy on certain benchmarks [45], highlighting
their emerging capacity for sophisticated reasoning and problem-solving.
To better enhance LLM reasoning capabilities–and to push their performance closer to, or even
beyond, human-level reasoning–numerous prompting-based strategies have been proposed. Chain-ofThought (CoT) prompting encourages explicit decomposition of complex problems into intermediate
steps [54, 62], while Tree-of-Thought (ToT) generalizes this idea by exploring multiple branching
reasoning paths [57]. Sampling-based approaches like Best-of-N improve robustness by selecting
the most coherent reasoning path from diverse candidates [16], and automatic prompt optimization
techniques aim to systematically discover prompts that better facilitate multi-step reasoning [58, 42].
If samples of the same type of question are provided, In-Context Learning (ICL) [5] also prompts
LLM with few-shot examples with advanced performance.
Despite these advances, LLM reasoning remains highly configuration-sensitive: as Figure 1 shows,
GPT-4o’s accuracy on the metaphor expression classification task [49] swings wildly under different
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: xzhang33@nd.edu
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
†

