Analog In-memory Training on General Non-ideal
Resistive Elements: The Impact of Response Functions

Zhaoxian Wu∗ , Quan Xiao∗ , Tayfun Gokmen♯ , Omobayode Fagbohungbe♯ , Tianyi Chen†∗
∗
Cornell University, New York, NY
♯
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY
†
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
{zw868, qx232}@cornell.edu,
{tgokmen, Omobayode.Fagbohungbe}@us.ibm.com,
tianyi.chen@cornell.edu

Abstract
As the economic and environmental costs of training and deploying large vision
or language models increase dramatically, analog in-memory computing (AIMC)
emerges as a promising energy-efficient solution. However, the training perspective,
especially its training dynamics, is underexplored. In AIMC hardware, the trainable
weights are represented by the conductance of resistive elements and updated using
consecutive electrical pulses. While the conductance changes by a constant in
response to each pulse, in reality, the change is scaled by asymmetric and non-linear
response functions, leading to a non-ideal training dynamics. This paper provides a
theoretical foundation for gradient-based training on AIMC hardware with nonideal response functions. We demonstrate that asymmetric response functions
negatively impact Analog SGD by imposing an implicit penalty on the objective.
To address the issue, we propose residual learning algorithm, which provably
converges exactly to a critical point by solving a bilevel optimization problem. We
demonstrate that the proposed method can be extended to address other hardware
imperfections, such as limited response granularity. As we know, it is the first
paper to investigate the impact of a class of generic non-ideal response functions.
The conclusion is supported by simulations validating our theoretical insights.

1

Introduction

The remarkable success of large vision and language models is underpinned by advances in modern
hardware accelerators, such as GPU, TPU [1], NPU [2], and NorthPole chip [3]. However, the
computational demands of training these models are staggering. For instance, training LLaMA
[4] cost $2.4 million, while training GPT-3 [5] required $4.6 million, highlighting the urgent need
for more efficient computing hardware. Current mainstream hardware relies on the Von Neumann
architecture, in which the physical separation of memory and processing units creates a bottleneck
due to frequent, costly data movement between them.
In this context, the industry has turned its attention to analog in-memory computing (AIMC) accelerators based on resistive crossbar arrays [6–10], which excel at accelerating ubiquitous, computationally
intensive matrix-vector multiplications (MVMs) operations. In AIMC hardware, the weights (matrices) are represented by the conductance states of the resistive elements in analog crossbar arrays
[11, 12], while the input and output of MVM are analog signals like voltage and current. Leveraging
∗
The work was done when the authors were at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. The work was supported by
IBM through the IBM-Rensselaer Future of Computing Research Collaboration, the National Science Foundation
Projects 2401297, 2532349, and 2532653, and by the Cisco Research Award.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

