Feasibility-Aware Decision-Focused Learning for
Predicting Parameters in the Constraints

Jayanta Mandi
Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
jayanta.mandi@kuleuven.be

Marianne Defresne∗
LAAS-CNRS, Université de Toulouse
CNRS, INSA, Toulouse
marianne.defresne@laas.fr

Senne Berden
Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
senne.berden@kuleuven.be

Tias Guns
Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
tias.guns@kuleuven.be

Abstract
When some parameters of a constrained optimization problem (COP) are uncertain, this gives rise to a predict-then-optimize (PtO) problem, comprising two
stages: the prediction of the unknown parameters from contextual information and
the subsequent optimization using those predicted parameters. Decision-focused
learning (DFL) implements the first stage by training a machine learning (ML)
model to optimize the quality of the decisions made using the predicted parameters. When the predicted parameters occur in the constraints, they can lead to
infeasible solutions. Therefore, it is important to simultaneously manage both
feasibility and decision quality. We develop a DFL framework for predicting constraint parameters in a generic COP. While prior works typically assume that the
underlying optimization problem is a linear program (LP) or integer LP (ILP), our
approach makes no such assumption. We derive two novel loss functions based
on maximum likelihood estimation (MLE): the first one penalizes infeasibility (by
penalizing predicted parameters that lead to infeasible solutions), while the second
one penalizes suboptimal decisions (by penalizing predicted parameters that make
the true optimal solution infeasible). We introduce a single tunable parameter to
form a weighted average of the two losses, allowing decision-makers to balance
suboptimality and feasibility. We experimentally demonstrate that adjusting this
parameter provides decision-makers control over this trade-off. Moreover, across
several COP instances, we show that adjusting the tunable parameter allows a
decision-maker to prioritize either suboptimality or feasibility, outperforming the
performance of existing baselines in either objective.

1

Introduction

Many real-world optimization problems involve parameters that are unknown at decision time, such
as uncertain customer demand in manufacturing problems or unknown traffic in delivery routing.
This gives rise to predict-then-optimize (PtO) problems [22], where a machine learning (ML) model
first makes point predictions of the unknown parameters from contextual features, after which the
resulting instantiated optimization problem is solved.
∗

Affiliated to KU Leuven during submission of this article

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

