Stable Gradients for Stable Learning at Scale in Deep
Reinforcement Learning

Roger Creus Castanyer1,2∗ Johan Obando-Ceron1,2∗ Lu Li1,2 Pierre-Luc Bacon1,2
Glen Berseth1,2 Aaron Courville1,2 Pablo Samuel Castro1,2,3
1

Mila - Québec AI Institute

2

Université de Montréal

3

Google DeepMind

Abstract
Scaling deep reinforcement learning networks is challenging and often results
in degraded performance, yet the root causes of this failure mode remain poorly
understood. Several recent works have proposed mechanisms to address this, but
they are often complex and fail to highlight the causes underlying this difficulty.
In this work, we conduct a series of empirical analyses which suggest that the
combination of non-stationarity with gradient pathologies, due to suboptimal
architectural choices, underlie the challenges of scale. We propose a series of direct
interventions that stabilize gradient flow, enabling robust performance across a
range of network depths and widths. Our interventions are simple to implement and
compatible with well-established algorithms, and result in an effective mechanism
that enables strong performance even at large scales. We validate our findings on a
variety of agents and suites of environments. Source code here.
“We must be able to look at the world and see it as a dynamic process, not a static picture.”
— David Bohm

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) have demonstrated the ability of deep
neural networks to solve complex decision-making tasks from robotics to game play and resource
optimization [Mnih et al., 2015, Vinyals et al., 2019, Bellemare et al., 2020, Fawzi et al., 2022].
Motivated by successes in supervised and generative learning, recent works have explored scaling
architectures in deep RL, showing gains in representation quality and generalization across tasks
[Farebrother et al., 2023, Taiga et al., 2023]. However, scaling neural networks in deep RL remains
fundamentally challenging [Ceron et al., 2024b,a]. A central cause of this instability lies in the unique
optimization challenges of RL. Unlike supervised learning, where data distributions are fixed, deep
RL involves policy-dependent data that constantly change during training [Lyle et al., 2022]. Each
update of the policy πθ alters future states and rewards, making the training objective inherently
non-stationary. Value-based methods exacerbate these issues via bootstrapping, recursively using
predicted values as targets.
Estimation errors compound over time [Fujimoto et al., 2018], especially under sparse or delayed
rewards [Zheng et al., 2018], leading to unstable updates, policy collapse, or value divergence
[Van Hasselt et al., 2016, Lyle et al., 2023, 2024]. These dynamics are tightly coupled with architectural vulnerabilities. Deep networks face well known pathologies such as vanishing/exploding
gradients [Pascanu et al., 2013], ill-conditioned Jacobians [Pennington et al., 2017], and activation
saturation [Glorot and Bengio, 2010]. In deep RL, these are magnified by the “deadly triad” [Sutton
and Barto, 2018, Van Hasselt et al., 2018], off-policy corrections, and changing targets. As networks
∗
Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Roger Creus C <roger.creus-castanyer@mila.quebec>,
Johan Obando-Ceron < jobando0730@gmail.com>, Pablo Samuel Castro <psc@google.com>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

