Relieving the Over-Aggregating Effect in
Graph Transformers

Junshu Sun1,2 Wanxing Chang3
Chenxue Yang4∗ Qingming Huang1,2 Shuhui Wang1∗
1
State Key Lab. of AI Safety, ICT, CAS 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 4 Agriculture Information Institute, CAAS
{sunjunshu21s,wangshuhui}@ict.ac.cn changwanxing.cwx@alibaba-inc.com
yangchenxue@caas.cn qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Graph attention has demonstrated superior performance in graph learning tasks.
However, learning from global interactions can be challenging due to the large
number of nodes. In this paper, we discover a new phenomenon termed overaggregating. Over-aggregating arises when a large volume of messages is aggregated into a single node with less discrimination, leading to the dilution of the key
messages and potential information loss. To address this, we propose Wideformer,
a plug-and-play method for graph attention. Wideformer divides the aggregation of
all nodes into parallel processes and guides the model to focus on specific subsets
of these processes. The division can limit the input volume per aggregation, avoiding message dilution and reducing information loss. The guiding step sorts and
weights the aggregation outputs, prioritizing the informative messages. Evaluations
show that Wideformer can effectively mitigate over-aggregating. As a result, the
backbone methods can focus on the informative messages, achieving superior
performance compared to baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Transformers have achieved remarkable success in modeling Euclidean-structured data, including
natural language processing [47, 26, 25], image understanding [27, 40, 38, 39], and video processing [2, 5, 52]. Built on this success, significant efforts have been devoted to adapting transformers
to graph-structured data, giving rise to various graph transformer models [23, 58, 55]. Leveraging the attention mechanism, graph transformers can learn from long-range dependencies and
capture global features. These strengths provide effective solutions to address the challenges of
over-smoothing [30] and over-squashing [1, 46], commonly encountered in traditional graph neural
networks (GNNs) [17, 14, 48, 43, 13, 44, 45]. Evaluations across diverse downstream tasks highlight
the promising performance of graph transformers [55, 42, 9].
Nevertheless, the dense global attention in graph transformers incurs a space complexity of O(n2 ),
where the memory consumption increases quadratically with the number of input nodes. This high
complexity hinders graph transformers from scaling to large datasets. To enhance the scalability of
graph transformers, two primary approaches have been proposed, including sparse attention [19, 42]
and linear global attention [50, 49, 51, 9]. Sparse methods reduce the density of dense global attention,
which, in its original form, corresponds to a fully connected graph. The sparsified attention graph
contains fewer edges, resulting in reduced memory overhead but also smaller receptive fields for
each node. In contrast, linear methods preserve pairwise interactions between nodes and reduce
complexity by eliminating the need for explicitly computing the dense attention.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

