A data and task-constrained mechanistic model of the
mouse outer retina shows robustness to contrast
variations
Kyra L. Kadhim1,2,* , Jonas Beck1,2 , Ziwei Huang1,2 , Jakob H. Macke2,3,4 , Fred Rieke5 ,
Thomas Euler6 , Michael Deistler2,3,7 , and Philipp Berens1,2
1

Hertie Institute for AI in Brain Health, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
2
Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen, Germany
3
Machine Learning in Science, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
4
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
5
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington, Seattle, United States
6
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
7
Max Planck Institute for Biological Intelligence, Martinsried, Germany
*
kyra.kadhim@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Visual processing starts in the outer retina where photoreceptors transform light into
electrochemical signals. These signals are modulated by inhibition from horizontal
cells and sent to the inner retina via excitatory bipolar cells. The outer retina is
thought to play an important role in contrast invariant coding of visual information,
but how the different cell types implement this computation together remains
incompletely understood. To understand the role of each cell type, we developed
a fully-differentiable biophysical model of a circular patch of mouse outer retina.
The model includes 200 cone photoreceptors with a realistic phototransduction
cascade and ribbon synapses as well as horizontal and bipolar cells, all with celltype specific ion channels. Going beyond decades of work constraining biophysical
models of neurons only by experimental data, we used a dual approach, constraining
some parameters of the model with available measurements and others by a visual
task: (1) We fit the parameters of the cone models to whole cell patch-clamp
measurements of photocurrents and two-photon glutamate imaging measurements
of synaptic release. (2) We then trained the spatiotemporal outer retina model with
photoreceptors and the other cell types to perform a visual classification task with
varying contrast and luminance levels. We found that our outer retina model could
learn to solve the classification task despite contrast and luminance variance in
the stimuli. Testing different cell type compositions and connectivity patterns, we
found that feedback from horizontal cells did not further improve task performance
beyond that of excitatory photoreceptors and bipolar cells. This is surprising given
that horizontal cells are positioned to mediate communication across cones and
that they add to the model’s number of trainable parameters. Finally, we found
that our model generalized better to out of distribution contrast levels than a linear
classifier. Our work shows how the nonlinearities found in the outer retina can
accomplish contrast invariant classification and teases apart the contributions of
different cell types.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

