Computation and Memory-Efficient Model
Compression with Gradient Reweighting

Zhiwei Li1∗, Yuesen Liao1∗, Binrui Wu1 , Yuquan Zhou1
Xupeng Shi2 , Dongsheng Jiang3 , Yin Li3 , Weizhong Zhang1,4†
1
Fudan University, 2 Northeastern University, 3 Huawei Inc.
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{zwli23, ysliao24, brwu23, yqzhou21}@m.fudan.edu.cn
dongsheng_jiang@outlook.com, liyin9@huawei.com
weizhongzhang@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Pruning is a commonly employed technique for deep neural networks (DNNs)
aiming at compressing the model size to reduce computational and memory costs
during inference. In contrast to conventional neural networks, large language
models (LLMs) pose a unique challenge regarding pruning efficiency due to their
substantial computational and memory demands. Existing methods, particularly
optimization-based ones, often require considerable computational resources in
gradient estimation because they cannot effectively leverage weight sparsity of
the intermediate pruned network to lower compuation and memory costs in each
iteration. The fundamental challenge lies in the need to frequently instantiate intermediate pruned sub-models to achieve these savings, a task that becomes infeasible
even for moderately sized neural networks. To this end, this paper proposes a
novel pruning method for DNNs that is both computationally and memory-efficient.
Our key idea is to develop an effective reweighting mechanism that enables us to
estimate the gradient of the pruned network in current iteration via reweigting the
gradient estimated on an outdated intermediate sub-model instantiated at an earlier
stage, thereby significantly reducing model instantiation frequency. We further
develop a series of techniques, e.g., clipping and preconditioning matrix, to reduce
the variance of gradient estimation and stabilize the optimization process. We
conducted extensive experimental validation across various domains. Our approach
achieves 50% sparsity and a 1.58× speedup in forward pass on Llama2-7B model
with only 6 GB of memory usage, outperforming state-of-the-art methods with
respect to both perplexity and zero-shot performance. As a by-product, our method
is highly suited for distributed sparse training and can achieve a 2 × speedup over
the dense distributed baselines.

1

Introduction

The explosive growth in the scale of deep neural networks (DNNs), especially large language models
(LLMs) [1, 6, 48], has introduced practical challenges, including computational expense, memory
usage, and latency in inference. Model pruning [13, 14, 21, 28, 34], particularly structured pruning,
has emerged as a promising solution, aiming to obtain a sparse neural network by removing redundant
components. For conventional DNNs, it has been reported that existing methods [8, 23] can enhance
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

