Addressing Mark Imbalance in Integration-free
Neural Marked Temporal Point Processes

Sishun Liu
RMIT University
Melbourne, Victoria 3000
sishun.liu@student.rmit.edu.au
Yongli Ren
RMIT University
Melbourne, Victoria 3000
yongli.ren@rmit.edu.au

Ke Deng
RMIT University
Melbourne, Victoria 3000
ke.deng@rmit.edu.au
Yan Wang
Macquarie University
Syndey, New South Wales 2000
yan.wang@mq.edu.au

Xiuzhen Zhang
RMIT University
Melbourne, Victoria 3000
xiuzhen.zhang@rmit.edu.au

Abstract
Marked Temporal Point Process (MTPP) has been well studied to model the
event distribution in marked event streams, which can be used to predict the mark
and arrival time of the next event. However, existing studies overlook that the
distribution of event marks is highly imbalanced in many real-world applications,
with some marks being frequent but others rare. The imbalance poses a significant
challenge to the performance of the next event prediction, especially for events of
rare marks. To address this issue, we propose a thresholding method, which learns
thresholds to tune the mark probability normalized by the mark’s prior probability
to optimize mark prediction, rather than predicting the mark directly based on
the mark probability as in existing studies. In conjunction with this method, we
predict the mark first and then the time. In particular, we develop a novel neural
MTPP model to support effective time sampling and estimation of mark probability
without computationally expensive numerical improper integration. Extensive
experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our
solution against various baselines for the next event mark and time prediction. The
code is available at https://github.com/undes1red/IFNMTPP.

1

Introduction

Marked Temporal Point Process (MTPP) models event sequences observed from natural phenomena
(e.g. earthquakes) or generated in human activities (e.g. retweets), where each event has a mark and
an arrival time. MTPP has attracted the attention of the research community (see Shchur et al. [34]
for a comprehensive review). Typically, MTPP models the joint Probability Distribution Function
(PDF) conditioned on history, denoted as p∗ (m, t)1 , where m and t are the mark and arrival time2
of the next event, respectively. Some studies are on the Poisson Process [37] and Hawkes process
1
2

The asterisk reminds the probability is conditioned on history, i.e., the events in the past.
The time relative to the most recent event

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

