Analytic Energy-Guided Policy Optimization for
Offline Reinforcement Learning
Jifeng Hu1

Sili Huang2∗
Zhejian Yang1
Shengchao Hu3
4
1∗
Li Shen
Hechang Chen
Lichao Sun5
1∗
Yi Chang
Dacheng Tao6
1
2
Jilin University Minzu University of China
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
5
Lehigh University 6 Nanyang Technological University
{hujf21, zjyang22}@mails.jlu.edu.cn {chenhc, yichang}@jlu.edu.cn
huangsili@muc.edu.cn mathshenli@gmail.com charles-hu@sjtu.edu.cn
lis221@lehigh.edu dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Conditional decision generation with diffusion models has shown powerful competitiveness in reinforcement learning (RL). Recent studies reveal the relation between
energy-function-guidance diffusion models and constrained RL problems. The
main challenge lies in estimating the intermediate energy, which is intractable
due to the log-expectation formulation during the generation process. To address
this issue, we propose the Analytic Energy-guided Policy Optimization (AEPO).
Specifically, we first provide a theoretical analysis and the closed-form solution of
the intermediate guidance when the diffusion model obeys the conditional Gaussian transformation. Then, we analyze the posterior Gaussian distribution in the
log-expectation formulation and obtain the target estimation of the log-expectation
under mild assumptions. Finally, we train an intermediate energy neural network
to approach the target estimation of log-expectation formulation. We apply our
method in 30+ offline RL tasks to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
Extensive experiments illustrate that our method surpasses numerous representative
baselines in D4RL offline reinforcement learning benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Controllable generation with diffusion models has shown remarkable success in text-to-image generation [9], photorealistic image synthesization [87], high-resolution video creation [8], and robotics
manipulation [10]. A common strategy to realize controllable diffusion models is guided sampling,
which can be further classified into two categories: classifier-guided [17, 48] and classifier-freeguided [61, 1] diffusion-based methods.
Usually, classifier guidance and classifier-free guidance need paired data, i.e., samples and the
corresponding conditioning variables, to train a controllable diffusion model [85, 24, 74]. However,
it is difficult to describe the conditioning variables for each transition in RL. We can only evaluate the
value for the transitions with a scalar and continuous function, which is generally called the action
value function (Q function) [64, 48]. Recently, energy-function-guided diffusion models provide an
effective way to realize elaborate manipulation in RL. Previous studies also reveal the relation of
equivalence between guided sampling energy-function-guided diffusion models and constrained RL
∗
Corresponding authors: Hechang Chen, Sili Huang, and Yi Chang.
code: https://github.com/JF-Hu/Analytic-Energy-guided-Policy-Optimization

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

