IntrinsiX:
High-Quality PBR Generation using Image Priors

Peter Kocsis
Lukas Höllein
Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich
peter-kocsis.github.io/IntrinsiX/

Figure 1: IntrinsiX. We present a text-guided intrinsic image generator. Given a text prompt, our
method produces high-quality albedo, roughness, metallic, and normal maps which can be rerendered
under any lighting conditions. Our model enables downstream applications, such as relightable object
or scene generation, and material or lighting editing.

Abstract
We introduce IntrinsiX, a novel method that generates high-quality intrinsic images
from text description. In contrast to existing text-to-image models whose outputs
contain baked-in scene lighting, our approach predicts physically-based rendering
(PBR) maps. This enables the generated outputs to be used for content creation
scenarios in core graphics applications that facilitate re-lighting, editing, and texture
generation tasks. In order to train our generator, we exploit strong image priors, and
pre-train separate models for each PBR material component (albedo, roughness,
metallic, normals). We then align these models with a new cross-intrinsic attention
formulation that concatenates key and value features in a consistent fashion. This
allows us to exchange information between each output modality and to obtain
semantically coherent PBR predictions. To ground each intrinsic component,
we propose a rendering loss which provides image-space signals to constrain the
model, thus facilitating sharp details also in the output BRDF properties. Our results
demonstrate detailed intrinsic generation with strong generalization capabilities that
outperforms existing intrinsic image decomposition methods used with generated
images by a significant margin. Finally, we show a series of applications, including
re-lighting, editing, and for the first time text-conditioned room-scale PBR texture
generation. We will release the code and the pre-trained model weights.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

