Act Only When It Pays: Efficient Reinforcement
Learning for LLM Reasoning via Selective Rollouts

Haizhong Zheng†
Bhavya Kailkhura‡

Yang Zhou†
Fan Lai§

Brian R. Bartoldson‡
Jiawei Zhao¶

Beidi Chen†

†

Carnegie Mellon University ‡Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
§
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign ¶Meta AI (FAIR)

Abstract
Reinforcement learning, such as PPO and GRPO, has powered recent breakthroughs
in LLM reasoning. Scaling rollout to sample more prompts enables models to
selectively use higher-quality data for training, which can stabilize RL training and
improve model performance, but at the cost of significant computational overhead.
In this paper, we first show that a substantial portion of this overhead can be
avoided by skipping uninformative prompts before rollout. Our analysis of reward
dynamics reveals a strong temporal consistency in prompt value: prompts that
are uninformative in one epoch of training are likely to remain uninformative in
near future epochs. Based on these insights, we propose GRESO (GRPO with
Efficient Selective Rollout), an online, lightweight pre-rollout filtering algorithm
that predicts and skips uninformative prompts using reward training dynamics. By
evaluating GRESO on a broad range of math reasoning benchmarks and models,
like Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B, DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B, Qwen2.5-Math-7B,
Qwen2.5-14B, and Qwen2.5-32B, we show that GRESO achieves up to 2.4×
wall-clock time speedup in rollout and up to 2.0× speedup in total training time
without accuracy degradation. We make our code publicly available at GitHub1 .

4.3M fewer rollouts

6.7 M fewer rollouts

Figure 1: We train Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B/7B on the DAPO + MATH dataset and evaluate them on five
math reasoning benchmarks: MATH500, AMC, Gaokao, Minerva, and Olympiad Bench. Compared
to the baseline method (Dynamic Sampling), our approach (GRESO) reduces rollout overhead by up
to 2× while achieving comparable training performance, improving the efficiency of rollout scaling.
1

https://github.com/Infini-AI-Lab/GRESO/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

