SingRef6D: Monocular Novel Object Pose Estimation
with a Single RGB Reference
Haiyue Zhu2 † Haoren Guo1 Abdullah Al Mamun1
Cheng Xiang1 Tong Heng Lee1
1
College of Design and Engineering, National University of Singapore
2
SIMTech, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
wjiahui@u.nus.edu zhu_haiyue@simtech.a-star.edu.sg

Jiahui Wang1

Abstract
Recent 6D pose estimation methods demonstrate notable performance but still
face some practical limitations. For instance, many of them rely heavily on sensor depth, which may fail with challenging surface conditions, such as transparent
or highly reﬂective materials. In the meantime, RGB-based solutions provide
less robust matching performance in low-light and texture-less scenes due to the
lack of geometry information. Motivated by these, we propose SingRef6D, a
lightweight pipeline requiring only a single RGB image as a reference, eliminating the need for costly depth sensors, multi-view image acquisition, or training
view synthesis models and neural ﬁelds. This enables SingRef6D to remain robust and capable even under resource-limited settings where depth or dense templates are unavailable. Our framework incorporates two key innovations. First,
we propose a token-scaler-based ﬁne-tuning mechanism with a novel optimization loss on top of Depth-Anything v2 to enhance its ability to predict accurate depth, even for challenging surfaces. Our results show a 14.41% improvement (in δ1.05 ) on REAL275 depth prediction compared to Depth-Anything v2
(with ﬁne-tuned head). Second, beneﬁting from depth availability, we introduce
a depth-aware matching process that effectively integrates spatial relationships
within LoFTR, enabling our system to handle matching for challenging materials and lighting conditions. Evaluations of pose estimation on the REAL275,
ClearPose, and Toyota-Light datasets show that our approach surpasses state-ofthe-art methods, achieving a 6.1% improvement in average recall. Project page:
https://plusgrey.github.io/singref6d.

1

Introduction

Determining the 6D pose of an object in a three-dimensional space is an essential task for various applications in robotics, industrial automation, and augmented reality [1–3]. Recent computer vision
approaches for 6D pose estimation have achieved remarkable progress, enabling machines to understand object orientation and position in space and interact with the physical world with increasing
sophistication [4–10].
Among these methods, one prevalent paradigm relies on accurate geometric information of object
CAD models and scene depth maps. By matching observed scenes with pre-obtained 3D models, it
achieves notable 6D pose estimation performance [6, 8, 9, 11, 12]. Although these solutions have
shown signiﬁcant effectiveness, they come with some practical limitations. First, obtaining CAD
models for new objects is costly, requires specialized scanning equipment, and involves tedious
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

