Rethinking Approximate Gaussian Inference
in Classification
Bálint Mucsányi∗

Nathaël Da Costa∗

Philipp Hennig

Tübingen AI Center
University of Tübingen

Abstract
In classification tasks, softmax functions are ubiquitously used as output activations
to produce predictive probabilities. Such outputs only capture aleatoric uncertainty.
To capture epistemic uncertainty, approximate Gaussian inference methods have
been proposed. We develop a common formalism to describe such methods, which
we view as outputting Gaussian distributions over the logit space. Predictives are
then obtained as the expectations of the Gaussian distributions pushed forward
through the softmax. However, such softmax Gaussian integrals cannot be solved
analytically, and Monte Carlo (MC) approximations can be costly and noisy. We
propose to replace the softmax activation by element-wise normCDF or sigmoid,
which allows for the accurate sampling-free approximation of predictives. This also
enables the approximation of the Gaussian pushforwards by Dirichlet distributions
with moment matching. This approach entirely eliminates the runtime and memory
overhead associated with MC sampling. We evaluate it combined with several
approximate Gaussian inference methods (Laplace, HET, SNGP) on large- and
small-scale datasets (ImageNet, CIFAR-100, CIFAR-10), demonstrating improved
uncertainty quantification capabilities compared to softmax MC sampling. Our
code is available at github.com/bmucsanyi/probit.

1

Introduction

Given an input space X , C classes and training data (xn , cn )N
n=1 ⊂ X × {1, . . . , C}, the goal of
probabilistic classification is to learn a function h : X → ∆C−1 , where
∆C−1 = {(p1 , . . . , pC ) ∈ [0, 1]C : p1 + · · · + pC = 1}

(1)

is the (C − 1)-dimensional probability simplex. The model h outputs the probability of inputs x ∈ X
belonging to each class, hc (x) = p(c | x). To learn such a map to the simplex, h is typically defined
as a composition
f

softmax

h : X −−−−→ RC −−−−−→ ∆C−1

(2)

where a function f , learned from the training data, is mapped through the softmax activation function.
In this case, RC is called the logit space, and, for x ∈ X , f (x) is a logit.
With the usual assumption of i.i.d. data, the likelihood under the model h is given by
N
p((cn )N
n=1 | (xn )n=1 ) =

N
Y
n=1

∗

p(cn | xn ) =

N Y
C
Y

hc (xn )δcn ,c ,

n=1 c=1

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

(3)

