Precise Information Control
in Long-Form Text Generation
Jacqueline Heω Howard Yenπ ∗ Margaret Liω ∗ Shuyue Stella Liω Zhiyuan Zengω
Weijia Shiω Yulia Tsvetkovω Danqi Chenπ Pang Wei Kohω, α Luke Zettlemoyerω
ω
Paul G. Allen School of Computing Science & Engineering, University of Washington
π
Princeton Language and Intelligence (PLI), Princeton University α Allen Institute for AI
{jyyh, pangwei, lsz}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
A central challenge in language models (LMs) is faithfulness hallucination: the
generation of information unsubstantiated by input context. To study this problem,
we propose Precise Information Control (PIC), a new task formulation that
requires models to generate long-form outputs grounded in a provided set of short
self-contained statements, without adding any unsupported ones. PIC includes
a full setting that tests a model’s ability to include exactly all input claims, and
a partial setting that requires the model to selectively incorporate only relevant
claims. We present PIC-Bench, a benchmark of eight long-form generation tasks
(e.g., summarization, biography generation) adapted to the PIC setting, where LMs
are supplied with well-formed, verifiable input claims. Our evaluation of a range of
open and proprietary LMs on PIC-Bench reveals that, surprisingly, state-of-the-art
LMs still hallucinate against user-provided input in over 70% of generations. To
alleviate this lack of faithfulness, we introduce a post-training framework that uses
a weakly supervised preference data construction method to train an 8B PIC-LM
with stronger PIC ability—improving from 69.1% to 91.0% F1 in the full PIC
setting. When integrated into end-to-end factual generation pipelines, PIC-LM
improves exact match recall by 17.1% on ambiguous QA with retrieval, and factual
precision by 30.5% on a birthplace fact-checking task, underscoring the potential
of precisely grounded generation.

1

Introduction

Exact control over what content language models (LMs) should produce is an open challenge in
long-form generation; LMs may miss key details, or generate superfluous or false claims. This is true
not only for unconstrained tasks that depend on parametric knowledge, but even when the prompt
states exactly what information the model ought to include. Omissions, distortions, and fabrications
collectively constitute a particular breakdown of information control, more generally referred to as
hallucinations [43, 41, 42].
In language modeling parlance, factuality hallucinations are generations that cannot be verified by
external real-world knowledge, while faithfulness hallucinations contradict supplied input context
knowledge [75, 82, 41]. Faithfulness hallucination is problematic in instances where the LM must
reliably transform or synthesize source text, such as in scientific literature synthesis [5], abstractive
summarization [75], or arbitrary style transfer [97]. The elimination thereof is just as critical in
fast-moving or high-stakes real-world applications in which updated, reliable in-context evidence
must override the model’s stale parametric memory [114]. Examples include gathering the latest
scientific consensus on COVID-19, or generating customized medical guidance based on a patient’s
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

