Transformer Copilot: Learning from The Mistake Log
in LLM Fine-tuning

Jiaru Zou1 , Yikun Ban1† , Zihao Li1 , Yunzhe Qi1 , Ruizhong Qiu1 , Ling Yang2† , Jingrui He1†
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Princeton University
{jiaruz2, yikunb2, jingrui}@illinois.edu, ly1988@princeton.edu
Code: https://github.com/jiaruzouu/TransformerCopilot

Abstract
Large language models are typically adapted to downstream tasks through supervised fine-tuning on domain-specific data. While standard fine-tuning focuses on
minimizing generation loss to optimize model parameters, we take a deeper step by
retaining and leveraging the model’s own learning signals, analogous to how human
learners reflect on past mistakes to improve future performance. We first introduce
the concept of Mistake Log to systematically track the model’s learning behavior
and recurring errors throughout fine-tuning. Treating the original transformer-based
model as the Pilot, we correspondingly design a Copilot model to refine the Pilot’s
inference performance via logits rectification. We name the overall Pilot-Copilot
framework the Transformer Copilot, which introduces (i) a novel Copilot model
design, (ii) a joint training paradigm where the Copilot continuously learns from
the evolving Mistake Log alongside the Pilot, and (iii) a fused inference paradigm
where the Copilot rectifies the Pilot’s logits for enhanced generation. We provide
both theoretical and empirical analyses on our new learning framework. Experiments on 12 benchmarks spanning commonsense, arithmetic, and recommendation
tasks demonstrate that Transformer Copilot consistently improves performance by
up to 34.5%, while introducing marginal computational overhead to Pilot models
and exhibiting strong scalability and transferability.

1

Introduction

Transformers, the foundation of modern large language models (LLMs), leverage attention and
feedforward layers to compute logits for sequence generation [77]. Pre-trained on general-domain
corpora, these models capture rich statistical patterns and exhibit strong generation capabilities
[13, 80, 57]. On top of that, supervised fine-tuning (SFT) serves as a critical technique for adapting
pre-trained LLMs to specific domains [40, 65, 80]. While SFT enables significant flexibility and
task-specific optimization, the performance of fine-tuned LLMs during inference often remains
suboptimal, exhibiting misalignment between training and testing stages [47, 79]. This gap arises
from the model’s inability to fully capture task-specific nuances or from overfitting to patterns within
the training data, ultimately degrading its final performance [65, 56, 95, 53]. Without data-side
interventions [52, 54, 27] or receiving external feedback [58, 72, 91], this paper aims to address a
fundamental question: Can we enhance the inference performance by retaining and leveraging the
model’s own learning signals in standard fine-tuning?
To address this question, our core idea draws inspiration from a common strategy by human learners:
maintaining a log to record mistakes during practice, reflecting, and using insights to improve
performance in formal tests. Rather than merely memorizing these mistakes, proficient learners
engage in reflective thinking—analyzing their internal cognitive states at the moment the errors
†

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

