A Physics-preserved Transfer Learning Method for
Differential Equations

Hao-Ran Yang
Sun Yat-Sen University
Guangzhou, China
yanghr26@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Chuan-Xian Ren∗
Sun Yat-Sen University
Guangzhou, China
rchuanx@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
While data-driven methods such as neural operator have achieved great success
in solving differential equations (DEs), they suffer from domain shift problems
caused by different learning environments (with data bias or equation changes),
which can be alleviated by transfer learning (TL). However, existing TL methods
adopted in DEs problems lack either generalizability in general DEs problems or
physics preservation during training. In this work, we focus on a general transfer
learning method that adaptively correct the domain shift and preserve physical
relation within the equation. Mathematically, we characterize the data domain
as product distribution and the essential problems as distribution bias and operator bias. A Physics-preserved Optimal Tensor Transport (POTT) method that
simultaneously admits generalizability to common DEs and physics preservation
of specific problem is proposed to adapt the data-driven model to target domain,
utilizing the pushforward distribution induced by the POTT map. Extensive experiments in simulation and real-world datasets demonstrate the superior performance,
generalizability and physics preservation of the proposed POTT method.

1

Introduction

Many scientific problems, such as climate forecasting [36, 33] and industrial design [40, 2], are
modeled by differential equations (DEs). In practice, DEs problems are usually discretized and
solved by numerical methods since analytic solutions are hard to obtain for most DEs. However,
traditional numerical solvers struggle with expensive computation cost and poor generalization ability.
Recently, dealing DEs with deep neural network has attracted extensive attention. These methods can
be roughly divided into two categories: physics-driven and data-driven. Optimizing neural networks
with objective constructed by exact equations, physics-driven methods such as Physics-Informed
Neural Networks [28, 26] have great interpretability, but suffer from the poor generalization capability
across equations and the hard requirement of exact formulation of DEs. In contrast, Data-driven
methods such as neural operator [24, 22] typically take the alterable function in the equations as input
data and solution function as output data. Their generalization capability are markedly improved as
they can cope with a family of equations rather than one.
However, the performance of data-driven methods are highly dependent on identical assumption
of training and testing environments. If the testing data comes from different distribution, model
performance may degrade significantly. In practice, however, applying model to different data
distributions is a common requirement, e.g. from simulation data to experiment data, cross-region
model application. While it is often hard to collect sufficient data from a new data domain to train a
new model, transfer learning (TL) that aims to transfer model from source domain with plenty of data
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

