Discovering Latent Graphs with GFlowNets
for Diverse Conditional Image Generation

Bailey Trang1 , Parham Saremi4,5 , Alan Q. Wang2 ,
Fangrui Huang1 , Zahra TehraniNasab4,5 , Amar Kumar4,5 ,
Tal Arbel4,5 , Li Fei-Fei1 , Ehsan Adeli1,2,3 ∗
1
Dept. of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
2
Dept. of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
3
Dept. of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
4
Center for Intelligent Machines, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
5
MILA - Quebec AI institute, Montreal, QC, Canada
{trangn, alanqw, fangruih, feifeili, eadeli}@stanford.edu
{parham.saremi, zahra.tehraninasab, amar.kumar}@mail.mcgill.ca
tal.arbel@mcgill.ca

Abstract
Capturing diversity is crucial in conditional and prompt-based image generation,
particularly when conditions contain uncertainty that can lead to multiple plausible outputs. To generate diverse images reflecting this diversity, traditional
methods often modify random seeds, making it difficult to discern meaningful
differences between samples, or diversify the input prompt, which is limited in
verbally interpretable diversity. We propose Rainbow, a novel conditional image
generation framework, applicable to any pretrained conditional generative model,
that addresses inherent condition/prompt uncertainty and generates diverse plausible images. Rainbow is based on a simple yet effective idea: decomposing the
input condition into diverse latent representations, each capturing an aspect of
the uncertainty and generating a distinct image. First, we integrate a latent graph,
parameterized by Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets), into the prompt representation computation. Second, leveraging GFlowNets’ advanced graph sampling
capabilities to capture uncertainty and output diverse trajectories over the graph, we
produce multiple trajectories that collectively represent the input condition, leading
to diverse condition representations and corresponding output images. Evaluations
on natural image and medical image datasets demonstrate Rainbow’s improvement in both diversity and fidelity across image synthesis, image generation, and
counterfactual generation tasks.

1

Introduction

Conditional image generation produces novel images that adhere to given input prompts or conditions2
like text [32, 75]. In real-world scenarios, an input prompt has inherent ambiguity, which may
correspond to multiple plausible output images [7, 40, 76, 85], especially when prompts are abstract,
high-level information. For example, an input text prompt describing a "sunset scene" could map to
many valid images, differing in factors such as season, light control, and overall ambiance. Similarly,
in medical imaging, brain magnetic resonance images (MRIs) of two patients of the same age and
gender may nevertheless display variability in the structure of brain regions and patterns of intensity
∗
2

Corresponding author.
We refer to "prompts" and "conditions" interchangeably.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

