FSNet: Feasibility-Seeking Neural Network for
Constrained Optimization with Guarantees

Hoang T. Nguyen
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA
hoangh@mit.edu

Priya L. Donti
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA
donti@mit.edu

Abstract
Efficiently solving constrained optimization problems is crucial for numerous realworld applications, yet traditional solvers are often computationally prohibitive for
real-time use. Machine learning-based approaches have emerged as a promising
alternative to provide approximate solutions at faster speeds, but they struggle to
strictly enforce constraints, leading to infeasible solutions in practice. To address
this, we propose the Feasibility-Seeking Neural Network (FSNet), which integrates
a feasibility-seeking step directly into its solution procedure to ensure constraint
satisfaction. This feasibility-seeking step solves an unconstrained optimization
problem that minimizes constraint violations in a differentiable manner, enabling
end-to-end training and providing guarantees on feasibility and convergence. Our
experiments across a range of different optimization problems, including both
smooth/nonsmooth and convex/nonconvex problems, demonstrate that FSNet can
provide feasible solutions with solution quality comparable to (or in some cases
better than) traditional solvers, at significantly faster speeds.1

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) has emerged as a promising technique to provide fast surrogate solvers
for parametric optimization problems [1, 2]. Specifically, given a set of optimization problems
that share a fixed structure but whose parameters vary between instances, ML can be used to
learn approximate, fast-to-evaluate mappings from parameters to optimization solutions. With this
approach, many expensive real-world optimization problems can now be solved using ML in a fraction
of a second, with promising examples in electric power systems [3, 4], building energy management
systems [5], communication networks [6], robotic planning and control [7, 8], and supply chain
management [9]. Unfortunately, although fast at producing solutions, ML approaches often struggle
to satisfy problem constraints, resulting in solutions that are infeasible and potentially unusable,
particularly in safety-critical applications. While several constraint-enforcement approaches have
been proposed to mitigate this problem, including penalty methods [10], projection-based methods
[11, 12], and iterative methods [13, 14], these methods often suffer from poor solution quality,
expensive computational costs, and/or lack of guarantees.
To address these challenges, we propose the Feasibility-Seeking Neural Network (FSNet), a general
framework for solving constrained optimization problems using neural networks (NNs). Our key
idea is to incorporate a differentiable feasibility-seeking step into the NN’s training and inference
processes to minimize constraint violations while still enabling end-to-end training. In particular,
this feasibility-seeking step uses the NN’s prediction as the starting point for a constraint violation
minimization problem, which is solved using an iterative optimization solver to ultimately produce
1

The code is available at https://github.com/MOSSLab-MIT/FSNet

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

