FreqPolicy: Frequency Autoregressive Visuomotor
Policy with Continuous Tokens

Yiming Zhong1 , Yumeng Liu2 , Chuyang Xiao1 , Zemin Yang1 ,
Youzhuo Wang1 , Yufei Zhu1 , Ye Shi1 , Yujing Sun2,3∗ , Xinge Zhu4 , Yuexin Ma1∗
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Digital Trust Centre, Nanyang Technological University4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{zhongym2024, mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Project Page: https://freq-policy.github.io/
Code: https://github.com/4DVLab/Freqpolicy

Abstract
Learning effective visuomotor policies for robotic manipulation is challenging, as
it requires generating precise actions while maintaining computational efficiency.
Existing methods remain unsatisfactory due to inherent limitations in the essential
action representation and the basic network architectures. We observe that representing actions in the frequency domain captures the structured nature of motion
more effectively: low-frequency components reflect global movement patterns,
while high-frequency components encode fine local details. Additionally, robotic
manipulation tasks of varying complexity demand different levels of modeling
precision across these frequency bands. Motivated by this, we propose a novel
paradigm for visuomotor policy learning that progressively models hierarchical
frequency components. To further enhance precision, we introduce continuous
latent representations that maintain smoothness and continuity in the action space.
Extensive experiments across diverse 2D and 3D robotic manipulation benchmarks
demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing methods in both accuracy
and efficiency, showcasing the potential of a frequency-domain autoregressive
framework with continuous tokens for generalized robotic manipulation.

1

Introduction

The study of visuomotor policies enable robots to learn task execution from demonstrations by
leveraging raw visual inputs, such as images or point clouds, allowing them to generate effective
action sequences in response to new visual observations. It has become a prevailing paradigm in robot
manipulation [10]. However the requirement of high precision in robotic tasks and the sequential
correlation in action space present challenges for visuomotor policy learning.
Existing methods for visuomotor policy learning can be broadly categorized into diffusion-based
methods [10, 48, 38, 42, 47, 15, 43, 39] and autoregressive (AR) methods [13, 16, 49]. Diffusionbased approaches model the action distribution conditioned on observations, leveraging their powerful
generative capabilities to produce reliable and diverse action sequences even from limited demonstrations. However, diffusion models typically encounter higher computational costs and increased
inference latency due to their iterative sampling process, which could limit their practicality in
efficiency-sensitive applications. In contrast, AR methods sequentially predict each action step
conditioned on previous actions and current observations. They are generally more computationally efficient and enable faster inference, making them attractive for real-time control scenarios.
Nevertheless, AR approaches may be prone to compounding errors over long horizons, and due to
their common reliance on discrete representations, often struggle to accurately model inherently
continuous action spaces, limiting their ability to capture complex temporal correlation. Despite
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

