AlphaZero Neural Scaling and Zipf’s Law:
a Tale of Board Games and Power Laws
Oren Neumann, Claudius Gros
Institute for Theoretical Physics
Goethe University Frankfurt
oneumann.papers@gmail.com, gros@itp.uni-frankfurt.de

Abstract
Neural scaling laws are observed in a range of domains, to date with no universal
understanding of why they occur. Recent theories suggest that loss power laws
arise from Zipf’s law, a power law observed in domains like natural language.
One theory suggests that language scaling laws emerge when Zipf-distributed task
quanta are learned in descending order of frequency. In this paper we examine
power-law scaling in AlphaZero, a reinforcement learning algorithm, using a model
of language-model scaling. We find that game states in training and inference
data scale with Zipf’s law, which is known to arise from the tree structure of
the environment, and examine the correlation between scaling-law and Zipf’slaw exponents. In agreement with the quanta scaling model, we find that agents
optimize state loss in descending order of frequency, even though this order scales
inversely with modelling complexity. We also find that inverse scaling, the failure of
models to improve with size, is correlated with unusual Zipf curves where end-game
states are among the most frequent states. We show evidence that larger models
shift their focus to these less-important states, sacrificing their understanding of
important early-game states.

1

Introduction

Neural scaling laws, describing the scaling of model performance with training resources, have been
documented across many architectures and use cases [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The performance of these models,
typically measured by test loss, follows a power law in either compute, model size or training data.
The robustness of these power laws and their usefulness in training large models, especially large
language models (LLMs) [6], prompted a range of attempts to find a model explaining the mechanism
behind neural power-law scaling [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Several models connect performance power laws
to Zipf’s law, a universal power law appearing in natural language [12, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16].
Scaling laws in reinforcement learning (RL) are so far relatively rare compared to supervised learning
[17, 18, 19]. AlphaZero, a multi-agent RL algorithm that beat human champions in games like chess
and Go [20], exhibits power laws of Elo score with training resources, as well as a power law relation
between compute and optimal model size [5, 21, 22].
In this paper, we explore the mechanism behind known RL scaling laws, comparing this mechanism
to the quantization model of LLM scaling [12]. Our main findings are:
1. We find that AlphaZero agents that exhibit scaling laws, such as those trained in Neumann &
Gros (2022) [5], produce train and test data that follows Zipf’s law, suggesting that learned
tasks also scale with Zipf’s law.
2. We show how these smooth Zipf laws form when agent policies are combined with the
tree-structure of board games, which is known to create a Zipf-like state distribution [23].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

