The Implicit Bias of Structured State Space
Models Can Be Poisoned With Clean Labels
Yonatan Slutzky∗
Tel Aviv University
slutzky1@mail.tau.ac.il

Yotam Alexander∗
Tel Aviv University
yotam.alexander@gmail.com

Noam Razin
PLI, Princeton University
noamrazin@princeton.edu

Nadav Cohen
Tel Aviv University
cohennadav@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Neural networks are powered by an implicit bias: a tendency of gradient descent to
fit training data in a way that generalizes to unseen data. A recent class of neural
network models gaining increasing popularity is structured state space models
(SSMs). Prior work argued that the implicit bias of SSMs leads to generalization in
a setting where data is generated by a low dimensional teacher. In this paper, we
revisit the latter setting, and formally establish a phenomenon entirely undetected
by prior work on the implicit bias of SSMs. Namely, we prove that while implicit
bias leads to generalization under many choices of training data, there exist special
examples whose inclusion in training completely distorts the implicit bias, to a
point where generalization fails. This failure occurs despite the special training
examples being labeled by the teacher, i.e., having clean labels! We empirically
demonstrate the phenomenon, with SSMs trained independently and as part of
non-linear neural networks. In the area of adversarial machine learning, disrupting
generalization with cleanly labeled training examples is known as clean-label
poisoning. Given the proliferation of SSMs, we believe that delineating their
susceptibility to clean-label poisoning, and developing methods for overcoming
this susceptibility, are critical research directions to pursue.

1

Introduction

Overparameterized neural networks can fit their training data in multiple ways, some of which
generalize to unseen data, while others do not. Remarkably, when the training data is fit via gradient
descent (or a variant thereof), generalization tends to occur. This phenomenon—one of the greatest
mysteries in modern machine learning [91, 8]—is often viewed as stemming from an implicit bias: a
tendency of gradient descent, when applied to neural network models, to fit training data in a way
that complies with common data-generating distributions. The latter view was formalized for several
neural network models and data-generating distributions [55, 77, 27, 64].
A recent class of neural network models gaining significant popularity is structured state space models
(SSMs). SSMs are often regarded as a computationally efficient alternative to transformers [85], and
underlie prominent neural networks such as S4 [24], Mamba [22], LRU [58], Mega [48], S5 [75]
and more [62, 14]. The implicit bias of SSMs, i.e., of gradient descent over SSMs, was formally
studied in prior works, e.g., Emami et al. [16], Cohen-Karlik et al. [11, 12]. Notable among these
is Cohen-Karlik et al. [12], which considered a setting where data is generated by a low dimensional
teacher SSM, and gradient flow (gradient descent with infinitesimally small step size) over a high
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

