Online Prediction with Limited Selectivity

Licheng Liu
Imperial College London
licheng.liu22@imperial.ac.uk

Mingda Qiao
University of Massachusetts Amherst
mqiao@umass.edu

Abstract
Selective prediction [Dru13, QV19] models the scenario where a forecaster freely
decides on the prediction window that their forecast spans. Many data statistics
can be predicted to a non-trivial error rate without any distributional assumptions
or expert advice, yet these results rely on that the forecaster may predict at any
time. We introduce a model of Prediction with Limited Selectivity (PLS) where
the forecaster can start the prediction only on a subset of the time horizon. We
study the optimal prediction error both on an instance-by-instance basis and via
an average-case analysis. We introduce a complexity measure that gives instancedependent bounds on the optimal error. For a randomly-generated PLS instance,
these bounds match with high probability.

1

Introduction

In selective prediction [Dru13, QV19], a forecaster observes n numbers in [0, 1] one by one. At
any time t, having observed the first t numbers, the forecaster may predict the average of the next
w ≤ n − t unseen numbers. Both the stopping time t and the window length w are freely chosen by
the forecaster, and only one such prediction needs to be made. The goal is to minimize the expected
prediction error—the expected squared difference between the forecast and the actual average. How
small can this error be?
Surprisingly, Drucker [Dru13] showed that the forecaster can guarantee an error that vanishes as
n → +∞, even though the sequence might be arbitrarily and adversarially chosen. Specifically, this
result holds without any distributional assumption on the sequence (other than boundedness), and is
thus robust to any misspecification, non-stationarity, or adversarial corruption in the data. Moreover,
it directly addresses the prediction error, rather than a regret with respect to a class of experts.
In this paper, we study a variant of the selective prediction model where the forecaster only has
limited selectivity. Concretely, the forecaster is given a subset of the time horizon, which specifies
the timesteps on which they are allowed to make a prediction. This model captures many natural
scenarios where predictions are either infeasible or unnecessary during certain time periods. For
example, people tend to care about weather forecasts primarily when they have plans for outdoor
activities. An investor may be restricted from trading specific commodities during particular seasons,
making market predictions less relevant at those times. Similarly, epidemic forecasts are most critical
before and during pandemics.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• We introduce a theoretical model of Prediction with Limited Selectivity (PLS), which generalizes
the selective prediction models of [Dru13, QV19].
• We define a complexity measure termed “approximate uniformity”, which gives instance-dependent
bounds on the optimal error that a forecasting algorithm can achieve on a PLS instance.
• For PLS instances that are randomly generated according to a k-monotone sequence (Definition 4),
we show that the instance-dependent bounds match up to a constant factor with high probability.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

