Improving the Generation and Evaluation of Synthetic
Data for Downstream Medical Causal Inference
Harry Amad
DAMTP
University of Cambridge
hmka3@cam.ac.uk
Julianna Piskorz
DAMTP
University of Cambridge

Zhaozhi Qian∗
Elm Europe
zqian@elm.sa

Dennis Frauen
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning

Stefan Feuerriegel
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning

Mihaela van der Schaar
DAMTP
University of Cambridge

Abstract
Causal inference is essential for developing and evaluating medical interventions,
yet real-world medical datasets are often difficult to access due to regulatory barriers. This makes synthetic data a potentially valuable asset that enables these
medical analyses, along with the development of new inference methods themselves. Generative models can produce synthetic data that closely approximate real
data distributions, yet existing methods do not consider the unique challenges that
downstream causal inference tasks, and specifically those focused on treatments,
pose. We establish a set of desiderata that synthetic data containing treatments
should satisfy to maximise downstream utility: preservation of (i) the covariate
distribution, (ii) the treatment assignment mechanism, and (iii) the outcome generation mechanism. Based on these desiderata, we propose a set of evaluation metrics
to assess such synthetic data. Finally, we present STEAM: a novel method for
generating Synthetic data for Treatment Effect Analysis in Medicine that mimics
the data-generating process of data containing treatments and optimises for our
desiderata. We empirically demonstrate that STEAM achieves state-of-the-art performance across our metrics as compared to existing generative models, particularly
as the complexity of the true data-generating process increases.

1

Introduction

Access to medical data is crucial for advancing healthcare research, enabling novel medical discoveries
and providing a testbed for developing new analytical approaches, such as machine-learning-based
causal inference methods [6, 94, 28]. However, regulations restrict access to patient data for research
purposes [3, 92]. Synthetic data, which is gaining significant recognition in medical literature [48],
offers a way to increase data availability, and recent initiatives are aiming to generate synthetic data
for broad ‘health data research’ [20, 72], such as testing of learning algorithms [33] and replication of
clinical trial results [17]. Importantly, the promise of synthetic data hinges on its ability to preserve
information critical to relevant downstream tasks. The majority of recent literature [7] focuses on
downstream predictive tasks, shaping standard evaluation and generation practices to this setting.
Medical data typically contain treatment assignment variables which invite unique approaches to
downstream analysis, beyond standard prediction [28]. Data containing treatments are typically analysed via causal inference (e.g. treatment effect estimation methods) to examine causal relationships
∗

Work completed while at University of Cambridge.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

