SensorLM: Learning the Language of
Wearable Sensors
Yuwei Zhang1,3,†,∗ Kumar Ayush1,∗ Siyuan Qiao2 A. Ali Heydari1 Girish Narayanswamy†
Maxwell A. Xu† Ahmed A. Metwally1 Shawn Xu1 Jake Garrison1 Xuhai Xu1 Tim Althoff1
Yun Liu1 Pushmeet Kohli2 Jiening Zhan1 Mark Malhotra1 Shwetak Patel1
Cecilia Mascolo3 Xin Liu1 Daniel McDuff1 Yuzhe Yang1,4,†
1

Google Research 2 Google DeepMind 3 University of Cambridge
4
University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
We present SensorLM, a family of sensor-language foundation models that enable
wearable sensor data understanding with natural language. Despite its pervasive
nature, aligning and interpreting sensor data with language remains challenging
due to the lack of paired, richly annotated sensor-text descriptions in uncurated,
real-world wearable data. We introduce a hierarchical caption generation pipeline
designed to capture statistical, structural, and semantic information from sensor
data. This approach enabled the curation of the largest sensor-language dataset to
date, comprising over 59.7 million hours of data from more than 103,000 people.
Furthermore, SensorLM extends prominent multimodal pretraining architectures
(e.g., CLIP, CoCa) and recovers them as specific variants within a generic architecture. Extensive experiments on real-world tasks in human activity analysis and
healthcare verify the superior performance of SensorLM over state-of-the-art in
zero-shot recognition, few-shot learning, and cross-modal retrieval. SensorLM also
demonstrates intriguing capabilities including scaling behaviors, label efficiency,
sensor captioning, and zero-shot generalization to unseen tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/Google-Health/consumer-health-research/tree/main/sensorlm.

1

Introduction

The human experience unfolds as a continuous dialogue between sensory perception and language
articulation. A perceived change in raw physiological readings like “heart rate”, can be seamlessly
translated from low-level statistical descriptions (e.g., “heart rate spikes from 65 to 90”) to high-level
semantic abstractions (e.g., “periods of strength training noted”). This intrinsic interplay between raw
sensation and linguistic abstraction forms human comprehension of internal states, health conditions,
behavioral changes, and more [7, 16]. Wearable sensors now record these narratives at unprecedented
resolution, producing minute-level data that captures dense insights into an individual’s physiological
and behavioral states [24, 41]. Aligning and interpreting this rich, continuous stream of fine-grained
sensor data with intuitive and actionable language descriptions is critical for user engagement [40],
clinical decision-making [38], personalized insights [7], and behavioral interventions [26].
However, directly interpreting continuous raw sensor data poses significant challenges. While large
language models (LLMs) excel at processing textual sequences, they inherently struggle with the
high-dimensional, continuous, and temporally extensive nature of wearable data [21]. For example, a
single day of minute-level multimodal sensor recordings (see Fig. 1(a)) would expand to over 200,000
tokens [24], far exceeding the practical context length limits of most contemporary LLMs [30, 32].
Interestingly, even with minimal subsampling to fit within context constraints, LLMs fail to perform
∗

Co-first authors. † Work done while at Google Research.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

