Which Data Attributes Stimulate Math and Code
Reasoning? An Investigation via Influence Functions

Siqi Kou, Qingyuan Tian, Hanwen Xu, Zihao Zeng, and Zhijie Deng∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{happy-karry, qy.tian, dctnorin, zengzihao, zhijied}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable reasoning capabilities in math and coding, often bolstered by post-training on the chain-of-thoughts
(CoTs) generated by stronger models. However, existing strategies for curating
such training data predominantly rely on heuristics, limiting generalizability and
failing to capture subtleties underlying in data. To address these limitations, we
leverage influence functions to systematically attribute LLMs’ reasoning ability on
math and coding to individual training examples, sequences, and tokens, enabling
deeper insights into effective data characteristics. Our Influence-based Reasoning
Attribution (Infra) uncovers nontrivial cross-domain effects across math and coding tasks: high-difficulty math examples improve both math and code reasoning,
while low-difficulty code tasks most effectively benefit code reasoning. Based on
these findings, we introduce a simple yet effective dataset reweighting strategy by
flipping task difficulty, which doubles AIME24 accuracy from 10% to 20% and
boosts LiveCodeBench accuracy from 33.8% to 35.3% for Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct.
Moreover, our fine-grained attribution reveals that the sequence-level exploratory
behaviors enhance reasoning performance in both math and code, and the tokenlevel influence patterns are distinct for math and code reasoning: the former prefers
natural language logic connectors and the latter emphasizes structural syntax.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) for reasoning, with OpenAI-o1 [15] and DeepSeek-R1 [9] as popular
examples, have shown great promise in solving complex math and coding problems. Recently, the
community has witnessed the prevalence of reproducing such reasoning capacities on open-source
small- to medium-sized LLMs [19, 5, 29]. An initial stage of the solutions often involves post-training
the model on some chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning traces curated by leading models (e.g., R1) for
diverse problems [34, 23, 24, 37, 13, 25]. As a data-centric paradigm, the core research question here
is: which attributes of the training data are effective in stimulating reasoning capabilities?
Pioneering studies addressing this question predominantly adopt heuristic approaches. Typically, they
first establish quantitative data quality metrics based on human expertise or empirical preferences, then
selectively retain high-quality data for model training to cultivate robust reasoning capabilities with
minimal data inputs. For example, s1K [24] filters 1k (question, answer) pairs with well-structured
formatting, longer CoT length, and broader domain coverage from an initial pool of 59k data for
training math reasoning LLMs. Similarly, LIMO [37] suggests incorporating more challenging math
questions with complex reasoning chains to enable better math reasoning.
Beyond focusing exclusively on math, Sky-T1 [25] targets competitive reasoning performance across
both math and coding tasks. It notices that the naive incorporation of code data from APPS [10]
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

