Avoiding exp(R) scaling in RLHF through
Preference-based Exploration

Mingyu Chen
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
mingyuc@bu.edu
Wen Sun
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
ws455@cornell.edu

Yiding Chen
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
yc2773@cornell.edu

Xuezhou Zhang
Faculty of Computing & Data Sciences
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
xuezhouz@bu.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a pivotal
technique for large language model (LLM) alignment. This paper studies the setting of online RLHF and focuses on improving its sample efficiency. All existing
algorithms for online RLHF, whether doing passive exploration or active exploration, suffer from a sample complexity that scales exponentially with the range
of the reward function. This statistical inefficiency hinders their effectiveness in
scenarios with heavily skewed preferences, e.g. questions with objectively correct
answers. To address this, we introduce Self-Exploring Preference-Incentive Online
Preference Optimization (SE-POPO), an online RLHF algorithm that for the first
time achieves a sample complexity that scales polynomially with the reward range,
answering an open problem raised by Xie et al. [2024]. Theoretically, we demonstrate that the sample complexity of SE-POPO dominates that of existing exploration
algorithms. Empirically, our systematic evaluation confirms that SE-POPO is more
sample-efficient than both exploratory and non-exploratory baselines, in two primary application scenarios of RLHF as well as on public benchmarks, marking a
significant step forward in RLHF algorithm design.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a pivotal technique in the
post-training of Large Language Models (LLMs) [Christiano et al., 2017, Ziegler et al., 2019, Ouyang
et al., 2022]. Earlier works on RLHF focus primarily on the offline setting [Ouyang et al., 2022,
?], where the preference data are pre-collected and fixed prior to the fine-tuning phase. However,
in this setting, the quality of alignment is fundamentally limited by the quality of response in the
pre-collected preference dataset. To overcome this limitation, recent works attempt to perform RLHF
in an online setting. By continually generating and subsequently labeling new samples during training,
online RLHF allow the agents to receive feedbacks on out-of-distribution (OOD) responses and
achieves improved empirical performance [Dong et al., 2024].
Similar to online reinforcement learning, the most critical challenge in online RLHF is how to balance
the exploration-exploitation trade-off. In naive online RLHF algorithms [Guo et al., 2024], the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

