The Dual Nature of Plasticity Loss in Deep Continual
Learning: Dissection and Mitigation

Haoyu Albert Wang1,2,†
haoyuwang18@fudan.edu.cn
Jialun Ma1
21307130025@m.fudan.edu.cn

Wei P. Dai1,4,†,‡
weidai@fudan.edu.cn

Jiawei Zhang1,3
Zhangjw22@m.fudan.edu.cn

Mingyi Huang1,2
myhuang20@fudan.edu.cn

Yuguo Yu1,2,3,4,‡
yuyuguo@fudan.edu.cn

1. Research Institute of Intelligent Complex Systems, Fudan University.
2. Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University.
3. State Key Laboratory of Brain Function and Disorders and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain
Science, Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University.
4. Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡ Corresponding author.

Abstract
Loss of plasticity (LoP) is the primary cause of cognitive decline in normal aging
brains next to cell loss. Recent works show that similar LoP also plagues neural networks during deep continual learning (DCL). While it has been shown that random
perturbations of learned weights can alleviate LoP, its underlying mechanisms remain insufficiently understood. Here we offer a unique view of LoP and dissect its
mechanisms through the lenses of an innovative framework combining the theory
of neural collapse and finite-time Lyapunov exponents (FTLE) analysis. We show
that LoP actually consists of two contrasting types: (i) type-1 LoP is characterized
by highly negative FTLEs, where the network is prevented from learning due to
the collapse of representations; (ii) while type-2 LoP is characterized by excessively positive FTLEs, where the network can train well but the growingly chaotic
behaviors reduce its test accuracy. Based on these understandings, we introduce
Generalized Mixup, designed to relax the representation space for prolonged DCL
and demonstrate its superior efficacy vs. existing methods.

1

Introduction

Loss of neural plasticity has been identified as the main reason for the progressive cognitive decline
in normal aging brains without neurodegenerative diseases (i.e., not due to loss of neurons) [4]. Deep
learning systems, despite their success across various domains, also struggle with a similar loss of
plasticity (LoP) with widespread effects in deep reinforcement learning (DRL) [23, 1, 28, 20] and
deep continual learning (DCL, e.g., Fig. 1a) [7]. Unlike catastrophic forgetting, which describes a
neural network’s poor performance on previous tasks after learning new tasks, LoP is characterized
by the deteriorating performance on new tasks which eventually prevents the system from learning
continually. Moreover, given the size of datasets and high energy demand of modern AI training [30],
the cost of time and resource required to re-train the existing networks from scratch to adopt new
tasks is increasing prohibitive [31]. Therefore, it is crucial that we understand and tame LoP as the
need is higher than ever for adaptive AI that can efficiently learn new tasks continually .
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

