Thresholds for sensitive optimality and Blackwell
optimality in stochastic games

Stéphane Gaubert
INRIA and Ecole Polytechnique
stephane.gaubert@inria.fr

Julien Grand-Clément
HEC Paris
grand-clement@hec.fr

Ricardo D. Katz
CIFASIS-CONICET
katz@cifasis-conicet.gov.ar

Abstract
We investigate refinements of the mean-payoff criterion in two-player zero-sum
perfect-information stochastic games. A strategy is Blackwell optimal if it is
optimal in the discounted game for all discount factors sufficiently close to 1.
The notion of d-sensitive optimality interpolates between mean-payoff optimality
(corresponding to the case d = −1) and Blackwell optimality (d = ∞). The
Blackwell threshold αBw ∈ [0, 1[ is the discount factor above which all optimal
strategies in the discounted game are guaranteed to be Blackwell optimal. The
d-sensitive threshold αd ∈ [0, 1[ is defined analogously. Bounding αBw and αd are
fundamental problems in algorithmic game theory, since these thresholds control
the complexity for computing Blackwell and d-sensitive optimal strategies,
by

reduction to discounted games which can be solved in O (1 − α)−1 iterations.
We provide the first bounds on the d-sensitive threshold αd beyond the case d =
−1, and we establish improved bounds for the Blackwell threshold αBw . This
is achieved by leveraging separation bounds on algebraic numbers, relying on
Lagrange bounds and more advanced techniques based on Mahler measures and
multiplicity theorems.

1

Introduction

Two-player perfect-information zero-sum stochastic games (SGs) are an important class of Shapley’s
stochastic games [Sha53] where every state is controlled by a unique player. SGs are a cornerstone of game theory, with important applications in auctions [LLP+ 99], mechanism design [Nar14],
multi-agent reinforcement learning [Lit94], robust optimization [GCPV23, CGK+ 23], and µ-calculus
model-checking [CHV+ 18]. Shapley originally considered the sum of discounted instantaneous rewards as the objective; the mean-payoff objective was studied in [Gil57]. Stationary and deterministic
optimal strategies exist for these objectives in the perfect-information case [Sha53, LL69].
The mean-payoff objective coincides with the limit of the discounted objective as the discount factor
goes to 1. This suggests to study the variation of the set of optimal strategies in the discounted game,
as a function of the discount factor. Blackwell showed (in the one-player case) that, for finite state
and action models, there exist strategies that remain discount optimal for all values of the discount
factor that are sufficiently close to 1 [Bla62]. These are now called Blackwell optimal strategies. As
the discount factor approaches 1, the “weight” given to the rewards received in the distant future
increases. Therefore, Blackwell optimal strategies can be considered as the most farsighted (or least
greedy) strategies for models in long horizon. This is why better understanding Blackwell optimality
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

