An Effective Levelling Paradigm for
Unlabeled Scenarios
Fangming Cui1,2 Zhou Yu3 Di Yang4 Yuqiang Ren4
Liang Xiao1∗ Xinmei Tian5∗
1
Defense Innovation Institute
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 The Key Laboratory of Complex Systems Modeling and
Simulation, the School of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
4
ByteDance Inc. 5 MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
cuifangming@sjtu.edu.cn yuz@hdu.edu.cn
xiaoliang@nudt.edu.cn xinmei@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Advancements in direct-integration fine-tuning frameworks have underscored their
potential to enhance the performance of labeled scenarios and tasks. To enhance the
generalization of different categories in the same dataset, some methods have added
visual loss to these frameworks for unlabeled scenarios. However, the performance
of these methods through visual loss does not improve significantly in domain
generalization and cross-dataset generalization tasks. This may be attributed to
the uncoordinated learning of the two-modalities alignment and visual loss. To
mitigate this issue of uncoordinated learning, we propose a novel method called
Levelling Paradigm (LePa) to improve performance for unlabeled tasks or scenarios.
The proposed LePa, designed as a plug-in module, dynamically constrains and
coordinates multiple objective functions, thereby improving the generalization of
these baseline methods. Comprehensive experiments have shown that our design
can effectively address generalized scenarios and tasks.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as the frozen CLIP [1], are garnering increasing attention
for their exceptional generalization capabilities. These VLMs have been trained to align textual
and visual components by utilizing large datasets [2]. As an example, CLIP undergoes training
on a massive dataset containing 400 million text-image pairs, enabling VLMs to encode a wide
range of concepts in a unified embedding space. By aligning and integrating textual and visual
information, VLMs can bridge the divide between language and visual representations, thereby
improving their comprehension of context within the shared embedding space [3, 4]. VLMs and
large language models [5, 6, 7] can exhibit strong performance across a diverse range of downstream
tasks [8, 9, 10, 11]. One remarkable aspect of CLIP is its exceptional zero-shot generalization
capability. This ability is achieved by employing predefined text inputs, like "a photo of a [class],"
known as prompts, to generate recognition weights during the inference stage. Through the use of
prompts, CLIP can effectively transfer its learned knowledge to achieve precise recognition, even for
classes that have not been encountered before. The zero-shot capability enhances the adaptability and
versatility of CLIP, allowing it to tackle various tasks [12, 13, 14] and domains without the need for
extensive fine-tuning and adaptation [15].
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

