LASeR: Learning to Adaptively Select
Reward Models with Multi-Armed Bandits
Duy Nguyen1∗
Archiki Prasad1∗
Elias Stengel-Eskin1,2
Mohit Bansal1
1
2
UNC Chapel Hill
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Reward Models (RMs) are crucial to aligning large language models (LLMs), but
the degree to which an RM specialized to one task (e.g. writing) generalizes to
new tasks (e.g. math) is often not known a priori, often making using only one
fixed RM to train LLMs suboptimal. However, optimizing LLMs with multiple
RMs simultaneously can incur a prohibitively high computational cost and lead to
conflicting signals from different RMs that may degrade performance. To address
these challenges, we introduce LAS E R (Learning to Adaptively Select Rewards),
which frames reward model selection as a multi-armed bandit problem, efficiently
and iteratively training LLMs using multiple RMs by selecting the most wellsuited RM for each instance. On commonsense and math reasoning tasks, we
show that LAS E R boosts iterative LLM training, improving the absolute average
accuracy of Llama-3-8B over three datasets by 2.67% over an ensemble of RM
scores while also showing superior efficiency (e.g., a 2× speedup). Moreover, on
WildChat (open-ended instruction-following tasks), LAS E R leads to a 72.69%
AlpacaEval win rate over the RM score ensemble baseline. Extending to longcontext generation, LAS E R improves by 2.96 F1 points (avg.) on single-document
QA tasks and 2.97 F1 points on few-shot learning over the RM score ensemble
baseline with best-of-n sampling.1

1

Introduction

When comparing two responses, human preferences often differ depending on factors like the
underlying task, who the annotators are [Santurkar et al., 2023, Ahmadian et al., 2024], and how
preferences are elicited [Bansal et al., 2024]. Therefore, models of preference data are also likely to
differ and might include noise as well as any biases contained in the preference data used to train them.
This can pose a problem when using such models as “reward models” (RMs) to align large language
models (LLMs) to human preferences using reinforcement learning with human feedback [Christiano
et al., 2017, Ziegler et al., 2019, Ouyang et al., 2022]. Recent work has focused on aligning LLMs
through iterative training, using reward models as proxies for human judgment [Gulcehre et al., 2023],
leveraging the LLM to act as an implicit RM or judge [Yuan et al., 2024b, Chen et al., 2024b], or
using the gold answer to compute a reward [Pang et al., 2024]. Under this paradigm, there are three
stages to training LLMs: (i) generating multiple responses to a query from an LLM; (ii) scoring
the responses with an RM to create preference data with better and worse responses; and (iii) using
model-generated preference data to further train the LLM. Note that for most domains, the gold
reward is not readily available, making the quality of the RM or the degree to which it reflects human
preferences (i.e., the gold reward) crucial to improving LLM performance. Indeed, several prior
efforts aim to train new RMs that better reflect human preferences [Lambert et al., 2024].
* Equal Contribution
1

Code: https://github.com/duykhuongnguyen/LASeR-MAB

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

