Contribution of task-irrelevant stimuli to drift of
neural representations

Farhad Pashakhanloo
Center for Brain Science
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
fpasha@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Biological and artificial learners are inherently exposed to a stream of data and
experience throughout their lifetimes and must constantly adapt to, learn from,
or selectively ignore the ongoing input. Recent findings reveal that, even when
the performance remains stable, the underlying neural representations can change
gradually over time, a phenomenon known as representational drift. Studying
the different sources of data and noise that may contribute to drift is essential for
understanding lifelong learning in neural systems. However, a systematic study
of drift across architectures and learning rules, and the connection to task, are
missing. Here, in an online learning setup, we characterize drift as a function of
data distribution, and specifically show that the learning noise induced by taskirrelevant stimuli, which the agent learns to ignore in a given context, can create
long-term drift in the representation of task-relevant stimuli. Using theory and
simulations, we demonstrate this phenomenon both in Hebbian-based learning—
Oja’s rule and Similarity Matching—and in stochastic gradient descent applied
to autoencoders and a supervised two-layer network. We consistently observe
that the drift rate increases with the variance and the dimension of the data in
the task-irrelevant subspace. We further show that this yields different qualitative
predictions for the geometry and dimension-dependency of drift than those arising
from Gaussian synaptic noise. Overall, our study links the structure of stimuli, task,
and learning rule to representational drift and could pave the way for using drift as
a signal for uncovering underlying computation in the brain.

1

Introduction

Continual lifelong learning requires intelligent agents to learn continuously and adaptively from a
stream of data and experience [1]. In this process, the internal representations of data may themselves
shift or evolve over time. Understanding flexibility and stability of neural representations, as well as
the learning algorithms that allow for efficient continual learning is fundamental to both neuroscience
and artificial intelligence [2]. In neuroscience, recent advances have allowed for tracking neurons
over several weeks or months. Such studies have revealed that representations at the single neuron
level might not be as stable as previously thought [3, 4]. This is specifically observed in the context
of stable performance and is referred to as representational drift 1 [5–8].
This phenomenon has also been recapitulated in computational models from different perspectives
[9–16]. Under one set of postulates, long-term changes in representations are a result of noisy learning
[17]. However, it is not clear which sources of noise drives this process. Broadly speaking, this
could include biological sources, such as intrinsically noisy synaptic turnover [18] or those related
1

We take representational drift to be any long-term changes in the internal representations that occur after the
loss or behavior reaches a steady-state. This applies in both neuroscience and machine learning contexts.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

