LeapFactual: Reliable Visual Counterfactual
Explanation Using Conditional Flow Matching

Zhuo Cao1

Xuan Zhao1∗ Lena Krieger1,2∗ Hanno Scharr1 Ira Assent1,3
1
IAS-8, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany
2
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), LMU Munich, Germany
3
Aarhus University, Denmark
{z.cao, xu.zhao, l.krieger, h.scharr, i.assent}@fz-juelich.de

Abstract
The growing integration of machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI)
models into high-stakes domains such as healthcare and scientific research calls for
models that are not only accurate but also interpretable. Among the existing explainable methods, counterfactual explanations offer interpretability by identifying
minimal changes to inputs that would alter a model’s prediction, thus providing
deeper insights. However, current counterfactual generation methods suffer from
critical limitations, including gradient vanishing, discontinuous latent spaces, and
an overreliance on the alignment between learned and true decision boundaries. To
overcome these limitations, we propose L EAP FACTUAL, a novel counterfactual
explanation algorithm based on conditional flow matching. L EAP FACTUAL generates reliable and informative counterfactuals, even when true and learned decision
boundaries diverge. Following a model-agnostic approach, L EAP FACTUAL is not
limited to models with differentiable loss functions. It can even handle human-inthe-loop systems, expanding the scope of counterfactual explanations to domains
that require the participation of human annotators, such as citizen science. We provide extensive experiments on benchmark and real-world datasets highlighting that
L EAP FACTUAL generates accurate and in-distribution counterfactual explanations
that offer actionable insights. We observe, for instance, that our reliable counterfactual samples with labels aligning to ground truth can be beneficially used as new
training data to enhance the model. The proposed method is diversely applicable
and enhances scientific knowledge discovery as well as non-expert interpretability.
The code is available on https://github.com/caicairay/LeapFactual.

1

Introduction

The widespread adoption of machine learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) models in
high-stakes domains — such as healthcare [1–7] or scientific research [8–10] — demands not only
high performance but also transparency, reliability, and interpretability. In the context of scientific
discovery, where reproducibility, verifiability, and a deep understanding of underlying mechanisms
are paramount, opaque "black-box" models can hinder progress and erode trust in computational
findings. Without interpretability, the outputs of ML models remain inscrutable, limiting their utility
for hypothesis generation, experimental validation, and the advancement of scientific knowledge.
In response, a variety of explainability methods have emerged to illuminate the inner workings of
black-box models. Among the most common are gradient-based methods [11] and perturbation-based
techniques [12, 13]. These methods generate a map of the regions that contribute most to the decision
by either taking the backpropagation through the neural network or perturbing the input data. While
∗

These authors contributed equally.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

