Accelerating RL for LLM Reasoning with
Optimal Advantage Regression

Kianté Brantley1∗, Mingyu Chen2 , Zhaolin Gao3 ,
Jason D. Lee4 , Wen Sun3 , Wenhao Zhan4 , Xuezhou Zhang2
1
Harvard University, 2 Boston University, 3 Cornell University, 4 Princeton University

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful tool for fine-tuning large
language models (LLMs) to improve complex reasoning abilities. However, stateof-the-art policy optimization methods often suffer from high computational overhead and memory consumption, primarily due to the need for multiple generations
per prompt and the reliance on critic networks or advantage estimates of the current
policy. In this paper, we propose A⋆ -PO, a novel two-stage policy optimization
framework that directly approximates the optimal advantage function and enables
efficient training of LLMs for reasoning tasks. In the first stage, we leverage
offline sampling from a reference policy to estimate the optimal value function V ⋆ ,
eliminating the need for costly online value estimation. In the second stage, we
perform on-policy updates using a simple least-squares regression loss with only a
single generation per prompt. Theoretically, we establish performance guarantees
and prove that the KL-regularized RL objective can be optimized without requiring
complex exploration strategies. Empirically, A⋆ -PO achieves competitive performance across a wide range of mathematical reasoning benchmarks, while reducing
training time by up to 2× and peak memory usage by over 30% compared to PPO,
GRPO, and REBEL[Gao et al., 2024a]. Implementation of A⋆ -PO can be found at
https://github.com/ZhaolinGao/A-PO.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs), including OpenAI-o1 [OpenAI, 2024], DeepSeekR1 [DeepSeek-AI, 2025], and Kimi-1.5 [Team, 2025], have demonstrated remarkable reasoning
capabilities. These models excel at producing long Chain-of-Thought (CoT)[Wei et al., 2023,
DeepSeek-AI, 2025, Zeng et al., 2025] responses when tackling complex tasks and exhibit advanced,
reflection-like reasoning behaviors[Gandhi et al., 2025]. A key factor driving these improvements is
reinforcement learning (RL) with rule-based rewards derived from ground-truth answers [Lambert
et al., 2025, DeepSeek-AI, 2025, Team, 2025], where models receive binary feedback indicating
whether their final answers are correct.
Substantial efforts have been devoted to refining RL algorithms, such as PPO [Schulman et al., 2017]
and GRPO [Shao et al., 2024], to further improve performance and training stability [Richemond et al.,
2024, Wang et al., 2024, Ji et al., 2024, Liu et al., 2024, Yu et al., 2025, Liu et al., 2025b]. However,
these methods either require explicit critic networks to estimate value functions or advantages, or
rely on multiple generations per prompt, leading to substantial computational overhead and memory
consumption. These limitations make it challenging to scale to long-context reasoning tasks and
larger model sizes. This naturally raises the question: Can we develop simpler and more efficient RL
algorithms for long context reasoning?
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order of their last names.
Correspondence to mingyuc@bu.edu, zg292@cornell.edu, wenhao.zhan@princeton.edu
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

