SIFusion: A Unified Fusion Framework for
Multi-granularity Arctic Sea Ice Forecasting

Jingyi Xu1,∗ , Shengnan Wang1,∗ ,Weidong Yang1,† , Keyi Liu1 , Yeqi Luo1 , Ben Fei3,† , Lei Bai2
1
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intellegence, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Chinese University of Hong Kong
jyxu22@m.fudan.edu.cn, wdyang@fudan.edu.cn,
benfei@cuhk.edu.hk, baisanshi@gmail.com

Abstract
Arctic sea ice performs a vital role in global climate and has paramount impacts
on both polar ecosystems and coastal communities. In the last few years, multiple
deep learning based pan-Arctic sea ice concentration (SIC) forecasting methods
have emerged and showcased superior performance over physics-based dynamical
models. However, previous methods forecast SIC at a fixed temporal granularity,
e.g. sub-seasonal or seasonal, thus only leveraging intra-granularity information
and overlooking the plentiful inter-granularity correlations. Specifically, intergranularity correlations mean that SIC at various temporal granularities exhibits
cumulative effects and are naturally consistent, with short-term fluctuations potentially impacting long-term trends and long-term trends provide effective hints for
facilitating short-term forecasts in Arctic sea ice. Therefore, in this study, we propose to cultivate temporal multi-granularity that naturally derived from Arctic sea
ice reanalysis data and provide a unified perspective for modeling SIC via our Sea
Ice Fusion framework. SIFusion is delicately designed to leverage intra-granularity
and inter-granularity information to capture granularity-consistent representations
that promote forecasting skills. Our extensive experiments indicate that SIFusion
outperforms off-the-shelf fixed temporal granularity SIC forecasting deep learning
models for their specific temporal granularity.

1

Introduction

Arctic sea ice has a profound influence on both local and global climate systems. The near-surface
air temperature of Arctic regions has increased at a speed that is two to nearly four times faster than
the global average from 1979 to 2021, a phenomenon known as “Arctic amplification” [1, 2]. This
accelerated temperature rise performs a key role in the unprecedented rapid diminishing of Arctic
sea ice which has extensive consequences that could transcend the polar area. For example, the
accelerated reduction of Arctic sea ice could not only jeopardize the survival of species residing in
polar regions but also pose adverse effects on local communities whose livelihoods and well-being
depend on those animals; it could substantially affect mid-latitude summer weather by weakening
the storm tracks [3]; and it will bring new opportunities for marine transportation and new access to
natural resources like fossil fuels [4].
Due to the vital role of Arctic sea ice in coastal communities, global climate, and potential impacts
on the world’s economy, numerical and statistical models have been proposed to forecast pan-Arctic
sea ice concentration (SIC) ranging from sub-seasonal to seasonal scale [5, 6]. However, numerical
∗
†

Equal Contributions.
Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

