Guard Me If You Know Me:
Protecting Specific Face-Identity from Deepfakes

Kaiqing Lin1,3* , Zhiyuan Yan2,3* , Ke-Yue Zhang3 , Li Hao2 , Yue Zhou1 , Yuzhen Lin1 ,
Weixiang Li1 , Taiping Yao3† , Shouhong Ding3 , Bin Li1†
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Media Security,
and SZU-AFS Joint Innovation Center for AI Technology, Shenzhen University
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking Univerisity,
3
Tencent Youtu Lab

Abstract
Securing personal identity against deepfake attacks is increasingly critical in the
digital age, especially for celebrities and political figures whose faces are easily
accessible and frequently targeted. Most existing deepfake detection methods focus
on general-purpose scenarios and often ignore the valuable prior knowledge of
known facial identities, e.g., "VIP individuals" whose authentic facial data are
already available. In this paper, we propose VIPGuard, a unified multimodal
framework designed to capture fine-grained and comprehensive facial representations of a given identity, compare them against potentially fake or similar-looking
faces, and reason over these comparisons to make accurate and explainable predictions. Specifically, our framework consists of three main stages. First, we fine-tune
a multimodal large language model (MLLM) to learn detailed and structural facial
attributes. Second, we perform identity-level discriminative learning to enable
the model to distinguish subtle differences between highly similar faces, including real and fake variations. Finally, we introduce user-specific customization,
where we model the unique characteristics of the target face identity and perform
semantic reasoning via MLLM to enable personalized and explainable deepfake
detection. Our framework shows clear advantages over previous detection works,
where traditional detectors mainly rely on low-level visual cues and provide no
human-understandable explanations, while other MLLM-based models often lack a
detailed understanding of specific face identities. To facilitate the evaluation of our
method, we build a comprehensive identity-aware benchmark called VIPBench
for personalized deepfake detection, involving the latest 7 face-swapping and 7
entire face synthesis techniques for generation. Extensive experiments show that
our model outperforms existing methods in both detection and explanation. The
code is available at https://github.com/KQL11/VIPGuard .

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of generative AI techniques [51, 59, 68, 75, 52, 13] has led to the widespread
creation and dissemination of deepfake content—synthetic media where a person’s identity is manipulated or replaced, often without consent. These techniques severely threaten personal reputation and
*

Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

