Multi-View Oriented GPLVM: Expressiveness and
Efficiency

Zi Yang∗
School of Computing and Data Science
University of Hong Kong
ziyang2023@connect.hku.hk

Ying Li∗
School of Computing and Data Science
University of Hong Kong
lynnli98@connect.hku.hk

Zhidi Lin†
School of Computing and Data Science
University of Hong Kong
linzhidi017@gmail.com

Michael Minyi Zhang†
School of Computing and Data Science
University of Hong Kong
mzhang18@hku.hk

Pablo M. Olmos
Department of Signal Theory and Communications
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
pamartin@ing.uc3m.es

Abstract
The multi-view Gaussian process latent variable model (MV-GPLVM) aims to learn
a unified representation from multi-view data but is hindered by challenges such as
limited kernel expressiveness and low computational efficiency. To overcome these
issues, we first introduce a new duality between the spectral density and the kernel
function. By modeling the spectral density with a bivariate Gaussian mixture, we
then derive a generic and expressive kernel termed Next-Gen Spectral Mixture
(NG-SM) for MV-GPLVMs. To address the inherent computational inefficiency
of the NG-SM kernel, we design a new form of random Fourier feature approximation. Combined with a tailored reparameterization trick, this approximation
enables scalable variational inference for both the model and the unified latent representations. Numerical evaluations across a diverse range of multi-view datasets
demonstrate that our proposed method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art
models in learning meaningful latent representations.

1

Introduction

Multi-view representation learning aims to construct a unified latent representation by integrating
multiple modalities and aspects of the observed data [1, 2]. The learned representation captures
inter-view correlations within observations. By sharing information between each view of the data,
we can obtain a much richer latent representation of the data compared to modeling each view
independently which is crucial for handling complex datasets [3–5]. For example, modeling video
data which involves both visual frames and audio signals [6], or developing clinical diagnostic
systems that incorporates the patients’ various medical records [7].
The paradigm of multi-view learning first emerged in early works leveraging techniques such as
canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [8] and its kernelized extensions [9, 10] to jointly model
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

