Unveiling Concept Attribution in Diffusion Models

1

Quang H. Nguyen1 , Hoang Phan1,2 , Khoa D. Doan1,2
College of Engineering and Computer Science, VinUniversity
2
VinUni-Illinois Smart Health Center, VinUniversity
{quang.nh, 21hoang.p, khoa.dd}@vinuni.edu.vn

Abstract
Diffusion models have shown remarkable abilities in generating realistic and highquality images from text prompts. However, a trained model remains largely
black-box; little do we know about the roles of its components in exhibiting a
concept such as objects or styles. Recent works employ causal tracing to localize
knowledge-storing layers in generative models without showing how other layers
contribute to the target concept. In this work, we approach diffusion models’ interpretability problem from a more general perspective and pose a question: “How do
model components work jointly to demonstrate knowledge?”. To answer this question, we decompose diffusion models using component attribution, systematically
unveiling the importance of each component (specifically the model parameter)
in generating a concept. The proposed framework, called Component Attribution
for Diffusion Model (CAD), discovers the localization of concept-inducing (positive) components, while interestingly uncovers another type of components that
contribute negatively to generating a concept, which is missing in the previous
knowledge localization work. Based on this holistic understanding of diffusion
models, we present and empirically evaluate one utility of component attribution in controlling the generation process. Specifically, we introduce two fast,
inference-time model editing algorithms, CAD-Erase and CAD-Amplify; in particular, CAD-Erase enables erasure and CAD-Amplify allows amplification of
a generated concept by ablating the positive and negative components, respectively, while retaining knowledge of other concepts. Extensive experimental results
validate the significance of both positive and negative components pinpointed
by our framework, demonstrating the potential of providing a complete view of
interpreting generative models. Our code is available here.

1

Introduction

Recent developments in diffusion models [18, 26, 36, 37] have greatly improved the synthesizing
capabilities, in terms of image quality and the diversity of generated knowledge. However, these
models lack interpretability; we do not fully understand how they can translate simple prompts to
coherent visual outputs. To investigate how generative models express learned concepts, a recent line
of work studies which components in the model store knowledge [2, 27]. In language models, Meng
et al. [27] propose causal tracing to locate layers storing facts and reveal that knowledge is localized in
middle-layer MLP modules. Basu et al. [2] transfer this approach to diffusion models and propose the
knowledge distributed hypothesis. They show that, unlike language models, knowledge is distributed
among a set of UNet components and the first self-attention layer of the text encoder. These
works shed light on interpreting generative models, enabling more effective model editing [3, 2].
Nevertheless, they focus only on knowledge storage—modules that are responsible for generating
concepts—and on coarse-grained components, such as layers. This perspective may overlook more
subtle properties and other types of modules that also influence the outputs.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

