Transstratal Adversarial Attack: Compromising
Multi-Layered Defenses in Text-to-Image Models

Chunlong Xie1∗, Kangjie Chen2∗, Shangwei Guo1†, Shudong Zhang3 ,
Tianwei Zhang2 , and Tao Xiang1
1
Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
{clxie, swguo, txiang}@cqu.edu.cn,
{kangjie001, tianwei.zhang}@ntu.edu.sg, zhangshudong2@huawei.com

Abstract
Modern Text-to-Image (T2I) models deploy multi-layered defenses to block NotSafe-For-Work (NSFW) content generation. These defenses typically include
sequential layers such as prompt filters, concept erasers and image filters. While
existing adversarial attacks have demonstrated vulnerabilities in isolated defense
layers, they prove largely ineffective against multi-layered defenses deployed in
real-world T2I systems. In this paper, we demonstrate that exploiting overlapping vulnerabilities across these distinct defense layers enables adversaries to
systematically bypass the entire safeguard of T2I systems. We propose Transstratal
Adversarial Attack (TAA), a novel black-box framework to compromise T2I models with multi-layered protection. It generates transstratal adversarial prompts to
evade all defense layers simultaneously. This is accomplished through transstratal
adversarial candidate generation using LLMs to fulfill implicit and subjective adversarial requirements against different defense layers, combined with adversarial
genetic optimization for efficient black-box search to maximize the bypass rates
and generated image harmfulness. Evaluated across 14 T2I models (e.g., Stable
Diffusion, DALL·E, and Midjourney) and 17 safety modules, our attack achieves an
average attack success rate of 85.6%, surpassing state-of-the-art methods by 73.5%.
Our findings challenge the isolated design of safety mechanisms and establish the
first benchmark for holistic robustness evaluation in multi-layered safeguarded T2I
models. The code can be found in https://github.com/Bluedask/TAA-T2I.
Warning: This paper contains content that has the potential to be offensive and harmful

1

Introduction

Text-to-Image (T2I) models [13, 32, 27] have rapidly evolved, offering unprecedented capabilities in
generating creative content from textual descriptions. Recent advancements, particularly in diffusionbased architectures [32], have significantly enhanced the quality and controllability of generated
images. However, this progress is accompanied by the critical risk of misuse, specifically the potential
for generating Not-Safe-For-Work (NSFW) images. To mitigate these risks and ensure responsible
deployment, modern T2I systems implement multi-layered safeguard mechanisms. These defenses
operate at different layers of the image generation pipeline: 1) Prompt Filters [24, 2, 33] evaluate input
queries to detect and block the prompts containing NSFW intention; 2) Concept Erasers [9, 35, 21]
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

