Are Large Language Models Sensitive to
the Motives Behind Communication?
Addison J. Wu1∗

Ryan Liu1∗ Kerem Oktar2∗ Theodore R. Sumers3 Thomas L. Griffiths1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
2
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
3
Anthropic

Abstract
Human communication is motivated: people speak, write, and create content with
a particular communicative intent in mind. As a result, information that large
language models (LLMs) and AI agents process is inherently framed by humans’
intentions and incentives. People are adept at navigating such nuanced information:
we routinely identify benevolent or self-serving motives in order to decide what
statements to trust. For LLMs to be effective in the real world, they too must critically evaluate content by factoring in the motivations of the source—for instance,
weighing the credibility of claims made in a sales pitch. In this paper, we undertake a comprehensive study of whether LLMs have this capacity for motivational
vigilance. We first employ controlled experiments from cognitive science to verify
that LLMs’ behavior is consistent with rational models of learning from motivated
testimony, and find they successfully discount information from biased sources in
a human-like manner. We then extend our evaluation to sponsored online adverts,
a more naturalistic reflection of LLM agents’ information ecosystems. In these
settings, we find that LLMs’ inferences do not track the rational models’ predictions nearly as closely—partly due to additional information that distracts them
from vigilance-relevant considerations. However, a simple steering intervention
that boosts the salience of intentions and incentives substantially increases the
correspondence between LLMs and the rational model. These results suggest that
LLMs possess a basic sensitivity to the motivations of others, but generalizing to
novel real-world settings will require further improvements to these models.

1

Introduction

Much of the information available online—and hence a large fraction of the data large language
models (LLMs) are tasked with processing—is the product of people’s intentional communication:
from op-eds in newspapers [15] to social media content by partisans [13] to word-of-mouth promotion
[41] to even online reviews [22]. When navigating these digital environments, people naturally infer
the accuracy of content. This capacity for tracking the processes that generate social data, known
as epistemic vigilance [83], enables selective social learning. In particular, vigilance of others’
motivations—motivational vigilance [65]—allows people to track the intentions and incentives
biasing data (for instance, people can ignore advice from malevolent sources while learning from
benevolent ones). As LLMs are increasingly deployed in high-stakes environments—particularly as
AI agents that act on behalf of users—it has become increasingly important to assess whether these
systems are similarly vigilant to the motivations behind communication.
*
Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Addison J. Wu <addisonwu@princeton.edu>, Ryan Liu
<ryanliu@princeton.edu>, Kerem Oktar <oktar.research@gmail.com>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

