Graph Diffusion that can Insert and Delete

Matteo Ninniri
Department of Computer Science
University of Pisa
56127 Pisa (Italy)
matteo.ninniri@phd.unipi.it

Marco Podda
Department of Computer Science
University of Pisa
56127 Pisa (Italy)
marco.podda@unipi.it

Davide Bacciu
Department of Computer Science
University of Pisa
56127 Pisa (Italy)
davide.bacciu@unipi.it

Abstract
Generative models of graphs based on discrete Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models (DDPMs) offer a principled approach to molecular generation by systematically removing structural noise through iterative atom and bond adjustments.
However, existing formulations are fundamentally limited by their inability to
adapt the graph size (that is, the number of atoms) during the diffusion process,
severely restricting their effectiveness in conditional generation scenarios such
as property-driven molecular design, where the targeted property often correlates
with the molecular size. In this paper, we reformulate the noising and denoising
processes to support monotonic insertion and deletion of nodes. The resulting
model, which we call G R IDDD, dynamically grows or shrinks the chemical graph
during generation. G R IDDD matches or exceeds the performance of existing
graph Diffusion Models on molecular property targeting despite being trained on
a more difficult problem. Furthermore, when applied to molecular optimization,
G R IDDD exhibits competitive performance compared to specialized optimization
models. This work paves the way for size-adaptive molecular generation with
graph diffusion.

1

Introduction

Generating molecules conditioned on predefined structures or properties is a central endeavor in
computational chemistry, with applications ranging from de novo drug design [You et al., 2018a] to
materials discovery [Zhao et al., 2023]. Depending on the conditioning information, we distinguish
two key learning tasks: property targeting, aimed at generating molecules endowed with prespecified
properties; and property optimization, where the goal is to edit a given molecule to improve a target
property while retaining its core structure. Unlike continuous data, generating graphs must account
for their discrete and combinatorial connectivity. For molecules in particular, chemical constraints
invalidate most atom-bond and atom-atom combinations, making this problem difficult and, therefore,
actively researched. Despite these challenges, deep graph generators [Faez et al., 2021] have achieved
striking success in the above-mentioned tasks, due to their ability to approximate complex molecular
distributions and their flexibility in incorporating conditioning information.
Based on the way they decode a graph from a latent representation, deep generative models for
molecules can be broadly categorized as autoregressive or one-shot [Zhu et al., 2022]. Autoregressive
models build the graph sequentially (atom-by-atom as in You et al. [2018b], or fragment-by-fragment
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

