A Compressive-Expressive Communication
Framework for Compositional Representations

Rafael Elberg ∗
Pontificia Universidad Católica, CENIA, i-Health
Chile
rafael.elberg@uc.cl
Mircea Petrache
Pontificia Universidad Católica, CENIA
Chile
mpetrache@uc.cl

Felipe del Rio
Pontificia Universidad Católica, CENIA
Chile
fidelrio@uc.cl

Denis Parra
Pontificia Universidad Católica, CENIA, i-Health
Chile
dparras@uc.cl

Abstract
Compositionality in knowledge and language—the ability to represent complex
concepts as a combination of simpler ones—is a hallmark of human cognition and
communication. Despite recent advances, deep neural networks still struggle to
acquire this property reliably. Neural models for emergent communication look to
endow artificial agents with compositional language by simulating the pressures
that form human language. In this work, we introduce CELEBI2 (CompressiveExpressive Language Emergence through a discrete Bottleneck and Iterated learning), a novel self-supervised framework for inducing compositional representations
through a reconstruction-based communication game between a sender and a
receiver. Building on theories of language emergence and the iterated learning
framework, we integrate three mechanisms that jointly promote compressibility,
expressivity, and efficiency in the emergent language. First, Progressive Decoding
incentivizes intermediate reasoning by requiring the receiver to produce partial
reconstructions after each symbol. Second, Final-State Imitation trains successive
generations of agents to imitate reconstructions rather than messages, enforcing a
tighter communication bottleneck. Third, Pairwise Distance Maximization regularizes message diversity by encouraging high distances between messages, with
formal links to entropy maximization. Our method significantly improves both
the efficiency and compositionality of the learned messages on the Shapes3D and
MPI3D datasets, surpassing prior discrete communication frameworks in both
reconstruction accuracy and topographic similarity. This work provides new theoretical and empirical evidence for the emergence of structured, generalizable
communication protocols from simplicity-based inductive biases.

1

Introduction

In natural languages, compositionality enables humans to communicate an infinite number of ideas
using a finite set of elements [12]. This principle enables speakers to flexibly combine known words
and structures to convey novel meanings, supporting flexible and generalizable communication across
diverse and previously unseen contexts.
∗
2

Corresponding author
Our oficial implementation can be found at https://github.com/SugarFreeManatee/CELEBI

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

