Machine Unlearning via Task Simplex Arithmetic

Junhao Dong1,2 , Hao Zhu3 , Yifei Zhang1 , Xinghua Qu3 ,
∗
∗
Yew-Soon Ong1,2 , and Piotr Koniusz4,5,6
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 CFAR, IHPC, A*STAR, 3 Bytedance,
4
Data61 CSIRO, 5 University of New South Wales, 6Australian National University

Abstract
As foundation Vision-Language Models (VLMs) unlock fine-tuning on smaller
datasets while leveraging large-scale pre-training data, machine unlearning becomes critical in addressing privacy concerns and regulatory compliance. Task
vector, representing the difference between parameters of models fine-tuned with
and without specific data, is a popular retraining-free unlearning strategy. However,
we observe that task vectors exhibit substantial sensitivity to various fine-tuning
configurations, resulting in unstable unlearning effectiveness that correlates negatively with the prediction-level variance. While aggregating multiple functions
(e.g., VLM with classifier) whose parameters are represented by different task vectors reduces function variance and improves unlearning, the computational cost of
obtaining numerous task vectors and aggregating functions is computationally high.
Thus, in order to capture the space of task vectors induced by diverse fine-tuning
strategies, we propose modeling it within the convex hull of (Q−1)-simplex whose
vertices represent Q task vectors. Although a function ensemble can be formed
by sampling numerous task vectors from such a simplex, we derive a closed-form
ensemble of an infinite number of functions whose parameters are uniformly sampled from the simplex, enabling efficient function-level task vector ensembling
with enhanced unlearning performance. Extensive experiments and analyses across
diverse datasets and scenarios demonstrate the efficacy of our method.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP [52] and its derivatives [39, 41] including adversarially fine-tuned VLMs [45, 13, 14, 20, 12, 15], enjoy remarkable generalization due to pre-training on
massive-scale datasets [65]. Given their superior performance on various tasks, including notable
robustness in single-modal settings [17, 16, 19, 10, 18, 9], significant privacy concerns and regulatory
compliance challenges arise regarding data erasure rights mandated by regulations [53, 2]. Consequently, developing efficient unlearning models that can effectively “forget” specific data is critical to
responsible deployment, as simply retraining VLMs from scratch is prohibitive [42].
Among machine unlearning approaches [23, 25, 4], so-called task vector arithmetic [29] is a very
effective plug-and-play strategy. Task vector is defined as the difference of parameters of the model
fine-tuned on the target data (e.g., data to be removed) and the original model. The simplicity of
task vector arithmetic makes it suitable for large-scale VLMs. Subtracting a task vector from the
original model’s parameters enables its efficient unlearning without retraining. It reduces the model’s
performance on a target dataset (forget set) and preserves performance on the remainder of the
original data. However, the unlearning performance inherently depends on the quality of task vectors,
which differ between fine-tuning runs, leading to prediction-level uncertainty due to variance that is
unaccounted for in task vector arithmetic.
∗

Corresponding authors. PK also in charge of theory & derivations.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

