Explaining Similarity in Vision–Language Encoders
with Weighted Banzhaf Interactions

Hubert Baniecki∗
University of Warsaw
Warsaw University of Technology
Barbara Hammer
Bielefeld University

Maximilian Muschalik
LMU Munich, MCML

Eyke Hüllermeier
LMU Munich, MCML, DFKI

Fabian Fumagalli
Bielefeld University

Przemyslaw Biecek
University of Warsaw
Warsaw University of Technology

Abstract
Language–image pre-training (LIP) enables the development of vision–language
models capable of zero-shot classification, localization, multimodal retrieval, and
semantic understanding. Various explanation methods have been proposed to visualize the importance of input image–text pairs on the model’s similarity outputs.
However, popular saliency maps are limited by capturing only first-order attributions, overlooking the complex cross-modal interactions intrinsic to such encoders.
We introduce faithful interaction explanations of LIP models (FI X LIP) as a unified
approach to decomposing the similarity in vision–language encoders. FI X LIP is
rooted in game theory, where we analyze how using the weighted Banzhaf interaction index offers greater flexibility and improves computational efficiency over
the Shapley interaction quantification framework. From a practical perspective,
we propose how to naturally extend explanation evaluation metrics, such as the
pointing game and area between the insertion/deletion curves, to second-order
interaction explanations. Experiments on the MS COCO and ImageNet-1k benchmarks validate that second-order methods, such as FI X LIP, outperform first-order
attribution methods. Beyond delivering high-quality explanations, we demonstrate
the utility of FI X LIP in comparing different models, e.g. CLIP vs. SigLIP-2.

1

Introduction

Contrastive language–image pre-training [CLIP, 57] revolutionized computer vision by learning
data representations well-performing in a plethora of downstream tasks. Scaling the training to
predict similarity between image and text, combined with continuous architectural improvements [e.g.
SigLIP, 75] and increasing the size of datasets, leads to the development of powerful vision–language
encoders [VLEs, 13, 66, 68, 75]. These rather opaque encoders become the backbone components
in large vision–language models capable of actual conversation and reasoning [2, 36, 43], and are
increasingly applied in high-stakes decision-making, like in the case of medical imaging [29, 76, 78].
The limitations in the way CLIP represents the visual world have been extensively studied [14, 35,
67, 72, 73]. For example, a recent study by Tong et al. [63] suggests vision–language models are
limited by the systematic shortcomings of CLIP, e.g. they fail when questioned about directions,
quantity of objects in an image, or recognizing the presented text in a visual form. The emergence of
“CLIP-blind pairs”, inputs that CLIP perceives as similar despite their clear differences, could lead to
critical errors when applied in medical visual question answering and treatment recommendation [78].
∗

Corresponding author: h.baniecki@uw.edu.pl

Code: https://github.com/hbaniecki/fixlip

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

