The Promise of RL for Autoregressive Image Editing

Saba Ahmadi1∗ Rabiul Awal1,2∗ Ankur Sikarwar1,2∗ Amirhossein Kazemnejad1∗
Ge Ya Luo 1,2 Juan A. Rodriguez1,4,6 Sai Rajeswar1,2,6
Siva Reddy1,3,6,7 Christopher Pal 1,5,6,7 Benno Krojer1,3 Aishwarya Agrawal1,2,7
1
Mila – Quebec AI Institute 2 Université de Montréal 3 McGill University
4
École de Technologie Supérieure (ETS) 5 Polytechnique Montréal 6 ServiceNow
7
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
While image generation techniques are now capable of producing high-quality
images that respect prompts which span multiple sentences, the task of text-guided
image editing remains a challenge. Even edit requests that consist of only a few
words often fail to be executed correctly. We explore three strategies to enhance
performance on a wide range of image editing tasks: supervised fine-tuning (SFT),
reinforcement learning (RL), and Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning. In order to
study all these components in one consistent framework, we adopt an autoregressive
multimodal model that processes textual and visual tokens in a unified manner. We
find RL combined with a large multi-modal LLM verifier to be the most effective
of these strategies. As a result, we release EARL: Editing with Autoregression
and RL, a strong RL-based image editing model that performs competitively on
a diverse range of edits compared to strong baselines, despite using much less
training data. Thus, EARL pushes the frontier of autoregressive multimodal
models on image editing. We release our code, training data, and trained models at
https://github.com/mair-lab/EARL.

1

Introduction

With internet-scale image-text pairs [41] and diffusion models [40, 39, 23], we have seen impressive
progress on open-ended image generation in recent years. At this point, the latest text-to-image models
can often adhere to detailed prompts that span several sentences [5, 13]. However, synthesizing
images from a prompt alone is often not sufficient for end-users and broader ML applications. In
reality, a person might want to alter highly specific details in a given image instead of creating one
from scratch. Beyond direct user applications, e.g., in the domains of robotics and planning, one
might want to “imagine into the future” with an image editing model acting as a simulator [59, 26, 7],
e.g., “how does this scene look like if the robot pushes the mug?”. In both cases, the model must
faithfully preserve all details of the original image while modifying the elements intended for editing.
From a capability perspective, most current editing models [61, 8, 56] cover arguably simpler object
and attribute edits (replace, change color, add, ...), yet only few works [26, 44] tackle more complex
edits that require e.g., action understanding or reasoning (spatial, counting, physical dynamics).
From a modeling perspective, a standard recipe to improve editing is to apply supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) to a diffusion-based image generation model [8, 61, 56], rarely incorporating more recent posttraining methods such as reinforcement learning (RL). A parallel line of work introduces additional
bounding-box conditioning, either explicitly provided by the user [31] or implicitly predicted [16],
leaving these methods far from an end-to-end solution. Hence, in this paper we ask: What is the
∗

denotes equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

