HiFC: High-efficiency Flash-based KV Cache
Swapping for Scaling LLM Inference

Inho Jeong1,2∗ Sunghyeon Woo1,3∗ Sol Namkung1 Dongsuk Jeon1†
1
Seoul National University 2 SK hynix 3 NAVER Cloud

Abstract
Large-language-model inference with long contexts often produces key–value
(KV) caches whose footprint exceeds the capacity of high-bandwidth memory on
a GPU. Prior LLM inference frameworks such as vLLM mitigate this pressure
by swapping KV cache pages to host DRAM. However, the high cost of large
DRAM pools makes this solution economically unattractive. Although offloading
to SSDs can be a cost-effective way to expand memory capacity relative to DRAM,
conventional frameworks such as FlexGen experience a substantial throughput
drop since the data path that routes SSD traffic through CPU to GPU is severely
bandwidth-constrained. To overcome these limitations, we introduce HiFC, a novel
DRAM-free swapping scheme that enables direct access to SSD-resident memory
with low latency and high effective bandwidth. HiFC stores KV pages in pseudoSLC (pSLC) regions of commodity NVMe SSDs, sustaining high throughput under
sequential I/O and improving write endurance by up to 8×. Leveraging GPU
Direct Storage, HiFC enables direct transfers between SSD and GPU, bypassing
host DRAM and alleviating PCIe bottlenecks. HiFC employs fine-grained block
mapping to confine writes to high-performance pSLC zones, stabilizing latency and
throughput under load. HiFC achieves inference throughput comparable to DRAMbased swapping under diverse long-context workloads, such as NarrativeQA, while
significantly lowering the memory expansion cost of a GPU server system by 4.5×
over three years.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance across a wide range
of tasks, including machine translation, code generation, and open-domain question answering
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, LLM services are often hindered by significant memory requirements due to
the storage of key–value (KV) caches [6, 7, 8, 9]. The size of this KV cache grows proportionally
with both the number of layers and the input sequence length, leading to substantial memory usage in
state-of-the-art LLMs. This issue becomes particularly pronounced in long-context scenarios, where
the cumulative KV cache can easily exceed the capacity of high-bandwidth memory (HBM) on a
GPU, resulting in out-of-memory errors or degraded throughput.
To overcome GPU HBM capacity limits, several LLM inference frameworks [7, 10, 11, 12] swap or
offload KV cache blocks to host DRAM. However, provisioning and maintaining large DRAM pools
requires substantial capital investment, increases power consumption, and demands more intensive
cooling, ultimately inflating the cost for long-context inference deployments.
Attempts to leverage lower-cost, higher-capacity NVMe SSDs for KV cache offloading have also
been explored recently [7, 10, 11, 13]. However, since GPUs lack a native NVMe interface, every
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

