Robust Graph Condensation via
Classification Complexity Mitigation

Jiayi Luo1 , Qingyun Sun1 , Beining Yang2 ,
Haonan Yuan , Xingcheng Fu3 , Yanbiao Ma4 , Jianxin Li1∗, Philip S. Yu5
1
SKLCCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Laboratory for Foundations of Computer Science, University of Edinburgh
3
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Guangxi Normal University
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois, Chicago
{luojy,sunqy,yuanhn,lijx}@buaa.edu.cn
b.yang-32@sms.ed.ac.uk,fuxc@gxnu.edu.cn,ybma1998@ruc.edu.cn,psyu@uic.edu
1

Abstract
Graph condensation (GC) has gained significant attention for its ability to synthesize smaller yet informative graphs. However, existing studies often overlook the
robustness of GC in scenarios where the original graph is corrupted. In such cases,
we observe that the performance of GC deteriorates significantly, while existing
robust graph learning technologies offer only limited effectiveness. Through both
empirical investigation and theoretical analysis, we reveal that GC is inherently
an intrinsic-dimension-reducing process, synthesizing a condensed graph with
lower classification complexity. Although this property is critical for effective GC
performance, it remains highly vulnerable to adversarial perturbations. To tackle
this vulnerability and improve GC robustness, we adopt the geometry perspective
of graph data manifold and propose a novel Manifold-constrained Robust Graph
Condensation framework named MRGC. Specifically, we introduce three graph
data manifold learning modules that guide the condensed graph to lie within a
smooth, low-dimensional manifold with minimal class ambiguity, thereby preserving the classification complexity reduction capability of GC and ensuring
robust performance under universal adversarial attacks. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the robustness of MRGC across diverse attack scenarios.

1

Introduction

Recently, Graph Condensation (GC) [17, 61] has emerged as a promising approach to enhance the
training efficiency of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) by condensing large graphs into smaller ones.
These smaller yet highly informative synthesized graphs enable GNNs trained on them to achieve
performance comparable to models trained on larger original graphs [20, 41, 54]. This has facilitated
the adoption of GC in areas like neural architecture search [33] and graph continual learning [43].
However, the quality of the condensed graph largely depends on the original graph while existing
GC methods assume a clean original graph. As shown in Figure 1(a), when the original graph is
attacked, the quality of the condensed graph deteriorates, adversely impacting the applications of GC
in real-world scenarios where noise and attackers are prevalent [53]. Nevertheless, GC robustness
remains largely unexplored. RobGC [16] is the first attempt to tackle this issue. While RobGC
effectively addresses structure attacks, its dependence on structure learning and label propagation
limits its defense against feature and label attacks [17]. Benchmark [20] also reveals that GC is
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

