Unveiling m-Sharpness Through the Structure of
Stochastic Gradient Noise
Haocheng Luo

Mehrtash Harandi Dinh Phung Trung Le
Monash University, Australia
{haocheng.luo, mehrtash.harandi, dinh.phung, trunglm}@monash.edu

Abstract
Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) has emerged as a highly effective technique
to improve model generalization, but its underlying principles are not fully understood. We investigate m-sharpness, where SAM performance improves monotonically as the micro-batch size for computing perturbations decreases, a phenomenon
critical for distributed training yet lacking rigorous explanation. We leverage an
extended Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) framework and analyze stochastic
gradient noise (SGN) to characterize the dynamics of SAM variants, including
n-SAM and m-SAM. Our analysis reveals that stochastic perturbations induce an
implicit variance-based sharpness regularization whose strength increases as m
decreases. Motivated by this insight, we propose Reweighted SAM (RW-SAM),
which employs sharpness-weighted sampling to mimic the generalization benefits
of m-SAM while remaining parallelizable. Comprehensive experiments validate
our theory and method.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, gradient-based optimization algorithms aim to minimize the following loss
function:
n
1X
min f (x) :=
fi (x),
(1)
n i=1
x∈Rd
where x ∈ Rd denotes the parameter, fi (x) represents the loss on the i-th sample, i ranges from
1 to n, and n is the size of the training set. We primarily focus on stochastic algorithms, where at
each step k, an index set γk of fixed
P cardinality |γ| is sampled uniformly at random. We denote the
1
mini-batch loss by fγk (x) = |γ|
i∈γk fi (x).
We investigate the recently proposed Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2021),
which has achieved remarkable success in various application domains (Foret et al., 2021; Kwon
et al., 2021; Kaddour et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022a; Qu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024; Nguyen et al.,
2024; Hoang-Anh et al., 2025; Singh et al., 2025). It seeks flat minima by minimizing the perturbed
loss minx∈Rd f (x + ρ ϵ∗ (x)), where the perturbation ϵ∗ (x) is defined as the solution to
max ⟨∇f (x), ϵ⟩,

∥ϵ∥≤1

(2)

which admits the closed-form expression ϵ∗ (x) = ∇f (x)/∥∇f (x)∥. Here ρ > 0 is a hyperparameter
controlling the perturbation radius. The algorithm, referred to as n-SAM, computes its perturbation
using the full-batch gradient. Its update at iteration k is


∇f (xk )
xk+1 = xk − η ∇fγk xk + ρ ∥∇f
(3)
(xk )∥ ,
where η > 0 is the learning rate, ρ > 0 the perturbation radius.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

