Enhancing Interpretability in Deep Reinforcement
Learning through Semantic Clustering

Liang Zhang
College of Information Science
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
liangzh@arizona.edu

Justin Lieffers
College of Information Science
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
lieffers@arizona.edu

Adarsh Pyarelal
College of Information Science
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
adarsh@arizona.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we explore semantic clustering properties of deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) to improve its interpretability and deepen our understanding of
its internal semantic organization. In this context, semantic clustering refers to
the ability of neural networks to cluster inputs based on their semantic similarity
in the feature space. We propose a DRL architecture that incorporates a novel
semantic clustering module that combines feature dimensionality reduction with
online clustering. This module integrates seamlessly into the DRL training pipeline,
addressing the instability of t-SNE and eliminating the need for extensive manual
annotation inherent to prior semantic analysis methods. We experimentally validate
the effectiveness of the proposed module and demonstrate its ability to reveal
semantic clustering properties within DRL. Furthermore, we introduce new analytical methods based on these properties to provide insights into the hierarchical
structure of policies and semantic organization within the feature space. Our code
is available at https://github.com/ualiangzhang/semantic_rl.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has been widely applied in domains such as robotics, autonomous
systems, game playing, and healthcare, due to its ability to solve complex decision-making tasks [1–3].
However, the black-box nature of DRL models obscures the decision-making process, potentially
leading to unforeseen risks. In this study, we explore semantic clustering properties to improve
the interpretability of DRL models. We use the term semantic clustering to refer to the process of
grouping states eliciting similar agent behaviors under comparable environmental contexts (e.g.,
approaching a target, jumping to a higher platform in Procgen). Studying semantic clustering in
DRL helps reveal the model’s internal knowledge structure and semantic relationships between states,
enhancing the interpretability and transparency of DRL models.
Although semantic clustering has been thoroughly investigated in natural language processing
(NLP) [4, 5] and computer vision (CV) [6–9], it remains underexplored in DRL due to the complexity
introduced by temporal dynamics and the absence of direct supervised signals. The sequential
nature of decisions in DRL further complicates the task of capturing evolving semantics. Early work
introduced external constraints—e.g., bisimulation [10, 11] and contrastive learning [12–15]—to
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

