QiMeng-CodeV-R1: Reasoning-Enhanced Verilog
Generation
Yaoyu Zhu1 , Di Huang1 , Hanqi Lyu1,2 , Xiaoyun Zhang1,3 , Chongxiao Li1,3 ,
Wenxuan Shi1,3 , Yutong Wu1,3 , Jianan Mu1 , Jinghua Wang3 , Yang Zhao1,3 ,
Pengwei Jin1 , Shuyao Cheng1 , Shengwen Liang1 , Xishan Zhang1,4 ,
Rui Zhang1 , Zidong Du1 , Qi Guo1 , Xing Hu1 , Yunji Chen1,3
1
State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Cambricon Technologies
https://iprc-dip.github.io/CodeV-R1

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) trained via reinforcement learning with verifiable
reward (RLVR) have achieved breakthroughs on tasks with explicit, automatable
verification, such as software programming and mathematical problems. Extending
RLVR to electronic design automation (EDA), especially automatically generating
hardware description languages (HDLs) like Verilog from natural-language (NL)
specifications, however, poses three key challenges: the lack of automated and
accurate verification environments, the scarcity of high-quality NL–code pairs, and
the prohibitive computation cost of RLVR. To this end, we introduce CodeV-R1,
an RLVR framework for training Verilog generation LLMs. First, we develop a
rule-based testbench generator that performs robust equivalence checking against
golden references. Second, we propose a round-trip data synthesis method that
pairs open-source Verilog snippets with LLM-generated NL descriptions, verifies
code–NL–code consistency via the generated testbench, and filters out inequivalent
examples to yield a high-quality dataset. Third, we employ a two-stage “distillthen-RL” training pipeline: distillation for the cold start of reasoning abilities,
followed by adaptive DAPO, our novel RLVR algorithm that can reduce training
cost by adaptively adjusting sampling rate. The resulting model, CodeV-R17B, achieves 68.6 % and 72.9 % pass@1 on VerilogEval v2 and RTLLM v1.1,
respectively, surpassing prior state-of-the-art by 12∼20 %, while even exceeding
the performance of 671B DeepSeek-R1 on RTLLM. We have released our model,
training code, and dataset to facilitate research in EDA and LLM communities. 1

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have recently demonstrated remarkable progress on reasoning tasks
when trained via reinforcement learning with verifiable reward (RLVR). Notable examples include
OpenAI-o1 [26] and DeepSeek-R1 [3], which exhibit emergent reasoning capabilities on problems
endowed with explicit verification procedures—such as software programming and mathematical
problem solving. This success suggests a promising opportunity to apply RLVR for electronic design
1

Corresponding author. Contact: {zhuyaoyu, huangdi, huxing}@ict.ac.cn.
Please refer to https://iprc-dip.github.io/CodeV-R1/ for relative resources.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

