Stable Cinemetrics : Structured Taxonomy and
Evaluation for Professional Video Generation
Agneet Chatterjee1,2,∗
Max Lapin1
Chitta Baral2
1

Stability AI

2

Rahim Entezari1
Reshinth Adithyan1
Yezhou Yang2

Arizona State University

Maksym Zhuravinskyi1
Amit Raj3
Varun Jampani1
3

Google DeepMind

https://stable-cinemetrics.github.io/

Abstract
Recent advances in video generation have enabled high-fidelity video synthesis
from user provided prompts. However, existing models and benchmarks fail to
capture the complexity and requirements of professional video generation. Towards
that goal, we introduce Stable Cinemetrics, a structured evaluation framework that
formalizes filmmaking controls into four disentangled, hierarchical taxonomies:
Setup, Event, Lighting, and Camera. Together, these taxonomies define 76 finegrained control nodes grounded in industry practices. Using these taxonomies,
we construct a benchmark of prompts aligned with professional use cases and
develop an automated pipeline for prompt categorization and question generation,
enabling independent evaluation of each control dimension. We conduct a largescale human study spanning 10+ models and 20K videos, annotated by a pool
of 80+ film professionals. Our analysis, both coarse and fine-grained reveal that
even the strongest current models exhibit significant gaps, particularly in Events
and Camera-related controls. To enable scalable evaluation, we train an automatic
evaluator, a vision-language model aligned with expert annotations that outperforms
existing zero-shot baselines. SCINE is the first approach to situate professional
video generation within the landscape of video generative models, introducing
taxonomies centered around cinematic controls and supporting them with structured
evaluation pipelines and detailed analyses to guide future research.

1

Introduction

The field of video generative models has made significant progress in recent years [37], drawing
substantial interest from both academia and industry. This can be evidenced by the growing number
of benchmarks [25, 32, 2, 35], datasets [41, 58], and both open- [3, 56, 14, 65] and closed- [6, 54, 36]
source models that have collectively driven the field forward. The foundational nature of these models
makes them useful for several downstream tasks, including video editing [26], 3D generation [55] and
robotics [69]. This widespread adoption of video generative models underpins the growing assertion
that they represent a revolution for professional video generation.
Generative vision offers tremendous potential for media creation, but a fundamental question remains:
how can we shift generative video from casual, exploratory synthesis to a medium that supports
professional-grade, controllable cinematic outputs? The important distinction between casual and
professional generative video lies in the critical gap of cinematic control [7]: while today’s models
can generate videos of "an astronaut riding a horse", professional creation necessitates granular
control over cinematic elements such as the framing of the shot, position of the key light, and even
whether the astronaut smiles before or after the horse gallops away - a truly professional video
generation system must put every one of those cinematic choices back in the creator’s hands. The
need for this exact control over every cinematic element, from the timing of a smile to the quality of
∗

Work done during an internship at Stability AI.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

