VITA-1.5: Towards GPT-4o Level Real-Time Vision
and Speech Interaction

Chaoyou Fu1,2,♠ , Haojia Lin4 , Xiong Wang3 , Yi-Fan Zhang5 , Yunhang Shen3
Xiaoyu Liu1,2 , Haoyu Cao3 , Zuwei Long3 , Heting Gao3 , Ke Li3 , Long Ma3 ,
Xiawu Zheng4 , Rongrong Ji4 , Xing Sun3,† , Caifeng Shan1,2 , Ran He5
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, 4 XMU, 5 CASIA
♠

Project Leader

†

Corresponding Author

Demo Video: Click YouTube Link
Source Code: https://github.com/VITA-MLLM/VITA

Abstract
Recent Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have typically focused
on integrating visual and textual modalities, with less emphasis placed on the
role of speech in enhancing interaction. However, speech plays a crucial role
in multimodal dialogue systems, and implementing high-performance in both
vision and speech tasks remains a challenge due to the fundamental modality
differences. In this paper, we propose a carefully designed multi-stage training
methodology that progressively trains LLM to understand both visual and speech
information, ultimately enabling fluent vision and speech interaction. Our approach
not only preserves strong vision-language capacity, but also enables efficient
speech-to-speech dialogue capabilities without separate ASR and TTS modules,
significantly accelerating multimodal end-to-end response speed. By comparing
against state-of-the-art counterparts across benchmarks for image, video, and
speech, we demonstrate that our omni model is equipped with both strong visual
and speech capabilities, making omni understanding and interaction.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in MLLMs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] have led to significant progress, particularly
in integration of visual and textual modalities. The introduction of visual information into LLMs has
notably enhanced model capabilities across various multimodal tasks. However, with the growing
appeal of human-computer interaction, the role of the speech modality has become increasingly
prominent, especially in multimodal dialogue systems. In such a system, speech not only serves as a
key medium for information transmission but also greatly improves the naturalness and convenience
of interactions. Consequently, integrating visual and speech modalities to achieve multimodal
interactions has emerged as a critical research focus.
The integration of vision and speech in MLLMs is not straightforward due to their inherently
differences [10]. For example, visual data, such as images, convey spatial information, while
speech data convey dynamic changes in time series. These fundamental differences pose challenges
for simultaneous optimization of both modalities, often leading to conflicts during training. For
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

