Tackling Continual Offline RL through Selective
Weights Activation on Aligned Spaces
Jifeng Hu1

Sili Huang2∗
Li Shen3
Zhejian Yang1
Shengchao Hu4
5
1∗
Shisong Tang
Hechang Chen
Lichao Sun6
1∗
7
Yi Chang
Dacheng Tao
1
Jilin University 2 Minzu University of China 3 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Tsinghua University 6 Lehigh University
7
Nanyang Technological University
{hujf21, zjyang22}@mails.jlu.edu.cn {chenhc, yichang}@jlu.edu.cn
huangsili@muc.edu.cn mathshenli@gmail.com charles-hu@sjtu.edu.cn
tangshisong13@gmail.com lis221@lehigh.edu dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual offline reinforcement learning (CORL) has shown impressive ability in
diffusion-based continual learning systems by modeling the joint distributions of
trajectories. However, most research only focuses on limited continual task settings
where the tasks have the same observation and action space, which deviates from
the realistic demands of training agents in various environments. In view of this,
we propose Vector-Quantized Continual Diffuser, named VQ-CD, to break the
barrier of different spaces between various tasks. Specifically, our method contains
two complementary sections, where the quantization spaces alignment provides a
unified basis for the selective weights activation. In the quantized spaces alignment,
we leverage vector quantization to align the different state and action spaces of
various tasks, facilitating continual training in the same space. Then, we propose to
leverage a unified diffusion model attached by the inverse dynamic model to master
all tasks by selectively activating different weights according to the task-related
sparse masks. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on 15 continual learning
(CL) tasks, including conventional CL task settings (identical state and action
spaces) and general CL task settings (various state and action spaces). Compared
with 17 baselines, our method reaches the SOTA performance.

1

Introduction

The endeavor of recovering high-performance policies from abundant offline samples gathered by
various sources and continually mastering future tasks learning and previous knowledge maintaining
gives birth to the issue of continual offline reinforcement learning (CORL) [62, 2, 39, 42]. Evergrowing scenarios or offline datasets pose challenges for most continual RL methods that are trained
on static data and are prone to showing catastrophic forgetting of previous knowledge and ineffective
learning of new tasks [63, 57]. Facing these challenges, three categories of methods, rehearsalbased [42, 74, 10], regularization-based [82, 105, 104], and structure-based methods [102, 67, 8], are
proposed to reduce forgetting and facilitate continual training.
However, most previous studies only focus on the continual learning (CL) setting with identical
state and action spaces [63, 82]. It deviates from the fact that the ever-growing scenarios or offline
datasets are likely to possess different state and action spaces with previous tasks for many reasons,
∗

Corresponding authors: Hechang Chen, Sili Huang, and Yi Chang.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

