Out-of-Distribution Detection with Relative Angles

Berker Demirel
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
berker.demirel@ist.ac.at

Marco Fumero
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
marco.fumero@ist.ac.at

Francesco Locatello
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
francesco.locatello@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Deep learning systems deployed in real-world applications often encounter data that
is different from their in-distribution (ID). A reliable model should ideally abstain
from making decisions in this out-of-distribution (OOD) setting. Existing state-ofthe-art methods primarily focus on feature distances, such as k-th nearest neighbors
and distances to decision boundaries, either overlooking or ineffectively using indistribution statistics. In this work, we propose a novel angle-based metric for OOD
detection that is computed relative to the in-distribution structure. We demonstrate
that the angles between feature representations and decision boundaries, viewed
from the mean of in-distribution features, serve as an effective discriminative
factor between ID and OOD data. We evaluate our method on nine ImageNetpretrained models. Our approach achieves the lowest FPR in 5 out of 9 ImageNet
models, obtains the best average FPR overall, and consistently ranking among
the top 3 across all evaluated models. Furthermore, we highlight the benefits of
contrastive representations by showing strong performance with ResNet SCL and
CLIP architectures. Finally, we demonstrate that the scale-invariant nature of our
score enables an ensemble strategy via simple score summation. Code is available at
https://github.com/berkerdemirel/ORA-OOD-Detection-with-Relative-Angles.

1

Introduction

A trustworthy deep learning system should not only produce accurate predictions, but also recognize
when it is processing an unknown sample. The ability to identify when a sample deviates from the
expected distribution, and potentially rejecting it, plays a crucial role especially in safety-critical
applications, such as medical diagnosis [Fernando et al., 2021], driverless cars [Bogdoll et al., 2022]
and surveillance systems [Diehl and Hampshire, 2002]. The out-of-distribution (OOD) detection
problem addresses the challenge of distinguishing between in-distribution (ID) and OOD data –
essentially, drawing a line between what the system knows and what it does not.
Various approaches have been proposed for OOD detection, mainly falling into two categories:
(i) methods that suggest model regularization during training [Lee et al., 2018, Hendrycks et al.,
2019, Meinke and Hein, 2020, Liu and Qin, 2025, Ammar et al., 2024], and (ii) post-hoc methods,
which leverage a pre-trained model to determine if a sample is OOD by designing appropriate score
functions [Peng et al., 2024, Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2022, Sun et al., 2022]. Post-hoc methods are
more advantageous for their efficiency and flexibility, as they can be applied to arbitrary pre-trained
models without retraining. These approaches are often categorized based on the domain of their
score functions, i.e., at which representational abstraction level they assess if a sample is OOD or
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

