Perturb a Model, Not an Image:
Towards Robust Privacy Protection
via Anti-Personalized Diffusion Models
Tae-Young Lee1∗ Juwon Seo2∗ Jong Hwan Ko3† Gyeong-Moon Park1†
1

Korea University 2 Kyung Hee University 3 Sungkyunkwan University
tylee0415@korea.ac.kr jwseo001@khu.ac.kr
jhko@skku.edu gm-park@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advances in diffusion models have enabled high-quality synthesis of specific subjects, such as identities or objects. This capability, while unlocking new
possibilities in content creation, also introduces significant privacy risks, as personalization techniques can be misused by malicious users to generate unauthorized
content. Although several studies have attempted to counter this by generating
adversarially perturbed samples designed to disrupt personalization, they rely on
unrealistic assumptions and become ineffective in the presence of even a few clean
images or under simple image transformations. To address these challenges, we
shift the protection target from the images to the diffusion model itself to hinder
the personalization of specific subjects, through our novel framework called AntiPersonalized Diffusion Models (APDM). We first provide a theoretical analysis
demonstrating that a naive approach of existing loss functions to diffusion models
is inherently incapable of ensuring convergence for robust anti-personalization.
Motivated by this finding, we introduce Direct Protective Optimization (DPO), a
novel loss function that effectively disrupts subject personalization in the target
model without compromising generative quality. Moreover, we propose a new
dual-path optimization strategy, coined Learning to Protect (L2P). By alternating
between personalization and protection paths, L2P simulates future personalization trajectories and adaptively reinforces protection at each step. Experimental
results demonstrate that our framework outperforms existing methods, achieving
state-of-the-art performance in preventing unauthorized personalization. The code
is available at https://github.com/KU-VGI/APDM.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DM) [33, 11] have become prominent generative models across various domains
and tasks, including image, video, and audio synthesis [30, 8, 21], image-to-image translation [27],
and image editing [9]. Among these, personalization techniques [4, 31, 15, 19]—enabling the
generation of images depicting specific subjects (e.g. individuals, objects) in varied contexts, such as
“an image of my dog on the moon”—have received significant attention. Several approaches, such as
DreamBooth [31] and Custom Diffusion [15], have demonstrated highly effective capabilities for
personalized image generation. However, such personalization also presents substantial privacy risks,
as malicious users could exploit it to create unauthorized images of specific individuals, for instance,
to generate and distribute fake news, thereby raising significant social and ethical concerns [32].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

