GMM-based VAE model with Normalizing Flow for
effective stochastic segmentation

Conghui Li
School of IT
Monash University Malaysia
Bandar Sunway, Selangor, 47500, Malaysia
conghui.li@monash.edu

Chern Hong Lim∗
School of IT
Monash University Malaysia
Bandar Sunway, Selangor, 47500, Malaysia
Lim.ChernHong@monash.edu

Xin Wang∗
School of Engineering
Monash University Malaysia
Bandar Sunway, Selangor, 47500, Malaysia
Wang.Xin@monash.edu

Abstract
While deep neural networks possess the capability to perform semantic segmentation, producing a single deterministic output limits reliability in safety-critical applications caused by uncertainty and annotation variability. To address this, stochastic segmentation models using Conditional Variational Autoencoders (CVAE),
Bayesian networks, and diffusion have been explored. However, existing approaches suffer from limited latent expressiveness and interpretability. Furthermore,
our experiments showed that models like Probabilistic U-Net rely excessively on
high latent variance, leading to posterior collapse. This work propose a novel framework by integrating Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) with Normalizing Flow (NF)
in CVAE for stochastic segmentation. GMM structures the latent space into meaningful semantic clusters, while NF captures feature deformations with quantified
uncertainty. Our method stabilizes latent distributions through constrained variance
and mean ranges. Experiments on LIDC, Crack500, and Cityscapes datasets show
that our approach outperformed state-of-the-art in curvilinear structure and medical
image segmentation.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks have made remarkable progress in semantic segmentation
tasks. The main goal of most methods lies in generating a single segmentation result that is highly
consistent with the content of the image. However, this deterministic segmentation has limitations
in safety-critical areas such as medical diagnosis, industrial testing, or autonomous driving. This
is due to the images in such applications are often accompanied by inherent uncertainty, leading to
the presence of multiple reasonable yet contradictory manual annotations. [41, 28]. In this context,
providing a single deterministic segmentation result may not be able to fully express the possible
true semantic distribution of the image, thus limiting the reliability and practicability of the model in
these critical tasks.
Currently, many studies have proposed probabilistic approches for sampling from output distributions,
including models based on Conditional Variational Autoencoders (CVAE) [25, 24], Normalizing
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

