Beyond Value Functions: Single-Loop Bilevel
Optimization under Flatness Conditions

Liuyuan Jiang∗,⋄ , Quan Xiao†,⋄ , Lisha Chen∗ , Tianyi Chen†,⋄
⋄
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
∗
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY
†
Cornell Tech, Cornell University, New York, NY
ljiang24@ur.rochester.edu, qx232@cornell.edu
lisha.chen@rochester.edu, tianyi.chen@cornell.edu ∗

Abstract
Bilevel optimization, a hierarchical optimization paradigm, has gained significant
attention in a wide range of practical applications, notably in the fine-tuning of
generative models. However, due to the nested problem structure, most existing
algorithms require either the Hessian vector calculation or the nested loop updates,
which are computationally inefficient in large language model (LLM) fine-tuning.
In this paper, building upon the fully first-order penalty-based approach, we propose an efficient value function-free (PBGD-Free) algorithm that eliminates the
loop of solving the lower-level problem and admits fully single-loop updates. Inspired by the landscape analysis of representation learning-based LLM fine-tuning
problem, we propose a relaxed flatness condition for the upper-level function and
prove the convergence of the proposed value-function-free algorithm. We test the
performance of the proposed algorithm in various applications and demonstrate its
superior computational efficiency over the state-of-the-art bilevel methods.

1

Introduction

Bi-level optimization (BLO) has gained significant attention for its powerful modeling capabilities
in hierarchical learning across a wide range of real-world applications, such as distributed learning
[69, 28], meta learning [27, 12, 27], model pruning [111, 96], reinforcement learning [108, 84, 79, 85],
continual learning [8, 33], fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) [76, 68, 64, 56, 107] and
diffusion models [93, 17, 61]. In this paper, we consider the BLO problem with f : Rdx × Rdy → R
and g : Rdx × Rdy → R being the upper-level (UL) and lower-level (LL) objectives that are
continuously differentiable but not necessarily convex. Since the LL problem may contain multiple
solutions in Sg∗ (x), we consider the optimistic BLO formulation which selects the one y that minimizes
the UL objective, given by
min f (x, y) s.t. y ∈ Sg∗ (x) := arg min g(x, y).
x,y

y

(1)

In large-scale machine learning problems, efficiency is given a higher priority [110] and it is critical to
use gradient-based approaches to solve the above problem. One can perform a direct gradient descent
(GD) on the hyper-objective ϕ(x) := miny∈Sg∗ (x) f (x, y). A popular GD-based method is the implicit
gradient descent (IGD) method with second-order Hessian evaluation [29, 34, 39, 15, 42, 47, 82].
However, evaluating Hessian or its inverse in IGD is costly. To reduce the computational burden,
especially in large-scale problems, first-order gradient-based methods, including the penalty-based
BLO methods [105, 50, 77, 44, 45, 40, 57], have been developed. For example, penalizing the LL
∗
The work was supported by the National Science Foundation Projects 2401297, 2532349 and 2532653, and
by the Cisco Research Award.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

