How many measurements are enough? Bayesian
recovery in inverse problems with general distributions

Ben Adcock
Department of Mathematics
Simon Fraser University
Canada

Nick Huang
Department of Mathematics
Simon Fraser University
Canada

Abstract
We study the sample complexity of Bayesian recovery for solving inverse problems with general prior, forward operator and noise distributions. We consider
posterior sampling according to an approximate prior P, and establish sufficient
conditions for stable and accurate recovery with high probability. Our main result
is a non-asymptotic bound that shows that the sample complexity depends on (i)
the intrinsic complexity of P, quantified by its approximate covering number, and
(ii) concentration bounds for the forward operator and noise distributions. As a key
application, we specialize to generative priors, where P is the pushforward of a
latent distribution via a Deep Neural Network (DNN). We show that the sample
complexity scales log-linearly with the latent dimension k, thus establishing the
efficacy of DNN-based priors. Generalizing existing results on deterministic (i.e.,
non-Bayesian) recovery for the important problem of random sampling with an
orthogonal matrix U , we show how the sample complexity is determined by the coherence of U with respect to the support of P. Hence, we establish that coherence
plays a fundamental role in Bayesian recovery as well. Overall, our framework
unifies and extends prior work, providing rigorous guarantees for the sample
complexity of solving Bayesian inverse problems with arbitrary distributions.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems are of fundamental importance in science, engineering and industry. In a standard
setting, the aim is to recover an unknown vector (e.g., an signal or image) x∗ ∈ Rn from measurements
y = Ax∗ + e ∈ Rm .

(1.1)

Here e ∈ Rm is measurement noise and A ∈ Rm×n , often termed the measurement matrix, represents
the forwards operator. While simple, the discrete, linear problem (1.1) is sufficient to model many
important applications [5, 25, 64, 68]. It is common to solve (1.1) using a Bayesian approach (see,
e.g., [30, 71]), where one assumes that x∗ is drawn from some prior distribution R. However, in
practice, R is never known exactly. Especially in modern settings that employ Deep Learning
(DL) [12,33], it is typical to learn an approximate prior P and then recover x∗ from y by approximate
posterior sampling, i.e., sampling x̂ from the posterior P(·|y, A). An increasingly popular approach
involves using generative models to learn P (see, e.g., [12, 21, 33, 68, 70, 80] and references therein).
A major concern in many inverse problems is that the number of measurements m is highly limited,
due to physical constraints such as time (e.g., in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)), power (e.g.,
in portable sensors), money (e.g., seismic imaging), radiation exposure (e.g., X-Ray CT), or other
factors [5, 64, 68]. Hence, one aims to recover x∗ well while keeping the number of measurements m
as small as possible. With this in mind, in this work we address the following broad question: How
many measurements suffice for stable and accurate recovery of x∗ ∼ R via approximate posterior
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

