Inferring stochastic dynamics with growth from
cross-sectional data
Stephen Zhang:
School of Mathematics and Statistics,
University of Melbourne

Suryanarayana Maddu
Center for Computational Biology,
Flatiron Institute

Xiaojie Qiu
Department of Genetics,
Stanford University School of Medicine

Victor Chardès:
Center for Computational Biology,
Flatiron Institute

Abstract
Time-resolved single-cell omics data offers high-throughput, genome-wide measurements of cellular states, which are instrumental to reverse-engineer the processes underpinning cell fate. Such technologies are inherently destructive, allowing only cross-sectional measurements of the underlying stochastic dynamical system. Furthermore, cells may divide or die in addition to changing their
molecular state. Collectively these present a major challenge to inferring realistic biophysical models. We present a novel approach, unbalanced probability
ﬂow inference, that addresses this challenge for biological processes modelled as
stochastic dynamics with growth. By leveraging a Lagrangian formulation of the
Fokker-Planck equation, our method accurately disentangles drift from intrinsic
noise and growth. We showcase the applicability of our approach through evaluation on a range of simulated and real single-cell RNA-seq datasets. Comparing
to several existing methods, we ﬁnd our method achieves higher accuracy while
enjoying a simple two-step training scheme.

1

Introduction

Single-cell measurement technologies offer an unbiased, single-cell resolution view of the molecular
processes dictating cell fate. These methods predominantly rely on microﬂuidic devices to capture
and read molecules in individual cells, destroying the cell in the measurement process. Therefore the
state of any cell can be measured only at a single time. Experimental study of temporal biological
processes must therefore proceed by time-course studies, in which a time-series of population snapshots is obtained. At each time-point, a measurement is obtained from a distinct population of cells,
assumed to be identically prepared at the initial time. In practice these data can be obtained by serial
sampling from a larger population, or from biological replicates measured at different times [1, 2].
The challenge with time-resolved population snapshot data is that direct observation of dynamics in
terms of longitudinal information is lost, and must be reconstructed from static population proﬁles.
This motivates the inverse problem of reconstructing an underlying dynamical system which not only
interpolates the data, but also captures the key biophysical phenomenon at play in the regulation of
gene expression, notably intrinsic noise and cellular proliferation. On the other hand, ignoring these
aspects can result in incorrect identiﬁcation of regulatory mechanism [3, 4].
While the task of learning stochastic dynamics interpolating high-dimensional distributions is now
routinely solved in generative modelling tasks [5, 6], doing so while ensuring faithfulness to biophysically relevant features like intrinsic molecular noise as well as division and death remains a
:

Corresponding authors: syz@syz.id.au, vchardes@flatironinstitute.org.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

