Degradation-aware Dynamic Schrödinger Bridge for
Unpaired Image Restoration

Jingjun Yi1,2∗, Qi Bi3 , Hao Zheng4 , Huimin Huang4 , Yixian Shen3 , Haolan Zhan5 , Wei Ji6 ,
Yawen Huang1 , Yuexiang Li7 , Xian Wu4 , Yefeng Zheng1
1
Westlake University, China, 2 University of Alberta, Canada
3
University of Amsterdam, the Netherland, 4 Tencent Jarvis Lab, China
5
Monash University, Australia, 6 Yale University, the United States, 7 University of Macau, Macau
q.bi@ieee.org, howzheng@tencent.com, zhengyefeng@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Image restoration is a fundamental task in computer vision and machine learning,
which learns a mapping between the clear images and the degraded images under
various conditions (e.g., blur, low-light, haze). Yet, most existing image restoration
methods are highly restricted by the requirement of degraded and clear image pairs,
which limits the generalization and feasibility to enormous real-world scenarios
without paired images. To address this bottleneck, we propose a Degradation-aware
Dynamic Schrödinger Bridge (DDSB) for unpaired image restoration. Its general
idea is to learn a Schrödinger Bridge between clear and degraded image distribution,
while at the same time emphasizing the physical degradation priors to reduce the accumulation of errors during the restoration process. A Degradation-aware Optimal
Transport (DOT) learning scheme is accordingly devised. Training a degradation
model to learn the inverse restoration process is particularly challenging, as it
must be applicable across different stages of the iterative restoration process. A
Dynamic Transport with Consistency (DTC) learning objective is further proposed
to reduce the loss of image details in the early iterations and therefore refine the
degradation model. Extensive experiments on multiple image degradation tasks
show its state-of-the-art performance over the prior arts.

1

Introduction

Image restoration, encompassing tasks like denoising, deblurring, and dehazing, is one of the most
crucial yet fundamental challenges in computer vision [8, 28, 54]. A traditional paradigm is supervised
learning, where paired data of clear and degraded images are used to train models. However, acquiring
large-scale paired datasets in many real-world scenarios is often impractical due to the vast diversity
of degradation conditions and the absence of ground truth. Unpaired image restoration methods,
which learn mappings between unpaired degraded and clear image sets, have gained significant
attention in recent years as an alternative solution [30, 58, 47]. However, one of its key challenges
lies in the absence of explicit correspondences between the input and output images.
The realm of generative models, exemplified by the recent diffusion models [38, 17, 39, 40, 35, 4], has
achieved remarkable progress over the past few years. Compared with the prior arts (e.g., generative
adversarial networks [14], variational autoencoders [23]), these recent generative models are more
capable to generate diverse and high-quality samples [50], and have shown great success in image
restoration [7]. Unfortunately, diffusion models are still subject to a specific prior distribution, e.g.,
Gaussian, which prevents its full potential to various degradation conditions in image restoration.
∗

Jingjun Yi is affiliated with University of Alberta. This research was conducted when he was a research
intern at Westlake University.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

