BitMark: Watermarking Bitwise Autoregressive
Image Generative Models

Louis Kerner, Michel Meintz, Bihe Zhao, Franziska Boenisch, Adam Dziedzic
{louis.kerner, michel.meintz, bihe.zhao, boenisch, adam.dziedzic}@cispa.de
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract
State-of-the-art text-to-image models generate photorealistic images at an unprecedented speed. This work focuses on models that operate in a bitwise autoregressive
manner over a discrete set of tokens that is practically infinite in size. However,
their impressive generative power comes with a growing risk: as their outputs
increasingly populate the Internet, they are likely to be scraped and reused as
training data—potentially by the very same models. This phenomenon has been
shown to lead to model collapse, where repeated training on generated content,
especially from the models’ own previous versions, causes a gradual degradation
in performance. A promising mitigation strategy is watermarking, which embeds
human-imperceptible yet detectable signals into generated images—enabling the
identification of generated content. In this work, we introduce BitMark, a robust
bitwise watermarking framework. Our method embeds a watermark directly at
the bit level of the token stream during the image generation process. Our bitwise
watermark subtly influences the bits to preserve visual fidelity and generation speed
while remaining robust against a spectrum of removal techniques. Furthermore, it
exhibits high radioactivity, i.e., when watermarked generated images are used to
train another image generative model, this second model’s outputs will also carry
the watermark. The radioactive traces remain detectable even when only fine-tuning
diffusion or image autoregressive models on images watermarked with our BitMark.
Overall, our approach provides a principled step toward preventing model collapse
in image generative models by enabling reliable detection of generated outputs.
The code is available at https://github.com/sprintml/BitMark.

1

Introduction

The image generation capabilities of large scale models [8, 11, 37, 12, 23, 26] have improved
tremendously. These models can now generate at an unprecedented speed high-quality photorealistic
outputs, which are often indistinguishable from real images [11, 37]. Several models [11, 37] now
achieve state-of-the-art performance by operating in a bitwise autoregressive manner [35, 41]. This
provides them with a near infinite number of possible tokens, yielding high-resolution images. This
performance, however, comes at the expense of a training process that is highly time-, cost- and most
of all data-intensive [25, 29]. The required training data are often scraped from the Internet [13, 24,
32]. This practice carries risks: with the ever-growing amount of generated data on the internet, the
models get increasingly trained on generated data rather than natural data. The iterative training
of models on their own generated data has been shown to degrade performance [1, 33], which is
referred to as model collapse. The process also leads to encoding the current models’ mistakes, biases,
and unfairnesses into its future versions [40]. From the perspective of model owners, especially big
companies such as OpenAI, Google, or ByteDance, who invest in large scale proprietary models that
are exposed via public APIs, this poses a significant threat. To prevent the possible degradation of
model quality, it is crucial for them to identify their own generated content.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

