EVODiff: Entropy-aware Variance Optimized
Diffusion Inference
Shigui Li
School of Mathematics
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, China
sgl.shiguili@gmail.com

Wei Chen
School of Mathematics
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, China
maweichen@mail.scut.edu.cn

Delu Zeng ∗
School of Electronic and Information Engineering
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China;
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
dlzeng@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) excel in image generation but suffer from slow inference
and training-inference discrepancies. Although gradient-based solvers for DMs
accelerate denoising inference, they often lack theoretical foundations in information transmission efficiency. In this work, we introduce an information-theoretic
perspective on the inference processes of DMs, revealing that successful denoising
fundamentally reduces conditional entropy in reverse transitions. This principle
leads to our key insights into the inference processes: (1) data prediction parameterization outperforms its noise counterpart, and (2) optimizing conditional variance
offers a reference-free way to minimize both transition and reconstruction errors.
Based on these insights, we propose an entropy-aware variance optimized method
for the generative process of DMs, called EVODiff, which systematically reduces
uncertainty by optimizing conditional entropy during denoising. Extensive experiments on DMs validate our insights and demonstrate that our method significantly
and consistently outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) gradient-based solvers. For
example, compared to the DPM-Solver++, EVODiff reduces the reconstruction
error by up to 45.5% (FID improves from 5.10 to 2.78) at 10 function evaluations
(NFE) on CIFAR-10, cuts the NFE cost by 25% (from 20 to 15 NFE) for highquality samples on ImageNet-256, and improves text-to-image generation while
reducing artifacts. Code is available at https://github.com/ShiguiLi/EVODiff.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) [1–3] have emerged as powerful generative models, achieving success in
tasks such as image synthesis and editing [4, 5], text-to-image generation [6], voice synthesis [7],
and video generation [8]. DMs generate high-fidelity samples by simulating a denoising process that
iteratively refines noisy inputs through diffusion inference guided by a trained model. The model is
trained via a forward process that corrupts data with Gaussian noise across multiple scales.
Despite their impressive performance, DMs face the challenge of a slow refinement process and a
discrepancy between training and inference [2, 9, 10]. To address this, training-free inference methods
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

