Amortized Sampling with Transferable
Normalizing Flows

Charlie B. Tan∗ 1
Saifuddin Syed 1

Majdi Hassan∗ 2,3
Dominique Beaini 2,3,5

Alexander Tong† 2,3,6
1

University of Oxford

4

Leon Klein 4

2

Freie Universität Berlin

Michael M. Bronstein 1,6
Kirill Neklyudov† 2,3,7

Université de Montréal
5

Valence Labs

6

3

Mila - Quebec AI Institute

AITHYRA

7

Institut Courtois

Abstract
Efficient equilibrium sampling of molecular conformations remains a core challenge in computational chemistry and statistical inference. Classical approaches
such as molecular dynamics or Markov chain Monte Carlo inherently lack
amortization; the computational cost of sampling must be paid in full for each
system of interest. The widespread success of generative models has inspired
interest towards overcoming this limitation through learning sampling algorithms.
Despite performing competitively with conventional methods when trained on a
single system, learned samplers have so far demonstrated limited ability to transfer
across systems. We demonstrate that deep learning enables the design of scalable and transferable samplers by introducing P ROSE, a 285 million parameter
all-atom transferable normalizing flow trained on a corpus of peptide molecular
dynamics trajectories up to 8 residues in length. P ROSE draws zero-shot uncorrelated proposal samples for arbitrary peptide systems, achieving the previously
intractable transferability across sequence length, whilst retaining the efficient
likelihood evaluation of normalizing flows. Through extensive empirical evaluation
we demonstrate the efficacy of P ROSE as a proposal for a variety of sampling
algorithms, finding a simple importance sampling-based fine-tuning procedure to
achieve competitive performance to established methods such as sequential Monte
Carlo. We open-source the P ROSE codebase, model weights, and training dataset,
to further stimulate research into amortized sampling methods and objectives.

1

Introduction

Accurately sampling molecular configurations from the Boltzmann distribution is a fundamental
problem in statistical physics with profound implications for understanding biological and chemical
systems. Key applications include protein folding [Noé et al., 2009, Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2011],
protein–ligand binding [Buch et al., 2011], and crystal structure prediction [Köhler et al., 2023];
processes that underpin advances in drug discovery and material science.
∗
Equal contribution. † Equal advising.
Correspondence to: charlie.tan@exeter.ox.ac.uk and majdi.hassan@mila.quebec

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

