TAMI: Taming Heterogeneity in Temporal
Interactions for Temporal Graph Link Prediction

Zhongyi Yu1 , Jianqiu Wu1 , Zhenghao Wu2 , Shuhan Zhong3 ,
Weifeng Su1,5 , Chul-Ho Lee4 , Weipeng Zhuo1,5∗
1

Beijing Normal-Hong Kong Baptist University, 2 University College Dublin
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 4 Texas State University
5
Guangdong Provincial / Zhuhai Key Laboratory of IRADS, China
{zhongyiyu,jianqiuwu,wfsu,weipengzhuo}@bnbu.edu.cn,
zhenghao.wu@ucdconnect.ie, szhongaj@cse.ust.hk, chulho.lee@txstate.edu
3

Abstract
Temporal graph link prediction aims to predict future interactions between nodes
in a graph based on their historical interactions, which are encoded in node embeddings. We observe that heterogeneity naturally appears in temporal interactions,
e.g., a few node pairs can make most interaction events, and interaction events
happen at varying intervals. This leads to the problems of ineffective temporal
information encoding and forgetting of past interactions for a pair of nodes that
interact intermittently for their link prediction. Existing methods, however, do
not consider such heterogeneity in their learning process, and thus their learned
temporal node embeddings are less effective, especially when predicting the links
for infrequently interacting node pairs. To cope with the heterogeneity, we propose
a novel framework called TAMI, which contains two effective components, namely
log time encoding function (LTE) and link history aggregation (LHA). LTE better
encodes the temporal information through transforming interaction intervals into
more balanced ones, and LHA prevents the historical interactions for each target
node pair from being forgotten. State-of-the-art temporal graph neural networks can
be seamlessly and readily integrated into TAMI to improve their effectiveness. Experiment results on 13 classic datasets and three newest temporal graph benchmark
(TGB) datasets show that TAMI consistently improves the link prediction performance of the underlying models in both transductive and inductive settings. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Alleinx/TAMI_temporal_graph.

1

Introduction

Temporal link prediction is a fundamental task that forecasts future interactions between two nodes on
continuous-time temporal graphs (CTTGs). This is important in a variety of real-world scenarios with
dynamic graph topologies changing over time, such as social networks [24, 1], user-item interaction
systems [13, 41, 38, 40], traffic networks [35, 32, 37], and physical systems [23, 20]. The temporal
link prediction task involves two major steps. The first step is to compute the temporal embedding of
each node by aggregating information from its own historical interactions with neighboring nodes.
For each target node pair for link prediction, the second step is to take their embeddings into a link
predictor (typically an MLP) to estimate the probability of having a link between them.
Heterogeneity arises in temporal interactions. For example, the number of interactions for each
node pair varies substantially. The time between two consecutive interaction events can also be
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

