AdaMSS: Adaptive Multi-Subspace Approach for
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning

Jingjing Zheng1,2,3,6
jjzheng233@gmail.com

Wanglong Lu4
Wanglong.Lu@nasdaq.com

Chaojie Ji2,3,6
chaojiej@math.ubc.ca
1

Yiming Dong1
yimingdong_ml@outlook.com

Yankai Cao2,3,5,†
yankai.cao@ubc.ca

Zhouchen Lin1,7,8,†
zlin@pku.edu.cn

State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Institute of Applied Mathematics, The University of British Columbia
3
Centre for AI Decision-Making and Action, The University of British Columbia
4
AI Analytics Team, Nasdaq, St. John’s, NL, Canada
5
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The University of British Columbia
6
Department of Mathematics, The University of British Columbia
7
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
8
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

Abstract
In this paper, we propose AdaMSS, an adaptive multi-subspace approach for
parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large models. Unlike traditional parameterefficient fine-tuning methods that operate within a large single subspace of the
network weights, AdaMSS leverages subspace segmentation to obtain multiple
smaller subspaces and adaptively reduces the number of trainable parameters
during training, ultimately updating only those associated with a small subset of
subspaces most relevant to the target downstream task. By using the lowest-rank
representation, AdaMSS achieves more compact expressiveness and finer tuning of
the model parameters. Theoretical analyses demonstrate that AdaMSS has better
generalization guarantee than LoRA, PiSSA, and other single-subspace low-rankbased methods. Extensive experiments across image classification, natural language
understanding, and natural language generation tasks show that AdaMSS achieves
comparable performance to full fine-tuning and outperforms other parameterefficient fine-tuning methods in most cases, all while requiring fewer trainable
parameters. Notably, on the ViT-Large model, AdaMSS achieves 4.7% higher
average accuracy than LoRA across seven tasks, using just 15.4% of the trainable
parameters. On RoBERTa-Large, AdaMSS outperforms PiSSA by 7% in average
accuracy across six tasks while reducing the number of trainable parameters by
approximately 94.4%. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of AdaMSS
in parameter-efficient fine-tuning. The code for AdaMSS is available at https:
//github.com/jzheng20/AdaMSS.

1

Introduction

With the successful application of large pre-trained models in natural language processing and
computer vision, the parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods have gradually become key
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
†

Corresponding authors

