Incentivizing Time-Aware Fairness in Data Sharing

Jiangwei Chen1 2 Kieu Thao Nguyen Pham1 Rachael Hwee Ling Sim1
Arun Verma3 Zhaoxuan Wu3 Chuan-Sheng Foo2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology, Singapore
{chenj,nguyen.pkt,rachael.sim}@u.nus.edu
{arun.verma,zhaoxuan.wu}@smart.mit.edu
foo_chuan_sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In collaborative data sharing and machine learning, multiple parties aggregate their
data resources to train a machine learning model with better model performance.
However, as the parties incur data collection costs, they are only willing to do so
when guaranteed incentives, such as fairness and individual rationality. Existing
frameworks assume that all parties join the collaboration simultaneously, which
does not hold in many real-world scenarios. Due to the long processing time for
data cleaning, difficulty in overcoming legal barriers, or unawareness, the parties
may join the collaboration at different times. In this work, we propose the following
perspective: As a party who joins earlier incurs higher risk and encourages the
contribution from other wait-and-see parties, that party should receive a reward of
higher value for sharing data earlier. To this end, we propose a fair and time-aware
data sharing framework, including novel time-aware incentives. We develop new
methods for deciding reward values to satisfy these incentives. We further illustrate
how to generate model rewards that realize the reward values and empirically
demonstrate the properties of our methods on synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Collaborative machine learning (CML) presents an appealing paradigm where multiple parties can
aggregate their data to train a machine learning (ML) model with better model performance [49,
63]. This paradigm has been widely adopted in various real-world applications, including clinical
trials [8, 33, 17], data marketplaces [45, 18], precision agriculture [53, 34]. However, parties, who
incur non-trivial data collection and processing costs [22], may be unwilling to collaborate without
fair reward. For example, hospitals may be reluctant to share their data with academic institutions
due to the substantial investment required to conduct clinical trials and generate medical data [19].
To incentivize such parties to collaborate, existing frameworks [43, 49] have proposed two main
steps: In data valuation, a party is assigned a value for its shared data. In reward realization, a party
will receive money, synthetic data, or an ML model as a reward whose value satisfies incentives like
fairness and individual rationality adapted from cooperative game theory (CGT). These incentives
respectively entail that a party’s reward value should be higher than that of others sharing less valuable
data [54, 41] and higher than what it can achieve alone.
In this work, we consider how data valuation and reward realization should change if parties join
the data sharing process at different times due to the long processing time for data cleaning, delay in
overcoming legal barriers, or unawareness of the collaboration opportunities [33] (see App. A for
more justification and description of our setting). As a concrete example, hospitals sharing their data
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

