On the sample complexity of semi-supervised
multi-objective learning
Tobias Wegel1
2

Geelon So2

Junhyung Park1

Fanny Yang1

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San Diego

Abstract
In multi-objective learning (MOL), several possibly competing prediction tasks
must be solved jointly by a single model. Achieving good trade-offs may require a
model class G with larger capacity than what is necessary for solving the individual
tasks. This, in turn, increases the statistical cost, as reflected in known MOL bounds
that depend on the complexity of G. We show that this cost is unavoidable for some
losses, even in an idealized semi-supervised setting, where the learner has access
to the Bayes-optimal solutions for the individual tasks as well as the marginal
distributions over the covariates. On the other hand, for objectives defined with
Bregman losses, we prove that the complexity of G may come into play only in
terms of unlabeled data. Concretely, we establish sample complexity upper bounds,
showing precisely when and how unlabeled data can significantly alleviate the need
for labeled data. This is achieved by a simple pseudo-labeling algorithm.

1

Introduction

The multi-objective learning (MOL) paradigm has recently emerged to extend the classical problem
of risk minimization from statistical learning to settings with multiple notions of risk [32, 19, 59, 27].
Multi-objective learning problems are ubiquitous in practice, as it often matters how our models
behave with respect to multiple metrics and across different populations. For example, consider
designing a policy for a self-driving car: the risks could measure different notions of safety (e.g.,
safety of passengers or pedestrians), or safety under various conditions (e.g., different locations).
More formally, we study the MOL setting with K population risk functionals R1 , . . . , RK , each
quantifying an average, possibly different, loss ℓk incurred by a prediction model g over the data
distribution P k . The aim is to learn models from a class G that minimize all K excess risks
Ek (g) := Rk (g) − inf Rk jointly, using only finite-sample access to the distributions. Here, inf Rk
is the Bayes risk of the kth task, which is the smallest achievable risk over all measurable functions.
Specifically, we study the sample complexity of learning the set of Pareto optimal models in G. Recall
that a model is Pareto optimal in G if any alternative model in G that reduces one risk necessarily
increases another (see Definition 1); we often simply say that such a model makes an optimal trade-off.
Under mild conditions, the set of Pareto optimal models can be recovered by minimizing a family of
scalarized objectives Ts that we call the s-trade-offs:1

min Ts (g) := s E1 (g), . . . , EK (g) ,
s∈S
(1)
g∈G

the s-trade-off achieved by g

where the map s : RK → R is from some family S of scalarization functions that aggregates the
excess risks into a single statistic. Notice that if the excess risks were known, the problem in Eq. (1)
would reduce to a family of classical (multi-objective) optimization problems [44, 54, 38]. However,
because the objectives in Eq. (1) depend on distributional quantities that are unknown, we need to
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

