DuoGPT: Training-free Dual Sparsity through
Activation-aware Pruning in LLMs

Ruokai Yin, Yuhang Li, Donghyun Lee, Priyadarshini Panda
Yale University
ruokai.yin@yale.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) deliver strong performance but are difficult to
deploy due to high memory and compute costs. While pruning reduces these demands, most methods ignore activation sparsity observed at runtime. We reinterpret
activation sparsity as dynamic structured weight sparsity and propose DuoGPT, a
unified framework that constructs dual-sparse (spMspV) workloads by combining
unstructured weight pruning with activation sparsity. To preserve accuracy, we
extend the Optimal Brain Compression (OBC) framework with activation-aware
calibration and introduce output residuals from the dense model as correction terms.
We further optimize the solution for efficient GPU execution, enabling scalability
to billion-parameter LLMs. Evaluations on LLaMA-2 and LLaMA-3 show that
DuoGPT outperforms state-of-the-art structured pruning methods by up to 9.17%
accuracy at an iso-speedup of 1.39× compared to the baseline dense model. Code
is available at GitHub.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have made significant advances in performance across a range
of complex, real-world language tasks (Brown et al. 2020, Touvron et al. 2023). However, their
massive parameter counts present practical challenges for deploying these large pre-trained models
during inference. For example, deploying LLaMA-2-70B (Touvron et al. 2023), an open-source
pre-trained LLM with 70 billion parameters, typically requires 150 GB of GPU and CPU RAM,
along with 60 GFLOPs of computation to decode a single token. Consequently, there is widespread
interest in reducing both the storage and computational requirements of LLMs through techniques
collectively referred to as model compression. Existing model compression techniques for LLMs
include quantization (Frantar et al. 2022, Ashkboos et al. 2024b), tensor decomposition (Wang et al.
2024, Lin et al. 2024), and pruning (Frantar & Alistarh 2023, Ashkboos et al. 2024a). This work
focuses on pruning, specifically incorporating activation sparsity into the one-shot weight pruning
framework.
One-shot pruning methods selectively zero out the elements in the weight matrices of an LLM
during one forward pass, and optionally update the remaining non-zero weights to compensate
for the pruning error. Depending on the freedom in the zero patterns, the pruning can be further
categorized into unstructured pruning and structured pruning. In general, the following tradeoff
between the two categories has long stood: more structured sparsity yields more speedup1 , while more
unstructured sparsity is associated with better accuracy performance. In this work, we strike a balance
between the two by incorporating activation sparsity. We observe that during the decoding stage of
LLMs (i.e., General Matrix-Vector (GEMV) operations2 ), activation sparsity can be interpreted as
structured weight sparsity, as only weight rows corresponding to non-zero activations are involved
1
2

We focus on the speedup of running LLMs on general purpose architectures, e.g., GPUs.
We primarily focus on single-batch decoding in this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

