Fairness-Regularized Online Optimization with
Switching Costs

Pengfei Li
School of Information
Rochester Institute of Technology
pflics@rit.edu

Yuelin Han
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Riverside
yhan116@ucr.edu

Adam Wierman
Computing & Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
adamw@caltech.edu

Shaolei Ren
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Riverside
shaolei@ucr.edu

Abstract
Fairness and action smoothness are two crucial considerations in many online
optimization problems, but they have yet to be addressed simultaneously. In this
paper, we study a new and challenging setting of fairness-regularized smoothed
online convex optimization with switching costs. First, to highlight the fundamental challenges introduced by the long-term fairness regularizer evaluated based
on the entire sequence of actions, we prove that even without switching costs,
no online algorithms can possibly achieve a sublinear regret or finite competitive
ratio compared to the offline optimal algorithm as the problem episode length T
increases. Then, we propose FairOBD (Fairness-regularized Online Balanced Descent), which reconciles the tension between minimizing the hitting cost, switching
cost, and fairness cost. Concretely, FairOBD decomposes the long-term fairness
cost into a sequence of online costs by introducing an auxiliary variable and then
leverages the auxiliary variable to regularize the online actions for fair outcomes.
Based on a new approach to account for switching costs, we prove that FairOBD
offers a worst-case asymptotic competitive ratio against a novel benchmark—the
optimal offline algorithm with parameterized constraints— by considering T → ∞.
Finally, we run trace-driven experiments of dynamic computing resource provisioning for socially responsible AI inference to empirically evaluate FairOBD, showing
that FairOBD can effectively reduce the total fairness-regularized cost and better
promote fair outcomes compared to existing baseline solutions.

1

Introduction

Smoothed decision-making is critical to reducing abrupt and even potentially dangerous large action
changes in many online optimization problems, e.g., energy production scheduling in power grids,
object tracking, motion planning, and server capacity provisioning in data centers, among others
[47, 55, 2]. Mathematically, action smoothness can be effectively achieved by including into the
optimization objective a switching cost that penalizes temporal changes in actions. The added
switching cost essentially equips the online optimization objective with a (finite) memory of the
previous actions and also creates substantial algorithmic challenges. As such, it has received a huge
amount of attention in the last decade, with a quickly growing list of algorithms developed under
various settings (see [50, 3, 32, 45, 30, 55, 47, 13, 34, 11] and the references therein).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

