SDTagNet: Leveraging Text-Annotated Navigation
Maps for Online HD Map Construction

Fabian Immel1

Jan-Hendrik Pauls2 Richard Fehler1 Frank Bieder1
Jonas Merkert2 Christoph Stiller2
1
FZI Research Center for Information Technology 2 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
{immel, fehler, bieder}@fzi.de {jan-hendrik.pauls, stiller}@kit.edu

Abstract
Autonomous vehicles rely on detailed and accurate environmental information to
operate safely. High definition (HD) maps offer a promising solution, but their high
maintenance cost poses a significant barrier to scalable deployment. This challenge
is addressed by online HD map construction methods, which generate local HD
maps from live sensor data. However, these methods are inherently limited by
the short perception range of onboard sensors. To overcome this limitation and
improve general performance, recent approaches have explored the use of standard
definition (SD) maps as prior, which are significantly easier to maintain. We
propose SDTagNet, the first online HD map construction method that fully utilizes
the information of widely available SD maps, like OpenStreetMap, to enhance
far range detection accuracy. Our approach introduces two key innovations. First,
in contrast to previous work, we incorporate not only polyline SD map data with
manually selected classes, but additional semantic information in the form of
textual annotations. In this way, we enrich SD vector map tokens with NLP-derived
features, eliminating the dependency on predefined specifications or exhaustive
class taxonomies. Second, we introduce a point-level SD map encoder together
with orthogonal element identifiers to uniformly integrate all types of map elements.
Experiments on Argoverse 2 and nuScenes show that this boosts map perception
performance by up to +5.9 mAP (+45%) w.r.t. map construction without priors and
up to +3.2 mAP (+20%) w.r.t. previous approaches that already use SD map priors.
https://github.com/immel-f/SDTagNet

1

Introduction

Autonomous vehicles require a variety of information about their static environment to drive safely.
This information is usually provided in form of high definition (HD) maps that contain highly accurate
and detailed lane-level road geometry, traffic lights, road signs, traffic rules, etc. The extension of
self-driving fleets to larger and larger areas showed that the creation and maintenance of HD maps
requires a huge amount of computational and manual effort, hence, posing a major obstacle for
scalable autonomous driving. To overcome this issue, a variety of approaches have proposed to
construct or perceive HD maps online from onboard sensor data [13, 15, 16].
Online HD map construction has the downside of being limited by the range and coverage of onboard
sensors. A variety of prior information and representations can be used to mitigate this restriction
and improve performance especially in the long range and for occluded areas. These priors can
include data from previously visited scenes [26, 32, 23, 27] as well as data from existing prior
maps [24, 8, 9, 21, 28]. This prior map data is usually provided in the form of dense grids, sparse
vectorized graph representations, or both [31] with different levels of richness.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

