Injecting Frame-Event Complementary Fusion into
Diffusion for Optical Flow in Challenging Scenes

Haonan Wang1 , Hanyu Zhou2∗, Haoyue Liu1 , Luxin Yan1
National Key Lab of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{whn_aurora,yanluxin}@hust.edu.cn, hy.zhou@nus.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Optical ﬂow estimation has achieved promising results in conventional scenes
but faces challenges in high-speed and low-light scenes, which suffer from motion blur and insufﬁcient illumination. These conditions lead to weakened texture and ampliﬁed noise and deteriorate the appearance saturation and boundary
completeness of frame cameras, which are necessary for motion feature matching. In degraded scenes, the frame camera provides dense appearance saturation
but sparse boundary completeness due to its long imaging time and low dynamic
range. In contrast, the event camera offers sparse appearance saturation, while its
short imaging time and high dynamic range gives rise to dense boundary completeness. Traditionally, existing methods utilize feature fusion or domain adaptation
to introduce event to improve boundary completeness. However, the appearance
features are still deteriorated, which severely affects the mostly adopted discriminative models that learn the mapping from visual features to motion ﬁelds and generative models that generate motion ﬁelds based on given visual features. So we
introduce diffusion models that learn the mapping from noising ﬂow to clear ﬂow,
which is not affected by the deteriorated visual features. Therefore, we propose
a novel optical ﬂow estimation framework Diff-ABFlow based on diffusion models with frame-event appearance-boundary fusion. Inspired by the appearanceboundary complementarity of frame and event, we propose an Attention-Guided
Appearance-Boundary Fusion module to fuse frame and event. Based on diffusion models, we propose a Multi-Condition Iterative Denoising Decoder. Our
proposed method can effectively utilize the respective advantages of frame and
event, and shows great robustness to degraded input. In addition, we propose a
dual-modal optical ﬂow dataset for generalization experiments. Extensive experiments have veriﬁed the superiority of our proposed method. The code is released
at https://github.com/Haonan-Wang-aurora/Diff-ABFlow.

1

Introduction

Optical ﬂow estimation is a visual task that models pixel-wise displacements between adjacent
frames. Existing methods [11, 17, 28] focus on conventional scenes, while challenging degraded
scenes such as high-speed and low-light scenes remain to be further explored. The motion blur
of high-speed scenes and the insufﬁcient illumination of low-light scenes both lead to weakened
texture and ampliﬁed noise. These degradations severely deteriorate visual features and violate the
photometric consistency assumption, which further brings about invalid motion feature matching.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

