Scalable Neural Network Geometric Robustness
Validation via Hölder Optimisation

Yanghao Zhang1,2

Panagiotis Kouvaros1 Alessio Lomuscio1,2
1
Safe Intelligence, UK
2
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
{yanghao, panagiotis, alessio}@safeintelligence.ai

Abstract
Neural Network (NN) verification methods provide local robustness guarantees
for a NN in the dense perturbation space of an input. In this paper we introduce
H2 V, a method for the validation of local robustness of NNs against geometric
perturbations. H2 V uniquely employs a Hilbert space-filling construction to recast
multi-dimensional problems into single-dimensional ones and Hölder optimisation, iteratively refining the estimation of the Hölder constant for constructing
the lower bound. In common with current methods, Hölder optimisation might
theoretically converge to a local minimum, thereby resulting in a robustness result
being incorrect. However, we here identify conditions for H2 V to be provably
sound, and show experimentally that even outside the soundness conditions, the
risk of incorrect results can be minimised by introducing appropriate heuristics in
the global optimisation procedure. Indeed, we found no incorrect results validated
by H2 V on a large set of benchmarks from SoundnessBench and VNN-COMP.
To assess the scalability of the approach, we report the results obtained on large
NNs ranging from Resnet34 to Resnet152 and vision transformers. These point to
state-of-the-art scalability of the approach when validating the local robustness of
large NNs against geometric perturbations on the ImageNet dataset. Beyond image
tasks, we show that the method’s scalability enables for the first time the robustness
validation of large-scale 3D-NNs in video classification tasks against geometric
perturbations for long-sequence input frames on Kinetics/UCF101 datasets.

1

Introduction

As well known, Neural Networks (NNs) are inherently vulnerable to adversarial perturbations [1],
i.e., their output is susceptible to fragilities, or attacks, in the neighbourhood of correctly processed
inputs. In the context of machine vision models, input perturbations generating such fragilities can
take various forms including noise, geometric changes, and illumination variations. Evaluating the
robustness of a model, i.e., its resistance to such small input changes, is particularly important in
safety-critical applications.
The area of robustness verification [2] consists of methods providing formal guarantees that a model
is locally robust in regions of the input space defined by a test point and a particular perturbation.
With the exceptions discussed in the Related Work (Section 5), methods for the verification of local
robustness are often theoretically sound (if a method reports that the model is either locally robust or
not robust in a region, then that is guaranteed to be the case), and often complete (given unlimited
time and resources a method can always resolve the local robustness query).
A well-known difficulty of sound and complete verification methods is their scalability: the robustness
verification problem is theoretically NP-hard [3] and present State-of-the-Art (SoA) methods often
fail to scale to large models, large inputs, or large perturbations [4], thereby hindering the application
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

