BrainMoE: Cognition Joint Embedding via
Mixture-of-Expert Towards Robust Brain Foundation
Model
Tingting Dan
Tianlong Chen
Guorong Wu˚
Departments of Computer Science and Psychiatry
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
{ziquanw,tianlong}@cs.unc.edu;{Tingting_Dan,grwu}@med.unc.edu

Ziquan Wei

Abstract
Given the large scale of public functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI),
e.g., UK Biobank (UKB) and Human Connectome Projects (HCP), brain foundation
models are emerging. Although the amount of samples under rich environmental
variables is unprecedented, existing brain foundation models learn from fMRI
derived from a narrow range of cognitive states stimulated by similar environments,
causing the limited robustness demonstrated in various applications and datasets
acquired with different pipelines and limited sample size. By capitalizing on the
variety of cognitive status as subjects performing explicit tasks, we present the
mixture of brain experts, namely BrainMoE, pre-training on tasking fMRI with rich
behavioral tasks in addition to resting fMRI for a robust brain foundation model.
Brain experts are designed to produce embeddings for different behavioral tasks related to cognition. Afterward, these cognition embeddings are mixed by a cognition
adapter via cross-attention so that BrainMoE can handle orthogonal embeddings
and be robust on those boutique downstream datasets. We have pre-trained two
existing self-regressive architectures and one new supervised architecture as brain
experts on 68,251 fMRI scans among UKB and HCP, containing 12 different cognitive states. Then, BrainMoE is evaluated on a variety of applications, including
sex, age prediction, human behavior recognition, disease early diagnosis of Autism,
Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, and Schizophrenia, and fMRI-EEG multimodal applications, where promising results in eight datasets from three different
pipelines indicate great potential to facilitate current neuroimaging applications in
clinical routines.

1

Introduction

Like foundation models for other topics, brain foundation models aim to learn feature representation
fundamentally from large-scale data of neuroimaging. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI) of the brain, as it offers insight into the relationship between functional fluctuations and
human behavior [1], is critical to discovering the enigma of human cognition and promoting clinical
applications. Blood-Oxygen-Level Dependent (BOLD) signal in fMRI measures neuronal activity.
Such raw signals are preprocessed as timeseries of regional mean or the functional connectivity
(FC) by coefficient correlation for analysis with high Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) [6]. While the
exploration of brain foundation model has expanded to various masking strategies for either (latent)
BOLD or FC reconstruction [23, 11, 34], previous works formulating this problem as transferring
˚

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

