Generative diffusion for perceptron problems:
statistical physics analysis and efficient algorithms
Davide Straziota∗
Department of Computing Sciences
Bocconi University, Milan, Italy

Elizaveta Demyanenko∗
Department of Computing Sciences
Bocconi University, Milan, Italy

Carlo Baldassi†
Department of Computing Sciences, BIDSA
Bocconi University, Milan, Italy

Carlo Lucibello‡
Department of Computing Sciences, BIDSA
Bocconi University, Milan, Italy

Abstract
We consider random instances of non-convex perceptron problems in the highdimensional limit of a large number of examples M and weights N , with finite
load α = M /N . We develop a formalism based on replica theory to predict the
fundamental limits of efficiently sampling the solution space using generative diffusion algorithms, conjectured to be saturated when the score function is provided by
Approximate Message Passing. For the spherical perceptron with negative margin
κ, we find that the uniform distribution over solutions can be efficiently sampled
in most of the Replica Symmetric region of the α–κ plane. In contrast, for binary
weights, sampling from the uniform distribution remains intractable. A theoretical
analysis of this obstruction leads us to identify a potential U (s) = − log(s), under
which the corresponding tilted distribution becomes efficiently samplable via diffusion. Moreover, we show numerically that an annealing procedure over the shape
of this potential yields a fast and robust Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm for
sampling the solution space of the binary perceptron.

1

Introduction

A fundamental challenge in modern machine learning is the ability to efficiently sample from complex
probability distributions. This problem is central to many areas, from generative modeling, where
methods such as variational autoencoders and autoregressive transformers aim to approximate realworld data distributions, to Bayesian inference, where the goal is to explore posterior distributions
over model parameters.
Diffusion models [Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015, Ho et al., 2020] have recently emerged as a prominent
class of generative models, capable of capturing very complex distributions across various domains,
with high sample efficiency. These models simulate a stochastic diffusion process in reverse, starting
from a simple distribution and arriving at a complex target distribution p(w) via a stochastic
differential equation, a process called denoising (the corresponding noising process being the forward
diffusion process). All dependence on p(w) is encoded in a drift term determined by a time-dependent
score function. In many applications, p(w) is not explicitly known, but samples from it are available.
A neural approximation to the score function driving the generative process is then learned using the
denoising score matching objective [Vincent, 2011].
∗

equal contributions
carlo.baldassi@unibocconi.it
‡
carlo.lucibello@unibocconi.it
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

