Efficiently Verifiable Proofs of Data Attribution

Ari Karchmer∗

Martin Pawelczyk†

Seth Neel‡

Abstract
Data attribution methods aim to answer useful counterfactual questions like "what
would a ML model’s prediction be if it were trained on a different dataset?” However, estimation of data attribution models through techniques like empirical influence or “datamodeling” remains very computationally expensive. This causes
a critical trust issue: if only a few computationally rich parties can obtain data
attributions, how can resource-constrained parties trust that the provided attributions are indeed “good,” especially when they are used for important downstream
applications (e.g., data pricing)? In this paper, we address this trust issue by
proposing an interactive verification paradigm for data attribution. An untrusted
and computationally powerful Prover learns data attributions, and then engages
in an interactive proof with a resource-constrained Verifier. Our main result is a
protocol that provides formal completeness, soundness, and efficiency guarantees
in the sense of Probably-Approximately-Correct (PAC) verification (Goldwasser
et al., 2021). Specifically, if both Prover and Verifier follow the protocol, the
Verifier accepts data attributions that are ε-close to the optimal data attributions
(in terms of the Mean Squared Error) with probability 1 − δ. Conversely, if the
Prover arbitrarily deviates from the protocol, even with infinite compute, then this
is detected (or it still yields data attributions to the Verifier) except with probability
δ. Importantly, our protocol ensures the Verifier’s workload, measured by the
number of independent model retrainings it must perform, scales only as O(1/ε2 );
i.e., independently of the dataset size. At a technical level, our results apply to
efficiently verifying any linear function over the boolean hypercube computed by
the Prover, making them broadly applicable to various attribution tasks.

1

Introduction

The attempt to understand and explain the behavior of complex machine learning systems has given
rise to the field of attribution. Broadly, attribution methods seek to trace model outputs or behaviors
back to their origins. This takes several forms. One prominent form is training data attribution,
which aims to quantify the influence of individual training examples on model predictions, facilitating
interpretability, debugging, and data valuation (e.g., Koh and Liang, 2017; Ghorbani and Zou, 2019;
Ilyas et al., 2022). Complementary to this, component attribution (Shah et al., 2024) focuses on
decomposing a model’s prediction in terms of its internal components, such as convolutional filters or
attention heads, to understand how they combine to shape model behavior.
While many applications of attribution may be of interest to the model developers, others are inherently
of interest to third parties who may not have access to the internal details of how the attributions
were computed. For instance, consider a framework where entities that supply data for training are
compensated in proportion to the degree their training data influences model outputs, an idea which
∗

Morgan Stanley Machine Learning Research, Harvard Business School, akarchmer0@gmail.com
Harvard Business School, martin.pawelczyk.1@gmail.com
‡
Google Research, Harvard Business School, sethneel@google.com

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

