The Atlas of In-Context Learning: How Attention
Heads Shape In-Context Retrieval Augmentation
∗

Patrick Kahardipraja1,

Reduan Achtibat1,
†

Wojciech Samek1,2,3,

∗

Thomas Wiegand1,2,3

Sebastian Lapuschkin1,4,

†

1

2

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Technische Universität Berlin
3
BIFOLD - Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data
4
Centre of eXplainable Artificial Intelligence, Technological University Dublin
{firstname.lastname}@hhi.fraunhofer.de

Abstract
Large language models are able to exploit in-context learning to access external knowledge beyond their training data through retrieval-augmentation. While
promising, its inner workings remain unclear. In this work, we shed light on the
mechanism of in-context retrieval augmentation for question answering by viewing
a prompt as a composition of informational components. We propose an attributionbased method to identify specialized attention heads, revealing in-context heads
that comprehend instructions and retrieve relevant contextual information, and
parametric heads that store entities’ relational knowledge. To better understand
their roles, we extract function vectors and modify their attention weights to show
how they can influence the answer generation process. Finally, we leverage the
gained insights to trace the sources of knowledge used during inference, paving the
way towards more safe and transparent language models.

1

Introduction

Many, if not most language tasks can be framed as a sequence to sequence problem [61, 69]. This view
is integral to how modern Large Language Models (LLMs) operate, as they are able to approximate
relations between an input and an output sequence not only as a continuation of text, but also as a
response to a stimulus [64]. In a sense, input prompts serve as a query to search and induce function(s)
in a vast, high-dimensional latent space, where the corresponding process can be cast as question
answering [50] or instruction following [56, 80].
This capability is brought forth with the introduction of in-context learning (ICL) [12] that enables
LLMs to adapt to new tasks with few demonstrations at inference time, without additional fine-tuning.
Previous work has investigated ICL from various perspectives, including its relation to induction
heads that can replicate token patterns during prediction [54], the ability to compress attention
heads to function vectors (FVs) representing a specific task [31, 74], and how it can emerge when
transformers [75] implicitly learn to perform gradient-based optimization [4, 77]. Besides metalearning, ICL can be used for retrieval-augmentation [62], where external knowledge from web
retrieval corpora [11, 29, 33] or dialogue information [66, 88, 92] is given instead of input-output
pairs to ground LLMs during generation. However, the mechanism behind ICL for knowledge
retrieval is not yet fully understood. In this work, we aim to shed light on this question.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

