ZeCO: Zero Communication Overhead Sequence
Parallelism for Linear Attention
Yuhong Chou1∗, Zehao Liu1∗ , Ruijie Zhu3 , Xinyi Wan4 , Tianjian Li2 ,
Congying Chu5 , Qian Liu2†, Jibin Wu1† , Zejun Ma2
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
TikTok
3
UC Santa Cruz
4
National University of Singapore
5
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Linear attention mechanisms deliver significant advantages for Large Language
Models (LLMs) by providing linear computational complexity, enabling efficient
processing of ultra-long sequences (e.g., 1M context). However, existing Sequence
Parallelism (SP) methods, essential for distributing these workloads across devices,
become the primary bottleneck due to substantial communication overhead. In
this paper, we introduce ZeCO (Zero Communication Overhead) sequence parallelism for linear attention models, a new SP method designed to overcome these
limitations and achieve end-to-end near-linear scalability for long sequence training. For example, training a model with a 1M sequence length across 64 devices
using ZeCO takes roughly the same time as training with an 16k sequence on a
single device. At the heart of ZeCO lies All-Scan, a new collective communication
primitive. All-Scan provides each SP rank with precisely the initial operator state
it requires while maintaining a minimal communication footprint, effectively eliminating communication overhead. Theoretically, we prove the optimaity of ZeCO,
showing that it introduces only negligible time and space overhead. Empirically,
we compare the communication costs of different sequence parallelism strategies
and demonstrate that All-Scan achieves the fastest communication in SP scenarios.
Specifically, on 256 devices with an 8M sequence length, ZeCO achieves a 60%
speedup compared to the current state-of-the-art (SOTA) SP method. We believe
ZeCO establishes a clear path toward efficiently training next-generation LLMs on
previously intractable sequence lengths.

1

Introduction

Long-context capabilities are becoming increasingly critical for Large Language Models (LLMs),
powering advancements in document-level reasoning, multimodal understanding, and retrievalaugmented generation where extensive context is paramount [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. The trajectory from
models like GPT-3.5 (4K context) [7] to Gemini 1.5 Pro [8] (1M context) highlights this trend.
However, pre-training models on such vast sequence lengths presents significant computational and
communication challenges. Standard self-attention mechanisms exhibit quadratic complexity (O(L2 ))
with respect to sequence length L. Scaling from 4k to 128k tokens, for instance, inflates the attention
FLOPs by over 1000×. The prohibitive computational cost of training on ultra-long sequences
restricts the long-context pretraining to a specialized adaptation phase (i.e., mid-training) [9], rather
than allowing for extensive training with long sequences from scratch [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15].
∗
†

Equal contribution. Emails: yuhong.chou@connect.polyu.hk; zehaoliu@polyu.edu.hk.
Corresponding authors: qian.liu@tiktok.com; jibin.wu@polyu.edu.hk.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

