Learning from Interval Targets

Rattana Pukdee ∗
Carnegie Mellon University
rpukdee@cs.cmu.edu

Ziqi Ke
Bloomberg
zke7@bloomberg.net

Chirag Gupta
Bloomberg
cgupta61@bloomberg.net

Abstract
We study the problem of regression with interval targets, where only upper and
lower bounds on target values are available in the form of intervals. This problem
arises when the exact target label is expensive or impossible to obtain, due to
inherent uncertainties. In the absence of exact targets, traditional regression loss
functions cannot be used. First, we study the methodology of using a loss function
compatible with interval targets, for which we establish non-asymptotic generalization bounds based on smoothness of the hypothesis class that significantly
relax prior assumptions. Second, we propose a novel minmax learning formulation:
minimize against the worst-case (maximized) target labels within the provided
intervals. The maximization problem in the latter is non-convex, but we show
that good performance can be achieved by incorporating smoothness constraints.
Finally, we perform extensive experiments on real-world datasets and show that
our methods achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning has achieved significant empirical success, largely due to the availability of
extensive labeled datasets. However, in many real-world tasks, obtaining target labels is challenging,
which hampers the performance of these methods. This difficulty arises either from high labeling
costs—for example, certain medical measurements are expensive—or from practical limitations, such
as sensors that only record target values at discrete intervals (e.g., every hour), leaving intermediate
values unobserved. Prior work has addressed this issue by incorporating additional information into
the learning pipeline. For instance, some approaches encourage model outputs to be smooth over
unlabeled data [Zhu, 2005, Chapelle et al.], while others enforce models to satisfy constraints derived
from domain knowledge, such as physical laws [Willard et al., 2020, Swischuk et al., 2019].
In this work, we focus on regression tasks where only the lower and upper bounds of the target
values (intervals) are available. Our setting relates to both weak supervision and learning with side
information. Learning with interval targets generalizes supervised learning, which corresponds to
the special case where the lower and upper bounds are equal. On the other hand, for many tasks, it
is easier and more practical for human labelers to provide interval targets instead of precise single
values; thus, these intervals can be viewed as a form of weak supervision. Additionally, in various
settings, such intervals are readily available for unlabeled data, either from domain knowledge or
inherent properties of the data, serving as side information e.g., in bond pricing.
A natural strategy for learning from interval targets is to learn a hypothesis whose outputs always lie
within the provided intervals. Despite its simplicity, previous work [Cheng et al., 2023a] has shown
that this method leads to a hypothesis that converges to the optimal one under two assumptions: (i)
the true target function belongs to the hypothesis class, and (ii) the intervals have an ambiguity degree
∗

This work was conducted during an internship at Bloomberg.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

