Scaling up Test-Time Compute with Latent Reasoning:
A Recurrent Depth Approach

Jonas Geiping1∗ Sean McLeish2 Neel Jain2
Brian R. Bartoldson3 Bhavya Kailkhura3
1

John Kirchenbauer2 Siddharth Singh2
Abhinav Bhatele2 Tom Goldstein2†

ELLIS Institute Tübingen, Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen AI Center
2
University of Maryland, College Park 3 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
∗
jonas@tue.ellis.eu †tomg@umd.edu

Abstract
We study a novel language model architecture that is capable of scaling test-time
computation by implicitly reasoning in latent space. Our model works by iterating
a recurrent block, thereby unrolling to arbitrary depth at test-time. This stands
in contrast to mainstream reasoning models that scale up compute by producing
more tokens. Unlike approaches based on chain-of-thought, our approach does not
require any specialized training data, can work with small context windows, and
can capture types of reasoning that are not easily represented in words. We train
a proof-of-concept model from scratch with 3.5 billion parameters and 800 billion
tokens. We show that this model can effortlessly use varying levels of compute,
significantly improving with additional compute especially on reasoning tasks, such
as math and coding. Further, this architecture naturally reduces compute costs via
zero-shot per-token adaptive compute, KV-cache sharing and speculative decoding.

1

Scaling by Thinking in Continuous Space

Humans naturally expend more mental effort solving some problems than others. While humans
are capable of thinking over long time spans by verbalizing intermediate results and writing them
down, a substantial amount of thought happens through complex, recurrent firing patterns in the brain,
before the first word of an answer is uttered.
Early attempts at increasing the power of language models focused on scaling model size, a practice
that requires extreme amounts of data and computation. More recently, researchers have explored
ways to enhance the reasoning capability of models by scaling test time computation. The mainstream
approach involves post-training on long chain-of-thought examples to develop the model’s ability to
verbalize intermediate calculations in its context window and thereby externalize thoughts.
However, the constraint that expensive internal reasoning must always be projected down to a single
verbalized next token appears wasteful; it is plausible that models could be more competent if they
were able to natively “think” in their continuous latent space. One way to unlock this untapped
dimension of additional compute involves adding a recurrent unit to a model. This unit runs in a
loop, iteratively processing and updating its hidden state and enabling computations to be carried on
indefinitely. While this is not currently the dominant paradigm, this idea is foundational to machine
learning and has been (re-)discovered in every decade, for example as recurrent neural networks,
diffusion models, feature recycling, and as universal or looped transformers.
In this work, we show that depth-recurrent language models can learn effectively, be trained in
an efficient manner, and demonstrate significant performance improvements under the scaling of
test-time compute. Our proposed transformer architecture is built upon a latent depth-recurrent
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

