BIPNN: Learning to Solve Binary Integer
Programming via Hypergraph Neural Networks

Sen Bai∗
baisen@cust.edu.cn

Chunqi Yang∗
yangchunqi@mails.cust.edu.cn

Xin Zhang∗
zhangxin@cust.edu.cn

Xin Bai† ‡
baixinbs@163.com

Zhengang Jiang∗
jiangzhengang@cust.edu.cn

Abstract
Binary (0-1) integer programming (BIP) is pivotal in scientific domains requiring
discrete decision-making. As the advance of AI computing, recent works explore
neural network-based solvers for integer linear programming (ILP) problems. Yet,
they lack scalability for tackling nonlinear challenges. To handle nonlinearities,
state-of-the-art Branch-and-Cut solvers employ linear relaxations, leading to exponential growth in auxiliary variables and severe computation limitations. To
overcome these limitations, we propose BIPNN (Binary Integer Programming
Neural Network), an unsupervised learning framework to solve nonlinear BIP
problems via hypergraph neural networks (HyperGNN). Specifically, (I) BIPNN
reformulates BIPs-constrained, discrete, and nonlinear (sin, log, exp) optimization
problems-into unconstrained, differentiable, and polynomial loss functions. The
reformulation stems from the observation of a precise one-to-one mapping between
polynomial BIP objectives and hypergraph structures, enabling the unsupervised
training of HyperGNN to optimize BIP problems in an end-to-end manner. On
this basis, (II) we propose a GPU-accelerated and continuous-annealing-enhanced
training pipeline for BIPNN. The pipeline enables BIPNN to optimize large-scale
nonlinear terms in BIPs fully in parallel via straightforward gradient descent, thus
significantly reducing the training cost while ensuring the generation of discrete,
high-quality solutions. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets
highlight the superiority of our approach.

1

Introduction

For decades, binary integer programming (BIP)—a powerful mathematical tool characterized by
discrete binary decision variables (0 or 1)—is of critical importance in numerous domains, such
as operational optimization [1, 2, 3], quantum computing [4, 5, 6], computational biology [7, 8],
materials science and computational chemistry [9, 10]. However, BIP is generally known to be
NP-complete [11], making large-scale BIP instances computationally intractable.
Along with AI computing shines in scientific discovery, the potential of neural network-based
IP solvers has emerged in recent years. To address integer linear programming (ILP) problems,
MIP-GNN [12] leverages graph neural networks (GNN) to improve the performance. Another
GNN&GBDT-guided framework [13] for large-scale ILP problems can save up 99% of running time
∗

School of Computer Science and Technology, Changchun University of Science and Technology.
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd.
‡
Corresponding author
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

