Online Optimization for Offline Safe
Reinforcement Learning

Yassine Chemingui
Washington State University
yassine.chemingui@wsu.edu

Aryan Deshwal
University of Minnesota
adeshwal@umn.edu

Thanh Nguyen-Tang
New Jersey Institute of Technology
thanh.nguyen@njit.edu

Alan Fern
Oregon State University
alan.fern@oregonstate.edu

Janardhan Rao Doppa
Washington State University
jana.doppa@wsu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of Offline Safe Reinforcement Learning (OSRL), where the
goal is to learn a reward-maximizing policy from fixed data under a cumulative
cost constraint. We propose a novel OSRL approach that frames the problem as a
minimax objective and solves it by combining offline RL with online optimization
algorithms. We prove the approximate optimality of this approach when integrated
with an approximate offline RL oracle and no-regret online optimization. We
also present a practical approximation that can be combined with any offline RL
algorithm, eliminating the need for offline policy evaluation. Empirical results
on the DSRL benchmark demonstrate that our method reliably enforces safety
constraints under stringent cost budgets, while achieving high rewards. The code is
available at https://github.com/yassineCh/O3SRL.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) [Levine et al., 2020] is a powerful paradigm to learn decisionmaking policies from logged datasets without the need for additional interaction with the environment.
Offline RL has shown good success in domains including autonomous driving, robotics, control
systems, and black-box optimization [Fang et al., 2022, Lin et al., 2024, Li et al., 2024, Zhan et al.,
2022, Chemingui et al., 2024] where executing exploratory actions is not practical. However, in
safety-critical domains such as healthcare and smart grid, the decision-making agent needs to also
satisfy some cost/safety constraints. Such problems are studied under the sub-area referred to as
offline safe RL (OSRL) where the goal is to learn reward-maximizing policies which satisfy cost
constraints from offline datasets [Wachi et al., 2024].
OSRL inherits the challenges from both offline RL and safe RL [Wachi et al., 2024]. First, handling
distributional shift when the learned policy encounters states and actions not seen in the offline dataset.
Prior work in offline RL addresses this challenge by some form of penalization to realize the general
principle of pessimism in the face of uncertainty [Levine et al., 2020]. Second, ensuring that the
learned policy meets the cost/safety constraints after deployment. Maintaining the cost constraints
typically requires off-policy evaluation (OPE) procedures which are highly unstable and typically
have estimation errors [Figueiredo Prudencio et al., 2024]. OSRL is an active research topic and is
relatively less-studied than offline RL. Constrained policy optimization using Lagrangian relaxation
[Polosky et al., 2022, Lee et al., 2022, Xu et al., 2022b] is a popular approach for OSRL, but due
to the need to solve intertwined optimization problems they are unstable in practice, and are shown
to have bad performance either causing oscillation/divergence or learning overly conservative (near
zero-reward) policies. Additionally, OSRL problem with stringent safety constraints (i.e., small cost
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

