Gaussian Process Upper Confidence Bound Achieves
Nearly-Optimal Regret
in Noise-Free Gaussian Process Bandits
Shogo Iwazaki
LY Corporation
Tokyo, Japan
siwazaki@lycorp.co.jp

Abstract
We study the noise-free Gaussian Process (GP) bandit problem, in which a learner
seeks to minimize regret through noise-free observations of a black-box objective function that lies in a known reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). The
Gaussian Process Upper Confidence Bound (GP-UCB) algorithm is a well-known
approach for GP bandits, where query points are adaptively selected based on
the GP-based upper confidence bound score. While several existing works have
reported the practical success of GP-UCB, its theoretical performance remains suboptimal. However, GP-UCB often empirically outperforms other nearly-optimal
noise-free algorithms that use non-adaptive sampling schemes. This paper resolves the gap between theoretical and empirical performance by establishing a
nearly-optimal regret upper bound for noise-free GP-UCB. Specifically, our analysis provides the first constant cumulative regret bounds in the noise-free setting
for both the squared exponential kernel and the Matérn kernel with some degree
of smoothness.

1

Introduction

This paper studies the noise-free Gaussian Process (GP) bandit problem, where the learner seeks
to minimize regret through noise-free observations of the black-box objective function. Several
existing works tackle this problem, and some of them [Iwazaki and Takeno, 2025a, Salgia et al.,
2024] propose algorithms whose regret nearly matches the lower bound of [Li and Scarlett, 2024]. For
ease of theoretical analysis, these algorithms rely on the non-adaptive sampling scheme, whose query
points are chosen independently of the observed function values, such as the uniform sampling [Salgia
et al., 2024] or maximum variance reduction [Iwazaki and Takeno, 2025a]. Although the theoretical
superiority of such non-adaptive algorithms is shown, in existing noisy setting literature [Bogunovic
et al., 2022, Iwazaki and Takeno, 2025b, Li and Scarlett, 2022], their empirical performance has
been reported to be worse than that of fully adaptive strategies such as GP upper confidence bound
(GP-UCB) [Srinivas et al., 2010]. Unsurprisingly, we also observe such empirical and practical gaps
in a noise-free setting, as shown in Figure 1. These observations suggest the possibility of further
theoretical improvement in the practical fully adaptive algorithm. From this motivation, our work
aims to establish the nearly-optimal regret for GP-UCB, which is one of the well-known adaptive GP
bandit algorithms, and its existing guarantees only show strictly sub-optimal regret in a noise-free
setting [Kim and Sanz-Alonso, 2024, Lyu et al., 2019].
Contributions.

Our contributions are summarized below:

• We give a refined regret analysis of GP-UCB (Theorems 1 and 2), which matches both the
cumulative regret lower bounds of [Li and Scarlett, 2024] and the simple regret lower bound
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

