Mitigating Sexual Content Generation via Embedding
Distortion in Text-conditioned Diffusion Models
Jaesin Ahn
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Kyungpook National University
ajs0420@knu.ac.kr

Heechul Jung
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Kyungpook National University
heechul@knu.ac.kr

Abstract
Diffusion models show remarkable image generation performance following text
prompts, but risk generating sexual contents. Existing approaches, such as prompt
filtering, concept removal, and even sexual contents mitigation methods, struggle
to defend against adversarial attacks while maintaining benign image quality.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach called Distorting Embedding Space
(DES), a text encoder-based defense mechanism that effectively tackles these issues
through innovative embedding space control. DES transforms unsafe embeddings,
extracted from a text encoder using unsafe prompts, toward carefully calculated
safe embedding regions to prevent unsafe contents generation, while reproducing
the original safe embeddings. DES also neutralizes the “nudity” embedding, by
aligning it with neutral embedding to enhance robustness against adversarial attacks.
As a result, extensive experiments on explicit content mitigation and adaptive
attack defense show that DES achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) defense, with attack
success rate (ASR) of 9.47% on FLUX.1, a recent popular model, and 0.52% on
the widely adopted Stable Diffusion v1.5. These correspond to ASR reductions
of 76.5% and 63.9% compared to previous SOTA methods, EraseAnything and
AdvUnlearn, respectively. Furthermore, DES maintains benign image quality,
achieving Fréchet Inception Distance and CLIP score comparable to those of the
original FLUX.1 and Stable Diffusion v1.5.
Warning: This paper contains explicit sexual contents that may be offensive.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in diffusion models [19, 40], including Stable Diffusion (SD) [36] and DALL-E [4],
have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in various image generation tasks such as text-to-image
(T2I) synthesis and text-based image editing [5]. However, these models can be misused to generate
deepfakes, pornographic, and Not-Safe-For-Work (NSFW) content, as highlighted by the Internet
Watch Foundation [12]. To prevent such misuse, simple filtering-based approaches, such as blacklistbased text filtering and image-based filtering [34], can be considered as possible solutions. However,
they can be readily bypassed by malicious prompts that avoid explicit keywords or leverage adversarial
attacks [44, 46].
Recently, several defense approaches have been proposed, such as concept removal [13, 37] and
sexual content mitigation methods [25], to address these vulnerabilities. However, they do not show
remarkable performance in suppressing explicit content, as measured by attack success rate (ASR), or
struggle to preserve benign image quality, in terms of Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [16, 25, 50],
as shown in Figure 1(a). Concept removal was often tackled by altering the U-Net, whereas more
recent research tends to focus on modifying just the text encoder [32, 49]. One possible reason for
this paradigm shift is that concept-related parameters are spread across U-Net layers [2], making it
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

