Distillation Robustifies Unlearning

Bruce W. Lee1,2∗ † Addie Foote1∗ Alex Infanger1∗
Leni Shor1,3∗ Harish Kamath1∗ Jacob Goldman-Wetzler1,4∗
Bryce Woodworth1
Alex Cloud∗ Alexander Matt Turner
1
ML Alignment & Theory Scholars 2 University of Pennsylvania
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 4 Brown University

Abstract
Current LLM unlearning methods are not robust. A few steps of finetuning can
revert their effects. We begin by showing that this is true even for an idealized
form of unlearning: training to imitate a model that was never trained on unwanted
information. This shows that training a model can drastically modify its inputoutput behavior while leaving its underlying capabilities intact. In light of this
dynamic, we show our main result. Training a randomly initialized student on the
outputs of an unlearned model transfers behaviors while leaving latent capabilities
behind. In short, distillation robustifies unlearning. Based on this result, we
propose Unlearn-Noise-Distill-on-Outputs (UNDO), a scalable method that distills
an unlearned model into a noised copy of itself. UNDO introduces a tunable
tradeoff between compute cost and robustness, establishing a new Pareto frontier
on synthetic language and arithmetic tasks. At its strongest setting, UNDO matches
the robustness of a model retrained from scratch with perfect data filtering while
using only 60-80% of the compute and requiring only 0.01% of the pretraining data
to be labeled. We also show that UNDO robustifies unlearning on the more realistic
Weapons of Mass Destruction Proxy (WMDP) benchmark. Since distillation is
widely used in practice, incorporating an unlearning step beforehand offers a
convenient path to robust capability removal.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) can acquire harmful capabilities during pretraining on massive,
largely unfiltered datasets [9, 64]. This complicates model deployment. For example, a model with
knowledge relevant to developing novel cyberweapons could enable global-scale harm if accessed
by bad actors [54, 63]. While data filtering before pretraining could mitigate such risks, precisely
auditing and filtering data at the required scale remains impractical [56, 84, 1].
Post-training methods like reinforcement learning from human feedback discourage models from
using undesired capabilities on common inputs [4, 55], but leave the underlying capabilities intact.
As a result, the model remains vulnerable to attacks that can elicit these capabilities, including
adversarial prompts, jailbreaks, or direct finetuning [87, 38, 83]. To address this vulnerability, recent
work has tried using machine unlearning to remove undesired capabilities from LLMs [53, 69, 6].
However, existing unlearning methods also suppress capabilities rather than remove them [32, 18].
The supposedly unlearned capabilities can be restored through a few steps of finetuning, leaving the
fundamental challenge of achieving true capability removal unsolved [48, 49, 23, 33].
* Core contributors. Author contributions in Appendix G.
†
‡

Correspondence to brucelws@seas.upenn.edu.
We share our code implementation publicly through GitHub.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

