When and how can inexact generative models still
sample from the data manifold?

Nisha Chandramoorthy
Department of Statistics
Committee on Computational and Applied Mathematics
The University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
nishac@uchicago.edu
Adriaan de Clercq
Department of Statistics
Committee on Computational and Applied Mathematics
The University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637

Abstract
A curious phenomenon observed in some dynamical generative models is the
following: despite learning errors in the score function or the drift vector field,
the generated samples appear to shift along the support of the data distribution
but not away from it. In this work, we investigate this phenomenon of robustness of the support by taking a dynamical systems approach on the generating
stochastic/deterministic process. Our perturbation analysis of the probability flow
reveals that infinitesimal learning errors cause the predicted density to be different
from the target density only on the data manifold for a wide class of generative
models. Further, what is the dynamical mechanism that leads to the robustness
of the support? We show that the alignment of the top Lyapunov vectors (most
sensitive infinitesimal perturbation directions) with the tangent spaces along the
boundary of the data manifold leads to robustness and prove a sufficient condition
on the dynamics of the generating process to achieve this alignment. Moreover, the
alignment condition is efficient to compute and, in practice, for robust generative
models, automatically leads to accurate estimates of the tangent bundle of the data
manifold. Using a finite-time linear perturbation analysis on samples paths as
well as probability flows, our work complements and extends existing works on
obtaining theoretical guarantees for generative models from a stochastic analysis,
statistical learning and uncertainty quantification points of view. Our results apply
across different dynamical generative models, such as conditional flow-matching
and score-based generative models, and for different target distributions that may
or may not satisfy the manifold hypothesis.

1

Introduction

Given samples from a target distribution, a generative model (GM) outputs more samples (approximately) from the target. Most generative models accomplish this task using a dynamical formulation
of probabilistic measure transport. They solve an optimization problem for a vector field or a drift
term of a deterministic or stochastic process that produces the desired target samples in finite time.
Flows under the learned vector field transports probability densities between some source density
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

