Channel Matters: Estimating Channel Influence for
Multivariate Time Series
Muyao Wang1,2
muyaowang@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Zeke Xie3∗
zekexie@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Hongwei Liu1,2
hwliu@xidian.edu.cn
1

Bo Chen1,2∗
bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn

James Kwok4
jamesk@cse.ust.hk

Intitute of Information Sensing 2 School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
The influence function serves as an efficient post-hoc interpretability tool that
quantifies the impact of training data modifications on model parameters, enabling
enhanced model performance, improved generalization, and interpretability insights without the need for expensive retraining processes. Recently, Multivariate
Time Series (MTS) analysis has become an important yet challenging task, attracting significant attention. While channel extremely matters to MTS tasks,
channel-centric methods are still largely under-explored for MTS. Particularly,
no previous work studied the effects of channel information of MTS in order to
explore counterfactual effects between these channels and model performance. To
fill this gap, we propose a novel Channel-wise Influence (ChInf) method that is
the first to estimate the influence of different channels in MTS. Based on ChInf,
we naturally derived two channel-wise algorithms by incorporating ChInf into
classic MTS tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of ChInf
and ChInf-based methods in critical MTS analysis tasks, such as MTS anomaly
detection and MTS data pruning. Specifically, our ChInf-based methods rank top-1
among all methods for comparison, while previous influence functions do not
perform well on MTS anomaly detection tasks and MTS data pruning problem.
This fully supports the superiority and necessity of ChInf. Code is available at
https://github.com/flare200020/Chinf.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series (MTS) plays an important role in a wide variety of domains, including
internet services [1] , industrial devices [2, 3] , health care [4, 5], finance [6, 7] , and so on. Thus,
MTS modeling is crucial across a wide array of applications, including disease forecasting, traffic
forecasting, anomaly detection, and action recognition. In recent years, researchers have focused
on deep learning-based MTS analysis methods [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. Due to the large
number of different channels in MTS, numerous studies aim to analyze the importance of these
channels [12, 16, 17, 18]. Some of them concentrate on using graph or attention structure to capture
the channel dependencies [12, 19], while some of them try to use Channel Independence to enhance
the generalization ability on different channels of MTS model [17, 20]. While these methods try to
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

