Disentangled Cross-Modal Representation Learning
with Enhanced Mutual Supervision

Lu Gao∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Central South University
Changsha, China
244711035@csu.edu.cn

Wenlan Chen∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Central South University
Changsha, China
244701041@csu.edu.cn

Daoyuan Wang
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Central South University
Changsha, China
244701040@csu.edu.cn

Fei Guo†
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Central South University
Changsha, China
guofei@csu.edu.cn

Cheng Liang†
School of Information Science and Engineering
Shandong Normal University
Jinan, China
alcs417@sdnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-modal representation learning aims to extract semantically aligned representations from heterogeneous modalities such as images and text. Existing
multimodal VAE-based models often suffer from limited capability to align heterogeneous modalities or lack sufficient structural constraints to clearly separate
the modality-specific and shared factors. In this work, we propose a novel framework, termed Disentangled Cross-Modal Representation Learning with Enhanced
Mutual Supervision (DCMEM). Specifically, our model disentangles the common
and distinct information across modalities and regularizes the shared representation learned from each modality in a mutually supervised manner. Moreover, we
incorporate the information bottleneck principle into our model to ensure that the
shared and modality-specific factors encode exclusive yet complementary information. Notably, our model is designed to be trainable on both complete and partial
multimodal datasets with a valid Evidence Lower Bound. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate significant improvements of our model over existing methods
on various tasks including cross-modal generation, clustering and classification.

1

Introduction

Cross-modal representation learning aims to bridge the semantic gap between heterogeneous data from
different modalities, such as images, text, audio and video [1, 2, 3]. The key challenge of the task lies
in capturing both the modality-specific features and the shared semantic structure across modalities,
despite their inherent differences in format and statistical properties [4]. Disentangled representation
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this work and are joint first authors.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

