Decreasing Entropic Regularization Averaged
Gradient for Semi-Discrete Optimal Transport

Ferdinand Genans1∗ Antoine Godichon-Baggioni1
François-Xavier Vialard2 Olivier Wintenberger1,3
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LPSM1
Université Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, LIGM2
Wolfgang Pauli Institute3
{ferdinand.genans-boiteux, antoine.godichon_baggioni,
olivier.wintenberger}@sorbonne-universite.fr
francois-xavier.vialard@u-pem.fr

Abstract
Adding entropic regularization to Optimal Transport (OT) problems has become
a standard approach for designing efficient and scalable solvers. However, regularization introduces a bias from the true solution. To mitigate this bias while still
benefiting from the acceleration provided by regularization, a natural solver would
adaptively decrease the regularization as it approaches the solution. Although some
algorithms heuristically implement this idea, their theoretical guarantees and the
extent of their acceleration compared to using a fixed regularization remain largely
open. In the setting of semi-discrete OT, where the source measure is continuous
and the target is discrete, we prove that decreasing the regularization can indeed
accelerate convergence. To this end, we introduce DRAG: Decreasing (entropic)
Regularization Averaged Gradient, a stochastic gradient descent algorithm where
the regularization decreases with the number of optimization steps. We provide a
theoretical analysis showing that DRAG benefits from decreasing regularization
compared to a fixed scheme, achieving an unbiased O(1/t) sample and iteration
√
complexity for both the OT cost and the potential estimation, and a O(1/ t) rate
for the OT map. Our theoretical findings are supported by numerical experiments
that validate the effectiveness of DRAG and highlight its practical advantages.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport is now a widely used framework to compare probability distributions in different
areas of data science such as machine learning [14, 25, 6], computational biology [47], imaging
[21, 7], even economics [22] or material sciences [9]. The computational and statistical efficiency of
OT solvers is the key to facilitating their use in practical applications. Therefore, both computational
methods and the statistical bottleneck in OT, often referred to as the curse of dimensionality, have
received significant attention over the past decade [42, 57]. Regularization methods such as Entropic
OT (EOT) [16] are popular techniques to mitigate these two issues. It consists of adding an entropic
regularization term to the objective function. OT and its entropic regularization apply to different
contexts of interest. The most general context is when the two distributions are accessed via samples
and one wants to estimate the OT distance and the corresponding plan or map. Another context of
interest in some applications, that has recently gained popularity in generative modeling [2, 10, 36],
is the case of semi-discrete OT. In this setting, one of the two distributions is discrete and the other
continuous. The OT problem, while being a natural proxy to the continuous case, is then slightly
simpler since (i) it reduces to the estimation of Laguerre cells and (ii) the curse of dimensionality is
alleviated [45].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

