Uncovering the Spectral Bias in
Diagonal State Space Models

Ruben Solozabal
MBZUAI
ruben.solozabal@mbzuai.ac.ae

Velibor Bojkovic
MBZUAI
velibor.bojkovic@mbzuai.ac.ae

Hilal AlQuabeh
MBZUAI, RIKEN AIP
hilal.alquabeh@mbzuai.ac.ae

Kentaro Inui
MBZUAI, RIKEN AIP
kentaro.inui@mbzuai.ac.ae

Martin Takáč
MBZUAI
Takac.MT@gmail.com

Abstract
Current methods for initializing state space models (SSMs) parameters mainly rely
on the HiPPO framework, which is based on an online approximation of orthogonal
polynomials. Recently, diagonal alternatives have shown to reach a similar level of
performance while being significantly more efficient due to the simplification in
the kernel computation. However, the HiPPO framework does not explicitly study
the role of its diagonal variants. In this paper, we take a further step to investigate
the role of diagonal SSM initialization schemes from the frequency perspective.
Our work seeks to systematically understand how to parameterize these models and
uncover the learning biases inherent in such diagonal state-space models. Based
on our observations, we propose a diagonal initialization on the discrete Fourier
domain S4D-DFouT. The insights in the role of pole placing in the initialization
enable us to further scale them and achieve state-of-the-art results on the Long
Range Arena benchmark, allowing us to train from scratch on very large datasets
as PathX-256.

1

Introduction
sCIFAR (32x32)

State space models (SSMs) have recently emerged as
a principled and scalable means of modeling long sequences across diverse domains, including image processing [1, 2, 3], time-series forecasting [4], and natural language understanding [5, 6, 7]. At their core, SSMs perform
a sequence-to-sequence mapping via a long-range convolution kernel that is parameterized under a continuous-time
linear dynamical system. This formulation captures dependencies at multiple timescales and admits strong stability
guarantees. Crucially, the “HiPPO matrix” [8] provides
a principled method to structure state transition matrices
that performs online compression of the input stream by
projecting onto an orthogonal polynomial basis. However,
naively propagating this dense state through a sequence of

Unrolled
kernel

1024

Figure 1: The kernels learned by S4D on
sCIFAR present a “local attention” profile.
When unrolled, these kernels align with positions corresponding to the vicinities of the
pixel being attended.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

