TABULA: A Tabular Self-Supervised Foundation
Model for Single-Cell Transcriptomics

Jiayuan Ding*†
Stanford University

Jianhui Lin*
Central South University

Yixin Wang
Stanford University

Shiyu Jiang*
University of Southern California

Ziyang Miao
Central South University

Jiliang Tang†
Michigan State University

Zhaoyu Fang
Central South University

Min Li†
Central South University

Xiaojie Qiu†
Stanford University

Abstract
Foundation models (FMs) have shown great promise in single-cell genomics,
yet current approaches, such as scGPT, Geneformer, and scFoundation, rely on
centralized training and language modeling objectives that overlook the tabular nature of single-cell data and raise significant privacy concerns. We present
TABULA, a foundation model designed for single-cell transcriptomics, which integrates a novel tabular modeling objective and federated learning framework
to enable privacy-preserving pretraining across decentralized datasets. TABULA
directly models the cell-by-gene expression matrix through column-wise gene
reconstruction and row-wise cell contrastive learning, capturing both gene-level
relationships and cell-level heterogeneity without imposing artificial gene sequence
order. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of TABULA: despite
using only half the pretraining data, TABULA achieves state-of-the-art performance
across key tasks, including gene imputation, perturbation prediction, cell type
annotation, and multi-omics integration. It is important to note that as public
single-cell datasets continue to grow, TABULA provides a scalable and privacyaware foundation that not only validates the feasibility of federated tabular modeling, but also establishes a generalizable framework for training future models under similar privacy-preserving settings. All resources are openly available
at https://github.com/aristoteleo/tabula to support broad community
adoption and future methodological advances.

1

Introduction

Over the past year, we have witnessed the emergence of single-cell foundation models, notably
Geneformer [1], scFoundation [2], CellPLM [3], scGPT [4], and NicheFormer [5]. However, current
models fail to explicitly account for the tabular structure of the scRNA-seq data, often naively
converting gene expression within a single cell to gene sequences to mimic word sequences used
in NLP. While this adapts the NLP paradigm to single-cell data, it overlooks critical features of the
underlying tabular structure of scRNA-seq. Moreover, it has been shown previously that scRNA-seq
data is susceptible to privacy breaches through linking attacks [6, 7] (More details are provided in
Appendix D), where information from one study can be linked to another to identify private data.
*

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

