Equivariance Everywhere All At Once:
A Recipe for Graph Foundation Models

Ben Finkelshtein
University of Oxford
Michael Bronstein
University of Oxford / AITHYRA

İsmail İlkan Ceylan
TU Wien / AITHYRA/ University of Oxford
Ron Levie
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract
Graph machine learning architectures are typically tailored to specific tasks on
specific datasets, which hinders their broader applicability. This has led to a new
quest in graph machine learning: how to build graph foundation models (GFMs)
capable of generalizing across arbitrary graphs and features? In this work, we
present a recipe for designing GFMs for node-level tasks from first principles. The
key ingredient underpinning our study is a systematic investigation of the symmetries that a graph foundation model must respect. In a nutshell, we argue that label
permutation-equivariance alongside feature permutation-invariance are necessary
in addition to the common node permutation-equivariance on each local neighborhood of the graph. To this end, we first characterize the space of linear transformations that are equivariant to permutations of nodes and labels, and invariant to
permutations of features. We then prove that the resulting network is a universal
approximator on multisets that respect the aforementioned symmetries. Our recipe
uses such layers on the multiset of features induced by the local neighborhood of
the graph to obtain a class of graph foundation models for node property prediction.
We validate our approach through extensive experiments on 29 real-world node
classification datasets, demonstrating both strong zero-shot empirical performance
and consistent improvement as the number of training graphs increases.

1

Introduction

Foundation models have shown remarkable success in diverse domains such as natural language
[33, 28, 41], computer vision [8, 31, 43, 1], and audio processing [6, 7, 32]. This success has
sparked interest in building foundation models for graph machine learning (graph foundation models
(GFMs))[24, 52, 2], raising a fundamental question: what are the key requirements for a graph
machine learning architecture to generalize across tasks, graph structures, and feature and label sets?
Significant progress has recently been made on link-level tasks in knowledge graphs [13, 21, 12,
51, 18], which typically do not involve node features. This success is partially due to the nature of
knowledge graphs, where learning focuses on structured relational patterns rather than raw feature
inputs. Unlike in knowledge graphs, natural language processing or computer vision, node-level tasks
in general graphs face a fundamental obstacle: the absence of a shared feature "vocabulary": Features
may encode textual embeddings in one dataset, molecular properties in another, or social attributes
in yet another. This semantic diversity makes it inherently difficult to define a unified feature space,
posing a major challenge to building graph foundation models that generalize across domains.
Classical graph neural networks (GNNs) [5, 20, 42, 47] rely on fixed feature ordering and predefined
feature sets, making them ill-equipped to generalize across arbitrary graphs with varying features.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

