Less is More: Improving LLM Alignment via
Preference Data Selection
Xun Deng14 , Han Zhong2∗, Rui Ai3 , Fuli Feng5∗, Zheng Wang4 , Xiangnan He5∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Peking University,
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 4 Alibaba Cloud Computing
5
MoE Key Lab of BIPC, University of Science and Technology of China
dx981228@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn, ruiai@mit.edu
{fulifeng93,xiangnanhe}@gmail.com, wz388779@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) has emerged as a promising approach for
aligning large language models with human preferences. While prior work mainly
extends DPO from the aspect of the objective function, we instead improve DPO
from the largely overlooked but critical aspect of data selection. Specifically, we
address the issue of parameter shrinkage caused by noisy data by proposing a novel
margin-maximization principle for dataset curation in DPO training. To further
mitigate the noise in different reward models, we propose a Bayesian Aggregation
approach that unifies multiple margin sources (external and implicit) into a single
preference probability. Extensive experiments in diverse settings demonstrate the
consistently high data efficiency of our approach. Remarkably, by using just 10%
of the Ultrafeedback dataset, our approach achieves 3% to 8% improvements across
various Llama, Mistral, and Qwen models on the AlpacaEval2 benchmark. Furthermore, our approach seamlessly extends to iterative DPO, yielding a roughly 3%
improvement with 25% online data, revealing the high redundancy in this presumed
high-quality data construction manner. These results highlight the potential of data
selection strategies for advancing preference optimization.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback [RLHF; 6, 65] has emerged as a crucial technique for
aligning Large Language Models (LLMs) with human preferences and values. Traditional RLHF implementations involve a two-stage process: reward model training based on preference data followed
by reinforcement learning optimization. However, this approach presents significant computational
challenges, requiring loading multiple model instances and extensive hyperparameter tuning.
As an alternative, [39] introduced Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), which streamlines the
alignment process by directly optimizing the LLM policy from preference data. DPO has demonstrated comparable effectiveness while substantially reducing computational requirements compared
to classical RLHF. Following DPO’s introduction, numerous studies have proposed improvements
through modified learning objectives [62, 1, 15] and iterative learning schemes [53]. While these
algorithmic advances have shown promise, there remains a critical gap in our understanding of the
data-centric aspects of preference learning: what characteristics of preference data contribute most
to model alignment?
This work thoroughly studies the impact of preference data quality on DPO training, which is crucial
for developing more efficient training strategies. In particular, we achieve both improved performance
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

