ChromFound: Towards A Universal Foundation
Model for Single-Cell Chromatin Accessibility Data
∗

∗

†

Yifeng Jiao1,2, , Yuchen Liu1,2, , Yu Zhang2 , Xin Guo1,2, , Yushuai Wu2 , Chen Jiang1,2 ,
†
†
Jiyang Li2 , Hongwei Zhang1,2 , Limei Han1,2 , Xin Gao2,3,4,5 , Yuan Qi1,2,6, , Yuan Cheng1,2,
1
Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Incubation Institute, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science
3
Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division, KAUST
4
Center of Excellence for Smart Health, KAUST
5
Center of Excellence on GenAI, KAUST
6
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University
Correspondence to: {jiaoyifeng,guoxin}@sais.org.cn, {cheng_yuan,qiyuan}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
The advent of single-cell Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin using sequencing (scATAC-seq) offers an innovative perspective for deciphering regulatory
mechanisms by assembling a vast repository of single-cell chromatin accessibility
data. While foundation models have achieved significant success in single-cell
transcriptomics, there is currently no foundation model for scATAC-seq that supports zero-shot high-quality cell identification and comprehensive multi-omics
analysis simultaneously. Key challenges lie in the high dimensionality and sparsity
of scATAC-seq data, as well as the lack of a standardized schema for representing
open chromatin regions (OCRs). Here, we present ChromFound, a foundation
model tailored for scATAC-seq. ChromFound utilizes a hybrid architecture and
genome-aware tokenization to effectively capture genome-wide long contexts and
regulatory signals from dynamic chromatin landscapes. Pretrained on 1.97 million cells from 30 tissues and 6 disease conditions, ChromFound demonstrates
broad applicability across 6 diverse tasks. Notably, it achieves robust zero-shot
performance in generating universal cell representations and exhibits excellent
transferability in cell type annotation and cross-omics prediction. By uncovering enhancer-gene links undetected by existing computational methods, ChromFound offers a promising framework for understanding disease risk variants in
the noncoding genome. The implementation of ChromFound is available via
https://github.com/JohnsonKlose/ChromFound.

1

Introduction

The human genome harbors an extensive repository of open chromatin regions (OCRs) responsible for
orchestrating precise spatial and temporal gene expression patterns [31]. Identifying OCRs at singlecell level is pivotal for understanding the regulatory landscape of individual cells, offering profound
insights into cellular diversity and dynamic mechanisms of gene regulation [14, 10]. The single-cell
Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin using sequencing (scATAC-seq) [4] stands as the most
prevalent genome-wide technique to enable the identification of OCRs at single-cell resolution. Its
principal applications span cancer research, immunological studies, and neuroscience [52, 63, 61, 79].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

