Cross City Traffic Flow Generation via Retrieval
Augmented Diffusion Model
Yudong Li1 , Jingyuan Wang*1, 2, 3 , Xie Yu1 , Peiyu Wang1 , Qian Huang4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
MIIT Key Laboratory of Data Intelligence and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
Global Technical Service Dept, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd Beijing, China
{yudongli, yjwang, yuxie_scse, peiyuwang}@buaa.edu.cn
huangqian16@huaiwei.com

Abstract
Traffic flow data are of great value in smart city applications. However, limited
by data collection costs and privacy sensitivity, it is rather difficult to obtain
large-scale traffic flow data. Therefore, various data generation methods have
been proposed in the literature. Nevertheless, these methods often require data
from a specific city for training and are difficult to directly apply to new cities
lacking data. To address this problem, this paper proposes a retrieval-augmented
diffusion generation model with geographic representation alignment. We use data
from multiple source cities for training, extract consistent representations across
multiple cities, and leverage retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) technology
to incorporate dynamic traffic flow patterns into the condition, aiming to improve
the accuracy of data generation in the target city. Experiments on four real-world
datasets demonstrate that, compared to existing generation methods, our method
achieves best cross-city zero-shot performance. Our code and datasets can be found
in https://github.com/lyd1881310/CRAFT.

1

Introduction

Background. Traffic flow data is crucial in intelligent transportation systems [26, 17], urban management [16, 49] and smart cities applications [11, 47]. The success of traffic flow analysis [48, 55] is
coupled with a data-hungry paradigm, where superior performance and remarkable generalization
ability rely on large-scale and high-quality data. However, unlike computer vision (CV) and natural
language processing (NLP), where large-scale datasets are readily available from public sources,
collecting traffic flow data faces strict privacy constraints and much higher costs. As a result, existing
public traffic flow datasets are usually limited in both scale and quality. Overcoming this challenge to
acquire larger-scale, higher-quality traffic flow data has emerged as a critical bottleneck.
Motivation of This Work. In response, traffic flow generation has become an increasingly urgent
research direction [58]. It aims to synthesize realistic traffic flow by learning the conditional mapping
from static urban geographic context to dynamic traffic flow distributions. Early work predominantly
employed physics-driven models [60, 52, 1, 42, 28], which only estimate static average flow volumes
and struggled to capture the complex temporal dynamics observed in real-world traffic. More recently,
deep generative approaches have been dominant, leveraging richer geographic context as input to
model flow distributions with greater fidelity. Their modeling paradigm has shifted from variational
*

Corresponding author: Jingyuan Wang

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

