BLEUBERI:
BLEU is a surprisingly effective reward
for instruction following

Yapei Chang
University of Maryland, College Park
Michael Krumdick
Kensho

Yekyung Kim
University of Maryland, College Park

Amir Zadeh
Lambda AI

Chuan Li
Lambda AI

Chris Tanner
Kensho

Mohit Iyyer
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
Reward models are central to aligning LLMs with human preferences, but they are
costly to train, requiring large-scale human-labeled preference data and powerful
pretrained LLM backbones. Meanwhile, the increasing availability of high-quality
synthetic instruction-following datasets raises the question: can simpler, referencebased metrics serve as viable alternatives to reward models during RL-based
alignment? In this paper, we show first that BLEU, a basic string-matching metric,
surprisingly matches strong reward models in agreement with human preferences
on general instruction-following datasets. Based on this insight, we develop BLEUBERI,1 a method that first identifies challenging instructions and then applies Group
Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) using BLEU directly as the reward function.
We demonstrate that BLEUBERI-trained models are competitive with models
trained via reward model-guided RL across four challenging instruction-following
benchmarks and three different base language models. A human evaluation further
supports that the quality of BLEUBERI model outputs is on par with those from
reward model-aligned models. Moreover, BLEUBERI models generate outputs
that are more factually grounded than competing methods. Overall, we show
that given access to high-quality reference outputs (easily obtained via existing
instruction-following datasets or synthetic data generation), string matching-based
metrics are cheap yet effective proxies for reward models during alignment. We
release our code and data at https://github.com/lilakk/BLEUBERI.2

1

Introduction

Modern LLM alignment often relies on reinforcement learning with a reward model that guides the
LLM to follow instructions according to human preferences [40]. Reward models are expensive
to train, requiring large-scale human preference data and powerful backbone models [39, 55, 60].
Meanwhile, the emergence of high-quality instruction-following datasets (e.g., OpenHermes, Magpie,
LIMA) has enabled cheaper reference-based alignment via supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [57, 73, 80].
1
2

BLEUBERI stands for “BLEU-based reward for instruction following.”
Correspondence to yapeic@umd.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

