SynCL: A Synergistic Training Strategy with
Instance-Aware Contrastive Learning for End-to-End
Multi-Camera 3D Tracking

Shubo Lin1,2,3 , Yutong Kou1,2,3 , Zirui Wu6 , Shaoru Wang1
Bing Li1,3,5 , Weiming Hu1,2,3,4 , Jin Gao1,2,3∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), CASIA
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Super Intelligent Security of Multi-Modal Information
4
School of Information Science and Technology, Shanghai Tech University
5
People AI, Inc, 6 Harbin Institute of Technology
{linshubo2023}@ia.ac.cn, {jin.gao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
While existing query-based 3D end-to-end visual trackers integrate detection and
tracking via the tracking-by-attention paradigm, these two chicken-and-egg tasks
encounter optimization difficulties when sharing the same parameters. Our findings
reveal that these difficulties arise due to two inherent constraints on the selfattention mechanism, i.e., over-deduplication for object queries and self-centric
attention for track queries. In contrast, removing the self-attention mechanism
not only minimally impacts regression predictions of the tracker, but also tends
to generate more latent candidate boxes. Based on these analyses, we present
SynCL, a novel plug-and-play synergistic training strategy designed to co-facilitate
multi-task learning for detection and tracking. Specifically, we propose a Taskspecific Hybrid Matching module for a weight-shared cross-attention-based decoder
that matches the targets of track queries with multiple object queries to exploit
promising candidates overlooked by the self-attention mechanism and the bipartite
matching. To flexibly select optimal candidates for the one-to-many matching,
we also design a Dynamic Query Filtering module controlled by model training
status. Moreover, we introduce Instance-aware Contrastive Learning to break
through the barrier of self-centric attention for track queries, effectively bridging
the gap between detection and tracking. Without additional inference costs, SynCL
consistently delivers improvements in various benchmarks and achieves state-ofthe-art performance with 58.9% AMOTA on the nuScenes dataset. Code and raw
results are available at https://github.com/shubolin028/SynCL.

1

Introduction

The perception system is an indispensable component in autonomous driving. Within the system,
accurate 3D multi-object tracking (MOT) provides reliable observations for planning. Camera-based
tracking algorithms have raised significant attention due to their cost-effectiveness [1]. Traditional
trackers following the tracking-by-detection paradigm often suffer from tedious and unstable postprocessing in new scenarios [2, 3]. To achieve cross-domain adaptability, the prevailing methods [4–8]
adopt the tracking-by-attention paradigm, which integrates single-frame detection and inter-temporal
tracking by encoding new-born and persistent targets as object queries and track queries respectively
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

