Learnable Sampler Distillation for
Discrete Diffusion Models
Feiyang Fu, Tongxian Guo, Zhaoqiang Liu∗
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Discrete diffusion models (DDMs) have shown powerful generation ability for
discrete data modalities like text and molecules. However, their practical application is hindered by inefficient sampling, requiring a large number of sampling
steps. Accelerating DDMs by using larger step sizes typically introduces significant
problems in generation quality, as it amplifies the impact of both the compounding decoding error due to factorized predictions and discretization error from
numerical approximations, leading to a significant decrease in sampling quality.
To address these challenges, we propose learnable sampler distillation (LSD), a
novel approach to train fast and high-fidelity samplers for DDMs. LSD employs
a distillation approach where a student sampler with a few steps learns to align
its intermediate score trajectory with that of a high-quality teacher sampler with
numerous steps. This alignment is achieved by optimizing learnable sampler coefficients that adaptively adjust sampling dynamics. Additionally, we further propose
LSD+, which also learns time schedules that allocate steps non-uniformly. Experiments across text generation, image generation, and synthetic tasks demonstrate
that our proposed approaches outperform existing samplers for DDMs, achieving
substantially higher sampling quality with significantly fewer sampling steps. Our
code is available at https://github.com/feiyangfu/LSD.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable success across various generative tasks, particularly
excelling in the synthesis of data within continuous domains like images, audio, and videos [1, 2, 3, 4,
5]. These models frame the data generation process as a gradual denoising procedure in a continuous
latent space. However, many other important data modalities, such as natural language, molecular
sequences, and categorical data, inherently possess discrete structures. Applying diffusion models
directly to these discrete spaces is challenging, as the standard formulation relies on continuous state
transitions. Recently, discrete diffusion models (DDMs) [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] have been developed
to address this issue. DDMs are specifically designed to operate on discrete data, adapting the core
diffusion idea to categorical variables and enabling principled generation. Recent advances in DDMs
have shown promising results, achieving competitive performance in generating high-fidelity discrete
data. Despite their promising applicability, DDMs face an important challenge in sampling efficiency,
and they typically require a substantial number of function evaluations (NFEs), e.g., 1024 or more,
making inference computationally expensive.
Current sampling methods for DDMs are mainly divided into two categories: 1) Exact simulation
methods [13, 14] provide unbiased samples from the target distribution but suffer from high sampling
times and expensive computational costs due to numerous model evaluations, leading to poor scaling
with dimensionality. 2) Approximate methods like τ -leaping [15, 16] are designed for parallelization
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

