Non-convex entropic mean-field optimization via Best
Response flow

Razvan-Andrei Lascu
RIKEN AIP
razvan-andrei.lascu@riken.jp

Mateusz B. Majka
Heriot-Watt University
m.majka@hw.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the problem of minimizing non-convex functionals on the space of
probability measures, regularized by the relative entropy (KL divergence) with
respect to a fixed reference measure, as well as the corresponding problem of
solving entropy-regularized non-convex-non-concave min-max problems. We
utilize the Best Response flow (also known in the literature as the fictitious play
flow) and study how its convergence is influenced by the relation between the
degree of non-convexity of the functional under consideration, the regularization
parameter and the tail behaviour of the reference measure. In particular, we
demonstrate how to choose the regularizer, given the non-convex functional, so
that the Best Response operator becomes a contraction with respect to the L1 Wasserstein distance, which ensures the existence of its unique fixed point that
is then shown to be the unique global minimizer for our optimization problem.
This extends recent results where the Best Response flow was applied to solve
convex optimization problems regularized by the relative entropy with respect
to arbitrary reference measures, and with arbitrary values of the regularization
parameter. Our results explain precisely how the assumption of convexity can be
relaxed, at the expense of making a specific choice of the regularizer. Additionally,
we demonstrate how these results can be applied in reinforcement learning in the
context of policy optimization for Markov Decision Processes and Markov games
with softmax parametrized policies in the mean-field regime.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of minimizing an entropy-regularized,
non-convex functional F : P1 (Rd ) →

d
R over the Wasserstein space P1 (R ), W1 , that is,
min F σ (ν), with F σ (ν) := F (ν) + σ KL(ν|ξ),
(1)
ν∈P1 (Rd )

where the function F is bounded below, i.e., inf ν∈P1 (Rd ) F (ν) > −∞, ξ ∈ P1 (Rd ) is a fixed
reference probability measure with finite first moment and σ > 0 is a regularization parameter,
while KL and W1 denote the KL-divergence (relative entropy) and the L1 -Wasserstein distance,
respectively.
In recent years, there has been considerable interest in such problems, motivated by their applications
in machine learning, including the task of training two-layer neural networks (NNs) in the mean-field
regime [18, 33, 9, 10, 31, 37, 35] and Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1, 24, 43, 28]. In particular,
several works studied problem (1) in a setting where F is assumed to be convex, by utilizing various
gradient flows such as the Best Response/fictitious play flow [8, 32], the Wasserstein gradient flow
[18, 33], or the Fisher-Rao gradient flow [25].
In these works, the convergence of the flow to the minimizer of (1) holds for any value of σ > 0
(although the convergence rate may degenerate when σ approaches zero) and for an arbitrary reference
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

