From Cradle to Cane: A Two-Pass Framework for
High-Fidelity Lifespan Face Aging

Tao Liu1 , Dafeng Zhang2 , Gengchen Li3 , Shizhuo Liu2 , Yongqi Song2
Senmao Li1 , Shiqi Yang1,∗, Boqian Li4 , Kai Wang5,6,7 , Yaxing Wang8†
1
VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
Samsung Research China - Beijing (SRC-B)
3
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University
4
School of Computer , Zhengzhou University of Aeronautics
5
Program of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong (Dongguan)
6
City University of Hong Kong 7 Computer Vision Center, Barcelona
8
College of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University
{lt0lcy0, senmaonk, shiqi.yang147.jp, 1602522393boxili}@gmail.com
{dfeng.zhang, shizhuo.liu, yongqi.song}@samsung.com
{lgc204747899}@gs.zzu.edu.cn, {kai.wang}@cityu-dg.edu.cn,
{yaxing}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Face aging has become a crucial task in computer vision, with applications ranging
from entertainment to healthcare. However, existing methods struggle with achieving a realistic and seamless transformation across the entire lifespan, especially
when handling large age gaps or extreme head poses. The core challenge lies in
balancing age accuracy and identity preservation—what we refer to as the Age-ID
trade-off. Most prior methods either prioritize age transformation at the expense of
identity consistency or vice versa. In this work, we address this issue by proposing
a two-pass face aging framework, named Cradle2Cane, based on few-step text-toimage (T2I) diffusion models. The first pass focuses on solving age accuracy by
introducing an adaptive noise injection (AdaNI) mechanism. This mechanism is
guided by including prompt descriptions of age and gender for the given person as
the textual condition. Also, by adjusting the noise level, we can control the strength
of aging while allowing more flexibility in transforming the face. However, identity
preservation is weakly ensured here to facilitate stronger age transformations. In
the second pass, we enhance identity preservation while maintaining age-specific
features by conditioning the model on two identity-aware embeddings (IDEmb):
SVR-ArcFace and Rotate-CLIP. This pass allows for denoising the transformed
image from the first pass, ensuring stronger identity preservation without compromising the aging accuracy. Both passes are jointly trained in an end-to-end
way. Extensive experiments on the CelebA-HQ test dataset, evaluated through
Face++ and Qwen-VL protocols, show that our Cradle2Cane outperforms existing
face aging methods in age accuracy and identity consistency. Additionally, Cradle2Cane demonstrates superior robustness when applied to in-the-wild human
face images, where prior methods often fail. This significantly broadens its applicability to more diverse and unconstrained real-world scenarios. Code is available
at https://github.com/byliutao/Cradle2Cane.

∗
†

:visiting researcher in Nankai University
:Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

