Knowledge Distillation of Uncertainty
using Deep Latent Factor Model

Sehyun Park
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
ps_hyen@snu.ac.kr

Jongjin Lee
Samsung Research
ga0408@snu.ac.kr

Yunseop Shin
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
dbstjq48@snu.ac.kr

Yongdai Kim∗
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
ydkim0903@gmail.com

Ilsang Ohn
Department of Statistics
Inha University
ilsang.ohn@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep ensembles deliver state-of-the-art, reliable uncertainty quantification, but their
heavy computational and memory requirements hinder their practical deployments
to real applications such as on-device AI. Knowledge distillation compresses an
ensemble into small student models, but existing techniques struggle to preserve
uncertainty partly because reducing the size of DNNs typically results in variation
reduction. To resolve this limitation, we introduce a new method of distribution
distillation (i.e. compressing a teacher ensemble into a student distribution instead
of a student ensemble) called Gaussian distillation, which estimates the distribution
of a teacher ensemble through a special Gaussian process called the deep latent
factor model (DLF) 2 by treating each member of the teacher ensemble as a
realization of a certain stochastic process. The mean and covariance functions in
the DLF model are estimated stably by using the expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm. By using multiple benchmark datasets, we demonstrate that the proposed
Gaussian distillation outperforms existing baselines. In addition, we illustrate that
Gaussian distillation works well for fine-tuning of language models and distribution
shift problems.

1

Introduction

While DNNs have succeeded tremendously in various AI tasks, the rapid increase in their model sizes
has raised a concern about high computational resource demands, which limits their applications to
real world applications such as on-device AI [1], and thus developers have increasingly compressed
large-scale language models into much smaller models [1, 2, 3, 4]. A representative tool for compression is knowledge distillation (KD), which constructs a smaller DNN that mimics a given large-scale
DNN [5].
Another concern is that the inherent over-parameterization of a single DNN makes them susceptible
to overfitting, leading to overconfident predictions. When training predictive models, it is essential
to learn models not only accurate but also reliable. For reliable prediction, proper quantification of
uncertainty has become an important topic in AI research [6, 7, 8]. Deep ensemble (an ensemble
of multiple DNNs) has received much attention not only for its strong predictive performance but
∗
2

Corresponding author.
The source code of DLF is publicly available at https://github.com/sehyun1094/DLF

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

