How Does Topology Bias Distort Message Passing in
Graph Recommender? A Dirichlet Energy Perspective

Yanbiao Ji1
Yue Ding1∗
Dan Luo2
Chang Liu1
1
3
Yuxiang Lu
Xin Xin
Hongtao Lu1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

Lehigh University

3

Shandong University

{jiyanbiao, dingyue, isonomialiu, luyuxiang_2018, htlu}@sjtu.edu.cn
danluo.ir@gmail.com
xinxin@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph-based recommender systems have achieved remarkable effectiveness by
modeling high-order interactions between users and items. However, such approaches are significantly undermined by popularity bias, which distorts the interaction graph’s structure—referred to as topology bias. This leads to overrepresentation of popular items, thereby reinforcing biases and fairness issues through
the user-system feedback loop. Despite attempts to study this effect, most prior
work focuses on the embedding or gradient level bias, overlooking how topology
bias fundamentally distorts the message passing process itself. We bridge this gap
by providing an empirical and theoretical analysis from a Dirichlet energy perspective, revealing that graph message passing inherently amplifies topology bias
and consistently benefits highly connected nodes. To address these limitations, we
propose Test-time Simplicial Propagation (TSP), which extends message passing
to higher-order simplicial complexes. By incorporating richer structures beyond
pairwise connections, TSP mitigates harmful topology bias and substantially improves the representation and recommendation of long-tail items during inference.
Extensive experiments across five real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority
of our approach in mitigating topology bias and enhancing recommendation quality.
The implementation code is available at https://github.com/sotaagi/TSP.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems (RS) are fundamental components of modern online platforms, playing a
crucial role in connecting users with relevant items [16, 64, 8]. Recently, graph-based methods,
such as LightGCN [21], have gained prominence in RS, as they effectively capture collaborative
filtering signals by modeling high-order connectivity between users and items [34, 66, 63, 72].
Despite their effectiveness, graph-based methods suffer from popularity bias, where popular items
are recommended disproportionately more often than less popular items [1, 3]. This notorious effect
not only undermines the accuracy and fairness of recommendation [74, 35, 55], but also exacerbates
the Matthew Effect and the filter bubble [38, 45] through the user-system feedback loop.
In graph-based recommender systems, popularity bias mainly distorts the topology of the interaction
graph, producing a highly biased degree distribution as shown in Figure 1(a), which we refer to
as topology bias. While research has shown that the topology bias gets further amplified [56, 76]
in graph-based methods, the root cause of this effect remains rather unexplored. Although some
recent studies have attempted to understand this issue, they exhibit significant limitations. Their
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

