Neural Entropy

Akhil Premkumar
Department of Applied Physics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511, USA
akhil.premkumar@yale.edu
Work done while at the University of Chicago

Abstract
We explore the connection between deep learning and information theory through
the paradigm of diffusion models. A diffusion model converts noise into structured
data by reinstating, imperfectly, information that is erased when data was diffused
to noise. This information is stored in a neural network during training. We quantify
this information by introducing a measure called neural entropy, which is related
to the total entropy produced by diffusion. Neural entropy is a function of not just
the data distribution, but also the diffusive process itself. Measurements of neural
entropy on a few simple image diffusion models reveal that they are extremely
efficient at compressing large ensembles of structured data.

1

Introduction

How much information is stored in a neural network? As a simple example, consider training a neural
network to store an 8-bit grayscale image of dimension H × W pixels. The network learns a smooth
map from pixel co-ordinates to grayscale intensity values from H × W bytes of raw data. This is
not the total number of bytes of the parameters that constitute the network, and not every image of
size H × W contains the same amount of information. But it is reasonable to expect that if we push
images of higher and higher resolutions/detail onto the same network, at some point the network will
not be able to reproduce the images faithfully
The question is even more pertinent in the context of generative models. These models are capable of
producing seemingly endless variations of the original training data, say images, but that does not
mean the neural network has stored an infinite number of images. Rather, generative models store a
distribution of images, call it pd , and the generated samples are points that interpolate the training
data in pd . This is similar to how the network from the prior example blends the grayscale intensities
between neighboring pixels. So the analogous question to ask is this: how many bytes of data is pd
worth? The primary goal of this paper is to answer this question in the context of diffusion-based
generative models (hint: it is not simply the Shannon entropy of pd , see App. C.2).
Diffusion models serve as a natural bridge between information theory and machine learning, having
been inspired by ideas from non-equilibrium thermodynamics [1], which itself can be viewed as an
application of information-theoretic principles to physical systems [2–4]. Very briefly, samples from
a training dataset are incrementally noised till they are distributed as a generic Gaussian, call it peq ,
while a neural network learns to reverse these noising steps. Once trained, the network can transform
a random Gaussian vector into a highly structured output that resembles a typical member of the
training data. In the continuum limit, the noising and denoising stages become diffusive processes
[5, 6], the thermodynamic properties of which are well established [7–9].
Diffusion gradually wipes out information from pd over time (cf. Fig. 6). The information loss is
quantified by the total entropy produced during the process, Stot . Within this framework, we can
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

