Robust learning of halfspaces under log-concave
marginals

Jane Lange∗
MIT
jlange@mit.edu

Arsen Vasilyan∗
UT Austin
ArsenVasilyan@gmail.com

Abstract
We say that a classifier is adversarially robust to perturbations of norm r if, with
high probability over a point x drawn from the input distribution, there is no point
within distance ≤ r from x that is classified differently. The boundary volume is
the probability that a point falls within distance r of a point with a different label.
This work studies the task of computationally efficient learning of hypotheses with
small boundary volume, where the input is distributed as a subgaussian isotropic
log-concave distribution over Rd .
Linear threshold functions are adversarially robust; they have boundary volume
proportional to r. Such concept classes are efficiently learnable by polynomial
regression, which produces a polynomial threshold function (PTF), but PTFs in
general may have boundary volume Ω(1), even for r ≪ 1.
We give an algorithm that agnostically learns linear threshold functions and returns
a classifier with boundary volume O(r+ε) at radius of perturbation r. The time and
2
sample complexity of dÕ(1/ε ) matches the complexity of polynomial regression.
Our algorithm augments the classic approach of polynomial regression with three
additional steps:
a) performing the ℓ1 -error regression under noise sensitivity constraints,
b) a structured partitioning and rounding step that returns a Boolean classifier
with error opt + O(ε) and noise sensitivity O(r + ε) simultaneously, and
c) a local corrector that “smooths” a function with low noise sensitivity into a
function that is adversarially robust.

1

Introduction

A predictor is robust to adversarial examples if for most possible inputs, a small perturbation will not
cause the input to be misclassified. We define the boundary volume as the probability, over the input
distribution, that a point is close to the boundary:
BoundaryD,r (f ) = Pr [∃z : ∥z∥2 ≤ r and f (x) ̸= f (x + z)].
x∼D

The sum of the boundary volume and the classification error is a natural upper bound on the standard
notion of robust risk:
RobRiskD,r (f ) =

Pr [∃z : ∥z∥2 ≤ r and y ̸= f (x + z)].

(x,y)∼D

In this work, we discuss computationally efficient learning of classifiers with optimal classification
error and boundary volume, thus minimizing the robust risk.
∗

Alphabetical order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

