Efficient Allocation of Working Memory Resource for
Utility Maximization in Humans and Recurrent
Neural Networks
Qingqing Yang
Department of Psychology
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43214
yang.6118@osu.edu

Hsin-Hung Li
Department of Psychology
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43214
li.14492@osu.edu

Abstract
Working memory (WM) supports the temporary retention of task-relevant information. It is limited in capacity and inherently noisy. The ability to flexibly allocate
WM resource is a hallmark of adaptive behavior. While it is well established
that WM resource can be prioritized via selective attention, whether they can be
allocated based on reward incentive alone remains under debate—raising open
questions about whether humans can efficiently allocate WM resource based on
utility. To address this, we conducted behavioral experiments using orientations as
stimuli. Participants first learned stimulus–reward associations and then performed
a delayed estimate WM task. We found that WM precision, indexed by the variability of memory reports, reflected both natural stimulus priors and utility-based
allocation. The effects from reward and prior on memory variability both grew over
time, indicating their effects in stabilizing memory representations. In contrast,
memory bias was largely unaffected by time or reward. To interpret these findings,
we extended efficient coding theory by incorporating time and reformulating the
objective from minimizing estimation loss to maximizing expected utility. We
showed that the behavioral results were consistent with an observer that efficiently
allocates WM resource over time to maximize utility. Lastly, we trained recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) to perform the same WM task under a 2×2 design: prior
(uniform vs. natural) × reward policy (baseline vs. reward context). Human-like
behaviors emerged in RNNs: memory was more stable (lower variability) for stimuli associated with higher probability or rewards, and these effects increased over
time. Transfer learning showed that recurrent dynamics were crucial for adapting
to different priors and reward policies. Together, these results provide converging
behavioral and computational evidence that WM resource allocation is shaped by
environmental statistics and rewards, offering insight into how intelligent systems
can dynamically optimize memory for utility under resource constraints.

1

Introduction

Working memory (WM) is the neural and cognitive process that temporarily maintain task-relevant
information online[Baddeley, 2003]. It supports a wide range of high-level cognition functions such
as learning, decision-making and planning [Collins and Frank, 2012, Daneman and Carpenter, 1980,
Süß et al., 2002, Ehrlich and Murray, 2022]. WM has limited capacity and is inherently noisy—the
quality of the WM decreases with the number of items stored [Luck and Vogel, 1997, 2013, Ma et al.,
2014], and the precision of WM representations decays over time [Pertzov et al., 2017, Panichello
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

