A Reliable Cryptographic Framework for Empirical
Machine Unlearning Evaluation

Yiwen Tu∗
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
evantu@umich.edu

Pingbang Hu∗
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
pbb@illinois.edu

Jiaqi W. Ma
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jiaqima@illinois.edu

Abstract
Machine unlearning updates machine learning models to remove information from
specific training samples, complying with data protection regulations that allow
individuals to request the removal of their personal data. Despite the recent development of numerous unlearning algorithms, reliable evaluation of these algorithms
remains an open research question. In this work, we focus on membership inference
attack (MIA) based evaluation, one of the most common approaches for evaluating
unlearning algorithms, and address various pitfalls of existing evaluation metrics
lacking theoretical understanding and reliability. Specifically, by modeling the
proposed evaluation process as a cryptographic game between unlearning algorithms and MIA adversaries, the naturally induced evaluation metric measures the
data removal efficacy of unlearning algorithms and enjoys provable guarantees
that existing evaluation metrics fail to satisfy. Furthermore, we propose a practical
and efficient approximation of the induced evaluation metric and demonstrate its
effectiveness through both theoretical analysis and empirical experiments. Overall,
this work presents a novel and reliable approach to empirically evaluating unlearning algorithms, paving the way for the development of more effective unlearning
techniques.

1

Introduction

Machine unlearning is an emerging research field in artificial intelligence (AI) motivated by the “Right
to be Forgotten,” outlined by various data protection regulations such as the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) [Mantelero, 2013] and the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) [CCPA,
2018]. Specifically, the Right to be Forgotten grants individuals the right to request that an organization erase their personal data from its databases, subject to certain exceptions. Consequently, when
such data were used for training machine learning models, the organization may be required to update
their models to “unlearn” the data to comply with the Right to be Forgotten. A naive solution is
retraining the model on the remaining data after removing the requested data points, but this solution
is computationally prohibitive. Recently, a plethora of unlearning algorithms have been developed to
efficiently update the model without complete retraining, albeit usually at the price of removing the
requested data information only approximately [Cao and Yang, 2015, Bourtoule et al., 2021, Guo
et al., 2020, Neel et al., 2021, Sekhari et al., 2021, Chien et al., 2023, Kurmanji et al., 2023].
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

