Dynamic Configuration for Cutting Plane Separators
via Reinforcement Learning on Incremental Graph
Mingxuan Ye1 , Jie Wang1∗, Fangzhou Zhu2 , Zhihai Wang1 , Yufei Kuang1 , Xijun Li3 ,
Weilin Luo2 , Jianye Hao2,4 , Feng Wu1
1 MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,

University of Science and Technology of China
3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4 Tianjin University

2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei

1 {mingxuanye,yfkuang,zhwangx}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {jiewangx,fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn
2 {zhufangzhou,luoweilin3,haojianye}@huawei.com
3 {lixijun}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Cutting planes (cuts) are essential for solving mixed-integer linear programming
(MILP) problems, as they tighten the feasible solution space and accelerate the
solving process. Modern MILP solvers offer diverse cutting plane separators to
generate cuts, enabling users to leverage their potential complementary strengths
to tackle problems with different structures. Recent machine learning approaches
learn to configure separators based on problem-specific features, selecting effective
separators and deactivating ineffective ones to save unnecessary computing time.
However, they ignore the dynamics of separator efficacy at different stages of
cut generation and struggle to adapt the configurations for the evolving problems
after multiple rounds of cut generation. To address this challenge, we propose a
novel dynamic separator configuration (DynSep) method that models separator
configuration in different rounds as a reinforcement learning task, making decisions
based on an incremental triplet graph updated by iteratively added cuts. Specifically,
we tokenize the incremental subgraphs and utilize a decoder-only Transformer as
our policy to autoregressively predict when to halt separation and which separators
to activate at each round. Evaluated on synthetic and large-scale real-world MILP
problems, DynSep speeds up average solving time by 64% on easy and medium
datasets, and reduces primal-dual gap integral within the given time limit by 16%
on hard datasets. Moreover, experiments demonstrate that DynSep well generalizes
to MILP instances of significantly larger sizes than those seen during training. The
code is released at https://github.com/MIRALab-USTC/L2O-DynSep.

1

Introduction

Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problems are linear programs that involve both discrete
and continuous decision variables, which have been widely used in real-world optimization tasks [1–3].
A standard MILP problem has the form:
△

𝑧∗ = min{c⊤ x | Ax ≤ b, x ∈ R𝑛 , 𝑥 𝑗 ∈ Z for all 𝑗 ∈ I},
x

(1)

where c ∈ R𝑛 , A ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 , b ∈ R𝑚 , I ⊆ {1, . . . , 𝑛} indexes those variables constrained to be integral,
and 𝑧∗ denotes the optimal objective value of the problem in (1).
∗ Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

