Few-Shot Knowledge Distillation of LLMs With
Counterfactual Explanations

Faisal Hamman

Pasan Dissanayake Yanjun Fu Sanghamitra Dutta
University of Maryland, College Park
{fhamman, pasand, yanjunfu, sanghamd}@umd.edu

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is a promising approach to transfer capabilities from complex teacher models to smaller, resource-efficient student models that can be
deployed easily, particularly in task-aware scenarios. However, existing methods
of task-aware distillation typically require substantial quantities of data which may
be unavailable or expensive to obtain in many practical scenarios. In this paper,
we address this challenge by introducing a novel strategy called Counterfactualexplanation-infused Distillation (C O D) for few-shot task-aware knowledge distillation by systematically infusing counterfactual explanations. Counterfactual
explanations (CFEs) refer to inputs that can flip the output prediction of the teacher
model with minimum perturbation. Our strategy C O D leverages these CFEs to
precisely map the teacher’s decision boundary with significantly fewer samples.
We provide theoretical guarantees for motivating the role of CFEs in distillation,
from both statistical and geometric perspectives. We mathematically show that
CFEs can improve parameter estimation by providing more informative examples
near the teacher’s decision boundary. We also derive geometric insights on how
CFEs effectively act as knowledge probes, helping the students mimic the teacher’s
decision boundaries more effectively than standard data. We perform experiments
across various datasets and LLMs to show that C O D outperforms standard distillation approaches in few-shot regimes (as low as 8 - 512 samples). Notably,
C O D only uses half of the original samples used by the baselines, paired with
their corresponding CFEs and still improves performance. Our code is available at
https://github.com/FaisalHamman/CoD.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance across a broad
spectrum of tasks [1–3]. However, as the size of LLMs grow, so does the associated computational
burden, making them difficult to deploy in resource-constrained environments, e.g., mobile phones,
edge devices, and embedded systems [4]. The challenge, therefore, lies in making large models
more efficient and accessible without sacrificing performance. To this end, knowledge distillation
(KD) (initially proposed in [5]; see surveys [6–8]) has emerged as a powerful technique for model
compression, enabling smaller student models to mimic the performance of a larger teacher model.
In the context of LLMs, KD plays a central role in transferring the broad capabilities such as natural
language understanding [9], reasoning [10], instruction following [11] onto smaller models.
While LLMs are trained for a broad range of tasks, we may often want a smaller, task-specific language
model when full task coverage is not required, particularly in resource-constrained environments.
To support this, task-aware knowledge distillation [12, 13] has been proposed to selectively transfer
task-relevant knowledge from teacher to student models. While effective, these methods typically
assume access to large datasets [14]. However, in many real-world applications, the amount of data
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

