NeuroPath: Neurobiology-Inspired Path Tracking and
Reflection for Semantically Coherent Retrieval

Junchen Li1 , Rongzheng Wang1 , Yihong Huang1 , Qizhi Chen1 ,
Jiasheng Zhang1 , Shuang Liang1∗
1

Institute of Intelligent Computing,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
junchenli@std.uestc.edu.cn, shuangliang@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) greatly enhances large language models
(LLMs) performance in knowledge-intensive tasks. However, naive RAG methods
struggle with multi-hop question answering due to their limited capacity to capture
complex dependencies across documents. Recent studies employ graph-based RAG
to capture document connections. However, these approaches often result in a loss
of semantic coherence and introduce irrelevant noise during node matching and subgraph construction. To address these limitations, we propose NeuroPath, an LLMdriven semantic path tracking RAG framework inspired by the path navigational
planning of place cells in neurobiology. It consists of two steps: Dynamic Path
Tracking and Post-retrieval Completion. Dynamic Path Tracking performs goaldirected semantic path tracking and pruning over the constructed knowledge graph
(KG), improving noise reduction and semantic coherence. Post-retrieval Completion further reinforces these benefits by conducting second-stage retrieval using
intermediate reasoning and the original query to refine the query goal and complete
missing information in the reasoning path. NeuroPath surpasses current state-ofthe-art baselines on three multi-hop QA datasets, achieving average improvements
of 16.3% on recall@2 and 13.5% on recall@5 over advanced graph-based RAG
methods. Moreover, compared to existing iter-based RAG methods, NeuroPath
achieves higher accuracy and reduces token consumption by 22.8%. Finally, we
demonstrate the robustness of NeuroPath across four smaller LLMs (Llama3.1,
GLM4, Mistral0.3, and Gemma3), and further validate its scalability across tasks of
varying complexity. Code is available at https://github.com/KennyCaty/NeuroPath.

1

Introduction

Humans and other animals possess fundamental spatial navigation and episodic memory capabilities
that enable accurate target searching. These abilities originate from cognitive maps formed through
the coordinated activity of multiple neural systems within the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex.
Place cells, as the cornerstone of spatial memory [29], work in concert with grid cells and boundary
vector cells to support not only physical spatial navigation but also the construction of abstract
memory spaces, organizing episodic memory [28, 8]. These neurons exhibit a continuous and
interconnected activation pattern, transitioning from single-location encoding to path integration and
broader cognitive map formation, dynamically supporting goal-directed behaviors [1].
∗

Corresponding Author
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China No.62406057, the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities No.ZYGX2025XJ042, and the Sichuan Science and Technology
Program under Grant No.2024ZDZX0011.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

