LODGE: Level-of-Detail Large-Scale Gaussian
Splatting with Efficient Rendering

Jonas Kulhanek1,4 , Marie-Julie Rakotosaona1 , Fabian Manhardt1 , Christina Tsalicoglou1 ,
Michael Niemeyer1 , Torsten Sattler5 , Songyou Peng2 , Federico Tombari1,3
1
Google, 2 Google DeepMind, 3 Technical University of Munich,
4
Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
5
Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics
https://lodge-gs.github.io/
Large-scale 3D reconstruction

Real-time rendering
on mobile devices

State-of-the-art quality
PSNR

257FPS

26.6

41FPS

Ours

H3DGS
Octree-GS

24.9

NVIDIA A100

3DGS
ZipNeRF

FLOD

43FPS
23.2

FPS

Scaffold-GS

40

150

MacBook
Air M3

iPhone 13 mini

260

Figure 1: LODGE. Applied to large-scale 3D scenes, LODGE achieves outstanding quality while
maintaining superior rendering speeds. Furthermore, it enables real-time rendering on mobile devices.

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel level-of-detail (LOD) method for 3D Gaussian Splatting that enables real-time rendering of large-scale scenes on memoryconstrained devices. Our approach introduces a hierarchical LOD representation
that iteratively selects optimal subsets of Gaussians based on camera distance, thus
largely reducing both rendering time and GPU memory usage. We construct each
LOD level by applying a depth-aware 3D smoothing filter, followed by importancebased pruning and fine-tuning to maintain visual fidelity. To further reduce memory
overhead, we partition the scene into spatial chunks and dynamically load only
relevant Gaussians during rendering, employing an opacity-blending mechanism to
avoid visual artifacts at chunk boundaries. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance on both outdoor (Hierarchical 3DGS) and indoor (Zip-NeRF) datasets,
delivering high-quality renderings with reduced latency and memory requirements.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis is a central area of research in computer vision that enables applications in
AR/VR, gaming, interactive maps, and others. The field has recently received a lot of attention with
the advent of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [22] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [10] — the
latter pushing the range of applications further as it enables real-time rendering. With the rising
popularity of NeRFs and 3DGS, there is an increasing interest in applying such methods to ever
larger and more complex scenes [27, 11, 5]. However, standard methods do not scale well to such
large-scale environments [11, 18]. The core issue lies in the representation: to capture fine details, a
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

