Set Smoothness Unlocks Clarke Hyper-stationarity
in Bilevel Optimization

He Chen
SEEM
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, Hong Kong
hchen@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Jiajin Li
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
jiajin.li@sauder.ubc.ca

Anthony Man-Cho So
SEEM
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, Hong Kong
manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Solving bilevel optimization (BLO) problems to global optimality is generally intractable. A common surrogate is to compute a hyper-stationary point—a stationary
point of the hyper-objective function obtained by minimizing or maximizing the
upper-level objective over the lower-level solution set. Existing methods, however,
either provide weak notions of stationarity or require restrictive assumptions to
guarantee the smoothness of hyper-objective functions. In this paper, we eliminate
these impractical assumptions and show that strong (Clarke) hyper-stationarity
remains computable even when the hyper-objective is nonsmooth. Our key ingredient is a new structural property, called set smoothness, which captures the
variational dependence of the lower-level solution set on the upper-level variable.
We prove that this property holds for a broad class of BLO problems and ensures
weak convexity (resp. concavity) of pessimistic (resp. optimistic) hyper-objective
functions. Building on this foundation, we show that a zeroth-order algorithm
that computes approximate Clarke hyper-stationary points with non-asymptotic
convergence guarantees. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first computational guarantee for Clarke-type stationarity in nonsmooth BLO. Beyond this
specific application, the set smoothness property emerges as a structural concept
of independent interest, with potential to inform the analysis of broader classes of
optimization and variational problems.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization (BLO) models hierarchical decision-making with two agents acting sequentially
[13, 14]. The follower responds to the leader’s decision by solving a lower-level optimization problem,
while the leader seeks an optimal strategy to minimize its upper-level objective subject to this reaction.
The follower’s attitude plays a central role: If the follower is favorable (resp. adverse) to the leader,
the resulting BLO is termed optimistic (resp. pessimistic) [13, 51, 36]. Formally, the optimistic and
pessimistic BLO take the following forms:

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

