Fairness under Competition

Ronen Gradwohl
Department of Economics
University of Haifa
rgradwohl@econ.haifa.ac.il

Eilam Shapira
Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
eilam.shapira@gmail.com

Moshe Tenneholtz
Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
moshet@ie.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Algorithmic fairness has emerged as a central issue in ML, and it has become standard practice to adjust ML algorithms so that they will satisfy fairness requirements
such as Equal Opportunity. In this paper we consider the effects of adopting such
fair classifiers on the overall level of ecosystem fairness. Specifically, we introduce
the study of fairness with competing firms, and demonstrate the failure of fair
classifiers in yielding fair ecosystems. Our results quantify the loss of fairness in
systems, under a variety of conditions, based on classifiers’ correlation and the level
of their data overlap. We show that even if competing classifiers are individually
fair, the ecosystem’s outcome may be unfair; and that adjusting biased algorithms
to improve their individual fairness may lead to an overall decline in ecosystem
fairness. In addition to these theoretical results, we also provide supporting experimental evidence. Together, our model and results provide a novel and essential call
for action.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic decision-making systems are not immune to human prejudices. This has been demonstrated by ample empirical evidence: For example, the use of algorithmic decision-making in
determining loan approval and interest rates has led to minority applicants facing higher loan rejection
rates and higher interest rates than non-minority applicants (Bartlett et al., 2022; Fuster et al., 2022),
and credit card issuers offering lower credit limits for women than men (Gupta, 2019; Telford,
2019). Additional contexts in which such algorithmic bias has been documented are as diverse as
job recruitment (Doleac and Hansen, 2016), insurance premiums and payouts (Angwin et al., 2017),
college admissions (Baker and Hawn, 2022; Gándara et al., 2024), and more (O’Neil, 2016).
To contextualize, consider a bank or other financial institution that issues loans and is subject to
regulatory oversight. The bank employs historical data to train a classifier—a decision rule—to
determine loan eligibility, with the aim of maximizing profit through successful loan repayments.
However, such classifiers frequently exhibit biases against protected groups, such as ethnic minorities.
In response, regulators can mandate fairness restrictions to mitigate these disparities. Bias is not only
normatively problematic, but also has tangible adverse effects on the utility of affected individuals
and, more broadly, on the welfare of the disadvantaged group.
The regulator’s goal in imposing fairness adjustments to classifiers is thus to enhance the welfare
of historically disadvantaged populations. One principled approach to fairness adjustment involves
specifying a utility function, and requiring the classifier to ensure equal welfare across groups.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

