Leveraging Conditional Dependence for Efficient
World Model Denoising
Shaowei Zhang1,2 , Jiahan Cao1,2 , Dian Cheng1,2 , Xunlan Zhou3 , Shenghua Wan1,2 , Le Gan1,2 ,
and De-Chuan Zhan†1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China

{zhangsw, caojh, chengd, wansh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wyattzhouxl@smail.nju.edu.cn,
{ganl, zhandc}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Effective denoising is critical for managing complex visual inputs contaminated
with noisy distractors in model-based reinforcement learning (RL). Current methods often oversimplify the decomposition of observations by neglecting the conditional dependence between task-relevant and task-irrelevant components given
an observation. To address this limitation, we introduce CsDreamer, a modelbased RL approach built upon the world model of Collider-structure Recurrent
State-Space Model (CsRSSM). CsRSSM incorporates colliders to comprehensively
model the denoising inference process and explicitly capture the conditional dependence. Furthermore, it employs a decoupling regularization to balance the
influence of this conditional dependence. By accurately inferring a task-relevant
state space, CsDreamer improves learning efficiency during rollouts. Experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness of CsRSSM in extracting task-relevant information, leading to CsDreamer outperforming existing approaches in environments
characterized by complex noise interference. 1

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning has achieved remarkable success in complex applications such as autonomous driving [1] and conversational interactions [2, 3]. A key factor in these advancements is
the agent’s ability to accurately perceive and interpret observations from its environment. However,
real-world observations are often corrupted by noise and extraneous information, which can severely
impair an agent’s ability to make sound decisions. This challenge intensifies significantly when
dealing with high-dimensional observations like images [4, 5, 6]. Therefore, effectively managing
such noisy observations is essential for developing robust and reliable RL agents.
From a generative model perspective [7], at timestep t, an observation ot is generated by two
distinct sets of latent variables: task-relevant variables st , which directly influence the agent’s
rewards or actions, and task-irrelevant variables ct , which introduce noise and distractions without
contributing to the task (Figure 1 (a)). Existing model-based RL approaches have sought to extract
task-relevant information from observations [8, 9]. Some methods utilize two separate dynamics
models to extract task-relevant and task-irrelevant information from observations [10, 11], while
others decompose observations into task-relevant and task-irrelevant branches [12] or pursue more
fine-grained decomposition [13, 14]. However, these methods oversimplify the decomposition of
observations by neglecting the conditional dependence between st and ct given ot . The importance
of this conditional dependence can be illustrated with a simple example: consider random variables
1

†: Corresponding author.
The code is available at https://github.com/Zhang-Shaowei/CsDreamer.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

