STRCMP: Integrating Graph Structural Priors with
Language Models for Combinatorial Optimization

Xijun Li1,2 , Jiexiang Yang2 , Jinghao Wang2 , Bo Peng1,2 , Jianguo Yao1,2 , Haibing Guan1,2
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Scalable Computing and Systems
2
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{lixijun,jianguo.yao}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Combinatorial optimization (CO) problems, central to operation research and theoretical computer science, present significant computational challenges due to their
N P-hard nature. While large language models (LLMs) have emerged as promising
tools for CO—either by directly generating solutions or synthesizing solver-specific
codes—existing approaches often neglect critical structural priors inherent to CO
problems, leading to suboptimality and iterative inefficiency. Inspired by human
experts’ success in leveraging CO structures for algorithm design, we propose
STRCMP, a novel structure-aware LLM-based algorithm discovery framework that
systematically integrates structure priors to enhance solution quality and solving
efficiency. Our framework combines a graph neural network (GNN) for extracting structural embeddings from CO instances with an LLM conditioned on these
embeddings to identify high-performing algorithms in the form of solver-specific
codes. This composite architecture ensures syntactic correctness, preserves problem topology, and aligns with natural language objectives, while an evolutionary
refinement process iteratively optimizes generated algorithm. Extensive evaluations
across Mixed Integer Linear Programming and Boolean Satisfiability problems,
using nine benchmark datasets, demonstrate that our proposed STRCMP outperforms
five strong neural and LLM-based methods by a large margin, in terms of both
solution optimality and computational efficiency. The code is publicly available in
the repository: https://github.com/Y-Palver/L2O-STRCMP.

1

Introduction

Making complex plans subject to multiple constraints is a
time- and labor-intensive process, but is critical in many
LLM
Code
Solver
Prompt
aspects of our lives such as scheduling [1], logistics [2],
and robotics [3]. These problems are frequently modPrevious work
eled as combinatorial optimization (CO) problem, a cornerstone of operation research and theoretical computer
science, where the objective is to identify optimal solu- Structure
tions within discrete, highly constrained search spaces.
Our Model
Solver
Code
However, the inherent N P-hardness of many CO problems renders obtaining exact solutions computationally
Prompt
intractable, posing significant challenges in solving them
The proposed method
efficiently and accurately. Consequently, substantial re- Figure 1: Intuitive comparison between
search efforts have endeavored to developing algorithms prior work and the proposed framework.
that balance solution quality with computational cost, typically requiring specialized domain expertise
and rigorous analytical modeling of problem structure [4–6].
p

p

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

