HypoBootstrap: A Bootstrapping Framework for
Inductive Reasoning

Si Chen† , Yifei Li† , Richong Zhang∗
SKLCCSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
chen.si@buaa.edu.cn, lyf0862@buaa.edu.cn, zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Inductive reasoning infers general rules from observed evidence, which is one of
the most critical intelligence abilities. Previous works have succeeded in formal
languages but suffer from onerous and error-prone conversions between a particular
formal language and the working language. As large language models (LLMs)
have emerged, direct reasoning with various kinds of languages, especially natural
languages, without formal language involvement has become feasible. However,
existing LLM-based inductive reasoning usually relies on LLM’s intrinsic generation ability, which is prone to LLM’s hallucination and lacks systematic guidance
according to the nature of inductive reasoning. To this end, we propose HypoBootstrap, an integrated framework for inductive reasoning that generates and confirms
hypotheses both in a bootstrapping manner. Regarding hypothesis generation, we
propose a novel bootstrapping generation strategy, bootstrapping object hypotheses,
relational hypotheses, and functional hypotheses successively, which assists LLM
in observing the evidence from trivial patterns to non-trivial patterns. Regarding
hypothesis confirmation, we utilize Glymour’s theory of bootstrap confirmation, a
hypothesis confirmation theory from the philosophy of science that can confirm
a set of hypotheses. We use its principles to confirm the object hypotheses, relational hypotheses, and functional hypotheses. Empirical studies on four inductive
reasoning scenarios of different natures, involving causal induction, concept learning, grammar learning, and abstract reasoning, demonstrate that HypoBootstrap
significantly outperforms existing methods.

1

Introduction

Inductive reasoning emblems high-level human intelligence [8, 19, 11, 1]. While deductive reasoning
is a critically required ability for intelligence, inductive reasoning is more significant, by which
means humans infer general rules from observed evidence. These rules are the basis of the soundness
of deductive reasoning. Figure 1 illustrates an inductive reasoning task. In contrast to deductive
reasoning, where we reason over given rules, inductive reasoning has no rules to follow and requires
creative thinking to generate various possible hypotheses.
In the past few decades, Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) [2] was the major research subject for
inductive reasoning in the AI community. An ILP system can learn symbolic rules from symbolic
evidence, typically expressed in first-order language. An example hypothesis in first-order language
is depicted in Figure 1. While ILP can efficiently learn interpretable rules in formal language, it
mandatorily requires the formalization of evidence, preventing it from inductive reasoning over
more common natural-language evidence. Besides, since ILP cannot produce natural-language rules,
translating formal-language rules into natural language is another tremendous burden.
†
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

