Hierarchical Optimization via LLM-Guided Objective
Evolution for Mobility-on-Demand Systems

Yi Zhang1∗ Yushen Long2 Yun Ni3 Liping Huang1 Xiaohong Wang1 Jun Liu4
1
Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
2
Morgan Stanley Asia Pte.
3
Onto Innovation Inc.
4
School of computing and communications, Lancaster University, UK
{Zhang_Yi, Huang_Liping, Wang_Xiaohong}@a-star.edu.sg
Yushen.Long@morganstanley.com, Yun.Ni@ontoinnovation.com
j.liu81@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
Online ride-hailing platforms aim to deliver efficient mobility-on-demand services,
often facing challenges in balancing dynamic and spatially heterogeneous supply
and demand. Existing methods typically fall into two categories: reinforcement
learning (RL) approaches, which suffer from data inefficiency, oversimplified
modeling of real-world dynamics, and difficulty enforcing operational constraints;
or decomposed online optimization methods, which rely on manually designed highlevel objectives that lack awareness of low-level routing dynamics. To address this
issue, we propose a novel hybrid framework that integrates large language model
(LLM) with mathematical optimization in a dynamic hierarchical system: (1) it is
training-free, removing the need for large-scale interaction data as in RL, and (2) it
leverages LLM to bridge cognitive limitations caused by problem decomposition
by adaptively generating high-level objectives. Within this framework, LLM
serves as a meta-optimizer, producing semantic heuristics that guide a low-level
optimizer responsible for constraint enforcement and real-time decision execution.
These heuristics are refined through a closed-loop evolutionary process, driven by
harmony search, which iteratively adapts the LLM prompts based on feasibility
and performance feedback from the optimization layer. Extensive experiments
based on scenarios derived from both the New York and Chicago taxi datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, achieving an average improvement
of 16% compared to state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Mobility-on-demand platforms, such as ride-hailing services, have become critical urban transportation infrastructures, to address unbalanced demand and supply by continuously executing two core
decision-making processes: order dispatch and vehicle routing [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. This sequential
decision-making involves solving complex combinatorial optimization problems under spatiotemporal
constraints, ensuring timely and efficient service delivery in ever-evolving urban environments.
Firstly, reinforcement learning methods [7, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11] have been employed to learn policies to
address the problem. These approaches can capture long-term rewards by considering the future
trajectories of drivers and passengers. However, RL methods often require extensive training data
and interactions to learn effectively. Training can be unstable and enforcing hard constraints is challenging. In addition, learned policies can behave unpredictably outside of their training distribution.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

