MOSDT: Self-Distillation-Based Decision Transformer
for Multi-Agent Offline Safe Reinforcement Learning

Yuchen Xia1 Yunjian Xu1∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
ycxia@link.cuhk.edu.hk, yjxu@mae.cuhk.edu.hk
1

Abstract
We introduce MOSDT, the first algorithm designed for multi-agent offline safe reinforcement learning (MOSRL), alongside MOSDB, the first dataset and benchmark
for this domain. Different from most existing knowledge distillation-based multiagent RL methods, we propose policy self-distillation (PSD) with a new global
information reconstruction scheme by fusing the observation features of all agents,
streamlining training and improving parameter efficiency. We adopt full parameter
sharing across agents, significantly slashing parameter count and boosting returns
up to 38.4-fold by stabilizing training. We propose a new plug-and-play cost binary
embedding (CBE) module, which binarizes cumulative costs as safety signals and
embeds the signals into return features for efficient information aggregation. On the
strong MOSDB benchmark, MOSDT achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) returns in 14
out of 18 tasks (across all base environments including MuJoCo, Safety Gym, and
Isaac Gym) while ensuring complete safety, with only 65% of the execution parameter count of a SOTA single-agent offline safe RL method CDT. Code, dataset, and
results are available at this website: https://github.com/Lucian1115/MOSDT.git

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (Offline RL) leverages
static datasets to derive policies [1]. Its applications span
diverse domains, such as large language models (LLMs)
[2], robotics [3], and power systems [4]. Offline RL has
spawned specialized subfields, including offline multiagent RL (offline MARL) [5, 6] for systems with interacting agents, and offline safe RL [7, 8] for safety-critical
problems. However, multi-agent offline safe RL (MOSRL)
remains largely unstudied. MOSRL seeks to learn safe
policies for multiple agents in an interaction-free way, offering significant potential for distributed safety-critical
applications, like autonomous vehicle coordination [9],
power grid scheduling [10], and robot collaboration [11].
While existing offline RL methods provide a solid foundation, they may not fully address the complexities of
multi-agent cooperation, offline learning, and safety assurance within such contexts.
Figure 1: Training MOSDT on MOSDB.
Addressing MOSRL requires tackling the key challenges
from both offline MARL and offline safe RL. For offline
MARL, the centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) framework has emerged as
∗

corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

