Near-Exponential Savings for Mean Estimation with
Active Learning

Julian M. Morimoto∗
jmmorimoto@berkeley.edu

Jacob Goldin†
jsgoldin@uchicago.edu

Daniel E. Ho‡
dho@law.stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of efficiently estimating the mean of a k-class random
variable, Y , using a limited number of labels, N , in settings where the analyst
has access to auxiliary information (i.e.: covariates) X that may be informative about Y . We propose an active learning algorithm (“PartiBandits”) to esti2
mate
bPB , such that (b
µPB − E[Y ]) is
 E[Y ]. The algorithm
 yields an estimate, µ
log(N )))
Õ ν+exp(c·(−N/
, where c > 0 is a constant and ν is the risk of the
N
Bayes-optimal classifier. PartiBandits is essentially a two-stage algorithm. In
the first stage, it learns a partition of the unlabeled data that shrinks the average
conditional variance of Y . In the second stage it uses a UCB-style subroutine
(“WarmStart-UCB”) to request labels from each stratum round-by-round. Both
the main algorithm’s and the subroutine’s convergence rates are minimax optimal
in classical settings. PartiBandits bridges the UCB and disagreement-based approaches to active learning despite these two approaches being designed to tackle
very different tasks. We illustrate our methods through simulation using nationwide
electronic health records. Our methods can be implemented using the PartiBandits
package in R.

1

Introduction

Estimating the mean of a k-class random variable, Y , with limited data from a subset of the population
of interest is a pervasive problem in statistics and machine learning. A classical solution to this
problem is to draw a simple random sample (SRS) of N independent and identically distributed
(IID) labels and compute the resulting sample mean. However, this may be an inefficient use of the
label budget if one has information X (i.e., covariates) that may be related to Y . In such cases, one
approach is to leverage X to get a better estimate of E[Y ] with fewer labels, perhaps through stratified
random sampling (StRS) over X and allocating the label budget across strata in proportion to how
frequently each stratum occurs in the population. But in practice, there are many ways to define
strata, and choosing a poor definition can result in minimal gains, or even worse performance than
SRS. In general, analysts who use X poorly, through stratification or otherwise, may over-sample
some subpopulations and neglect others, resulting in biased or sub-optimally noisy estimates (see,
e.g., Aznag et al. (2023); Henderson et al. (2022)). This challenge has motivated the development of
different adaptive sampling techniques for mean estimation (see, e.g., Seber and Mohammad Salehi
(2015); Thompson (1991)), but these approaches focus on asymptotic performance and do not address
whether fast rates of convergence can be achieved in finite samples. In parallel, the active learning
literature has developed strategies for learning with limited labels. While classical active learning
∗

Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley; Regulation, Evaluation, and Governance Lab,
Stanford Law School; World Bank Group
†
University of Chicago; American Bar Foundation
‡
Stanford University
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

