SPFL: Sequential Updates with Parallel
Aggregation for Enhanced Federated Learning
Under Category and Domain Shifts
†

Haoyuan Liang1∗, Shilei Cao1∗ , Guowen Li1 , Zhiyu Ye3 , Haohuan Fu2,3 , Juepeng Zheng1,2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
National Supercomputing Center in Shenzhen, China
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, China
{lianghy68 , caoshlei , ligw8}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
zhengjp8@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yezy25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) has recently emerged as the primary approach to overcoming data silos, enabling collaborative model training without sharing sensitive
or proprietary data. Parallel Federated Learning (PFL) aggregates models trained
independently on each client’s local data, which could prevent the model from converging to the optimal solution due to limited data exposure. In contrast, Sequential
Federated Learning (SFL) allows models to traverse client datasets sequentially,
enhancing data utilization. However, SFL effectiveness is limited in real-world
Non-IID scenarios characterized by category shift (inconsistent class distributions)
and domain shift (distribution discrepancies). These shifts cause two critical issues:
update order sensitivity, where model performance varies significantly with the
sequence of client updates; and catastrophic forgetting, where the model forgets
previously learned features when trained on new client data. Therefore, based on
SFL, we propose a novel updating framework, SPFL (Sequential updates with
Parallel aggregation Federated Learning), that can be integrated into existing PFL
methods. It integrates sequential updates with parallel aggregation to enhance
data utilization and ease update order sensitivity. Meanwhile, we give the convergence analysis of SPFL under strong convex, general convex, and non-convex
conditions, proving that this update scheme is significantly better than PFL and
SFL. Additionally, we introduce the GLAM (Global-Local Alignment Module)
to mitigate catastrophic forgetting by aligning the predictions of the local model
with those of previous models and the global model during training. Our extensive
experiments demonstrate that integrating the SPFL framework into existing PFL
methods significantly improves performance under category and domain shifts.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have demonstrated immense potential across various vision tasks, typically
depending on large-scale data training [1, 2, 3]. As privacy concerns regarding the centralized
collection of extensive data continue to escalate, traditional centralized training methods increasingly
fail to address clients’ privacy needs. In response, Federated Learning (FL) [4, 5, 6] has emerged as
a decentralized solution, designed specifically to prioritize data privacy by allowing models to be
trained collaboratively without centralizing sensitive information. Aligning with the foundational
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

