Estimating Interventional Distributions with
Uncertain Causal Graphs through Meta-Learning

Anish Dhir∗
Imperial College London

Cristiana Diaconu∗
University of Cambridge

Valentinian Mihai Lungu
University of Cambridge

James Requeima
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
Alan Turing Institute

Mark van der Wilk
University of Oxford

Abstract
In scientific domains—from biology to the social sciences—many questions boil
down to What effect will we observe if we intervene on a particular variable? If
the causal relationships (e.g. a causal graph) are known, it is possible to estimate
the intervention distributions. In the absence of this domain knowledge, the causal
structure must be discovered from the available observational data. However,
observational data are often compatible with multiple causal graphs, making methods that commit to a single structure prone to overconfidence. A principled way
to manage this structural uncertainty is via Bayesian inference, which averages
over a posterior distribution on possible causal structures and functional mechanisms. Unfortunately, the number of causal structures grows super-exponentially
with the number of nodes in the graph, making computations intractable. We
propose to circumvent these challenges by using meta-learning to create an end-toend model: the Model-Averaged Causal Estimation Transformer Neural Process
(MACE-TNP). The model is trained to predict the Bayesian model-averaged interventional posterior distribution, and its end-to-end nature bypasses the need for
expensive calculations. Empirically, we demonstrate that MACE-TNP outperforms
strong Bayesian baselines. Our work establishes meta-learning as a flexible and
scalable paradigm for approximating complex Bayesian causal inference, that can
be scaled to increasingly challenging settings in the future.

1

Introduction

Answering interventional questions such as: "What happens to Y when we change X?" is central to
areas such as healthcare [37] and economics [57]. One can estimate such interventional distributions
by actively intervening on the variable of interest and observing the effects (obtaining interventional
data), but this can be costly, difficult, unethical, or even impossible in practice [35]. Causal inference
offers an alternative by leveraging readily available observational data alongside knowledge of
the underlying causal relationships in the form of a causal graph [50]. A causal graph can be
manually specified when domain knowledge is available. In the absence of this, causal discovery
techniques attempt to learn the causal structure from data [45]. However, causal discovery from purely
observational data is notoriously difficult. Identifying the true graph requires strong assumptions,
such as the use of certain restricted model classes [54, 13, Ch. 4] and the acquisition of infinite data,
that are rarely met in practice. It is therefore often the case that data provides plausible evidence
for a set of causal graphs, even though each of these graphs may imply drastically different causal
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

