CoP: Agentic Red-teaming for Large Language
Models using Composition of Principles

Chen Xiong
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
cxiong23@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
New York, USA
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Tsung-Yi Ho
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
tyho@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have spurred transformative
applications in various domains, ranging from open-source to proprietary LLMs.
However, jailbreak attacks, which aim to break safety alignment and user compliance by tricking the target LLMs into answering harmful and risky responses, are
becoming an urgent concern. The practice of red-teaming for LLMs is to proactively explore potential risks and error-prone instances before the release of frontier
AI technology. This paper proposes an agentic workflow to automate and scale the
red-teaming process of LLMs through the Composition-of-Principles (CoP) framework, where human users provide a set of red-teaming principles as instructions
to an AI agent to automatically orchestrate effective red-teaming strategies and
generate jailbreak prompts. Distinct from existing red-teaming methods, our CoP
framework provides a unified and extensible framework to encompass and orchestrate human-provided red-teaming principles to enable the automated discovery
of new red-teaming strategies. When tested against leading LLMs, CoP1 reveals
unprecedented safety risks by finding novel jailbreak prompts and improving the
best-known single-turn attack success rate by up to 19.0 times.

1

Introduction

Modern language models employ safety alignment through techniques such as Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) [1, 2, 3] and Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) [4, 5], but they are
not completely immune to jailbreak attacks that bypass these safeguards. Examples include tricking
LLMs into providing step-by-step tutorials on how to perform illegal or dangerous activities, and
generating malicious programming code to compromise cybersecurity, among others. Early jailbreak
methods such as Greedy Coordinate Gradient (GCG) [6] uses optimization-based adversarial suffixes,
while Base64 [7] encodes obfuscated harmful content to evade detection. More recently, AutoDAN
uses a hierarchical genetic algorithm [8] for optimizing human-readable jailbreak templates with
cross-query transferability. Prompt Automatic Iterative Refinement (PAIR) [9], Tree of Attacks with
Pruning (TAP) [10], and AutoDAN-Turbo [11] leverage LLM-as-an-attacker (i.e., attack LLMs)
within sophisticated pipelines to generate effective jailbreak prompts. In the context of red-teaming,
jailbreak attacks are used by model developers and auditors as adversarial testing tools.
1

Project Page available at: https://huggingface.co/spaces/TrustSafeAI/CoP/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

