Efficient Speech Language Modeling via Energy
Distance in Continuous Latent Space

Zhengrui Ma 1,2,3 , Yang Feng 1,2 * , Chenze Shao 3 , Fandong Meng 3 , Jie Zhou 3 , Min Zhang 4
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc
4
School of Future Science and Engineering, Soochow University
*: Corresponding author {mazhengrui21b,fengyang}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
We introduce SLED, an alternative approach to speech language modeling by encoding speech waveforms into sequences of continuous latent representations and
modeling them autoregressively using an energy distance objective. The energy distance offers an analytical measure of the distributional gap by contrasting simulated
and target samples, enabling efficient training to capture the underlying continuous
autoregressive distribution. By bypassing reliance on residual vector quantization,
SLED avoids discretization errors and eliminates the need for the complicated hierarchical architectures common in existing speech language models. It simplifies the
overall modeling pipeline while preserving the richness of speech information and
maintaining inference efficiency. Empirical results demonstrate that SLED achieves
strong performance in both zero-shot and streaming speech synthesis, showing
its potential for broader applications in general-purpose speech language models.
Demos and code are available at https://github.com/ictnlp/SLED-TTS.

1

Introduction

Text language modeling has achieved tremendous success in recent years. Works such as the GPT
series [2, 50] have demonstrated that by modeling text sequences in an autoregressive manner and
pretraining on large corpora, language models acquire impressive in-context learning abilities and
can perform nearly any downstream natural language processing task. This remarkable potential of
autoregressive language modeling has inspired researchers to explore whether speech audio, which
also possesses a linear structure, can be modeled in a similar fashion.
Unlike text sequences composed of discrete tokens from a finite vocabulary, speech audio is often
represented as a lengthy sequence of sampling points usually stored as integers or floating-point
values within a range. This fundamental difference poses significant challenges for autoregressive
speech modeling in a manner analogous to text. Text language models typically rely on a finite
vocabulary to acquire a categorical distribution at each step, which is essential for stable training
via cross-entropy loss and efficient ancestral sampling during inference. To adapt autoregressive
modeling to speech, researchers have explored discretizing speech into sequences of discrete tokens
using external quantization modules. Examples include discretization on SSL-learned features [24] in
[33, 85, 49], discretization on ASR-supervised features in [7, 8, 83, 31] and reconstruction-oriented
codec [82, 9, 32, 86, 80, 51, 25] in [1, 72, 88, 10, 81, 38]. However, discretization inevitably creates
an information bottleneck, potentially losing the rich details in the raw waveform and thus degrading
the reconstruction quality derived from the discretized tokens. One popular approach to mitigating this
information loss is residual vector quantization [RVQ; 70, 82], which converts raw waveforms into
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

