AdaptDel: Adaptable Deletion Rate Randomized
Smoothing for Certified Robustness

Zhuoqun Huang
University of Melbourne
zhuoqun@unimelb.edu.au

Neil G. Marchant
University of Melbourne
nmarchant@unimelb.edu.au

Olga Ohrimenko
University of Melbourne
oohrimenko@unimelb.edu.au

Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein
University of Melbourne
brubinstein@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
We consider the problem of certified robustness for sequence classification against
edit distance perturbations. Naturally occurring inputs of varying lengths (e.g., sentences in natural language processing tasks) present a challenge to current methods
that employ fixed-rate deletion mechanisms and lead to suboptimal performance.
To this end, we introduce AdaptDel methods with adaptable deletion rates that dynamically adjust based on input properties. We extend the theoretical framework of
randomized smoothing to variable-rate deletion, ensuring sound certification with
respect to edit distance. We achieve strong empirical results in natural language
tasks, observing up to 30 orders of magnitude improvement to median cardinality
of the certified region, over state-of-the-art certifications.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in machine learning have led to significant improvements across many domains,
however the fragility of models to benign noise [1] and adversarial perturbations [2] continues to
undermine model reliability. While empirical defenses have shown promising results in enhancing
model robustness [3–8], they often lack guarantees when facing adaptive adversaries capable of
exploiting the model’s defense strategies. Consequently, certified defenses have emerged as a
promising alternative, providing robustness guarantees against arbitrary attacks within a defined threat
model [9–13]. Among certified defenses, randomized smoothing [14, 15] has gained widespread
recognition for its scalability to large models and strong robustness guarantees.
Sequence prediction tasks, fundamental to natural language processing, bioinformatics, and time
series analysis, present unique challenges for certified robustness. Established threat models, such as
bounded ℓp perturbations, are fundamentally incompatible with variable-length, discrete sequences.
Moreover, the prevailing additive noise-based smoothing mechanisms are ill-defined for discrete data.
To address these challenges, smoothing mechanisms have been proposed that additively perturb and
permute sequences in embedding space [16] or delete sequence elements [17]. The deletion-based
mechanism provides certificates under bounded edit distance perturbations, whereas the perturbation/
permutation-based mechanisms provide certificates in embedding space and typically fail to cover
edit distance perturbations of any magnitude [18, Appendix F]. This focus on variable-length inputs
is a key differentiator from many certified defenses in computer vision, where fixed-size inputs are
the norm and length-dependent adaptation is less critical.
While deletion-based mechanisms have shown promise, one area where existing mechanisms fall
short is their use of a fixed deletion rate for all inputs. This one-size-fits-all approach disregards
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

