A Dynamic Learning Strategy for Dempster-Shafer
Theory with Applications in Classification and
Enhancement
Linlin Fan1 , Xingyu Liu1 , Mingliang Zhou1∗, Xuekai Wei1 , Weizhi Xian2 , Jielu Yan1 , Weijia Jia3
1
School of Computer Science, Chongqing University,
2
Chongqing Research Institute of HIT, Harbin Institute of Technology,
3
BNU-UIC Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Future Networks, Beijing Normal University
linlinfan@stu.cqu.edu.cn,xingyuliu@stu.cqu.edu.cn,mingliangzhou@cqu.edu.cn,
xuekaiwei2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk,wasxxwz@163.com, yanjielu@cqu.edu.cn,
jiawj@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Effective modelling of uncertain information is crucial for quantifying uncertainty.
Dempster–Shafer evidence (DSE) theory is a widely recognized approach for handling uncertain information. However, current methods often neglect the inherent
a priori information within data during modelling, and imbalanced data lead to
insufficient attention to key information in the model. To address these limitations,
this paper presents a dynamic learning strategy based on nonuniform splitting
mechanism and Hilbert space mapping. First, the framework uses a nonuniform
splitting mechanism to dynamically adjust the weights of data subsets and combines the diffusion factor to effectively incorporate the data a priori information,
thereby flexibly addressing uncertainty and conflict. Second, the conflict in the
information fusion process is reduced by Hilbert space mapping. Experimental
results on multiple tasks show that the proposed method significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art methods and effectively improves the performance of classification and low-light image enhancement (LLIE) tasks. The code is available at
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Third-ED16.

1

Introduction

Uncertain information is inevitably encountered in the process of modelling data-based complex
systems via deep learning. Effective modelling and processing of uncertain information is an
important technique that plays a key role in the decision-making process and improves the ultimate
decision-making level. Currently, many methods have been proposed to solve this problem, such as
evidence-theoretic methods [57] and fuzzy logic methods [10]. and deep learning-based methods [44].
These techniques have been applied in several fields, such as graph clustering [49], classification [56],
and target detection [32]. However, how to effectively handle uncertain information from different
sources and combine them effectively while avoiding mutual conflicts is still a challenging problem.
In machine learning, classification is the task of making predictions about new sample categories by
learning the features of samples from known categories [26]. In the classification task, the reliability
of the classifier plays an important role. However, owing to the uncertainty of the data itself and
the possible conflict or redundancy of information from different sources, effectively and rationally
addressing information from different sources to improve classification accuracy has become an
urgent problem. Currently, many classical machine learning methods have been proposed. Denoeux
∗

Corresponding author: Mingliang Zhou.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

