Re-coding for Uncertainties: Edge-awareness Semantic
Concordance for Resilient Event-RGB Segmentation

1

Nan Bao1 , Yifan Zhao1 , Lin Zhu2 , Jia Li1∗
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE & QRI, Beihang University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
{nbao, zhaoyf, jiali}@buaa.edu.cn, linzhu@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic segmentation has achieved great success in ideal conditions. However,
when facing extreme conditions (e.g., insufficient light, fierce camera motion),
most existing methods suffer from significant information loss of RGB, severely
damaging segmentation results. Several researches exploit the high-speed and
high-dynamic event modality as a complement, but event and RGB are naturally
heterogeneous, which leads to feature-level mismatch and inferior optimization
of existing multi-modality methods. Different from these researches, we delve
into the edge secret of both modalities for resilient fusion and propose a novel
Edge-awareness Semantic Concordance framework to unify the multi-modality
heterogeneous features with latent edge cues. In this framework, we first propose
Edge-awareness Latent Re-coding, which obtains uncertainty indicators while
realigning event-RGB features into unified semantic space guided by re-coded distribution, and transfers event-RGB distributions into re-coded features by utilizing a
pre-established edge dictionary as clues. We then propose Re-coded Consolidation
and Uncertainty Optimization, which utilize re-coded edge features and uncertainty
indicators to solve the heterogeneous event-RGB fusion issues under extreme
conditions. We establish two synthetic and one real-world event-RGB semantic
segmentation datasets for extreme scenario comparisons. Experimental results
show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art by a 2.55% mIoU on our
proposed DERS-XS, and possesses superior resilience under spatial occlusion. Our
code and datasets are publicly available at https://github.com/iCVTEAM/ESC.

1

Introduction

Being widely used in autonomous driving, medical imaging, geospatial analysis, and industrial
inspection, semantic segmentation aims to resolve the semantics of visual objects, assigning category
labels to each pixel in the image [8]. When facing extreme conditions due to diversity and complexity
in the wild, conventional single-RGB semantic segmentation faces challenges of corrupted results,
suffering from significant information loss. This has led to the exploration of leveraging information
from multiple modalities for semantic segmentation [46, 50, 51].
We investigate the problem of leveraging event and RGB for semantic segmentation under extreme
conditions, focusing on inferior optimization issues in modality imbalance and failure situations.
Dynamic vision sensor [24, 6, 38], commonly known as event camera, responds to brightness changes
and generates events for each pixel asynchronously and independently. This unique mechanism
gives it many advantages beyond conventional cameras, such as high dynamic range, high temporal
resolution, low latency, and low power consumption [10]. Therefore, event data are widely used
∗

Correspondence should be addressed to Jia Li. Website: https://cvteam.buaa.edu.cn/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

