Leveraging Robust Optimization for LLM Alignment
under Distribution Shifts
Mingye Zhu1,2 Yi Liu2∗ Zheren Fu1
Yongdong Zhang1 Zhendong Mao1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition, People’s Daily Online, Beijing, China

Abstract
Preference alignment methods are increasingly critical for steering large language
models (LLMs) to generate outputs consistent with human values. While recent
approaches often rely on synthetic data generated by LLMs for scalability and costefficiency reasons, this reliance can introduce distribution shifts that undermine the
nuanced representation of human preferences needed for desirable outputs. In this
paper, we propose a novel distribution-aware optimization framework that improves
preference alignment despite such shifts. Our approach first leverages well-learned
classifiers to assign a calibration value to each training sample, quantifying its
alignment with the target human-preferred distribution. These values are then
incorporated into a robust optimization objective that minimizes the worst-case loss
over regions of the data space most relevant to human preferences. By explicitly
focusing optimization on the target distribution, our approach mitigates the impact
of distributional mismatch and improves the generation of responses that better
reflect intended values.

1

Introduction

The rapid proliferation of large language models (LLMs) has made it
increasingly important to ensure that
model outputs align with human values. Techniques such as Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [33, 51, 40] and Direct
Preference Optimization (DPO) [35,
45] have shown promise by leveraging high-quality, human-annotated
data to guide model behavior [43, 2,
12]. A common approach to constructing alignment data involves either manual annotation by humans or
the use of LLMs, with the former
being resource-intensive and timeconsuming, thus limiting scalability
and broader applicability [4]. Consequently, recent research has increasingly focused on leveraging synthetic
∗

Training distribution

Learning

Target distribution
ERM training
over

DoRA training
over
Mixture Response Shift

Figure 1: Comparison of ERM and DoRA Training. The
left section illustrates the training distribution P , which is
a mixture of human-preferred (target) distribution Q0 and
LLM distributions Q1 , highlighting the mixture response
shift. The right section contrasts the outcomes of the traditional method (ERM training) over P with the proposed
DoRA training over Q0 , demonstrating how DoRA better
aligns with the target distribution.

Corresponding author: Yi Liu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

