CoT Information: Improved Sample Complexity
under Chain-of-Thought Supervision

Awni Altabaa
Statistics & Data Science
Yale University
awni.altabaa@yale.edu

Omar Montasser
Statistics & Data Science
Yale University
omar.montasser@yale.edu

John Lafferty
Statistics & Data Science
Yale University
john.lafferty@yale.edu

Abstract
Learning complex functions that involve multi-step reasoning poses a signiﬁcant
challenge for standard supervised learning from input-output examples. Chainof-thought (CoT) supervision, which augments training data with intermediate
reasoning steps to provide a richer learning signal, has driven recent advances in
large language model reasoning. This paper develops a statistical theory of learning under CoT supervision. Central to the theory is the CoT information, which
measures the additional discriminative power offered by the chain-of-thought for
distinguishing hypotheses with different end-to-end behaviors. The main theoretical results demonstrate how CoT supervision can yield signiﬁcantly faster learning
rates compared to standard end-to-end supervision, with both upper bounds and
information-theoretic lower bounds characterized by the CoT information.

1

Introduction

“Chain-of-thought” (CoT) reasoning has been a driving force behind recent advances in the capabilities of large language models. While chain-of-thought began as a prompting technique [1–3],
CoT-supervised training is now an important component of the post-training pipeline for large language models, and has been found to be highly effective in recent empirical research [4–6].
This paper proposes new concepts in statistical learning theory that are aimed at gaining insight into
chain-of-thought learning. Consider the following concrete example of chain-of-thought, to ground
the theoretical framework to be developed. The input x is the sequence “Which is larger, 8.9
or 8.10?” and the intended answer y is “8.9”. When asked to answer directly, earlier systems (e.g.,
GPT-4) might respond incorrectly [e.g., 7]. However, newer models trained with chain-of-thought
supervision will typically ﬁrst output a CoT z, represented as a sequence of tokens, enabling the
model to arrive at the correct answer. For example, the CoT might be, “Compare the numbers
as decimals, with 8.9 written as 8.90 and where 8.10 already has two decimal places.
Then compare them digit by digit. The numbers agree in the first digit. But 9 is
larger than 1 in the tenths place, so 8.9 is larger than 8.10.”. At test time, the CoT

z serves as an explanation of the answer. During training, however, the CoT z plays the role of a
natural language description of the execution trace of an algorithm—a step-by-step procedure that
is to be learned. In this way, CoT is used as a rich, additional supervised learning signal that goes
beyond standard input-output (“end-to-end”) supervision.
The focus of our theory is to describe how this additional information impacts the statistical complexity of CoT-supervised learning. A key contribution of the paper is to identify a quantity that
CoT
we call the chain-of-thought information, denoted by ID,h
(ε; H). As we show, the CoT informa⋆
tion characterizes the statistical complexity of CoT-supervised learning and captures the additional
discrimination power granted to the learning algorithm by observing the chain-of-thought. In particular, the CoT information governs how the end-to-end error of the learned algorithm scales with
the number of CoT training examples. Speciﬁcally, in the standard setting of PAC learning for bi39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

