Towards Robust Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
for Federated Learning

Xiuwen Fang1 , Mang Ye1,2∗
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Taikang Center for Life and Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{fangxiuwen, yemang}@whu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Federated Learning enables collaborative training across decentralized edge devices
while preserving data privacy. However, fine-tuning large-scale pre-trained models
in federated learning is hampered by substantial communication overhead and client
resource limitations. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods like Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) reduce resource demands but suffer from aggregation discrepancies
and heightened vulnerability to label noise, particularly in heterogeneous federated
settings. In this paper, we introduce RFedLR, a robust federated PEFT framework
designed to overcome these challenges. RFedLR integrates two key components:
(1) Sensitivity-aware robust tuning, which identifies and selectively updates noisesensitive parameters to bolster local robustness against label noise, and (2) Adaptive
federated LoRA aggregation, which dynamically weights and aggregates LoRA
updates based on their importance and stability to minimize bias and noise propagation. Comprehensive experimental validation shows RFedLR outperforms existing
methods, achieving superior accuracy and robustness in noisy federated scenarios.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/FangXiuwen/RFedLR

1

Introduction

The proliferation of edge devices generates massive siloed data volumes, whose direct aggregation
and utilization are impeded by significant privacy, regulatory, and transmission constraints [1]. To
meet the challenge, Federated Learning (FL) [2] is a distributed machine learning framework that
facilitates collaborative model training across multiple decentralized clients without sharing sensitive
private data [3–5]. In the classic FedAvg algorithm, clients train models locally on their private
datasets and transmit updated parameters to the server for weighted averaging.
Recently, large-scale Pre-Trained Models (PTMs) show impressive performance in various tasks [6].
Combining the knowledge of large models with the distributed nature of FL [7], via client-side
fine-tuning and server-side aggregation, offers improved performance and privacy guarantees [8–10].
However, applying Full Fine-Tuning (FFT) to large-scale PTMs in FL faces significant challenges [11]:
(1) the substantial communication overhead incurred by transmitting large parameter updates across
resource-constrained networks, and (2) the excessive storage and computational demands that exceed
the capabilities of typical edge devices. Consequently, to facilitate FL with large-scale models on
resource-constrained edge devices, we adopt Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [12], a representative
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) technique, as the paradigm for client-side updates. LoRA
drastically reduces trainable parameters by decomposing weight updates into low-rank matrices
(Fig. 1), making PTMs fine-tuning viable on edge devices.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

