A Principle of Targeted Intervention for
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Anjie Liu∗
Thrust of Artificial Intelligence
HKUST (GZ)

Jianhong Wang∗†
INFORMED-AI Hub
University of Bristol

Samuel Kaski‡

Jun Wang
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London

Mengyue Yang
School of Engineering Mathematics and Technology
University of Bristol

ELLIS Institute Finland

Abstract
Steering cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) towards desired
outcomes is challenging, particularly when the global guidance from a human on
the whole multi-agent system is impractical in a large-scale MARL. On the other
hand, designing external mechanisms (e.g., intrinsic rewards and human feedback)
to coordinate agents mostly relies on empirical studies, lacking a easy-to-use research tool. In this work, we employ multi-agent influence diagrams (MAIDs) as a
graphical framework to address the above issues. First, we introduce the concept
of MARL interaction paradigms (orthogonal to MARL learning paradigms), using
MAIDs to analyze and visualize both unguided self-organization and global guidance mechanisms in MARL. Then, we design a new MARL interaction paradigm,
referred to as the targeted intervention paradigm that is applied to only a single
targeted agent, so the problem of global guidance can be mitigated. In implementation, we introduce a causal inference technique—referred to as Pre-Strategy
Intervention (PSI)—to realize the targeted intervention paradigm. Since MAIDs
can be regarded as a special class of causal diagrams, a composite desired outcome
that integrates the primary task goal and an additional desired outcome can be
achieved by maximizing the corresponding causal effect through the PSI. Moreover, the bundled relevance graph analysis of MAIDs provides a tool to identify
whether an MARL learning paradigm is workable under the design of an MARL
interaction paradigm. In experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed targeted intervention, and verify the result of relevance graph analysis.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) provides a powerful framework for sequential decisionmaking in complex interacting systems, applied in autonomous systems including robotics [1, 2, 3].
A central challenge in MARL is enabling effective coordination among agents that must operate with
partial information in dynamic environments. Achieving robust coordination is often hindered by
inherent difficulties such as non-stationarity [4], where concurrent learning destabilizes individual
agent’s perspectives, making stable learning difficult. Furthermore, effective coordination often
requires guiding a multi-agent system towards a desired outcome—an outcome with specific beneficial
properties that standard MARL approaches may struggle to achieve consistently—especially when
only maximizing a single, shared team reward (task goal) [5, 6].
∗

Equal contributions, names listed in alphabetical order. † Correspondence to Jianhong Wang (jianhong.
wang@bristol.ac.uk). ‡ Samuel Kaski is also with Aalto University and University of Manchester.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

