From Pixels to Views: Learning Angular-Aware and
Physics-Consistent Representations for
Light Field Microscopy

Feng He, Guodong Tan, Qiankun Li∗ , Jun Yu∗ , Quan Wen∗
University of Science and Technology of China
hefengcs@gmail.com, tagodong@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qklee@mail.ustc.edu.cn

harryjun@ustc.edu.cn, qwen@ustc.edu.cn
*Corresponding Author

Abstract
Light field microscopy (LFM) has become an emerging tool in neuroscience for
large-scale neural imaging in vivo, with XLFM (eXtended Light Field Microscopy)
notable for its single-exposure volumetric imaging, broad field of view, and high
temporal resolution. However, learning-based 3D reconstruction in XLFM remains
underdeveloped due to two core challenges: the absence of standardized datasets
and the lack of methods that can efficiently model its angular–spatial structure
while remaining physically grounded. We address these challenges by introducing
three key contributions. First, we construct the XLFM-Zebrafish benchmark, a
large-scale dataset and evaluation suite for XLFM reconstruction. Second, we propose Masked View Modeling for Light Fields (MVM-LF), a self-supervised task
that learns angular priors by predicting occluded views, improving data efficiency.
Third, we formulate the Optical Rendering Consistency Loss (ORC Loss), a differentiable rendering constraint that enforces alignment between predicted volumes
and their PSF-based forward projections. On the XLFM-Zebrafish benchmark, our
method improves PSNR by 7.7% over state-of-the-art baselines. Code and datasets
are publicly available at: https://github.com/hefengcs/XLFM-Former.

1

Introduction

Light Field Microscopy (LFM) has emerged as a crucial technique for rapid volumetric imaging
of nervous systems [18, 36, 19]. Notably, eXtended Light Field Microscopy (XLFM) [7], due to
its graceful balance between speed, scale and resolution, is considered one of the most suitable
LFM techniques for large-scale neural activity recording in several model organisms, including fish
and mouse [1]. XLFM offers several advantages: 1)XLFM enables single-exposure acquisition
of complete light field information at 100 Hz, whereas conventional microscopy techniques (e.g.,
two-photon microscopy [10], light-sheet microscopy [16]) require sequential layer-by-layer scanning,
making it challenging to capture sub-second large-scale neural dynamics simultaneously. 2) The
XLFM system incorporates a point spread function (PSF) that is approximately spatially invariant.
Consequently, the reconstruction of volumes through 3D deconvolution is free from artifacts. 3)
The rapid speed of XLFM allows real-time observation of large-scale population neural activity
in vivo. Integrating volumetric imaging with optogenetic manipulation [3, 35] will enable optical
brain-machine interface, namely closed-loop optical interrogation of brain-wide activity in both
immobilized [28] and freely behaving animals [7, 4].
Despite the promise of eXtended Light Field Microscopy (XLFM) for rapid volumetric neural
imaging, progress in learning-based 3D reconstruction remains limited not only due to the unique
physics of XLFM, but also because of a lack of standardized datasets and evaluation protocols. First,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

