Latent Mixture of Symmetries for Sample-Efficient
Dynamic Learning

Haoran Li Chenhan Xiao Muhao Guo Yang Weng
School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281
{lhaoran, cxiao20, mguo26, yweng2}@asu.edu

Abstract
Learning dynamics is essential for model-based control and Reinforcement Learning in engineering systems, such as robotics and power systems. However, limited
system measurements, such as those from low-resolution sensors, demand sampleefficient learning. Symmetry provides a powerful inductive bias by characterizing
equivariant relations in system states to improve sample efficiency. While recent
methods attempt to discover symmetries from data, they typically assume a single
global symmetry group and treat symmetry discovery and dynamic learning as
separate tasks, leading to limited expressiveness and error accumulation. In this
paper, we propose the Latent Mixture of Symmetries (Latent MoS), an expressive
model that captures a mixture of symmetry-governed latent factors from complex
dynamical measurements. Latent MoS focuses on dynamic learning while locally
and provably preserving the underlying symmetric transformations. To further
capture long-term equivariance, we introduce a hierarchical architecture that stacks
MoS blocks. Numerical experiments in diverse physical systems demonstrate that
Latent MoS outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in interpolation and extrapolation tasks while offering interpretable latent representations suitable for future
geometric and safety-critical analyses.

1

Introduction

Learning dynamic models is fundamental to modern physical and control systems, especially when
exact governing equations are unavailable due to incomplete records, device aging, or privacy
constraints [1, 2]. Accurate dynamic modeling enables robust control and Reinforcement Learning
[3], and supports model-based analysis for performance and safety guarantees [4, 5]. However,
sample-efficient learning remains a challenge in practice, where data scarcity arises from lowresolution meters, communication failures, or storage limitations. For example, in smart grids,
SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) systems typically report measurements every
2 ∼ 10 seconds, while critical events may occur within milliseconds [6, 7].
To mitigate data scarcity issues, existing methods can be grouped into four main categories. The
first category interpolates the low-resolution data by assuming sparsity [8], low-rankness [9], or
manifold geometry [10]. The second category imposes known physical laws as constraints on the
learning process [11, 12]. The third category utilizes Bayesian frameworks that demand accurate
prior distributions [13–15]. In general, all of the above methods require certain domain-specific
assumptions or knowledge. The fourth category requires little prior knowledge and leverages Ordinary
Differential Equation (ODE) solvers to construct a continuous ODE process, e.g., the family of Neural
ODEs [16–19]. Although Neural ODE-based methods are well-suited for sparse data, they often
employ generic architectures such as multilayer perceptrons [16, 20]. This lack of inductive bias
hinders generalization, leading to overfitting rather than capturing true dynamics.
To address these limitations, we propose to use the underlying symmetries in dynamical systems.
Symmetry, defined as a group of transformations that leave a system’s behavior or properties equivari39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

