The Burden of Interactive Alignment with
Inconsistent Preferences
Ali Shirali
UC Berkeley

Abstract
From media platforms to chatbots, algorithms shape how people interact, learn,
and discover information. Such interactions between users and an algorithm often
unfold over multiple steps, during which strategic users can guide the algorithm to
better align with their true interests by selectively engaging with content. However,
users frequently exhibit inconsistent preferences: they may spend considerable
time on content that offers little long-term value, inadvertently signaling that such
content is desirable. Focusing on the user side, this raises a key question: what
does it take for such users to align the algorithm with their true interests?
To investigate these dynamics, we model the user’s decision process as split between
a rational “system 2” that decides whether to engage and an impulsive “system 1”
that determines how long engagement lasts. We then study a multi-leader, singlefollower extensive Stackelberg game, where users, specifically system 2, lead by
committing to engagement strategies and the algorithm best-responds based on
observed interactions. We define the burden of alignment as the minimum horizon
over which users must optimize to effectively steer the algorithm. We show that a
critical horizon exists: users who are sufficiently foresighted can achieve alignment,
while those who are not are instead aligned to the algorithm’s objective. This critical
horizon can be long, imposing a substantial burden. However, even a small, costly
signal (e.g., an extra click) can significantly reduce it. Overall, our framework
explains how users with inconsistent preferences can align an engagement-driven
algorithm with their interests in a Stackelberg equilibrium, highlighting both the
challenges and potential remedies for achieving alignment.

1

Introduction

We study the interactions between human users and an algorithm over multiple steps. While these
interactions may benefit both parties, the user and the algorithm can have misaligned interests. Our
focus is on the user side, asking what it takes for a user to align the algorithm with her interests.
We explore this alignment problem in an interactive environment where users may exhibit inconsistent
preferences within an incentive-aware framework. The following explains our setting in detail.
Our setting and model. When users have consistent preferences—i.e., the engagement length is
in proportion to user’s true reward—the alignment problem reduces to engagement maximization.
Recent advances in designing instruction-following language models rely on this assumption of
consistent preferences, often using models such as Bradley-Terry [1] to directly or indirectly infer
human rewards and optimize them to maximize human approval [2–4]. Similarly, recommender
systems are typically designed to optimize recommendations that maximize user engagement [5].
Users can, however, have inconsistent preferences, where their actions may not reflect their true
interests. This often occurs when a user’s decision results from a combination of impulsive system 1
and rational system 2 processes [6–8], or when consumption choices are influenced by both long-term
benefits (enrichment) and a desire for instant gratification (temptation) [9]. In such cases, revealed
preferences do not necessarily align with the user’s true preferences.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

