MIDAS: Misalignment-based Data Augmentation
Strategy for Imbalanced Multimodal Learning

Seong-Hyeon Hwang∗ Soyoung Choi∗ Steven Euijong Whang†
KAIST
{sh.hwang, wer07081, swhang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Multimodal models often over-rely on dominant modalities, failing to achieve optimal performance. While prior work focuses on modifying training objectives or
optimization procedures, data-centric solutions remain underexplored. We propose
MIDAS, a novel data augmentation strategy that generates misaligned samples
with semantically inconsistent cross-modal information, labeled using unimodal
confidence scores to compel learning from contradictory signals. However, this
confidence-based labeling can still favor the more confident modality. To address
this within our misaligned samples, we introduce weak-modality weighting, which
dynamically increases the loss weight of the least confident modality, thereby
helping the model fully utilize weaker modality. Furthermore, when misaligned
features exhibit greater similarity to the aligned features, these misaligned samples pose a greater challenge, thereby enabling the model to better distinguish
between classes. To leverage this, we propose hard-sample weighting, which
prioritizes such semantically ambiguous misaligned samples. Experiments on multiple multimodal classification benchmarks demonstrate that MIDAS significantly
outperforms related baselines in addressing modality imbalance.

1

Introduction

The human ability to perceive and interpret the world is inherently multimodal, integrating information
from visual, auditory, and textual cues to form a complete understanding. Motivated by this human
perception, multimodal learning has gained significant attention in artificial intelligence research [1, 2].
This approach has led to breakthroughs across domains, including vision-language modeling [3],
medical diagnosis [4], and autonomous systems [5]. In spite of its success in various areas, one of
the fundamental challenges is imbalanced multimodal learning [6], where models tend to rely on
the more informative modality while neglecting the weaker ones. Modality imbalance leads models
toward degraded overall performance, even worse than unimodal models [7].
While extensive recent studies [7, 8, 9, 10] have addressed the multimodal imbalance problem, they
have largely overlooked the importance of data and feature processing. Most studies solve the
problem through designing new training objectives or optimization strategies using only aligned
samples, such as re-weighting each modality importance [7] or adjusting the direction and magnitude
of gradients [11]. Even if a few studies propose data or feature-level solutions, these approaches
typically rely on masking [12] or zero-vector substitution [13]. Such approaches intentionally limit
information use and fail to fully exploit the information embedded in multimodal data.
To overcome this limitation, we introduce a different data-centric perspective: leveraging misaligned
samples as informative data that can reveal and help address modality imbalance, rather than as noise
or outliers [14]. A misaligned sample is formed by combining modalities from different original
* Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

