Sparse MeZO: Less Parameters for Better
Performance in Zeroth-Order LLM Fine-Tuning

Yong Liu1 , Zirui Zhu1 , Chaoyu Gong1∗, Minhao Cheng2 , Cho-Jui Hsieh3 , Yang You1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Pennsylvania State University
3
University of California, Los Angeles
{liuyong, youy}@comp.nus.edu.sg, seu_gcy@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
While fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) for specific tasks often yields impressive results, it comes at the cost of memory inefficiency due to back-propagation
in gradient-based training. Memory-efficient Zeroth-order (MeZO) optimizers,
recently proposed to address this issue, only require forward passes during training,
making them more memory-friendly. However, compared with exact gradients,
ZO-based gradients usually exhibit an estimation error, which can significantly
hurt the optimization process, leading to slower convergence and suboptimal
solutions. In addition, we find that the estimation error will hurt more when
adding to large weights instead of small weights. Based on this observation,
this paper introduces Sparse MeZO, a novel memory-efficient zeroth-order optimization approach that applies ZO only to a carefully chosen subset of parameters. We propose a simple yet effective parameter selection scheme that yields
significant performance gains with Sparse-MeZO. Additionally, we develop a
memory-optimized implementation for sparse masking, ensuring the algorithm
requires only inference-level memory consumption, allowing Sparse-MeZO to
fine-tune LLaMA-30b on a single A100 GPU. Experimental results illustrate that
Sparse-MeZO consistently improves both performance and convergence speed over
MeZO without any overhead. For example, it achieves a 9% absolute accuracy
improvement and 3.5x speedup over MeZO on the RTE task. Code is available at
https://github.com/NUS-HPC-AI-Lab/SparseMeZO.

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning large language models for specific tasks or datasets has become a prevalent practice in
machine learning. However, a major obstacle in fine-tuning is the substantial memory requirements,
which escalate as models increase in size and complexity, thereby limiting the scalability and
accessibility for those with limited computational resources.
To mitigate the memory constraints, Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) has been developed,
allowing for the modification of only a subset of parameters and achieving comparable results to full
model tuning (Hu et al., 2021; Lester et al., 2021; Li & Liang, 2021; Zaken et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2023). However, PEFT methods still necessitate the calculation of gradients for backpropagation and
caching of numerous activations during training, which introduces additional memory overhead. For
instance, Malladi et al. demonstrates that, even with PEFT, training still requires approximately 6
times more memory than the memory cost for inference. This discrepancy raises a critical question:
Can large language models be fine-tuned solely with the cost of inference?
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

