Word-Level Emotional Expression Control in
Zero-Shot Text-to-Speech Synthesis

Tianrui Wang1,2,3 , Haoyu Wang1 , Meng Ge1 , Cheng Gong4 , Chunyu Qiang1,5 ,
Ziyang Ma3,6 , Zikang Huang1 , Guanrou Yang6 , Xiaobao Wang1,2 ,
Eng Siong Chng3 , Xie Chen6 , Longbiao Wang1,7∗, Jianwu Dang8
1
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, College of
Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, 2 Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial
Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), 3 Nanyang Technological University,
4
TeleAI, China Telecom, 5 Kuaishou Technology, 6 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
7
Huiyan Technology (Tianjin), 8 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology

Abstract
While emotional text-to-speech (TTS) has made significant progress, most existing
research remains limited to utterance-level emotional expression and fails to support
word-level control. Achieving word-level expressive control poses fundamental
challenges, primarily due to the complexity of modeling multi-emotion transitions
and the scarcity of annotated datasets that capture intra-sentence emotional and
prosodic variation. In this paper, we propose WeSCon, the first self-training framework that enables word-level control of both emotion and speaking rate in a pretrained zero-shot TTS model, without relying on datasets containing intra-sentence
emotion or speed transitions. Our method introduces a transition-smoothing strategy and a dynamic speed control mechanism to guide the pretrained TTS model
in performing word-level expressive synthesis through a multi-round inference
process. To further simplify the inference, we incorporate a dynamic emotional attention bias mechanism and fine-tune the model via self-training, thereby activating
its ability for word-level expressive control in an end-to-end manner. Experimental
results show that WeSCon effectively overcomes data scarcity, achieving state-ofthe-art performance in word-level emotional expression control while preserving
the strong zero-shot synthesis capabilities of the original TTS model.

1

Introduction

Humans possess the ability to regulate emotional expression during speech flexibly [1]. To simulate
this expressive capability, recent advances in text-to-speech synthesis (TTS) have increasingly focused
on controllable generation of various aspects of speech, such as timbre, emotion, and speaking rate [2].
Such control is a key objective in the development of human-like and expressive TTS.
Most current TTS models exhibit zero-shot capabilities, enabling them to synthesize speech from
text while cloning attributes such as timbre, emotion, and speaking rate from a reference speech
sample [3, 4, 5]. Despite these advances, as shown in Figure 1, emotional and speaking rate control in
current models is typically limited to the utterance level. This differs significantly from how humans
naturally express emotion in speech. Unlike global speaker identity, emotional expression and
speaking rate are dynamic and often vary within a single sentence [6, 7]. Therefore, word-level
control of these factors is essential for achieving more natural and expressive speech synthesis [8]. To
address this limitation, some approaches have proposed phoneme-level emotion prediction from target
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

