UGoDIT: Unsupervised Group Deep Image Prior Via
Transferable Weights

Shijun Liang∗ 1,2 , Ismail R. Alkhouri∗ 1,2 ,
Siddhant Gautum2 , Qing Qu1 , Saiprasad Ravishankar2,3
1
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
2
Department of Computational Mathematics, Science, & Engineering, Michigan State University
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Michigan State University
{shijunli,ismailal,qingqu}@umich.edu
{liangs16,alkhour3,gautamsi,ravisha3}@msu.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in data-centric deep generative models have led to significant
progress in solving inverse imaging problems. However, these models (e.g., diffusion models) typically require large amounts of fully sampled (clean) training data,
which is often impractical in medical and scientific settings. Training-data-free
approaches like Deep Image Prior (DIP) do not require clean images but suffer from
noise overfitting and can be computationally expensive as the network parameters
need to be optimized for each measurement vector independently. Moreover, DIPbased methods often overlook the potential of learning a prior using a small number
of sub-sampled measurements (or degraded images) available during training. In
this paper, we propose UGoDIT —an Unsupervised Group DIP via Transferable
weights—designed for the low-data regime where only a very small number, M , of
sub-sampled measurement vectors are available during training. Our method learns
a set of transferable weights by optimizing a shared encoder and M disentangled
decoders. At test time, we reconstruct the unseen degraded image using a DIP
network, where part of the parameters are fixed to the learned weights, while
the remaining are optimized to enforce measurement consistency. We evaluate
UGoDIT on both medical (multi-coil MRI) and natural (super resolution and nonlinear deblurring) image recovery tasks under various settings. Compared to recent
standalone DIP methods, UGoDIT provides accelerated convergence and notable
improvement in reconstruction quality. Furthermore, UGoDIT achieves performance competitive with SOTA DM-based and supervised approaches, despite not
requiring large amounts of clean training data. Our code is available at: UGoDIT.

1

Introduction

Solving inverse problems is important across a wide range of practical applications, such as those
in robotics [1], forensics [2], remote sensing [3], and geophysics [4]. One class of such problems
is Inverse Imaging Problems (IIPs), including super-resolution [5], image denoising [6], image
deblurring [7], recovering missing portions of images [8] (in-painting), and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) reconstruction [9].
In recent years, an abundance of deep learning (DL) methods have been developed to solve IIPs
[10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. Based on the availability of training data points, DL-based IIP methods can be
categorized into (i) data-less DL approaches, such as the ones based on the Deep Image Prior (DIP)
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

