Robust Cross-modal Alignment Learning for
Cross-Scene Spatial Reasoning and Grounding

Yanglin Feng1 , Hongyuan Zhu2 , Dezhong Peng1,3 , Xi Peng1 , Xiaomin Song4 , Peng Hu1∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore.
3
Tianfu Jincheng Laboratory, Chengdu, China.
4
Sichuan National Innovation New Vision UHD Video Technology Co., Ltd., Chengdu, China.
fcyzfyl@163.com, hongyuanzhu.cn@gmail.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn,
pengx.gm@gmail.com, songxiaomin@uptcsc.com, penghu.ml@gmail.com

Abstract
Grounding target objects in 3D environments via natural language is a fundamental
capability for autonomous agents to successfully fulfill user requests. Almost
all existing works typically assume that the target object lies within a known
scene and focus solely on in-scene localization. In practice, however, agents often
encounter unknown or previously visited environments and need to search across
a large archive of scenes to ground the described object, thereby invalidating this
assumption. To address this, we reveal a novel task called Cross-Scene Spatial
Reasoning and Grounding (CSSRG), which aims to locate a described object
anywhere across an entire collection of 3D scenes rather than predetermined
scenes. Due to the difference from existing 3D visual grounding, CSSRG poses
two challenges: the prohibitive cost of exhaustively traversing all scenes and
more complex cross-modal spatial alignment. To address the challenges, we
propose a Cross-Scene 3D Object Reasoning Framework (CoRe), which adopts a
matching-then-grounding pipeline to reduce computational overhead. Specifically,
CoRe consists of i) a Robust Text-Scene Aligning (RTSA) module that learns
global scene representations for robust alignment between object descriptions
and the corresponding 3D scenes, enabling efficient retrieval of candidate scenes;
and ii) a Tailored Word-Object Associating (TWOA) module that establishes
fine-grained alignment between words and target objects to filter out redundant
context, supporting precise object-level reasoning and alignment. Additionally, to
benchmark CSSRG, we construct a new CrossScene-RETR dataset and evaluation
protocol tailored for cross-scene grounding. Extensive experiments across four
multimodal datasets demonstrate that CoRe dramatically reduces computational
overhead while showing superiority in both scene retrieval and object grounding.
Code is available at https://github.com/Yangl1nFeng/CoRe.

1

Introduction

Grounding objects in 3D environments with natural language has emerged as a pivotal advancement
in multimodal artificial intelligence, enhancing object understanding and interaction of autonomous
agents. Building on this progress, recent developments in 3D Visual Grounding (3DVG) [1, 2, 3]
and Group-wise 3D Object Grounding (GNL3D) [4] have further demonstrated the capability of
agents to locate objects accurately within several given scenes using linguistic cues. However, in
real-world scenarios, users may inquire about where specific events occurred or seek to distinguish
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025)

