A Circular Argument:
Does RoPE need to be Equivariant for Vision?

Chase van de Geijn1,† , Timo Lüddecke1 , Polina Turishcheva1 Alexander S. Ecker1,2,∗
1
Institute of Computer Science and Campus Institute Data Science, University of Göttingen
2
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen, Germany
†
chase.geijn@uni-goettingen.de
∗
ecker@cs.uni-goettingen.de

Abstract
Rotary Positional Encodings (RoPE) have emerged as a highly effective technique
for one-dimensional sequences in Natural Language Processing spurring recent
progress towards generalizing RoPE to higher-dimensional data such as images
and videos. The success of RoPE has been thought to be due to its positional
equivariance, i.e. its status as a relative positional encoding. In this paper, we
mathematically show RoPE to be one of the most general solutions for equivariant
positional embedding in one-dimensional data. Moreover, we show Mixed RoPE
to be the analogously general solution for M -dimensional data, if we require
commutative generators – a property necessary for RoPE’s equivariance. However,
we question whether strict equivariance plays a large role in RoPE’s performance.
We propose Spherical RoPE, a method analogous to Mixed RoPE, but assumes
non-commutative generators. Empirically, we find Spherical RoPE to have the
equivalent or better learning behavior compared to its equivariant analogues. This
suggests that relative positional embeddings are not as important as is commonly
believed, at least within computer vision. We expect this discovery to facilitate
future work in positional encodings for vision that can be faster and generalize
better by removing the preconception that they must be relative.

1

Introduction

Deep learning is in the age of transformers [73]. At their core, transformers are built on attention [4,
61], which is a permutation-invariant operation [74], making them agnostic to word or token position
within a corpus. To break this symmetry, tokens must be modified with position embeddings [25, 83].
Recently, Rotational Positional Encodings (RoPE) [69] have gained popularity, touting an emphasis
on the relative position between two tokens rather than their absolute positions [22, 26, 43, 46].
However, some of the original claims of RoPE have been called into question leading to confusion as
to why it works: Su et al. [69] claimed the attention scores to decay with distance between tokens.
This was found to be true only for attention with the same query and key [5]. Moreover, transformers
with causal masking have been shown to require no positional encodings to be capable of recovering
absolute position [24], making RoPE’s relative (shift-equivariant) claim questionable. However, many
new methods continue to be motivated by RoPE’s benefit from shift-equivariance [27, 60, 85] . To
guide future research in positional encodings, it is important to discover whether shift-equivariance
truly makes RoPE successful and needs to be preserved when extending it.
Both transformer and RoPE were originally designed for one-dimensional sequences such as language.
RoPE encodes position by pairing dimensions within the query and key vectors within a transformer
and rotating the paired dimensions. Transformers have become the current staple across all AI
fields [17, 29, 46, 47, 63]. Naturally, RoPE’s recent popularity in NLP has also spread to Vision
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

