Pruning Spurious Subgraphs for Graph
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Tianjun Yao1

Haoxuan Li1 Yongqiang Chen1,2 Tongliang Liu3,1
Le Song1 Eric Xing1,2 Zhiqiang Shen1
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2
Carnegie Mellon University 3 The University of Sydney
{tianjun.yao,haoxuan.li,yongqiang.chen}@mbzuai.ac.ae
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au, {le.song,eric.xing,zhiqiang.shen}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) often encounter significant performance degradation under distribution shifts between training and test data, hindering their applicability in real-world scenarios. Recent studies have proposed various methods to
address the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization challenge, with many methods
in the graph domain focusing on directly identifying an invariant subgraph that is
predictive of the target label. However, we argue that identifying the edges from the
invariant subgraph directly is challenging and error-prone, especially when some
spurious edges exhibit strong correlations with the targets. In this paper, we propose
PrunE, the first pruning-based graph OOD method that eliminates spurious edges
to improve OOD generalizability. By pruning spurious edges, PrunE retains the
invariant subgraph more comprehensively, which is critical for OOD generalization.
Specifically, PrunEemploys two regularization terms to prune spurious edges: 1)
graph size constraint to exclude uninformative spurious edges, and 2) ϵ-probability
alignment to further suppress the occurrence of spurious edges. Through theoretical analysis and extensive experiments, we show that PrunE achieves superior
OOD performance and outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods significantly.
Codes are available at: https://github.com/tianyao-aka/PrunE-GraphOOD.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [25, 61, 55] often encounter significant performance degradation
under distribution shifts between training and test data, hindering their applicability in real-world
scenarios [18, 19, 27]. To address the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization challenge, recent
studies propose to utilize the causally invariant mechanism to learn invariant features that remain
stable across different environments [44, 2, 1, 23, 29, 10]. In graph domain, various methods have
been proposed to address the OOD generalization problem [59, 34, 9, 38, 52, 16, 64], Most OOD
methods, both in the general domain and the graph domain, aim to learn invariant features directly.
To achieve this, many graph-specific OOD methods utilize a subgraph selector to model independent
edge probabilities to directly identify invariant subgraphs that remain stable across different training
environments [9, 42, 59, 52]. However, we argue that directly identifying invariant subgraphs can
be challenging and error-prone, particularly when spurious edges exhibit strong correlations with
target labels. In such scenarios, certain edges in the invariant subgraph Gc may be misclassified (i.e.,
assigned low predicted probabilities), leading to partial preservation of the invariant substructure
and thereby degrading OOD generalization performance. In contrast, while a subset of spurious
edges may correlate strongly with targets, the majority of spurious edges are relatively uninformative
and easier to identify due to their weak correlations with labels. Consequently, pruning these less
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

