PaceLLM: Brain-Inspired Large Language Models for
Long-Context Understanding

Kangcong Li1∗ , Peng Ye2,3∗, Chongjun Tu1 , Lin Zhang1 , Chunfeng Song2 ,
Jiamin Wu2 , Tao Yang1 , Qihao Zheng2† , Tao Chen1†
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
While Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate strong performance across
domains, their long-context capabilities are limited by transient neural activations causing information decay and unstructured feed-forward network (FFN)
weights leading to semantic fragmentation. Inspired by the brain’s working memory and cortical modularity, we propose PaceLLM, featuring two innovations: (1)
a Persistent Activity (PA) Mechanism that mimics prefrontal cortex (PFC) neurons’
persistent firing by introducing an activation-level memory bank to dynamically
retrieve, reuse, and update critical FFN states, addressing contextual decay; and (2)
Cortical Expert (CE) Clustering that emulates task-adaptive neural specialization
to reorganize FFN weights into semantic modules, establishing cross-token dependencies and mitigating fragmentation. Extensive evaluations show that PaceLLM
achieves 6% improvement on LongBench’s Multi-document QA and 12.5–17.5%
performance gains on ∞-Bench tasks, while extending measurable context length
to 200K tokens in Needle-In-A-Haystack (NIAH) tests. This work pioneers braininspired LLM optimization and is complementary to other works. Besides, it
can be generalized to any model and enhance their long-context performance and
interpretability without structural overhauls.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized natural language processing, achieving stateof-the-art results in tasks ranging from open-ended text generation [3] to complex multi-step
reasoning [47]. These advances have made LLMs the backbone of many real-world applications [43, 14, 41, 44, 42], from dialogue systems [24] to knowledge-intensive tasks [19]. As these
applications scale, there is a growing demand for models to handle longer input sequences, particularly in scenarios such as multi-document question answering [50], long-form summarization [30],
and conversational memory [36]. Modeling such extended contexts requires LLMs not only to retain
information over longer spans, but also to reason over distributed and interdependent content. This
has brought renewed attention to the internal mechanisms that govern context modeling and memory
persistence within LLMs.
Existing approaches to address long-context challenges generally fall into three categories. The first
enhances LLMs’ reasoning capacity through architectural or training improvements [27, 40, 37, 32].
The second focuses on input compression, reducing redundancy while preserving key information [23,
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors: zhengqihao@pjlab.org.cn,eetchen@fudan.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

