A Closer Look at NTK Alignment: Linking Phase
Transitions in Deep Image Regression

Giuseppe Castiglione
School of Engineering and Informatics
University of Sussex
g.castiglione@sussex.ac.uk

Christopher Buckley
School of Engineering and Informatics
University of Sussex
c.l.buckley@sussex.ac.uk

Ivor Simpson
School of Engineering and Informatics
University of Sussex
i.simpson@sussex.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep neural networks trained with gradient descent exhibit varying rates of learning
for different patterns. However, the complexity of fitting models to data makes
direct elucidation of the dynamics of learned patterns challenging. To circumvent
this, many works have opted to characterize phases of learning through summary
statistics known as order parameters. In this work, we propose a unifying framework for constructing order parameters based on the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK),
in which the relationship with the data set is more transparent. In particular, we
derive a local approximation of the NTK for a class of deep regression models
(SIRENs) trained to reconstruct natural images. In so doing, we analytically connect three seemingly distinct phase transitions: the emergence of wave patterns
in residuals (a novel observation), loss rate collapse, and NTK alignment. Our
results provide a dynamical perspective on the observed biases of SIRENs, and
deep image regression models more generally.

1

Introduction

Classical learning theory suggests that models with sufficient capacity - specifically, one whose
parameters outnumber the training samples - tend to "memorise" individual examples rather than
learn underlying patterns, leading to poor generalisation [1]. However, while Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) are typically over-parameterised, a growing body of research highlights the role of Gradient
Descent (GD) in constraining their effective capacity [2, 3]. A recurring observation is that GD biases
neural networks to prioritise learning simple patterns before more complex ones, resulting in distinct
phases of learning [4, 5]. These phases are characterised by changes in the collective evolution
of the network’s weights, which can be quantified by statistics known as order parameters [6, 7,
8, 9]. Although numerous authors have independently proposed statistics to account for changes
in convergence rate [10, 11] - and correspondingly, the memorisation [12] and over-fitting [13] of
complex/noisy patterns - their interrelationships remain under-explored. More significantly, these
existing approaches provide limited insight into the actual content being learned during each phase and consequently, which patterns models systematically struggle to learn. Addressing these gaps is
essential to developing a unified understanding of learning dynamics in DNNs.
A major obstacle in understanding this inductive bias lies in the inherent complexity of GD itself.
While conceptually GD can be viewed as a function mapping from the dataset, hyperparameters,
and initial weights to the final learned weights, in practice, the thousands of iterations through high39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

