Pareto-Optimal Energy Alignment for Designing
Nature-Like Antibodies
Yibo Wen

Chenwei Xu

Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu

Kaize Ding

Han Liu

Northwestern University
{yibo,cwx,jhu}@u.northwestern.edu, {kaize.ding,hanliu}@northwestern.edu

Abstract
We present a three-stage framework for training deep learning models specializing
in antibody sequence-structure co-design. We first pre-train a language model using
millions of antibody sequence data. Then, we employ the learned representations
to guide the training of a diffusion model for joint optimization over both sequence
and structure of antibodies. During the final alignment stage, we optimize the
model to favor antibodies with low repulsion and high attraction to the antigen
binding site, enhancing the rationality and functionality of the designs. To mitigate
conflicting energy preferences, we extend AbDPO (Antibody Direct Preference
Optimization) to guide the model toward Pareto optimality under multiple energybased alignment objectives. Furthermore, we adopt an iterative learning paradigm
with temperature scaling, enabling the model to benefit from diverse online datasets
without requiring additional data. In practice, our proposed methods achieve
high stability and efficiency in producing a better Pareto front of antibody designs
compared to top samples generated by baselines and previous alignment techniques.
Through extensive experiments, we showcase the superior performance of our
methods in generating nature-like antibodies with high binding affinity.

1

Introduction

Antibodies are large, Y-shaped proteins that play a crucial role in protecting the human body against
various disease-causing antigens [Scott et al., 2012]. As shown in Figure 1, an antibody consists of
two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains. Antibodies possess remarkable abilities to
bind a wide range of antigens, and the tips of the Y shape exhibit the most variability [Collis et al.,
2003, Chiu et al., 2019]. These critical regions, composed of specific arrangements of amino acids,
are known as Complementarity Determining Regions (CDRs) since their shapes complement those of
antigens. To a great extent, the CDRs at the tips of light and heavy chains determine an antibody’s
specificity to antigens [Akbar et al., 2021]. Hence, the key challenge in antibody design is identifying
and designing effective CDRs as part of the antibody framework that bind to specific antigens.
Recently, various deep learning models achieve great success in the long-standing problem of antibody
design and optimization. For example, Madani et al. [2023] and Rives et al. [2019] borrow ideas
from language models and treat proteins as sequences to predict their structures, functions, and
other important properties. These methods benefit from having access to large datasets with millions
of protein sequences, but often lead to subpar results in generation tasks conditioned on protein
structures [Gao et al., 2023, Martinkus et al., 2024]. Due to the determinant role of structure in
protein function, co-designing sequences with structures emerges as a more promising approach
[Anishchenko et al., 2020, Harteveld et al., 2022, Jin et al., 2022a,b]. Among all, diffusion-based
Future updates can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.20984.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

