Closed-Form Training Dynamics Reveal Learned Features
and Linear Structure in Word2Vec-like Models

Dhruva Karkada∗
UC Berkeley

James B. Simon
Imbue and UC Berkeley

Yasaman Bahri
Google DeepMind

Michael R. DeWeese
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Self-supervised word embedding algorithms such as word2vec provide a minimal
setting for studying representation learning in language modeling. We examine the
quartic Taylor approximation of the word2vec loss around the origin, and we show
that both the resulting training dynamics and the final performance on downstream
tasks are empirically very similar to those of word2vec. Our main contribution is
to analytically solve for both the gradient flow training dynamics and the final word
embeddings in terms of only the corpus statistics and training hyperparameters.
The solutions reveal that these models learn orthogonal linear subspaces one at
a time, each one incrementing the effective rank of the embeddings until model
capacity is saturated. Training on Wikipedia, we find that each of the top linear
subspaces represents an interpretable topic-level concept. Finally, we apply our
theory to describe how linear representations of more abstract semantic concepts
emerge during training; these can be used to complete analogies via vector addition.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models achieve impressive performance on complex tasks in large part due
to their ability to automatically extract useful features from data. Despite rapid strides in engineering,
a scientific theory describing this process remains elusive. The challenges in developing such a
theory include the complexity of model architectures, the nonconvexity of the optimization, and the
difficulty of data characterization. To make progress, it is prudent to turn to simple models that admit
theoretical analysis while still capturing phenomena of interest.
Word embedding algorithms are a class of self-supervised algorithms that learn word representations
with task-relevant vector structure. One example is word2vec, a contrastive algorithm that learns
to model the probability of finding two given words co-occurring in natural text using a two-layer
linear network (Mikolov et al., 2013). Despite its simplicity, the resulting models succeed on a variety
of semantic understanding tasks. One striking ability exhibited by these embeddings is analogy
completion: most famously, man − woman ≈ king − queen, where man is the embedding for
the word “man” and so on. Importantly, this ability is not explicitly promoted by the optimization
objective; instead, it emerges spontaneously from the process of representation learning.
Contributions. In this work, we give a closed-form description of representation learning in models
trained to minimize the quartic Maclaurin approximation of the word2vec loss. We prove that
the learning problem reduces to matrix factorization with quadratic loss (Theorem 1), so we call
these models quadratic word embedding models (QWEMs). We derive analytic solutions for their
training dynamics and final embeddings under gradient flow and vanishing initialization (Result 3).
Training on Wikipedia, we show that QWEMs closely match word2vec-trained models in their
training dynamics, learned features, and performance on standard benchmarks (Figure 3). We apply
our results to show that the dynamical formation of abstract linear representations is well-described
by quantities taken from random matrix theory (Figure 4). Taken together, our results give a clear
picture of the learning dynamics in contrastive word embedding algorithms such as word2vec.
∗

dkarkada@berkeley.edu
Code to reproduce all experiments available at https://github.com/dkarkada/qwem.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

