Multi-scale Temporal Prediction via Incremental
Generation and Multi-agent Collaboration

Zhitao Zeng1†

Guojian Yuan1†

Junyuan Mao1†

Yuxuan Wang2

Xiaoshuang Jia3

Yueming Jin1∗
1

National University of Singapore

2

Alibaba Group

3

Renmin University of China

Abstract
Accurate temporal prediction is the bridge between comprehensive scene understanding and embodied artificial intelligence. However, predicting multiple finegrained states of scene at multiple temporal scales is difficult for vision-language
models. We formalize the Multi-Scale Temporal Prediction (MSTP) task in general
and surgical scene by decomposing multi-scale into two orthogonal dimensions:
the temporal scale, forecasting states of human and surgery at varying look-ahead
intervals, and the state scale, modeling a hierarchy of states in general and surgical scene. For instance in general scene, states of contacting relationship are
finer-grained than states of spatial relationship. For instance in surgical scene,
medium-level steps are finer-grained than high-level phases yet remain constrained
by their encompassing phase. To support this unified task, we introduce the first
MSTP Benchmark, featuring synchronized annotations across multiple state scales
and temporal scales. We further propose a novel method, Incremental Generation
and Multi-agent Collaboration (IG-MC), which integrates two key innovations.
Firstly, we propose an plug-and-play incremental generation to keep high-quality
temporal prediction that continuously synthesizes up-to-date visual previews at
expanding temporal scales to inform multiple decision-making agents, ensuring
decision content and generated visuals remain synchronized and preventing performance degradation as look-ahead intervals lengthen. Secondly, we propose
a decision-driven multi-agent collaboration framework for multiple states prediction, comprising generation, initiation, and multi-state assessment agents that
dynamically triggers and evaluates prediction cycles to balance global coherence
and local fidelity. Extensive experiments on the MSTP Benchmark in general
and surgical scene show that IG-MC is a generalizable plug-and-play method for
MSTP, demonstrating the effectiveness of incremental generation and the stability
of decision-driven multi-agent collaboration. The code, model weights, benchmark
can be found in https://github.com/jinlab-imvr/MSTP.

1

Introduction

The evolution of embodied AI has ushered in systems capable of interpreting human behavior,
predicting intentions, and executing physical actions in dynamic general and surgical environments
[1, 2, 3]. From assistive robots in healthcare [4, 5] to autonomous agents in smart home settings
[6, 7] to surgical robot with agentic systems in operating room, these systems aim to bridge the
gap between cognitive reasoning and real-world interaction in healthcare. Traditional robotics,
confined to structured tasks with predefined routines, has been revolutionized by models trained
∗

Corresponding Author

† Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

