Elucidated Rolling Diffusion Models for
Probabilistic Forecasting of Complex Dynamics

Salva Rühling Cachay
UC San Diego
Arash Vahdat
NVIDIA

Miika Aittala
NVIDIA

Karsten Kreis
NVIDIA

Morteza Mardani*
NVIDIA

Noah Brenowitz
NVIDIA
Rose Yu*
UC San Diego

Abstract
Diffusion models are a powerful tool for probabilistic forecasting, yet most applications in high-dimensional complex systems predict future states individually.
This approach struggles to model complex temporal dependencies and fails to
explicitly account for the progressive growth of uncertainty inherent to the systems. While rolling diffusion frameworks, which apply increasing noise to forecasts at longer lead times, have been proposed to address this, their integration
with state-of-the-art, high-fidelity diffusion techniques remains a significant challenge. We tackle this problem by introducing Elucidated Rolling Diffusion Models (ERDM), the first framework to successfully unify a rolling forecast structure
with the principled, performant design of Elucidated Diffusion Models (EDM).
To do this, we adapt the core EDM components–its noise schedule, network preconditioning, and Heun sampler–to the rolling forecast setting. The success of
this integration is driven by three key contributions: piq a novel loss weighting
scheme that focuses model capacity on the mid-range forecast horizons where
determinism gives way to stochasticity; piiq an efficient initialization strategy using a pre-trained EDM for the initial window; and piiiq a bespoke hybrid sequence
architecture for robust spatiotemporal feature extraction under progressive denoising. On 2D Navier–Stokes simulations and ERA5 global weather forecasting at
1.5˝ resolution, ERDM consistently outperforms key diffusion-based baselines,
including conditional autoregressive EDM. ERDM offers a flexible and powerful
general framework for tackling diffusion-based dynamics forecasting problems
where modeling uncertainty propagation is paramount.1

1

Introduction

Probabilistic forecasting of complex dynamical systems is essential for realistically assessing future
states (“snapshots”) and their inherent uncertainties [2, 11]. For example, medium-range weather
forecasting (ď 15 days) grapples with the inherent chaotic nature of the atmosphere and high sensitivities to the initial conditions. Ensembles of numerical weather prediction (NWP) models are
therefore standard practice for estimating forecast uncertainty and the likelihood of high-impact
events [42, 3]. However, each ensemble run of a flagship system such as IFS ENS [15] is computationally expensive, motivating data-driven alternatives [7].
1

Code is available at: https://github.com/NVlabs/ERDM
*
Equal advising. Corresponding authors listed alphabetically.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

