RobustMerge: Parameter-Efficient Model Merging
for MLLMs with Direction Robustness
Fanhu Zeng1 Haiyang Guo1 Fei Zhu2∗ Li Shen3,4 Hao Tang5∗
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI-CAS
3
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 4 Shenzhen Loop Area Institute
5
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
challengezengfh@gmail.com, guohaiyang2023@ia.ac.cn,
zhfei2018@gmail.com, shenli6@mail.sysu.edu.cn, haotang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Fine-tuning pre-trained models with custom data leads to numerous expert models
on specific tasks. Merging models into one universal model to empower multi-task
ability refraining from data leakage has gained popularity. With the expansion in
data and model size, parameter-efficient tuning becomes the common practice for
obtaining task-specific models efficiently. However, few methods are dedicated to
efficient merging, and existing methods designed for full fine-tuning merging fail
under efficient merging. To address the issue, we analyze from low-rank decomposition and reveal that direction robustness during merging is crucial for merging
efficient modules. We furthermore uncover that compensating for the gap between
stark singular values contributes to direction robustness. Therefore, we propose
RobustMerge, a training-free parameter-efficient merging method with complementary parameter adaptation to maintain direction robustness. Specifically, we (1)
prune parameters and scale coefficients from inter-parameter relations for singular
values to maintain direction stability away from task interference, and (2) perform
cross-task normalization to enhance unseen task generalization. We establish a
benchmark consisting of diverse multimodal tasks, on which we conduct experiments to certify the outstanding performance and generalizability of our method.
Additional studies and extensive analyses further showcase the effectiveness. Code
is available at https://github.com/AuroraZengfh/RobustMerge.

1

Introduction

Rapid development of foundation models has facilitated the construction of expert models from
custom data. Modern models like large language models (LLMs) are pre-trained on various datasets
to obtain general knowledge and employing pre-trained models typically involves fine-tuning on
task-specific data to gain ability in specific areas. When dealing with tasks of different domains, multitask learning [47] is a common paradigm to mitigate performance variations. However, particular
knowledge may be required progressively over time. As the model becomes larger [4, 59], once the
model is specialized on specific datasets, it is time-consuming and resource-intensive to retrain models
to gain knowledge of another area, even encountering catastrophic forgetting [67]. Furthermore,
issues regarding data privacy may obstruct its practical application. To address these issues, model
merging [51] has been proposed to integrate multiple separate models of specific knowledge off-theshelf into one model with multi-task ability without the demand of training or accessing data. Its
effectiveness and convenience show great potential in various downstream tasks [10, 49].
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

