HollowFlow: Efficient Sample Likelihood Evaluation
using Hollow Message Passing

Johann Flemming Gloy1 Simon Olsson1∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Chalmers University of Technology and University of Gothenburg
SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden.
{gloy, simonols}@chalmers.se
1

Abstract
Flow and diffusion-based models have emerged as powerful tools for scientific
applications, particularly for sampling non-normalized probability distributions,
as exemplified by Boltzmann Generators (BGs). A critical challenge in deploying
these models is their reliance on sample likelihood computations, which scale
prohibitively with system size n, often rendering them infeasible for large-scale
problems. To address this, we introduce HollowFlow, a flow-based generative
model leveraging a novel non-backtracking graph neural network (NoBGNN).
By enforcing a block-diagonal Jacobian structure, HollowFlow likelihoods are
evaluated with a constant number of backward passes in n, yielding speed-ups of up
to O(n2 ): a significant step towards scaling BGs to larger systems. Crucially, our
framework generalizes: any equivariant GNN or attention-based architecture
can be adapted into a NoBGNN. We validate HollowFlow by training BGs on two
different systems of increasing size. For both systems, the sampling and likelihood
evaluation time decreases dramatically, following our theoretical scaling laws. For
the larger system we obtain a 102 × speed-up, clearly illustrating the potential of
HollowFlow-based approaches for high-dimensional scientific problems previously
hindered by computational bottlenecks.

1

Introduction

Efficiently sampling high-dimensional, non-normalized densities — a cornerstone of Bayesian inference and molecular dynamics — remains computationally intractable for many scientific applications.
Boltzmann generators (BGs) [1] address this by training a surrogate model ρ1 (x) to approximate
the Boltzmann distribution µ(x) = Z −1 exp(−βu(x)), where u(x) is the potential energy of the
system configuration x ∈ Ω ⊂ RN , β the inverse temperature, and Z the intractable partition
function. While BGs enable unbiased estimation of observables through reweighting xi ∼ ρ1 with
weights wi ∝ µ(xi )/ρ1 (xi ), their practicality is limited by a fundamental trade-off: likelihood
computations of expressive surrogates rely on N automatic differentiation backward passes with
system dimensionality N , rendering them infeasible for large-scale problems.
To address this problem, we outline a framework combining non-backtracking equivariant graph
neural networks with continuous normalizing flows (CNFs), breaking this trade-off. This strategy
enforces a Jacobian that can easily be split into a block-diagonal and a block-hollow part, reducing
the number of backward passes required for likelihood computation to scale as O(1) in N . Our
contributions include:
Hollow Message Passing (HoMP): A general scheme for message passing with a blockdiagonal Jacobian structure.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

