Eagle 2.5: Boosting Long-Context Post-Training for
Frontier Vision-Language Models

Guo Chen1,2∗, Zhiqi Li1,2 , Shihao Wang3,2 , Jindong Jiang2 , Yicheng Liu1 , Lidong Lu1 ,
De-An Huang2 , Wonmin Byeon2 , Matthieu Le2 , Max Ehrlich2 , Tong Lu1† , Limin Wang1† ,
Bryan Catanzaro2 , Jan Kautz2 , Andrew Tao2 , Zhiding Yu2† , Guilin Liu2†
1
Nanjing University, 2 NVIDIA, 3 Hong Kong Polytechnic University
chenguo1177@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce Eagle2.5, a frontier vision-language model (VLM) for long-context
multimodal learning. Our work addresses the challenges in long video comprehension and high-resolution image understanding, introducing a generalist framework
for both tasks. The proposed training framework incorporates Automatic Degrade
Sampling and Image Area Preservation, two techniques that preserve contextual
integrity and visual details. The framework also includes numerous efficiency
optimizations in the pipeline for long-context data training. Finally, we propose
Eagle-Video-110K, a novel dataset that integrates both story-level and clip-level
annotations, facilitating long-video understanding. Eagle2.5 demonstrates substantial improvements on long-context multimodal benchmarks, providing a robust
solution to the limitations of existing VLMs. Notably, our best model Eagle2.5-8B
achieves 72.4% on Video-MME with 512 input frames, matching the results of
top-tier commercial model such as GPT-4o and large-scale open-source models
like Qwen2.5-VL-72B and InternVL2.5-78B.

1

Introduction

Despite the significant advances in multimodal learning [4, 16, 52, 53, 97], many vision-language
models (VLMs) remain focused on short-context tasks, with long-context understanding underexplored. This gap is particularly evident in both long video comprehension and high-resolution
image/video understanding, where the processing of extended visual contexts remains an open
challenge. Such extended contexts encompass multiple images, extended video sequences, highresolution media, or combinations thereof. However, the development of long-context VLMs is still
in its early stages, hindered by fundamental challenges in dataset construction, architecture design,
training strategies, and computation/memory bottlenecks.
To enable long-context visual understanding, several approaches have been proposed to address the
challenge of processing extended visual inputs by designing specialized compression or selection
modules [52, 84, 57, 45, 43, 117, 103, 53]. While these methods effectively circumvent the need
to extend the context length of VLMs, they often introduce additional computational overhead or
capacity limitations, potentially constraining model performance. A promising research direction
is to extend the context length of LLMs to enable native long-context understanding. While prior
studies [110, 126, 85] have explored this direction, challenges and key limitations still remain. First,
the performance of existing methods is often suboptimal, generally falling behind proprietary models.
Second, these approaches struggle to achieve consistent improvements as the amount of visual input
∗
†

Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
Co-corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

