Fair Deepfake Detectors Can Generalize

Harry Cheng
National University of Singapore
xaCheng1996@gmail.com

Ming-Hui Liu
Shandong University
liuminghui@mail.sdu.edu.cn

Yangyang Guo∗
National University of Singapore
guoyang.eric@gmail.com

Tianyi Wang
National University of Singapore
terry.ai.wang@gmail.com

Liqiang Nie
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
nieliqiang@gmail.com

Mohan Kankanhalli
National University of Singapore
mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Deepfake detection models face two critical challenges: generalization to unseen
manipulations and demographic fairness among population groups. However,
existing approaches often demonstrate that these two objectives are inherently
conflicting, revealing a trade-off between them. In this paper, we, for the first
time, uncover and formally define a causal relationship between fairness and generalization. Building on the back-door adjustment, we show that controlling for
confounders (data distribution and model capacity) enables improved generalization via fairness interventions. Motivated by this insight, we propose Demographic
Attribute-insensitive Intervention Detection (DAID), a plug-and-play framework
composed of: i) Demographic-aware data rebalancing, which employs inversepropensity weighting and subgroup-wise feature normalization to neutralize distributional biases; and ii) Demographic-agnostic feature aggregation, which uses
a novel alignment loss to suppress sensitive-attribute signals. Across three crossdomain benchmarks, DAID consistently achieves superior performance in both
fairness and generalization compared to several state-of-the-art detectors, validating
both its theoretical foundation and practical effectiveness.

1

Introduction

With the advancement of cutting-edge facial synthesis models, attackers can generate high-quality
forged faces at minimal cost [69, 27], resulting in serious negative social implications [65]. In
response to these threats, numerous deepfake detection methods have been proposed [17, 31, 80].
Employing binary real/fake classification [79, 53], these approaches have achieved promising results
when trained and tested on datasets with similar distributions (i.e., forged samples generated using
the same manipulation techniques). However, their generalization ability remains limited when faced
with previously unseen forgery methods [28, 52, 63, 39, 5, 3, 73, 19].
On the other hand, the fairness of deepfake detectors has also drawn increasing attention [13, 35]. The
problem lies in that a detector should maintain consistent performance across different demographic
groups, such as gender and race. However, prior studies [2, 12, 34] have predominantly shown that
simply improving cross-domain generalization does not benefit all demographic subgroups equally
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

