DexGarmentLab: Dexterous Garment Manipulation
Environment with Generalizable Policy

Yuran Wang1* Ruihai Wu1* Yue Chen1*
Jiarui Wang1 Jiaqi Liang1 Ziyu Zhu1 Haoran Geng2
Jitendra Malik2 Pieter Abbeel2 Hao Dong1†
1
Peking University 2 University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Garment manipulation is a critical challenge due to the diversity in garment categories, geometries, and deformations. Despite this, humans can effortlessly handle
garments, thanks to the dexterity of our hands. However, existing research in the
field has struggled to replicate this level of dexterity, primarily hindered by the lack
of realistic simulations of dexterous garment manipulation. Therefore, we propose
DexGarmentLab, the first environment specifically designed for dexterous (especially bimanual) garment manipulation, which features large-scale high-quality 3D
assets for 15 task scenarios, and refines simulation techniques tailored for garment
modeling to reduce the sim-to-real gap. Previous data collection typically relies on
teleoperation or training expert reinforcement learning (RL) policies, which are
labor-intensive and inefficient. In this paper, we leverage garment structural correspondence to automatically generate a dataset with diverse trajectories using only a
single expert demonstration, significantly reducing manual intervention. However,
even extensive demonstrations cannot cover the infinite states of garments, which
necessitates the exploration of new algorithms. To improve generalization across
diverse garment shapes and deformations, we propose a Hierarchical gArmentmanipuLation pOlicy (HALO). It first identifies transferable affordance points to
accurately locate the manipulation area, then generates generalizable trajectories
to complete the task. Through extensive experiments and detailed analysis of
our method and baseline, we demonstrate that HALO consistently outperforms
existing methods, successfully generalizing to previously unseen instances even
with significant variations in shape and deformation where others fail. Our project
page is available at: https://wayrise.github.io/DexGarmentLab/.

1

Introduction

The ability to manipulate various objects is critical for general robots. Despite advancements in
the manipulation of rigid [12] and articulated [33] objects, deformable objects, and garments in
particular, continue to pose substantial challenges [34, 36, 35] due to their highly variable geometries
and intricate deformations. Despite this, humans handle garments with remarkable ease using
dexterous hands, thanks to their superior adaptability, larger manipulation area, and coordinated
finger control, highlighting the importance of equipping robots with similar capabilities. Dexterous
(especially bimanual) hands enable stable and precise actions (such as catching, cradling, pinching,
and smoothening, as shown in Fig. 1), and excel in complex tasks like tie knotting and assisted
dressing, where multi-finger coordination ensures accurate and adaptive manipulation.
Dexterous garment manipulation faces three key challenges: (i) Data: The high-dimensional action
space of dexterous hands and the complex nature of garments make policy learning data-intensive
[14, 6]. What’s more, different garment manipulation tasks require different hand grasp poses to
ensure smooth manipulation and make garments maintain the desired condition. Directly collecting
real-world data is impractical due to high cost. Thus, researchers have pursued simulators for garment
manipulation [23, 26, 39, 16, 25], but these simulators often rely on labor-intensive teleoperation
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

