Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection with
Idempotent Reconstruction

Xin Sun
Zhejiang University
xinsun1@zju.edu.cn

Heng Zhou
Zhejiang University
hengzhou@zju.edu.cn

Chao Li∗
Zhejiang University
chaoli@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstruction-based methods are competitive choices for multivariate time series anomaly detection (MTS AD). However, one challenge these methods may
suffer is over generalization, where abnormal inputs are also well reconstructed.
In addition, balancing robustness and sensitivity is also important for final performance, as robustness ensures accurate detection in potentially noisy data, while
sensitivity enables early detection of subtle anomalies. To address these problems, inspired by idempotent generative network, we take the view from the
manifold and propose a novel module named Idempotent Generation for Anomaly
Detection (IGAD) which can be flexibly combined with a reconstruction-based
method without introducing additional trainable parameters. We modify the manifold to make sure that normal time points can be mapped onto it while tightening it to drop out abnormal time points simultaneously. Regarding the latest
findings of AD metrics, we evaluated IGAD on various methods with four realworld datasets, and they achieve visible improvements in VUS-PR than their
predecessors, demonstrating the effective potential of IGAD for further improvements in MTS AD tasks. Our instructions on integrating IGAD into customized
models and example codes are available at https://github.com/ProEcho1/
Idempotent-Generation-for-Anomaly-Detection-IGAD.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series (MTS) are continuously collected from numerous sensors [3, 56], which is
widely present in many critical scenarios, such as production data from multiple devices in modern
factories and monitoring data from various sensors in smart grids [12, 16, 25]. The task of anomaly
detection (AD) in multivariate time series lies in determining whether each time point within the series
is normal or abnormal, helping to identify possible malfunctions and minimize losses [69, 28, 8],
where each time point in the series can be viewed as a time instance.
Unsupervised anomaly detection methods often develop reconstruction-based models, such as [54,
62, 50]. All time points are label-absent and viewed as normal in the training data. These models
tend to show an encoder-decoder architecture, producing small reconstruction errors for normal time
points and larger reconstruction errors for abnormal ones after training the ability to reconstruct
only on these normal data, as in the second case in Fig.1. However, one challenge these methods
may suffer is over generalization [48], where abnormal time points can also be reconstructed so
well that it becomes harder to distinguish them [6, 39, 17], as shown in the first case of Fig.1. We
conclude the reasons for this issue as that this may happen when: (1) the built model incorrectly
captures the intrinsic patterns of abnormal series in a contaminated dataset for training; or (2) the
model has an excessive decoding power, even for abnormal series. We provide math analysis for
these in Appendix.A. The phenomenon of contaminated datasets exists across multiple domains,
∗

The Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

