Let the LLM Stick to Its Strengths:
Learning to Route Economical LLM

Yi-Kai Zhang1,2 Shiyin Lu3 Qing-Guo Chen3 Weihua Luo3
De-Chuan Zhan1,2 Han-Jia Ye1,2∗
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
2
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
3
AI Business, Alibaba Group

Abstract
Recently, test-time scaling of Large Language Models (LLMs) has emerged as a
practical alternative to parameter and data scaling. Reasoning tasks often require
large-scale, RLVR-based LLMs, while more economical LLMs can handle simpler
tasks. Routing an LLM tailored to suitability (i.e., capability and cost) ensures
usability and efficiency. We introduce LLMRec, which routes the most suitable
LLM to the user query without pre-inference on the candidate LLM zoo. It pioneeringly reframes the LLM routing problem as a comprehensive recommendation
system (RecSys) task. Our core insight is that an LLM’s suitability for a query is a
complex, latent signal equal to user-item preference. LLMRec systematically engineers features for candidate LLMs (intrinsic attributes and capability distributions),
queries (general semantics and meta-dimensional info), and context (inference
type, cost budgets). It also incorporates behavioral features to learn high-order
interactions. LLMRec is designed to generalize to out-of-domain datasets and
adapt to new LLMs as the model zoo evolves. We define the metric with the Pareto
frontier under user-specified cost budgets. Across six datasets, LLMRec achieves
an average cost reduction of over 38% while maintaining accuracy and consistently
outperforming baselines in converging toward the Pareto frontier.

1

Introduction

The rapid growth of large language models (LLMs) [27, 38] has produced a diverse ecosystem
of models varying in scale, functionality, and performance. The parameter scaling era gave rise
to models ranging from 1B-parameter edge-device variants to 100B+ omni-models [48, 57]. The
subsequent test-time scaling era introduced advanced reasoning LLMs like DeepSeek-R1 [15], which
leverage reinforcement learning and extended thinking processes for superior performance.
In practice, companies often provide LLMs-as-API-services [19]. For medium-sized business clients,
the monthly expenses for these services can reach millions of dollars [1], [53]. A significant challenge
arises from this diversity: the capabilities of large or reasoning-heavy LLMs often far exceed the
requirements of some downstream tasks, leading to unnecessary costs. Smaller-scale LLMs are
typically sufficient for handling simple tasks, but more complex tasks, such as code generation [10]
or mathematical reasoning [12], often require techniques like chain-of-thought (CoT), or larger,
reasoning LLMs with extended inference tokens [28, 13, 54]. An intuitive idea emerges: can we
intelligently route user queries to the most suitable LLM, balancing performance and cost?
A good model routing outcome hinges on cost considerations, primarily driven by two factors [3]:
the cost per token and the number of tokens generated. The former reflects the expense of producing
∗

Corresponding author, email: yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

