Improving Diffusion-based Inverse Algorithms under
Few-Step Constraint via Linear Extrapolation

Jiawei Zhang
Tsinghua University

Ziyuan Liu
Tsinghua University

jiawei-z23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

liuziyua22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Leon Yan
Tsinghua University

Gen Li
CUHK

Yuantao Gu∗
Tsinghua University

yansc23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

genli@cuhk.edu.hk

gyt@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion-based inverse algorithms have shown remarkable performance across
various inverse problems, yet their reliance on numerous denoising steps incurs high
computational costs. While recent developments of fast diffusion ODE solvers offer
effective acceleration for diffusion sampling without observations, their application
in inverse problems remains limited due to the heterogeneous formulations of
inverse algorithms and their prevalent use of approximations and heuristics, which
often introduce significant errors that undermine the reliability of analytical solvers.
In this work, we begin with an analysis of ODE solvers for inverse problems that
reveals a linear combination structure of approximations for the inverse trajectory.
Building on this insight, we propose a canonical form that unifies a broad class of
diffusion-based inverse algorithms and facilitates the design of more generalizable
solvers. Inspired by the linear subspace search strategy, we propose Learnable
Linear Extrapolation (LLE), a lightweight approach that universally enhances the
performance of any diffusion-based inverse algorithm conforming to our canonical
form. LLE optimizes the combination coefficients to refine current predictions
using previous estimates, alleviating the sensitivity of analytical solvers for inverse
algorithms. Extensive experiments demonstrate consistent improvements of the
proposed LLE method across multiple algorithms and tasks, indicating its potential
for more efficient solutions and boosted performance of diffusion-based inverse
algorithms with limited steps. Codes for reproducing our experiments are available
at https://github.com/weigerzan/LLE_inverse_problem.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable capability in modeling complex data priors [1, 2, 3,
4], which has led to their widespread application in solving inverse problems. Extensive efforts have
been devoted to the development of diffusion-based inverse algorithms [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14],
achieving impressive performance in numerous tasks including inpainting [15], super-resolution [16],
deblurring [17], and compressed sensing [18].
One major drawback of diffusion-based inverse algorithms is the need for multiple neural network
inferences, resulting in high computational complexity. Directly reducing the number of inference
steps often degrades the performance of these inverse algorithms. Therefore, enhancing the performance of diffusion-based inverse algorithms under limited steps has emerged as a critical research
∗

The corresponding author is Yuantao Gu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

