When Lower-Order Terms Dominate: Adaptive
Expert Algorithms for Heavy-Tailed Losses

Antoine Moulin∗
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
antoine.moulin@upf.edu

Emmanuel Esposito∗
Università degli Studi di Milano
emmanuel@emmanuelesposito.it

Dirk van der Hoeven
Leiden University
dirk@dirkvanderhoeven.com

Abstract
We consider the problem setting of prediction with expert advice with possibly
heavy-tailed losses, i.e. the only assumption on the losses is an upper bound on their
second moments, denoted by θ. We develop adaptive algorithms that do not require
any prior knowledge about the range or the second moment of the losses. Existing
adaptive algorithms have what is typically considered a lower-order term in their
regret guarantees. We show that this lower-order term, which is often the maximum
of the losses, can actually dominate the regret bound in our setting. Specifically,
√
we show that even with small constant θ, this lower-order term can scale as KT ,
where K is the number of experts and T is the time horizon. We propose adaptive
algorithms with improved regret bounds
that avoid the dependence on such a
p
lower-order term and guarantee O( θT log(K)) regret in the worst case, and
O(θ log(KT )/∆min ) regret when the losses are sampled i.i.d. from some fixed
distribution, where ∆min is the difference between the mean losses of the second
best expert and the best expert. Additionally, when the loss function is the squared
loss, our algorithm also guarantees improved regret bounds over prior results.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of prediction with expert advice [Vovk, 1990, Littlestone and Warmuth, 1994],
a sequential decision-making setting over T rounds where each round t goes as follows. The learner
selects a probability distribution pt ∈ P = p ∈ RK : p(i) ≥ 0, ⟨pt , 1⟩ = 1 over K experts, suffers
some loss ft (pt ) ∈ R, and subsequently observes the loss function ft : P → R. The goal in this
problem, also known more briefly as the experts setting, is to control the (pseudo-)regret
" T
#
X
RT = max RT (ei ) = max E
(ft (pt ) − ft (ei )) ,
i∈[K]

i∈[K]

t=1

where the expectation is with respect to the randomness in (ft )t∈[T ] , and ei ∈ P is the i-th standard
basis vector. The pseudo-regret measures the expected difference between the learner’s cumulative
loss and that of the best expert in hindsight. Throughout the paper, we assume that either the
losses or the outcomes are heavy tailed, and provide a concrete answer to the concluding remarks
of Mhammedi et al. [2019] that highlight the challenge of dealing with infrequent large values in
the full-information setting. Such conditions arise in various practical settings involving noisy data,
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

