Reward-oriented Causal Representation Learning

Zirui Yan∗
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
yanz11@rpi.edu

Emre Acartürk∗
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
acarte@rpi.edu

Ali Tajer
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
tajer@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Causal representation learning (CRL) is the process of disentangling the latent
low-dimensional causally-related generating factors underlying high-dimensional
observable data. Extensive recent studies have characterized CRL identifiability
and perfect recovery of the latent variables and their attendant causal graph. This
paper introduces the notion of reward-oriented CRL, the purpose of which is to
move away from perfectly learning the latent representation and instead learning
it to the extent needed for optimizing a desired downstream task (reward). In
reward-oriented CRL, perfectly learning the latent representation can be excessive;
instead, it must be learned at the coarsest level sufficient for optimizing the desired
task. Reward-oriented CRL is formalized as the optimization of a desired function
of the observable data over the space of all possible interventions and focuses
on linear causal and transformation models. To sequentially identify the optimal
subset of interventions, an adaptive exploration algorithm is designed that learns
the latent causal graph and the variables needed to identify the best intervention. It
is shown that for an n-dimensional latent space and a d-dimensional observation
√
1
1
2
2
space, over a horizon T the algorithm’s regret scales as Õ(d 3 n 3 u 3 T 3 + u T ),
where u measures total uncertainty in the graph estimates. Furthermore,
an almost√
1
1
2
2
matching lower bound is shown to scale as Ω(d 3 n 3 p 3 T 3 + p T ), in which u is
replaced by p that counts the number of causal paths in the graph.

1

Introduction

Consider a data-generating process in which latent low-dimensional causally-related variables are
mapped to observational high-dimensional data through an unknown transformation. Causal representation learning (CRL) is the process of using observational data to learn the latent, unobserved
generating factors, i.e., the latent variables and the latent causal graph that specifies their causal interactions. CRL is considered a significant step toward understanding the world by learning appropriate
representations that support causal interventions, reasoning, and planning [1].
CRL literature. There exists rich recent literature on CRL identifiability analysis – the objective
of which is establishing conditions under which the latent space can be recovered uniquely – across
various models for the latent causal model (e.g., linear, parametric, and non-parametric) and the
unknown transformation (e.g., linear, parametric, and non-parametric). Some representative studies
include [2–13]. Aiming to establish possibility/impossibility results, the existing literature is primarily
focused on the asymptotic setting of access to an infinite number of observations, with limited studies
on finite-sample guarantees [4]. Specifically, we refer to [2–5] for the most closely related works in
terms of setting and methodology.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

