PRESTO: Preimage-Informed Instruction
Optimization for Prompting Black-Box LLMs

Jaewon Chu1

Seunghun Lee2∗ Hyunwoo J. Kim2†
Korea University, 2 KAIST
allonsy07@korea.ac.kr {llsshh319, hyunwoojkim}@kaist.ac.kr
1

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success across diverse
domains, due to their strong instruction-following capabilities. This has led to
increasing interest in optimizing instructions for black-box LLMs, whose internal parameters are inaccessible but widely used due to their strong performance.
To optimize instructions for black-box LLMs, recent methods employ white-box
LLMs to generate candidate instructions from optimized soft prompts. However,
white-box LLMs often map different soft prompts to the same instruction, leading
to redundant queries. While previous studies regarded this many-to-one mapping
as a structure that hinders optimization efficiency, we reinterpret it as a useful
prior knowledge that can accelerate the optimization. To this end, we introduce
PREimage-informed inSTruction Optimization (PRESTO), a novel framework
that leverages the preimage structure of soft prompts for efficient optimization.
PRESTO consists of three key components: (1) score sharing, which shares the
evaluation score with all soft prompts in a preimage; (2) preimage-based initialization, which selects initial data points that maximize search space coverage using
preimage information; and (3) score consistency regularization, which enforces
prediction consistency within each preimage. By leveraging preimages, PRESTO
achieves the effect of effectively obtaining 14 times more scored data under the
same query budget, resulting in more efficient optimization. Experimental results on 33 instruction optimization tasks demonstrate the superior performance of
PRESTO. Code is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/PRESTO.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong performance across a wide range of domains [1–5]. This success is largely attributed to their impressive instruction-following capabilities,
which have led to growing interest in discovering effective instructions to enhance their performance [6, 7]. In particular, LLMs provided through APIs (i.e., black-box LLMs), such as GPT-4 [2],
are widely used and show exceptionally strong performance. However, optimizing instructions for
the black-box LLMs is a challenging problem, since their internal parameters are inaccessible. To
tackle this challenge, recent studies have explored various strategies for optimizing instructions for
black-box LLMs, without access to internal model parameters [8–13].
Recently, some studies [14–16] have leveraged open-source LLMs (i.e., white-box LLMs) [1, 17, 18]
to assist instruction optimization for black-box LLMs, demonstrating promising results and attracting
growing interest. Specifically, these methods optimize a soft prompt, which is taken as input
to the white-box LLM. The optimization is performed using black-box optimization algorithms
such as Bayesian Optimization [19, 20] or Neural Bandits [21, 22], guided by a score predictor
∗
†

Work done while at Korea University.
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

