Guarantees for Alternating Least Squares in
Overparameterized Tensor Decomposition

Dionysis Arvanitakis
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
dionarva@u.northwestern.edu

Vaidehi Srinivas
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
vaidehi@u.northwestern.edu

Aravindan Vijayaraghavan
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
aravindv@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Tensor decomposition is a canonical non-convex optimization problem that is
computationally challenging, and yet important due to applications in factor
analysis and parameter estimation of latent variable models. In practice, scalable iterative methods, particularly Alternating Least Squares (ALS), remain the
workhorse for tensor decomposition despite the lack of global convergence guarantees. A popular approach to tackle challenging non-convex optimization problems
is overparameterization— on input an n × n × n tensor of rank r, the algorithm
can output a decomposition of potentially rank k (potentially larger than r). On the
theoretical side, overparameterization for iterative methods is challenging to reason
about and requires new techniques. The work of Wang et al., (NeurIPS 2020)
makes progress by showing that a variant of gradient descent globally converges
when overparameterized to k = O(r7.5 log n). Our main result shows that overparameterization provably enables global convergence of ALS: on input a third order
n × n × n tensor with a decomposition of rank r ≪ n, ALS overparameterized
with rank k = O(r2 ) achieves global convergence with high probability under
random initialization. Moreover our analysis also gives guarantees for the more
general low-rank approximation problem. The analysis introduces new techniques
for understanding iterative methods in the overparameterized regime based on new
matrix anticoncentration arguments.

1

Introduction

Iterative heuristics like alternating least squares (ALS), alternate minimization, and gradient descent
are the workhorse for many computational tasks in machine learning and high-dimensional data
analysis. Their simplicity, scalability and empirical success have led to their widespread use, even
for highly non-convex problems. Yet rigorous guarantees have been hard to establish due to the
non-convex nature of these problems.
Tensor decomposition is a prime example of a well-studied non-convex problem where there is a
disconnect between the practical performance of iterative heuristics and known theoretical guarantees.
We are given a third-order tensor T ∈ Rn×n×n , and the goal is to decompose the tensor as a sum of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

