Simulation-Based Inference for Adaptive Experiments

Brian M Cho
Cornell Tech
bmc233@cornell.edu

Aurélien Bibaut
Netflix
abibaut@netflix.com

Nathan Kallus
Netflix & Cornell Tech
kallus@cornell.edu

Abstract
Multi-arm bandit experimental designs are increasingly being adopted over standard
randomized trials due to their potential to improve outcomes for study participants,
enable faster identification of the best-performing options, and/or enhance the
precision of estimating key parameters. Current approaches for inference after
adaptive sampling either rely on asymptotic normality under restricted experiment
designs or underpowered martingale concentration inequalities that lead to weak
power in practice. To bypass these limitations, we propose a simulation-based
approach for conducting hypothesis tests and constructing confidence intervals for
arm specific means and their differences. Our simulation-based approach uses positively biased nuisances to generate additional trajectories of the experiment, which
we call simulation with optimism. Using these simulations, we characterize the
distribution potentially non-normal sample mean test statistic to conduct inference.
We provide guarantees for (i) asymptotic type I error control, (ii) convergence of
our confidence intervals, and (iii) asymptotic strong consistency of our estimator
over a wide variety of common bandit designs. Our empirical results show that our
approach achieves the desired coverage while reducing confidence interval widths
by up to 50%, with drastic improvements for arms not targeted by the design.

1

Introduction

In recent years, adaptive experimental designs have gained increasing popularity over the classic
randomized controlled trial. Bandit algorithms, where treatment assignment probabilities are updated
sequentially and simultaneously with data collection, are increasingly used for objectives such as
welfare maximization during experimentation [1, 20], quickly identifying well-performing option(s)
[8, 11], and maximizing power against particular hypotheses [16, 25, 37]. Compared to classic fixed
designs, modern approaches offer the promise of flexible, efficient experimentation by leveraging
information collected during the experiment.
However, once the experiment is over, researchers are still interested in using adaptively collected
data to conduct inference on a variety of different quantities, including those not targeted by the
design. For example, while an adaptive design may sample the best-performing option at a higher rate,
experimenters may still be interested in conducting inference on all offered options in the experiment.
Policymakers may be interested in whether the best-performing option outperforms other alternatives
with a certain level of statistical significance to assess the credibility of their conclusions. Such goals
necessitate after-study inference. However, while adaptive experiments offer numerous benefits, they
pose challenges for after-study inference [2, 22]. Unlike classic randomized controlled trials, standard
hypothesis tests and confidence intervals are not guaranteed to provide their nominal error control
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

