AMBER: Adaptive Mesh Generation by
Iterative Mesh Resolution Prediction
Niklas Freymuth1∗ Tobias Würth2 Nicolas Schreiber1 Balazs Gyenes1 Andreas Boltres1 3
Johannes Mitsch2 Aleksandar Taranovic1 Tai Hoang1 Philipp Dahlinger1
Philipp Becker1 Luise Kärger2 Gerhard Neumann1
1
Autonomous Learning Robots, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe
2
Institute of Vehicle System Technology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe
3
SAP SE

Abstract
The cost and accuracy of simulating complex physical systems using the Finite
Element Method (FEM) scales with the resolution of the underlying mesh. Adaptive
meshes improve computational efficiency by refining resolution in critical regions,
but typically require task-specific heuristics or cumbersome manual design by a
human expert. We propose Adaptive Meshing By Expert Reconstruction (AMBER),
a supervised learning approach to mesh adaptation. Starting from a coarse mesh,
AMBER iteratively predicts the sizing field, i.e., a function mapping from the
geometry to the local element size of the target mesh, and uses this prediction to
produce a new intermediate mesh using an out-of-the-box mesh generator. This
process is enabled through a hierarchical graph neural network, and relies on data
augmentation by automatically projecting expert labels onto AMBER-generated
data during training. We evaluate AMBER on 2D and 3D datasets, including
classical physics problems, mechanical components, and real-world industrial
designs with human expert meshes. AMBER generalizes to unseen geometries and
consistently outperforms multiple recent baselines, including ones using Graph and
Convolutional Neural Networks, and Reinforcement Learning-based approaches.

1

Introduction

Physical simulations are a fundamental tool in a wide range of science and engineering applications.
As simulations become more complex, researchers and practitioners increasingly rely on numerical
solutions to intricate Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). The Finite Element Method (FEM)
discretizes complex geometries into simpler mesh elements and solves the resulting system of linear
equations [1–4]. The FEM is ubiquitous in numerical engineering, finding application in fluid flow
simulations [5], structural mechanics [6, 7], electromagnetics [8], and injection molding [9].
For such simulations, both the simulation cost and accuracy scale with mesh resolution. Therefore,
adaptive meshing, which assigns more mesh elements to key regions of the geometry, is essential
for efficient and accurate simulations [10, 11]. An example is structural analysis in the automotive
industry [7], where FEM is used to model complex components under varying forces and stresses.
Figure 1 shows such a component, a car seat crossmember, where a finer mesh is required near
bends and holes. Traditional Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) techniques iteratively refine existing
meshes using predefined heuristics based on problem geometry and process conditions [12–14].
Similarly, Adaptive Mesh Generation (AMG) generates meshes from functions such as sizing fields,
which define local element sizes on the geometry [15, 16]. However, both methods are still limited in
efficiency and adaptability to new applications. As a result, adaptive meshing in practice requires
∗

correspondence to niklas.freymuth@kit.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

