Partition to Evolve: Niching-enhanced Evolution with
LLMs for Automated Algorithm Discovery

Qinglong Hu
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China
qinglhu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Qingfu Zhang
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China
qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Large language model-assisted Evolutionary Search (LES) has emerged as a promising approach for Automated Algorithm Discovery (AAD). While many evolutionary search strategies have been developed for classic optimization problems, LES
operates in abstract language spaces, presenting unique challenges for applying
these strategies effectively. To address this, we propose a general LES framework
that incorporates feature-assisted niche construction within abstract search spaces,
enabling the seamless integration of niche-based search strategies from evolutionary computation. Building on this framework, we introduce PartEvo (Partition to
Evolve), an LES method that combines niche collaborative search and advanced
prompting strategies to improve algorithm discovery efficiency. Experiments on
both synthetic and real-world optimization problems show that PartEvo outperforms human-designed baselines and surpasses prior LES methods. In particular,
on resource scheduling tasks, PartEvo generates meta-heuristics with low design
costs, achieving up to 90.1% performance improvement over widely-used baseline
algorithms, highlighting its potential for real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Algorithms are essential for solving real-world problems. As demands across domains become
increasingly diverse and complex, Automated Algorithm Discovery (AAD) has emerged as a critical
approach to improving the efficiency of algorithm development [1]. Techniques such as genetic
programming, auto-regressive models, and reinforcement learning have successfully automated tasks
like algorithm configuration and composition [2–4]. However, the automated generation of more
sophisticated algorithms remains an ongoing pursuit.
Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have provided transformative tools for
algorithm generation, owing to their impressive capabilities in natural language understanding and
code generation [5]. Among these, the LLM-assisted Evolutionary Search (LES) paradigm has
shown great promise in AAD tasks. LES represents search objects (e.g., algorithms, code, heuristics)
as individuals in an evolutionary framework, where LLMs, guided by specialized prompts, act as
evolutionary operators to improve these individuals iteratively [6–9]. While early LES methods have
demonstrated the feasibility and potential of LES in AAD, they often rely on oversimplified search
mechanisms (e.g., greedy selection), which limit their efficiency.
In Evolutionary Computation (EC), search efficiency is enhanced through better explorationexploitation trade-offs, which can be achieved via computational resource allocation techniques
such as niching [10] and search space partitioning [11]. It is natural to consider adapting these
established EC techniques to the LES to enhance algorithm discovery. However, applying them to
LES poses new challenges due to the fundamental shift in the nature of the search space.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

