Ditch the Denoiser: Emergence of Noise Robustness in
Self-Supervised Learning from Data Curriculum

Wenquan Lu1

Jiaqi Zhang1

Hugues Van Assel2

Randall Balestriero1

1
Brown University 2 Genentech
{wenquan_lu, jiaqi_zhang6, randall_balestriero}@brown.edu
van_assel.hugues@gene.com

Abstract
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has become a powerful solution to extract rich
representations from unlabeled data. Yet, SSL research is mostly focused on
clean, curated and high-quality datasets. As a result, applying SSL on noisy data
remains a challenge, despite being crucial to applications such as astrophysics,
medical imaging, geophysics or finance. In this work, we present a fully selfsupervised framework that enables noise-robust representation learning without
requiring a denoiser at inference or downstream fine-tuning. Our method first
trains an SSL denoiser on noisy data, then uses it to construct a denoised-tonoisy data curriculum (i.e., training first on denoised, then noisy samples) for
pretraining a SSL backbone (e.g., DINOv2), combined with a teacher-guided
regularization that anchors noisy embeddings to their denoised counterparts. This
process encourages the model to internalize noise robustness. Notably, the denoiser
can be discarded after pretraining, simplifying deployment. On ImageNet-1k with
ViT-B under extreme Gaussian noise (σ = 255, SNR = 0.72 dB), our method
improves linear probing accuracy by 4.8% over DINOv2, demonstrating that
denoiser-free robustness can emerge from noise-aware pretraining. The code is
available at https://github.com/wenquanlu/noisy_dinov2.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised methods like DINOv2 [31, 7, 16, 9] have demonstrated remarkable success by
leveraging unlabeled data to learn visual representations able to solve many tasks in zero or few
shot manners [3]. However, the performances of those methods heavily rely on the availability
of clean and high-quality datasets. As a result, some prior works have focused on building data
curation pipelines for self-supervised learning (SSL) [37, 1]. But data curation disregards samples
and introduces additional design questions and thus begs the following question:
Can we enable off-the-shelf SSL models like DINOv2 to learn from highly corrupted data?
In real-world scenarios, datasets often contain noise that can severely degrade the performance
of learned representations, and clean references required for supervised denoising are typically
unavailable due to sensor limitations, privacy constraints, or acquisition costs.
This is especially common in medical imaging [28, 43, 27], astrophysics [30], geological rock
imaging [6], remote sensing [17] and finance [29]. For example, the earth radar images taken by ESA
Sentinel-1 [14] comes with speckle noise, and the clean data for supervised denoising is difficult to
acquire since it requires better sensor and atmospheric conditions. As another example, Sloan Digital
Sky Survey (SDSS) imaging in the COSMOS region contains significant sky noise [30] which can
obscure faint celestial objects. Despite advancements in SSL, methods like DINOv2, as shown in
Figure 5, still yield significant reduction in performance when trained directly on corrupted datasets.
To address the challenges outlined above, a trivial baseline is a denoiser-preprocessed pipeline, which
trains a self-supervised denoiser on the noisy data first, then trains the SSL models on the denoised
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

