Unlabeled Data Can Provably Enhance In-Context
Learning of Transformers

Renpu Liu
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
renpu@virginia.edu

Jing Yang
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
yangjing@virginia.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit impressive in-context learning (ICL) capabilities, yet the quality of their predictions is fundamentally limited by the few
costly labeled demonstrations that can fit into a prompt. Meanwhile, there exist vast and continuously growing amounts of unlabeled data that may be closely
related to the ICL task. How to utilize such unlabeled data to provably enhance
the performance of ICL thus becomes an emerging fundamental question. In this
work, we propose a novel augmented ICL framework, in which the prompt includes a small set of labeled examples alongside a block of unlabeled inputs. We
focus on the multi-class linear classification setting and demonstrate that, with
chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting, a multi-layer transformer can effectively emulate an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm. This enables the transformer
to implicitly extract useful information from both labeled and unlabeled data, leading to provable improvements in ICL accuracy. Moreover, we show that such a
transformer can be trained via teacher forcing, with its parameters converging to
the desired solution at a linear rate. Experiments demonstrate that the augmented
ICL framework consistently outperforms conventional few-shot ICL, providing
empirical support for our theoretical findings. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first theoretical study on the impact of unlabeled data on the ICL performance
of transformers.

1

Introduction

Since the introduction (Vaswani et al., 2017), transformers have become foundational models in
diverse fields such as natural language processing (Radford, 2018; Devlin et al., 2019), computer
vision (Dosovitskiy, 2020), and reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021). A key driver of their
impact is the remarkable capability for In-Context Learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020). Without
requiring parameter updates, transformers performing ICL can adapt to new tasks based solely on
contextual examples provided within the prompt. This enables state-of-the-art few-shot performance
across a multitude of applications, including reasoning and language understanding (Chowdhery
et al., 2023), dialog generation (Thoppilan et al., 2022), and linear regression (Garg et al., 2022; Fu
et al., 2023), etc.
Despite the power of ICL, its reliance on labeled examples presents a significant bottleneck for large
language models (LLMs). Acquiring high-quality labeled data is in general expensive and timeconsuming (Zhou et al., 2023; Chung et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). For example,
creating the instruction-tuning and RLHF datasets for models like GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 involved
thousands of expert annotator hours, yet constituted less than 0.1% of the tokens encountered during
pre-training (Ouyang et al., 2022; Achiam et al., 2023).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

