Taxonomy of reduction matrices for Graph Coarsening

Antonin Joly
CNRS, IRISA, Rennes, FRANCE
antonin.joly@irisa.fr

Nicolas Keriven
CNRS, IRISA, Rennes, FRANCE
nicolas.keriven@cnrs.fr

Aline Roumy
INRIA, Rennes, FRANCE
aline.roumy@inria.fr

Abstract
Graph coarsening aims to diminish the size of a graph to lighten its memory
footprint, and has numerous applications in graph signal processing and machine
learning. It is usually defined using a reduction matrix and a lifting matrix, which,
respectively, allows to project a graph signal from the original graph to the coarsened one and back. This results in a loss of information measured by the so-called
Restricted Spectral Approximation (RSA). Most coarsening frameworks impose a
fixed relationship between the reduction and lifting matrices, generally as pseudoinverses of each other, and seek to define a coarsening that minimizes the RSA.
In this paper, we remark that the roles of these two matrices are not entirely
symmetric: indeed, putting constraints on the lifting matrix alone ensures the
existence of important objects such as the coarsened graph’s adjacency matrix or
Laplacian. In light of this, in this paper, we introduce a more general notion of
reduction matrix, that is not necessarily the pseudo-inverse of the lifting matrix.
We establish a taxonomy of “admissible” families of reduction matrices, discuss
the different properties that they must satisfy and whether they admit a closed-form
description or not. We show that, for a fixed coarsening represented by a fixed
lifting matrix, the RSA can be further reduced simply by modifying the reduction
matrix. We explore different examples, including some based on a constrained
optimization process of the RSA. Since this criterion has also been linked to the
performance of Graph Neural Networks, we also illustrate the impact of this choices
on different node classification tasks on coarsened graphs.

1

Introduction

In recent years, several applications in data science and machine learning have produced large-scale
graph data [18, 5]. For instance, online social networks [13] or recommender systems [36] routinely
produce graphs with millions of nodes or more. To handle such massive graphs, researchers have
developed general-purpose graph reduction methods [4], such as graph coarsening [27, 7] as well
as specific learning techniques on these coarsened graphs [23, 19]. Graph coarsening starts to play an
increasingly prominent role in machine learning applications [7].
Graph Coarsening and Spectral guarantees Graph coarsening consists in producing a small
graph from a large graph while retaining some of its key properties. There are many ways to evaluate
the quality of a coarsening, following different criteria [10, 27, 7]. The majority of these approaches
aims to preserve spectral properties of the graph and its Laplacian, and have given rise to different
coarsening algorithms [27, 8, 4, 22, 28]. The most widely used spectral guarantee is the so-called
Restricted Spectral Approximation (RSA, see Sec. 2), introduced by Loukas [27]. In broad terms,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

