Covariances for Free: Exploiting Mean Distributions
for Training-free Federated Learning

Dipam Goswami1,2 Simone Magistri3 Kai Wang2,5,6∗
Bartłomiej Twardowski1,2,4 Andrew D. Bagdanov3 Joost van de Weijer1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain
2
Computer Vision Center, Barcelona, Spain
3
Media Integration and Communication Center (MICC), University of Florence, Italy
4
IDEAS Research Institute, Warsaw, Poland 5 City University of Hong Kong
6
Program of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong (Dongguan)
dgoswami@cvc.uab.es, simone.magistri@unifi.it, kai.wang@cityu-dg.edu.cn

Abstract
Using pre-trained models has been found to reduce the effect of data heterogeneity
and speed up federated learning algorithms. Recent works have explored trainingfree methods using first- and second-order statistics to aggregate local client data
distributions at the server and achieve high performance without any training. In
this work, we propose a training-free method based on an unbiased estimator
of class covariance matrices which only uses first-order statistics in the form of
class means communicated by clients to the server. We show how these estimated
class covariances can be used to initialize the global classifier, thus exploiting the
covariances without actually sharing them. We also show that using only withinclass covariances results in a better classifier initialization. Our approach improves
performance in the range of 4-26% with exactly the same communication cost
when compared to methods sharing only class means and achieves performance
competitive or superior to methods sharing second-order statistics with dramatically
less communication overhead. The proposed method is much more communicationefficient than federated prompt-tuning methods and still outperforms them. Finally,
using our method to initialize classifiers and then performing federated fine-tuning
or linear probing again yields better performance. Code is available at https:
//github.com/dipamgoswami/FedCOF.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a widely used paradigm for distributed learning across multiple clients.
In FL, each client trains their local model on their private data and then sends model updates to a
common global server that aggregates this information into a global model. The objective is to learn a
global model that performs similarly to a model jointly trained on all the client data. A major concern
in existing FL algorithms [37] is the poor performance when the client data is not identically and
independently distributed (iid) or when classes are imbalanced between clients [56, 32, 1, 21]. In [35],
the authors showed that client drift in FL is mainly due to drift in client classifiers which optimize
to local data distributions, resulting in forgetting knowledge from clients of previous rounds [30, 5].
Another challenge in FL is the partial participation of clients in successive rounds [32], which
becomes particularly acute with large numbers of clients [43, 20]. To address these challenges, recent
works have focused on algorithms to better tackle data heterogeneity across clients [35, 47, 29, 11].
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

