Track3R: Joint Point Map and Trajectory Prior for
Spatiotemporal 3D Understanding

Seong Hyeon Park
KAIST
seonghyp@kaist.ac.kr

Jinwoo Shin
KAIST and RLWRLD
jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Understanding the 3D world from 2D monocular videos is a crucial ability for AI.
Recently, to tackle this underdetermined task, end-to-end 3D geometry priors have
been sought after, such as pre-trained point map models at scale. These models
enable robust 3D understanding from casually taken videos, providing accurate
object shapes disentangled from uncertain camera parameters. However, they still
struggle when affected by object deformation and dynamics, failing to establish
consistent correspondence over the frames. Furthermore, their architectures are
typically limited to pairwise frame processing, which is insufficient for capturing
complex motion dynamics over extended sequences. To address these limitations,
we introduce Track3R, a novel framework that integrates a new architecture and
task to jointly predict point map and motion trajectories across multiple frames from
video input. Specifically, our key idea is modeling two disentangled trajectories
for each point: one representing object motion and the other camera poses. This
design not only can enable understanding of the 3D object dynamics, but also
facilitates the learning of more robust priors for 3D shapes in dynamic scenes.
In our experiments, Track3R demonstrates significant improvements in a joint
point mapping and 3D motion estimation task for dynamic scenes, such as 25.8%
improvements in the motion estimation, and 15.7% in the point mapping accuracy.

1

Introduction

The recent advance of 3D prior models by the point mapping frameworks has enabled robust
and accurate 3D understanding in casually taken video frames. Unlike the 3D reconstruction
methods that rely on external matching, depth, and pose estimation priors [1], these models directly
learn 3D shape priors via end-to-end designs predicting dense 3D points directly from 2D frames.
Notably, DUSt3R [2] has introduced the pair-wise point mapping, which, given a pair of two image
frames with unknown camera parameters, maps every pixel in one frame to 3D points in the other
frame’s view. This design allows robust 3D representation disentangling the 3D shapes and the
camera motion, providing a strong prior trained at scale.
However, current methods are often challenged when given videos capturing dynamic scenes, affected
by moving and deforming objects. For example, the point map task accounts for only variable
camera poses, but cannot establish a consistent motion trajectory of the 3D points over the frames.
Furthermore, the typical model architectures suffer from the constrained temporal window size of 2
frames, which hinders modeling complex dynamics spanning over wider windows. Although there
have been approaches to mitigate the problem, such as injecting motion estimation priors [3], memory
bank architecture [4], they cannot generalize well to various tasks in dynamic scenes and fail to learn
holistic priors that can disentangle the object dynamics.
To tackle this problem, we propose a new framework which can jointly predict the point map and
their motion trajectory from a multiple number of frames in the end-to-end manner, coined Track3R.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

