Generating Computational Cognitive Models
using Large Language Models

Milena Rmus †
Helmholtz Munich
milena.rmus@helmholtz-munich.de

Akshay K. Jagadish †
Princeton University
akshay.jagadish@princeton.edu

Marvin Mathony
Helmholtz Munich
marvin.mathony@helmholtz-munich.de

Tobias Ludwig
Tübingen University
tobias.ludwig@uni-tuebingen.de

Eric Schulz
Helmholtz Munich
eric.schulz@helmholtz-munich.de
† Milena Rmus and Akshay K. Jagadish contributed equally.

Abstract
Computational cognitive models, which formalize theories of cognition, enable researchers to quantify cognitive processes and arbitrate between competing theories
by fitting models to behavioral data. Traditionally, these models are handcrafted,
which requires significant domain knowledge, coding expertise, and time investment. However, recent advances in machine learning offer solutions to these
challenges. In particular, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated
remarkable capabilities for in-context pattern recognition, leveraging knowledge
from diverse domains to solve complex problems, and generating executable code
that can be used to facilitate the generation of cognitive models. Building on this
potential, we introduce a pipeline for Guided generation of Computational Cognitive Models (GeCCo). Given task instructions, participant data, and a template
function, GeCCo prompts an LLM to propose candidate models, fits proposals
to held-out data, and iteratively refines them based on feedback constructed from
their predictive performance. We benchmark this approach across four different
cognitive domains – decision making, learning, planning, and memory – using
three open-source LLMs, spanning different model sizes, capacities, and families. On four human behavioral data sets, the LLM generated models consistently
matched or outperformed the best domain-specific models from the cognitive science literature. To validate these findings, we performed control experiments that
investigated (1) the contribution of the different LLM features (model size, model
family, capacities); (2) the causal role of different prompt components; (3) the effect
of data contamination; (4) the ability to recover ground truth models from simulated data; and (5) the total explainable variance in human behavior captured by
LLM-generated models. Taken together, our results suggest that LLMs can rapidly
generate cognitive models with conceptually plausible models that rival – or even
surpass – the best models from the literature across diverse task domains. The code
for GeCCo is available at https://github.com/MilenaCCNlab/gecco.git

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

