Audio Super-Resolution with Latent Bridge Models
Chang Li1,2,3,∗ Zehua Chen1,2,∗ , † Liyuan Wang1

Jun Zhu1,2,†

1

Department of CST, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Shengshu AI, Beijing, China
3
USTC, Hefei, China
{zhc23thuml, liyuanwang, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn
lc_lca@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Audio super-resolution (SR), i.e., upsampling the low-resolution (LR) waveform to
the high-resolution (HR) version, has recently been explored with diffusion and
bridge models, while previous methods often suffer from sub-optimal upsampling
quality due to their uninformative generation prior. Towards high-quality audio
super-resolution, we present a new system with latent bridge models (LBMs), where
we compress the audio waveform into a continuous latent space and design an LBM
to enable a latent-to-latent generation process that naturally matches the LR-toHR upsampling process, thereby fully exploiting the instructive prior information
contained in the LR waveform. To further enhance the training results despite the
limited availability of HR samples, we introduce frequency-aware LBMs, where
the prior and target frequency are taken as model input, enabling LBMs to explicitly
learn an any-to-any upsampling process at the training stage. Furthermore, we
design cascaded LBMs and present two prior augmentation strategies, where
we make the first attempt to unlock the audio upsampling beyond 48 kHz and
empower a seamless cascaded SR process, providing higher flexibility for audio
post-production. Comprehensive experimental results evaluated on the VCTK,
ESC-50, Song-Describer benchmark datasets and two internal testsets demonstrate
that we achieve state-of-the-art objective and perceptual quality for any-to-48kHz
SR across speech, audio, and music signals, as well as setting the first record
for any-to-192kHz audio SR. Demo at https://AudioLBM.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Audio super-resolution (SR) systems aim to generate the high-resolution (HR) audio waveform
from the observed low-resolution (LR) waveform [47, 56, 109]. Audio SR plays a crucial roles
in various applications, including historical recording restoration [73, 59, 74], hearing aids [30],
and improvement of perceptual quality [62]. Previous works have explored audio SR with diverse
methods such as mapping-based [60, 59], generative adversarial network (GAN)-based [69, 65],
diffusion-based [72, 62], and recently proposed bridge-based [54, 45] methods. However, these
efforts focus on the audio SR task in a limited scope, e.g., the speech signals in a benchmark dataset,
without generalizing to a broader domain of different audio types. To extend audio SR to multiple
domains spanning speech signals, sound effects, and music samples, Liu et al. [62] has recently
explored diffusion models in the latent space of mel-spectrogram, enabling any-to-48 kHz audio SR.
A2 SB [45] has recently explored bridge models to synthesize the short-time Fourier transformation
(STFT) representation, achieving any-to-44.1 kHz music SR.
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Authors: Zehua Chen and Jun Zhu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

