Towards Uniﬁed and Lossless Latent Space for 3D
Molecular Latent Diffusion Modeling

Yanchen Luo1 , Zhiyuan Liu2* , Yi Zhao1 , Sihang Li1 , Hengxing Cai3 ,
Kenji Kawaguchi2 , Tat-Seng Chua2 , Yang Zhang2 , Xiang Wang1*
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
National University of Singapore
3
DP Technology
luoyanchen@mail.ustc.edu.cn
acharkq@gmail.com
xiangwang1223@gmail.com

Abstract
3D molecule generation is crucial for drug discovery and material science, requiring models to process complex multi-modalities, including atom types, chemical
bonds, and 3D coordinates. A key challenge is integrating these modalities of
different shapes while maintaining SE(3) equivariance for 3D coordinates. To
achieve this, existing approaches typically maintain separate latent spaces for invariant and equivariant modalities, reducing efﬁciency in both training and sampling. In this work, we propose Uniﬁed Variational Auto-Encoder for 3D Molecular Latent Diffusion Modeling (UAE-3D), a multi-modal VAE that compresses
3D molecules into latent sequences from a uniﬁed latent space, while maintaining
near-zero reconstruction error. This uniﬁed latent space eliminates the complexities of handling multi-modality and equivariance when performing latent diffusion modeling. We demonstrate this by employing the Diffusion Transformer–a
general-purpose diffusion model without any molecular inductive bias–for latent
generation. Extensive experiments on GEOM-Drugs and QM9 datasets demonstrate that our method signiﬁcantly establishes new benchmarks in both de novo
and conditional 3D molecule generation, achieving leading efﬁciency and quality.
On GEOM-Drugs, it reduces FCD by 72.6% over the previous best result, while
achieving over 70% relative average improvements in geometric ﬁdelity. Our code
is released at https://github.com/lyc0930/UAE-3D/.

1

Introduction

The discovery of novel molecules is fundamental to various scientiﬁc ﬁelds, particularly in drug
and material development. Given signiﬁcant progress has been made in designing 2D molecular
graphs [1–4], recent research has increasingly focused on the generation of 3D molecules [5, 6].
Unlike 2D molecular generation, which focuses on forming valid molecular structures based on
chemical bonds, 3D generation must also predict 3D atomic coordinates that align with the 2D
structure. Accurate 3D molecule generation is essential to power many important applications, such
as structure-based drug design [7] and inverse molecule design targeting quantum properties [8].
3D molecule generation is challenging due to its multi-modal nature. As shown in Figure 1(a), a 3D
molecule consists of features of three distinct modalities: atom types, atomic coordinates, and chemical bonds. This requires the generation model to handle both discrete (e.g., atom types) and continuous features (e.g., coordinates), while also addressing differences in feature shapes (atom-wise
* Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

