VideoChat-R1.5: Visual Test-Time Scaling to Reinforce
Multimodal Reasoning by Iterative Perception
∗

∗

∗

Ziang Yan1,2, , Xinhao Li3,2, , Yinan He2, , Zhengrong Yue2 ,
†
Xiangyu Zeng3,2 , Yali Wang4, 2 , Yu Qiao2 , Limin Wang3,2 , Yi Wang2,
1
Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Nanjing University
4
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
https://github.com/OpenGVLab/VideoChat-R1

Abstract
Inducing reasoning in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) is critical for
achieving human-level perception and understanding. Existing methods mainly
leverage LLM reasoning to analyze parsed visuals, often limited by static perception stages. This paper introduces Visual Test-Time Scaling (VTTS), a novel
approach to enhance MLLMs’ reasoning via iterative perception during inference.
VTTS mimics humans’ hierarchical attention by progressively refining focus on
high-confidence spatio-temporal regions, guided by updated textual predictions.
Specifically, VTTS employs an Iterative Perception (ITP) mechanism, incorporating reinforcement learning with spatio-temporal supervision to optimize reasoning.
To support this paradigm, we also present VTTS-80K, a dataset tailored for iterative
perception. These designs allows a MLLM to enhance its performance by increasing its perceptual compute. Extensive experiments validate VTTS’s effectiveness
and generalization across diverse tasks and benchmarks. Our newly introduced
Videochat-R1.5 model has achieved remarkable improvements, with an average
increase of over 5%, compared to robust baselines such as Qwen2.5VL-3B and
-7B, across more than 15 benchmarks that encompass video conversation, video
reasoning, and spatio-temporal perception.

1

Introduction

How to induce reasoning in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) becomes increasingly
crucial in foundation models and multimodal understanding for general intelligence. Many believe
[62, 47, 64, 50] it is one of the indispensable prerequisites to enable MLLMs with human-level
perception and understanding, as people usually perceive surroundings with reflection, more than only
parsing. Existing advances in MLLMs mostly concentrate on exploiting LLMs’ reasoning to process
parsed visuals deeply [55, 70, 67], or leveraging vision rules to elicit multimodal reasoning [47, 11].
Either of them explores rich causal dependencies in languages space to dig given evidences for more
persuasive analysis and sound decisions. In this paper, inspired by humans’ hierarchical attention
with refinement [48, 43, 22], we study causal relations in vision for reasoning, delivering a learnable
diagram to scale test-time compute of MLLMs by iterative perception.
To explicitly improve multimodal reasoning, existing approaches usually extend or enhance search
space of LLMs and score them for the most reasonable one. Examples include Best-of-N (BoN)
sampling [20], which selects the optimal output from multiple candidates via scoring; guided beam
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

