How Well Can Differential Privacy Be Audited in One
Run?
Amit Keinan Moshe Shenfeld Katrina Ligett
Department of computer science and engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
{amit.keinan2, moshe.shenfeld, katrina.ligett}@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Recent methods for auditing the privacy of machine learning algorithms have
improved computational efficiency by simultaneously intervening on multiple
training examples in a single training run. Steinke et al. [1] prove that one-run
auditing indeed lower bounds the true privacy parameter of the audited algorithm,
and give impressive empirical results. Their work leaves open the question of
how precisely one-run auditing can uncover the true privacy parameter of an
algorithm, and how that precision depends on the audited algorithm. In this work,
we characterize the maximum achievable efficacy of one-run auditing and show
that the key barrier to its efficacy is interference between the observable effects of
different data elements. We present new conceptual approaches to minimize this
barrier, towards improving the performance of one-run auditing of real machine
learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) is increasingly deployed to protect the privacy of training data, including
in large-scale industry machine learning settings. As DP provides a theoretical guarantee about the
worst-case behavior of a machine learning algorithm, any DP algorithm should be accompanied by a
proof of an upper bound on its privacy parameters. However, such upper bounds can be quite loose.
Worse, analyses and deployments of differential privacy can contain bugs that render those privacy
upper bounds incorrect. As a result, there is growing interest in privacy auditing methods that can
provide empirical lower bounds on an algorithm’s privacy parameters. Such lower bounds can help
detect whether the upper bounds in proofs are unnecessarily loose, or whether there are analysis or
implementation errors that render those bounds incorrect.
Differential privacy constrains how much a change in one training point is allowed to affect the
resulting distribution over outputs (e.g., trained models). Hence, one natural approach to auditing
DP, which we term “classic auditing,” simply picks a pair of training datasets that differ in one entry
and runs the learning algorithm over each of them repeatedly in order to discover differences in the
induced output distributions. Estimating these distributions reasonably well (and hence obtaining
meaningful lower bounds on the privacy parameters) requires hundreds or thousands of runs of the
learning algorithm, which may not be practical. In response, there has been increasing interest in
more computationally feasible auditing approaches that change multiple entries of the training data
simultaneously. In particular, Steinke et al. [1] study privacy auditing with one training run (one-run
auditing) and show impressive empirical results on DP-SGD.
Classic auditing is not only valid (informally: with high probability, the lower bounds on the privacy
parameters it returns are indeed no higher than the true privacy parameters); it is also asymptotically
tight (informally: there exists a pair of training datasets such that, if auditing is run for enough
rounds, the resulting lower bounds approach the true privacy parameters). Steinke et al. [1] show that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

