Inference-Time Scaling for Flow Models via
Stochastic Generation and Rollover Budget Forcing

Jaihoon Kim∗

Taehoon Yoon∗
Jisung Hwang∗
KAIST

Minhyuk Sung

{jh27kim,taehoon,4011hjs,mhsung}@kaist.ac.kr
“Five horses, three cars, one train, five airplanes.”
FLUX + Ours
NFEs : 10

NFEs : 100

NFEs : 200

RSS : 14

RSS : 10

RSS : 27

Stable Diffusion 2

NFEs : 300

NFEs : 400

NFEs : 500

NFEs : 2500

RSS : 5

RSS : 1

RSS : 0

RSS : 36

Logical

Counting

Comparison

“Every painting in the gallery is framed and hung
straight, except for one that is hanging crooked.”

“Two cups, three paintings, four lamps,
and four bananas decorated the art studio.”

“The arcade machine is bigger than the
television but smaller than the refrigerator.”

Spatial Relation

Aesthetic

Concept Erasure

“A large suitcase is placed beside an open closet,
with a folded jacket resting on top where a pair of
shoes sit side by side in front of it.”

“Duck”

(+) “A nurse”
(−) “Stethoscope, hat, mask”

Figure 1: Diverse applications of our inference-time scaling method. Pretrained flow models
struggle to generate images that align with complex prompts (left side of each case), whereas our
inference-time scaling effectively extends their capabilities to achieve precise alignment (red box).

Abstract
We propose an inference-time scaling approach for pretrained flow models. Recently, inference-time scaling has gained significant attention in LLMs and diffusion
models, improving sample quality or better aligning outputs with user preferences
by leveraging additional computation. For diffusion models, particle sampling has
allowed more efficient scaling due to the stochasticity at intermediate denoising
steps. On the contrary, while flow models have gained popularity–offering faster
generation and high-quality outputs–efficient inference-time scaling methods used
for diffusion models cannot be directly applied due to their deterministic generative
process. To enable efficient inference-time scaling for flow models, we propose
three key ideas: 1) SDE-based generation, enabling particle sampling in flow
models, 2) Interpolant conversion, broadening the search space, and 3) Rollover
Budget Forcing (RBF), maximizing compute utilization. Our experiments show
that SDE-based generation and variance-preserving (VP) interpolant-based generation, improves the performance of particle sampling methods for inference-time
scaling in flow models. Additionally, we demonstrate that RBF with VP-SDE
achieves the best performance, outperforming all previous inference-time scaling
approaches. Project page: flow-inference-time-scaling.github.io.
*

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

