Frame In-N-Out: Unbounded Controllable
Image-to-Video Generation

Boyang Wang1
1

Xuweiyi Chen1 Matheus Gadelha2 Zezhou Cheng1
University of Virginia 2 Adobe Research

Project Page: https://uva-computer-vision-lab.github.io/Frame-In-N-Out/
Frame In: object enters the scene

Frame Out: object leaves the scene

Identity Reference

Unbounded Canvas

Motion

First Frame
Identity
Reference
Frame In & Frame Out

Frame Out + In

Identity Reference

Text: “A European Robin enters the scene, pecks at scattered seeds
on the ground, and then flies out of the frame.”

Physical Interaction: simulate real-world interaction

Object Insertion

Object Removal

Identity
Reference

Figure 1: Frame In-N-Out presents a new task in the image-to-video generation that extends the first frame
into an unbounded canvas region, where the model could be conditioned on identity reference with motion
trajectory control to achieve Frame In and Frame Out cinematic technique.

Abstract
Controllability, temporal coherence, and detail synthesis remain the most critical
challenges in video generation. In this paper, we focus on a commonly used yet
underexplored cinematic technique known as Frame In and Frame Out. Specifically,
starting from image-to-video generation, users can control the objects in the image
to naturally leave the scene or provide breaking new identity references to enter
the scene, guided by a user-specified motion trajectory. To support this task, we
introduce a new dataset that is curated semi-automatically, an efficient identitypreserving motion-controllable video Diffusion Transformer architecture, and a
comprehensive evaluation protocol targeting this task. Our evaluation shows that
our proposed approach significantly outperforms existing baselines.

1

Introduction

While watching a movie, the frame presented to the viewer only shows a deliberately chosen portion of
the scene. The director’s imagination extends far beyond what is shown on screen. Crucial plot twists
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

