Monitoring Risks in Test-Time Adaptation

Mona Schirmer1,∗ Metod Jazbec1,∗ Christian A. Naesseth1 Eric Nalisnick2
1
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab, University of Amsterdam 2 Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Encountering shifted data at test time is a ubiquitous challenge when deploying
predictive models. Test-time adaptation (TTA) methods address this issue by
continuously adapting a deployed model using only unlabeled test data. While
TTA can extend the model’s lifespan, it is only a temporary solution. Eventually
the model might degrade to the point that it must be taken offline and retrained. To
detect such points of ultimate failure, we propose pairing TTA with risk monitoring
frameworks that track predictive performance and raise alerts when predefined
performance criteria are violated. Specifically, we extend existing monitoring tools
based on sequential testing with confidence sequences to accommodate scenarios in
which the model is updated at test time and no test labels are available to estimate
the performance metrics of interest. Our extensions unlock the application of
rigorous statistical risk monitoring to TTA, and we demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed TTA monitoring framework across a representative set of datasets,
distribution shift types, and TTA methods.

1

Introduction

Whenever test data is drawn from a different distribution than the one the model was trained on,
performance might degrade, which can cause the model to ‘expire’. Such drops in performance
are especially concerning in safety-critical applications. For example, a medical device trained on
patients from a specific demographic group may produce poor predictions when, upon deployment, it
encounters patients from a different subpopulation.
Test-time adaptation (TTA) [44] has proven to be a powerful paradigm for prolonging the life of a
model subjected to distribution shift. TTA methods adapt model parameters online, using only test
batches of features and no labels. By leveraging unsupervised objectives such as test-time entropy
[42] or pseudo-label losses [41], these methods effectively ‘fine-tune’ model parameters on unlabeled
test data. Despite their stark potential to retain high performance under a variety of distribution shifts
[49], TTA methods can suffer performance drops under severe shifts or after prolonged adaptation.
The TTA literature has documented a range of persistent failure cases in which the model collapses
entirely, resulting in near-zero accuracy [31]. Alarmingly, these failures often occur silently and
prohibit TTA methods from safe deployment in practice.
Timely detection of performance degradations—whether due to harmful distribution shifts or adaptation collapse—is thus crucial for safe deployment. At the same time, however, falsely flagging
that a model should be taken offline and retrained can incur significant, avoidable costs given the
size of modern predictive models. Recently, sequential testing has emerged as a promising statistical
framework for monitoring model performance over time [30]. When a predefined risk (or error)
threshold is exceeded, the monitoring tool triggers an alarm. By employing time-uniform confidence
sequences [13], such tools provide rigorous guarantees on the false alarm rate, thereby minimizing
unnecessary retraining with high probability.
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding authors: <m.c.schirmer@uva.nl, m.jazbec@uva.nl>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

