On the Complexity of Finding Stationary Points in
Nonconvex Simple Bilevel Optimization

Jincheng Cao
UT Austin
jinchengcao@utexas.edu
Erfan Yazdandoost Hamedani
The University of Arizona
erfany@arizona.edu

Ruichen Jiang
UT Austin
rjiang@utexas.edu
Aryan Mokhtari
UT Austin & Google Research
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of solving a simple bilevel optimization problem, where the upper-level objective is minimized over the solution set of the
lower-level problem. We focus on the general setting in which both the upper- and
lower-level objectives are smooth but potentially nonconvex. Due to the absence
of additional structural assumptions for the lower-level objective—such as convexity or the Polyak–Łojasiewicz (PL) condition—guaranteeing global optimality
is generally intractable. Instead, we introduce a suitable notion of stationarity
for this class of problems and aim to design a first-order algorithm that finds
such stationary points in polynomial time. Intuitively, stationarity in this setting
means the upper-level objective cannot be substantially improved locally without causing a larger deterioration in the lower-level objective. To this end, we
show that a simple and implementable variant of the dynamic barrier gradient
descent (DBGD) framework can effectively solve the considered nonconvex simple
bilevel problems up to stationarity. Specifically, to reach an (ϵf , ϵg )-stationary
point—where ϵf and ϵg denote the target stationarity accuracies for the upper- and
lower-level objectives, respectively—the considered method achieves a complex− 3+p

− 3+p

ity of O(max(ϵf 1+p , ϵg 2 )), where p ≥ 0 is an arbitrary constant balancing
the terms. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first complexity result for a
discrete-time algorithm that guarantees joint stationarity for both levels in general
nonconvex simple bilevel problems.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following nonconvex simple bilevel optimization problem
min f (x)

x∈Rn

s.t.

x ∈ Xg∗ = argmin g(z),

(1)

z∈Rn

where f, g : Rn → R are continuously differentiable and Xg∗ denotes the solution set of the lowerlevel problem. This problem is referred to as simple bilevel. The term “simple” distinguishes this
setting from general bilevel optimization, where the lower-level solution set Xg∗ may depend on
the upper-level variable, introducing additional complexity. Owing to its numerous applications in
areas such as lifelong learning [1, 2] and over-parameterized machine learning [3, 4], simple bilevel
optimization has garnered significant recent interest in understanding its structure and developing
efficient algorithms for finding its solution [2, 4–6].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

