Hierarchical Balance Packing: Towards Efficient
Supervised Fine-tuning for Long-Context LLM
Yongqiang Yao1,† , Jinru Tan3,† , Kaihuan Liang2,† , Feizhao Zhang2 , Jiahao Hu 2
Shuo Wu2 , Yazhe Niu 4 , Ruihao Gong5,2,∗ , Dahua Lin2 , Ningyi Xu1∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 SenseTime Research 3 Central South University
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 Beihang University
soundbupt@gmail.com, tanjingru@csu.edu.cn, liangkaihuan@sensetime.com
zhangfeizhao, hujiahao1, wushuo1@sensetime.com, niuyazhe314@outlook.com,
gongruihao@buaa.edu.cn, dhlin@sensetime.com, xuningyi@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Training Long-Context Large Language Models (LLMs) is challenging, as hybrid
training with long-context and short-context data often leads to workload imbalances. Existing works mainly use data packing to alleviate this issue, but fail to
consider imbalanced attention computation and wasted communication overhead.
This paper proposes Hierarchical Balance Packing (HBP), which designs a novel
batch-construction method and training recipe to address those inefficiencies. In
particular, the HBP constructs multi-level data packing groups, each optimized
with a distinct packing length. It assigns training samples to their optimal groups
and configures each group with the most effective settings, including sequential
parallelism degree and gradient checkpointing configuration. To effectively utilize
multi-level groups of data, we design a dynamic training pipeline specifically tailored to HBP, including curriculum learning, adaptive sequential parallelism, and
stable loss. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly
reduces training time over multiple datasets and open-source models while maintaining strong performance. For the largest DeepSeek-V2 (236B) MoE model, our
method speeds up the training by 2.4× with competitive performance. Codes will
be released at https://github.com/ModelTC/HBP.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3] have achieved state-of-the-art performance in tasks like
machine translation, summarization, and code generation. However, many applications demand to
process and understand long-context information [4, 5, 6], such as summarizing books, analyzing
legal documents, or retaining context in multi-turn conversations. This underscores the necessity for
long-context LLMs that can efficiently process long input sequences.
As mentioned in [1], incorporating long context during the Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) [7]
stage is highly necessary. On the other hand, general short-context data is also crucial to maintain
the model’s general capabilities. However, this hybrid dataset composition introduces significant
challenges, primarily in terms of speed and accuracy. For speed, long-context data intensifies training
inefficiencies due to imbalanced workloads; For accuracy, long-context data can degrade performance
on short-context tasks, affecting the model’s general capabilities. These challenges hinder the
efficiency and effectiveness of SFT for long-context LLMs.
The workload imbalance caused by the hybrid of long and short data arises from two main aspects: (1)
within mini-batch imbalance [8], which is caused by excessive padding from randomized mini-batch
∗

Corresponding authors: gongruihao@buaa.edu.cn, xuningyi@sjtu.edu.cn; †: equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

