Efficient Bayesian Experiment Design with
Equivariant Networks

Conor Igoe∗
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
cigoe@cs.cmu.edu

Tejus Gupta∗
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
tejusg@cs.cmu.edu

Jeff Schneider
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
schneide@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent work in Bayesian Experiment Design (BED) has shown the value of using Deep Learning (DL) to obtain highly efficient adaptive experiment designs.
In this paper, we argue that a central bottleneck of DL training for BED is belief explosion. Specifically, as an agent progresses deeper into an experiment, the
effective number of realisable beliefs grows enormously, placing significant sampling burdens on offline training schemes in an effort to gather experience from
all regions of belief space. We argue that choosing an appropriate inductive bias
for actor/critic networks is a critical component in mitigating the effects of belief explosion and has so far been overlooked in the BED literature. We show
how Graph Neural Networks are particularly well-suited for BED DL training due
to their domain permutation equivariance properties, resulting in multiple orders
of magnitude improvement to sample efficiency compared to naive parameterizations.

1

Introduction

Scientific inquiry depends on empirical observations to refine our understanding of the world. These
observations generate data that can be analyzed, interpreted, and used to test hypotheses and theories. However, conducting experiments comes with costs, including time, financial resources, and
logistical constraints. As a result, determining which observations are most valuable for a given line
of inquiry is a central concern in the Design of Experiments.
In particular, Bayesian Experiment Design, or BED, has emerged as an elegant formalism for understanding the value of different experiment designs [1, 2]. Moreover, in recent years there has
been a growing interest in adopting Deep Learning (DL) and Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)
techniques to obtain effective experiment designs for BED tasks [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
Principal among the motivations for the involvement of DL techniques is their potential to increase
the scope of problems that admit practical BED solutions [11]. More specifically, practitioners
typically trade off decision-theoretic performance with online computational costs when deploying
BED policies in real-world tasks. Deep Learning can amortize computationally costly but highperforming BED policies, allowing for improved decision-making, reduced compute burdens, or
both. For example, recent work has shown that multistep lookahead-based approaches for achieving
non-myopic experiment designs involve considerable online computation in the face of nested integrals. Wu and Frazier [12] describe how these approaches can require up to an hour of compute for
a single decision in modest Bayesian Optimization (BO) problems. Although they propose a novel
method to reduce this compute overhead to at most several minutes, such online compute requirements are prohibitive in certain high-frequency or resource-constrained tasks, for example in remote
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

