Causally Reliable Concept Bottleneck Models

Giovanni De Felice∗
Università della Svizzera Italiana
giovanni.de.felice@usi.ch
Silvia Santini
Università della Svizzera Italiana

Arianna Casanova Flores∗
University of Liechtenstein

Johannes Schneider
University of Liechtenstein

Francesco De Santis∗
Politecnico di Torino

Pietro Barbiero†
IBM Research

Alberto Termine†
Scuola Universitaria Professionale della Svizzera Italiana, IDSIA

Abstract
Concept-based models are an emerging paradigm in deep learning that constrains
the inference process to operate through human-interpretable variables, facilitating
explainability and human interaction. However, these architectures, on par with
popular opaque neural models, fail to account for the true causal mechanisms
underlying the target phenomena represented in the data. This hampers their ability
to support causal reasoning tasks, limits out-of-distribution generalization, and
hinders the implementation of fairness constraints. To overcome these issues,
we propose Causally reliable Concept Bottleneck Models (C2 BMs), a class of
concept-based architectures that enforce reasoning through a bottleneck of concepts structured according to a model of the real-world causal mechanisms. We
also introduce a pipeline to automatically learn this structure from observational
data and unstructured background knowledge (e.g., scientific literature). Experimental evidence suggests that C2 BMs are more interpretable, causally reliable, and
improve responsiveness to interventions w.r.t. standard opaque and concept-based
models, while maintaining their accuracy.

1

Introduction

In recent years, interpretable neural models have become more popular, achieving performance similar
to powerful opaque Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (Alvarez Melis & Jaakkola, 2018; Chen et al.,
2019, 2020). Among these, Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020; Zarlenga et al.,
2022; Yuksekgonul et al., 2022; Barbiero et al., 2023) guarantee high expressivity and interpretability
by enforcing DNNs to reason through a layer of high-level, human-interpretable variables called
concepts (e.g., the “color” and “shape” of an object) (Kim et al., 2018; Achtibat et al., 2023; Fel
et al., 2023). In CBMs, a neural encoder first maps the raw input to concepts, forming a semantically
transparent intermediate representation that is used by a simple decoder for downstream predictions.
Beyond transparency, this design allows human experts to intervene on mispredicted concepts at test
time to improve downstream task predictions (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2024).
However, like standard DNN architectures, CBMs remain pure associative models (Pearl, 2019):
their decision-making process reflects statistical correlations within the data rather than real-world
causal mechanisms. As a result, they fail to distinguish between spurious correlations and true causal
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Equal senior authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

