OpenHype: Hyperbolic Embeddings for
Hierarchical Open-Vocabulary Radiance Fields

Lisa Weijler∗
TU Wien

Sebastian Koch
Ulm University

Fabio Poiesi
Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Timo Ropinski
Ulm University

Pedro Hermosilla
TU Wien

Abstract
Modeling the inherent hierarchical structure of 3D objects and 3D scenes is highly
desirable, as it enables a more holistic understanding of environments for autonomous agents. Accomplishing this with implicit representations, such as Neural
Radiance Fields, remains an unexplored challenge. Existing methods that explicitly
model hierarchical structures often face significant limitations: they either require
multiple rendering passes to capture embeddings at different levels of granularity,
significantly increasing inference time, or rely on predefined, closed-set discrete
hierarchies that generalize poorly to the diverse and nuanced structures encountered
by agents in the real world. To address these challenges, we propose OpenHype,
a novel approach that represents scene hierarchies using a continuous hyperbolic
latent space. By leveraging the properties of hyperbolic geometry, OpenHype naturally encodes multi-scale relationships and enables smooth traversal of hierarchies
through geodesic paths in latent space. Our method outperforms state-of-theart approaches on standard benchmarks, demonstrating superior efficiency and
adaptability in 3D scene understanding.

1

Introduction

Understanding 3D scenes requires capturing their inherent semantic hierarchical structure, as objects
and their relationships are naturally organized in a multi-scale fashion [28]. For example, objects
are composed of multiple parts, such as the arms and legs of a chair, and can also be semantically
grouped at a higher level, e.g. a fridge and cabinets within a kitchen, or a couch and TV within a
living room. Preserving this hierarchical organization is critical for a range of applications, including
semantic segmentation, scene reconstruction, and object detection.
Natural language provides a human-readable interface for interacting with computational representations of 3D scenes. However, enabling such an interaction requires more than the mere processing of
language input aligned with visual representations; it also requires the ability to model semantics
at multiple scales and to reason about long-tail and abstract concepts. This requirement is particularly pronounced in the task of 3D open-vocabulary segmentation from Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [29], where a holistic understanding of the scene is essential for handling queries of varying
granularity. Despite its importance, most existing methods overlook the hierarchical nature of 3D
scenes. Instead, they treat 3D scenes as flat collections of independent elements and process the
entire scene uniformly, generating independent embeddings for each spatial position [19, 15, 25, 7],
often resulting in suboptimal performance when hierarchical understanding is required [1].
∗

lweijler@cvl.tuwien.ac.at, lisaweijler.github.io

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

