Variational Regularized Unbalanced Optimal
Transport: Single Network, Least Action

Yuhao Sun1,∗, Zhenyi Zhang2,∗ , Zihan Wang3,∗ , Tiejun Li1,2,4,† and Peijie Zhou1,3,4,5,†
1
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University.
2
LMAM and School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University.
3
Center for Quantitative Biology, Peking University.
4
NELBDA, Peking University. 5 AI for Science Institute, Beijing.
Emails: {2501111524,zhenyizhang,jackwzh}@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{tieli,pjzhou}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recovering the dynamics from a few snapshots of a high-dimensional system is a
challenging task in statistical physics and machine learning, with important applications in computational biology. Many algorithms have been developed to tackle
this problem, based on frameworks such as optimal transport and the Schrödinger
bridge. A notable recent framework is Regularized Unbalanced Optimal Transport
(RUOT), which integrates both stochastic dynamics and unnormalized distributions. However, since many existing methods do not explicitly enforce optimality
conditions, their solutions often struggle to satisfy the principle of least action and
meet challenges to converge in a stable and reliable way. To address these issues,
we propose Variational RUOT (Var-RUOT), a new framework to solve the RUOT
problem. By incorporating the optimal necessary conditions for the RUOT problem
into both the parameterization of the search space and the loss function design,
Var-RUOT only needs to learn a scalar field to solve the RUOT problem and can
search for solutions with lower action. We also examined the challenge of selecting
a growth penalty function in the widely used Wasserstein-Fisher-Rao metric and
proposed a solution that better aligns with biological priors in Var-RUOT. We
validated the effectiveness of Var-RUOT on both simulated data and real single-cell
datasets. Compared with existing algorithms, Var-RUOT can find solutions with
lower action while exhibiting faster convergence and improved training stability.
Our code is available at https://github.com/ZerooVector/VarRUOT.

1

Introduction

Inferring continuous dynamics from finite observations is crucial when analyzing systems with many
particles (Chen et al. 2018). However, in many important applications such as single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNA-seq) experiments, only a few snapshot measurements are available, which makes
recovering the underlying continuous dynamics a challenging task (Ding et al. 2022). Such a task of
reconstructing dynamics from sparse snapshots is commonly referred to as trajectory inference in
time-series scRNA-seq modeling (Zhang et al. 2025b; Ding et al. 2022; Heitz et al. 2024; Yeo et al.
2021a; Schiebinger et al. 2019a; Bunne et al. 2023b; Zhang et al. 2021) or the mathematical problem
of ensemble regression (Yang et al. 2022).
A number of frameworks have been proposed to address this problem. For example, in dynamical
optimal transport (OT), particles evolve according to the ordinary differential equations (ODEs) with
∗

These authors contributed equally. † Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

