Certifying Concavity and Monotonicity in Games via
Sum-of-Squares Hierarchies

Vincent Leon1
1

UIUC

Iosif Sakos2
2

SUTD

3

Ryann Sim2

NUS CQT

4

Antonios Varvitsiotis2,3,4

Archimedes/Athena RC

leon18@illinois.edu
{iosif_sakos, ryann_sim, antonios}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Concavity and its refinements underpin tractability in multiplayer games, where
players independently choose actions to maximize their own payoffs which depend on other players’ actions. In concave games, where players’ strategy sets are
compact and convex, and their payoffs are concave in their own actions, strong
guarantees follow: Nash equilibria always exist and decentralized algorithms converge to equilibria. If the game is furthermore monotone, an even stronger guarantee holds: Nash equilibria are unique under strictness assumptions. Unfortunately, we show that certifying concavity or monotonicity is NP-hard, already
for games where utilities are multivariate polynomials and compact, convex basic semialgebraic strategy sets—an expressive class that captures extensive-form
games with imperfect recall. On the positive side, we develop two hierarchies
of sum-of-squares programs that certify concavity and monotonicity of a given
game, and each level of the hierarchies can be solved in polynomial time. We
show that almost all concave/monotone games are certified at some finite level of
the hierarchies. Subsequently, we introduce the classes of SOS-concave/monotone
games, which globally approximate concave/monotone games, and show that for
any given game we can compute the closest SOS-concave/monotone game in polynomial time. Finally, we apply our techniques to canonical examples of extensiveform games with imperfect recall.

1

Introduction

Game theory models settings where multiple decision-makers independently maximize personal
objectives that depend on the actions of others. Formally, a game with n players is modeled by
assigning to each player i a strategy set Xi ⊂ Rmi and a utility function ui (xi , x−i ), where xi ∈ Xi
is player i’s action and x−i denotes the actions of all other players. The interdependence of players’
utilities makes analyzing the collective behavior of such systems both rich and challenging.
The canonical solution concept in game theory is the Nash equilibrium [42], a product distribution over strategies in which no player can unilaterally deviate to improve their utility, given the
strategies of the other players. While Nash equilibria are guaranteed to exist in finite normal-form
games, several key questions must be addressed in games with continuous, infinite action spaces: Do
Nash equilibria always exist? If one exists, is it unique (thereby avoiding the equilibrium selection
problem)? And crucially, can it be computed efficiently using distributed algorithms?
Extensive research has identified concavity, and its refinements, as key enablers in addressing these
fundamental questions. In the setting of games, this entails assuming that each strategy set Xi
is compact and convex. Furthermore, concavity of players’ utilities can manifest in at least two
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

