Generalizable Domain Adaptation for
Sim-and-Real Policy Co-Training
Shuo Cheng1*
Liqian Ma1*
Zhenyang Chen1
2†
2†
Ajay Mandlekar
Caelan Garrett
Danfei Xu1
1
2
Georgia Institute of Technology
NVIDIA Corporation
*

and † denote equal contribution
{shuocheng, mlq}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Behavior cloning has shown promise for robot manipulation, but real-world demonstrations are costly to acquire at scale. While simulated data offers a scalable
alternative, particularly with advances in automated demonstration generation,
transferring policies to the real world is hampered by various simulation and real
domain gaps. In this work, we propose a unified sim-and-real co-training framework for learning generalizable manipulation policies that primarily leverages
simulation and only requires a few real-world demonstrations. Central to our approach is learning a domain-invariant, task-relevant feature space. Our key insight
is that aligning the joint distributions of observations and their corresponding actions across domains provides a richer signal than aligning observations (marginals)
alone. We achieve this by embedding an Optimal Transport (OT)-inspired loss
within the co-training framework, and extend this to an Unbalanced OT framework
to handle the imbalance between abundant simulation data and limited real-world
examples. We validate our method on challenging manipulation tasks, showing it
can leverage abundant simulation data to achieve up to a 30% improvement in the
real-world success rate and even generalize to scenarios seen only in simulation.
Project webpage: https://ot-sim2real.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Behavior cloning [1] is a promising approach for acquiring robot manipulation skills directly in the
real world, due to its simplicity and effectiveness in mimicking expert demonstrations [2, 3]. However,
achieving robust and generalizable performance requires collecting large-scale datasets [4, 5] across
diverse environments, object configurations, and tasks. This data collection process is labor-intensive,
time-consuming, and costly, posing significant challenges to scalability in real-world applications.
Recently, with rapid advancements in physics simulators [6, 7], procedural scene generation [8, 9],
and motion synthesis techniques [10, 11], there has been growing interest in leveraging simulation
as an alternative source of training data. These simulation-based approaches enable scalable and
controllable data generation, allowing for diverse and abundant supervision at a fraction of the
real-world cost. However, transferring policies trained in simulation to the physical world remains
a non-trivial challenge due to sim-to-real gap—the discrepancies between the simulated and realworld environments that a policy encounters during execution. These differences can manifest in
various forms, such as variations in visual appearance, sensor noise, and action dynamics [12, 13].
In particular, learning visuomotor control policies that remain robust under changing perceptual
conditions during real-world deployment continues to be an open area of research.
Common strategies to bridge this domain gap include domain randomization [12, 13] and data
augmentation [14, 15], though these often require careful tuning. Domain adaptation (DA) techniques
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

