It’s Hard to Be Normal: The Impact of Noise on
Structure-agnostic Estimation

Jikai Jin∗
Stanford University
jkjin@stanford.edu

Lester Mackey
Microsoft Research
lmackey@microsoft.com

Vasilis Syrgkanis†
Stanford University
vsyrgk@stanford.edu

Abstract
Structure-agnostic causal inference studies how well one can estimate a treatment
effect given black-box machine learning estimates of nuisance functions (like the
impact of confounders on treatment and outcomes). Here, we find that the answer
depends in a surprising way on the distribution of the treatment noise. Focusing
on the partially linear model of Robinson [1988], we first show that the widely
adopted double machine learning (DML) estimator is minimax rate-optimal for
Gaussian treatment noise, resolving an open problem of Mackey et al. [2018].
Meanwhile, for independent non-Gaussian treatment noise, we show that DML
is always suboptimal by constructing new practical procedures with higher-order
robustness to nuisance errors. These ACE procedures use structure-agnostic cumulant estimators to achieve r-th order insensitivity to nuisance errors whenever
the (r + 1)-st treatment cumulant is non-zero. We complement these core results with novel minimax guarantees for binary treatments in the partially linear
model. Finally, using synthetic demand estimation experiments, we demonstrate
the practical benefits of our higher-order robust estimators.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning (ML) offers a rich toolbox of flexible methods for modeling complex,
high-dimensional functions — ranging from regularized linear regression [Belloni et al., 2014, Zou
and Hastie, 2005] and random forests [Breiman, 2001, Biau et al., 2008, Syrgkanis and Zampetakis,
2020] to neural networks [Schmidt-Hieber, 2020, Farrell et al., 2021] and hybrid combinations of
these techniques [Džeroski and Ženko, 2004, Chernozhukov et al., 2022]. For statisticians and
econometricians, it is natural to ask whether ML can improve both the accuracy and the robustness of estimating a target parameter of interest. Recently, Balakrishnan et al. [2023] introduced
the paradigm of structure-agnostic estimation (SAE). SAE enables parameter inference by directly
plugging in black-box ML-based estimates of the so-called nuisance functions — the other regression components that impact our observations while not being of primary inferential interest. This
framework characterizes the best possible target estimation accuracy in terms of the error of these
nuisance estimates. By contrast, the classical semiparametric approach derives optimal error rates
under explicit structural assumptions on the nuisance — such as smoothness or sparsity — which
must be exploited by the estimator and can render it fragile when those assumptions fail [Stone,
1982, Chen and White, 1999, Belloni et al., 2011].
In the field of causal inference, a typical goal is to estimate the impact of a treatment on an observed
outcome in the presence of confounders X that impact both treatment T and outcome Y in largely
unknown ways. When all confounders are observed, many causal estimands admit expressions in
∗
†

Jikai Jin was supported by NSF Award IIS-2337916.
Vasilis Syrgkanis was supported by NSF Award IIS-2337916.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

