The Adaptive Complexity of Minimizing Relative
Fisher Information
Huanjian Zhou
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences
The University of Tokyo
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
RIKEN
zhou@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Masashi Sugiyama
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
RIKEN
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences
The University of Tokyo
sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Non-log-concave sampling from an unnormalized density is fundamental in machine learning and statistics. As datasets grow larger, computational efficiency
becomes increasingly important, particularly in reducing adaptive complexity,
namely the number of sequential rounds required for sampling algorithms. In this
work, we initiate the study of the adaptive complexity of non-log-concave sampling
within the framework of relative Fisher information introduced by Balasubramanian et al. in 2022. To obtain a relative Fisher information of at most ε2 from
the target distribution, we propose a novel algorithm that reduces the adaptive
complexity from O(d2 /ε4 ) to O(d/ε2 ) by leveraging parallelism. Furthermore,
we show our algorithm is optimal for a specific regime of large ε. Our algorithm
builds on a diagonally parallelized Picard iteration, while the lower bound is based
on a reduction from the problem of finding stationary points.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of adaptive sampling from a target distribution over Rd given query access
to its unnormalized density, a fundamental task in areas such as Bayesian inference, randomized
algorithms, and machine learning [MR+ 07, NWS19, RCC99]. Recently, significant progress has
been made in developing sequential algorithms for this problem, drawing inspiration from the
extensive optimization toolkit, particularly when the target distribution is log-concave [JKO98,
DMM19, MCC+ 21]. Typically, when access to the function value is available, many high-accuracy
samplers1 have been designed based on Metropolis–Hastings filters or a proximal sampler [DCWY19,
CDWY20, LST20, ALPW24, LST21, AC24, FYC23].
However, in many practical applications, such as energy-based models and Markov Decision Processes, evaluating the log-likelihood is often computationally intractable [LCH+ 06, SB13]. In such
scenarios, an alternative approach to designing high-accuracy samplers involves leveraging parallelism [SL19, YD24, ACV24, ZS24]. These algorithms effectively leverage contemporary parallel
computing resources, such as multi-core central processing units (CPUs) and many-core graphics
processing units (GPUs), especially since log-likelihood gradient evaluations often admit parallelization [HLB+ 21, HLFS21]. In particular, the authors [SL19, YD24, ACV24, ZS24] proposed samplers
that find an ε-accurate solution within O(poly log(d/ε2 )) iterations, significantly improving upon the
sub-polynomial complexity of O(da /εb ) for log-concave distributions for some constant a, b ∈ (0, 1).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

1
Samplers with complexity poly(d, log(K0 /ε)), assuming constant smoothness and condition number and
K0 as initial KL divergence.

