Beyond Scores: Proximal Diffusion Models

Zhenghan Fang
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
zfang23@jhu.edu

Mateo Díaz
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
mateodd@jhu.edu

Sam Buchanan
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
sdbuchanan@berkeley.edu

Jeremias Sulam
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
jsulam1@jhu.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have quickly become some of the most popular and powerful
generative models for high-dimensional data. The key insight that enabled their
development was the realization that access to the score—the gradient of the logdensity at different noise levels —allows for sampling from data distributions by
solving a reverse-time stochastic differential equation (SDE) via forward discretization, and that popular denoisers allow for unbiased estimators of this score. In this
paper, we demonstrate that an alternative, backward discretization of these SDEs,
using proximal maps in place of the score, leads to theoretical and practical benefits.
We leverage recent results in proximal matching to learn proximal operators of
the log-density and, with them, develop Proximal Diffusion Models (ProxDM).
√
O(d/ ε) steps suffice for the resulting discretization
Theoretically, we prove that e
to generate an ε-accurate distribution w.r.t. the KL divergence. Empirically, we
show that two variants of ProxDM achieve significantly faster convergence within
just a few sampling steps compared to conventional score-matching methods.

1

Introduction

Within a remarkably brief period, diffusion models [72, 27] have overtaken generative artificial
intelligence, emerging as the de facto solution across diverse domains including medical imaging
[13], video [36] and audio [28], drug discovery [15], and protein docking prediction [12]. Diffusion
models combine a forward diffusion process that converts the data distribution we wish to sample
into noise and a reverse-time process that reconstructs data from noise. The forward process is easy
to simulate by progressively adding noise to data. The reverse process, which allows for sampling
data from noise, involves the so-called score function—the gradient of the log-density of the noisy
data at any time point. Though unknown in general, such a score can be estimated by common
denoising algorithms that approximate minimum mean-squared-error solutions. Various diffusion
algorithms have been recently proposed [75, 53, 81], all relying on forward discretizations of the
reverse stochastic differential equation, and allowing for impressive generative modeling performance.
Despite these capabilities, current state-of-the-art diffusion-based methods face drawbacks: highquality samples require a large number of model evaluations, which tends to be computationally
expensive, and they are sensitive to hyperparameter choices and the lack of regularity of the data
distribution [67, 35]. Naturally, computational cost, and sensitivity to hyperparameters and data
regularity are not unique to diffusion models. Many numerical analysis and optimization algorithms
grounded on forward discretizations of continuous-time processes share similar limitations. For
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

