SAMPO: Scale-wise Autoregression with Motion
PrOmpt for Generative World Models

Sen Wang1 Jingyi Tian1 Le Wang1, Zhimin Liao1 Jiayi Li1 Huaiyi Dong1
Kun Xia1 Sanping Zhou1 Wei Tang2 Hua Gang3
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
University of Illinois at Chicago 3 Amazon.com, Inc.

Abstract
World models allow agents to simulate the consequences of actions in imagined
environments for planning, control, and long-horizon decision-making. However,
existing autoregressive world models struggle with visually coherent predictions
due to disrupted spatial structure, inefficient decoding, and inadequate motion modeling. In response, we propose Scale-wise Autoregression with Motion PrOmpt
(SAMPO), a hybrid framework that combines visual autoregressive modeling for
intra-frame generation with causal modeling for next-frame generation. Specifically, SAMPO integrates temporal causal decoding with bidirectional spatial attention, which preserves spatial locality and supports parallel decoding within each
scale. This design significantly enhances both temporal consistency and rollout
efficiency. To further improve dynamic scene understanding, we devise an asymmetric multi-scale tokenizer that preserves spatial details in observed frames and
extracts compact dynamic representations for future frames, optimizing both memory usage and model performance. Additionally, we introduce a trajectory-aware
motion prompt module that injects spatiotemporal cues about object and robot
trajectories, focusing attention on dynamic regions and improving temporal consistency and physical realism. Extensive experiments show that SAMPO achieves
competitive performance in action-conditioned video prediction and model-based
control, improving generation quality with 4.4× faster inference. We also evaluate
SAMPO’s zero-shot generalization and scaling behavior, demonstrating its ability
to generalize to unseen tasks and benefit from larger model sizes.

1

Introduction

Building a world model that can simulate the physical environment and respond to the actions of agents
is a central challenge on the path to artificial general intelligence (AGI) [2, 11, 77, 33, 52, 72, 73].
Recently, video generation has been integrated into world models, enabling models to generate future
frames based on agent actions, simulating dynamic environments and making it possible for agents to
anticipate outcomes and make informed decisions [24, 7, 50, 4]. Despite growing progress, designing
a world model that is simultaneously high-fidelity, temporally consistent, and efficiently scalable
remains an open problem.
Prior works have advanced video-based world models by formulating future prediction as an actionconditioned generation problem. These approaches can be categorized into three major families based
on their generative paradigms: masked modeling, diffusion-based models and autoregressive models.
Corresponding author.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

