ProDyG: Progressive Dynamic Scene Reconstruction
via Gaussian Splatting from Monocular Videos

Shi Chen
ETH Zürich
Sandro Lombardi
Independent Researcher

Erik Sandström
Google
Siyuan Li
ETH Zürich

Martin R. Oswald
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
Achieving truly practical dynamic 3D reconstruction requires online operation,
global pose and map consistency, detailed appearance modeling, and the flexibility to handle both RGB and RGB-D inputs. However, existing SLAM methods
typically merely remove the dynamic parts or require RGB-D input, while offline
methods are not scalable to long video sequences, and current transformer-based
feedforward methods lack global consistency and appearance details. To this end,
we achieve online dynamic scene reconstruction by disentangling the static and dynamic parts within a SLAM system. The poses are tracked robustly with a novel motion masking strategy, and dynamic parts are reconstructed leveraging a progressive
adaptation of a Motion Scaffolds graph. Our method yields novel view renderings
competitive to offline methods and achieves on-par tracking with state-of-the-art
dynamic SLAM methods. Project page: cs-vision.github.io/ProDyG.github.io

1

Introduction

Dynamic scene reconstruction is fundamental to problems like action recognition, scene understanding, autonomous driving, robotics and augmented reality, because it provides a temporally
consistent spatial understanding of how objects and agents move and interact in their environment —
an essential prerequisite for any system to perceive, predict, and act in the world. This problem has
been tackled in various ways e.g. as an online SLAM task [4, 89, 34], an offline reconstruction task
[29, 73, 79, 39, 56, 55], and lately as a feedforward task [86, 87, 11, 69]. However, most dynamic
SLAM works ignore the dynamic parts [89, 4], only reconstructing the static world, only track rigid
objects [85, 43] or are restricted to object-centric reconstruction [45, 58]. Offline methods typically
separate the reconstruction task into pose estimation followed by reconstruction [55, 56], or are not
scalable to long input videos due to their reliance on global optimization over all past frames [29, 73].
Feed-forward methods train large transformers for online dynamic scene reconstruction, but are yet
to achieve global pose consistency and only produce point clouds [69, 11, 86].
Despite recent progress, existing methods fall short of at least one of the requirements for practical
dynamic scene reconstruction: (1) online operation, tightly coupling pose estimation and dense map
reconstruction for scalability; (2) global pose and map consistency; (3) expressive representations
like 3DGS [23] for detailed appearance and geometry; and (4) flexibility to handle both RGB and
RGB-D input. SLAM systems often ignore dynamics or lack detail; feedforward methods trade
consistency and accuracy for speed; and offline methods are challenging to scale.
We propose ProDyG1 , a method for Progressive, Dynamic scene reconstruction with Gaussians from
monocular input, that meets all four criteria. Our contributions are:
1

Pronounced “Prodigy”.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

