Wavelet Canonical Coherence for Nonstationary
Signals

Haibo Wu1∗ Marina I. Knight2
Keiland W. Cooper3,4 Norbert J. Fortin3,4 Hernando Ombao1
1

Statistics Program, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
2
Department of Mathematics, The University of York
3
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine
4
Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, University of California, Irvine

Abstract
Understanding the evolving dependence between two sets of multivariate signals
is fundamental in neuroscience and other domains where sub-networks in a system interact dynamically over time. Despite the growing interest in multivariate
time series analysis, existing methods for between-clusters dependence typically
rely on the assumption of stationarity and lack the temporal resolution to capture
transient, frequency-specific interactions. To overcome this limitation, we propose
scale-specific wavelet canonical coherence (WaveCanCoh), a novel framework that
extends canonical coherence analysis to the nonstationary setting by leveraging
the multivariate locally stationary wavelet model. The proposed WaveCanCoh
enables the estimation of time-varying canonical coherence between clusters, providing interpretable insight into scale-specific time-varying interactions between
clusters. Through extensive simulation studies, we demonstrate that WaveCanCoh
accurately recovers true coherence structures under both locally stationary and
general nonstationary conditions. Application to local field potential (LFP) activity
data recorded from the hippocampus reveals distinct dynamic coherence patterns
between correct and incorrect memory-guided decisions, illustrating the capacity
of the method to detect behaviorally relevant neural coordination. These results
highlight WaveCanCoh as a flexible and principled tool for modeling complex
cross-group dependencies in nonstationary multivariate systems. Code for implementing WaveCanCoh is available at https://github.com/mhaibo/WaveCanCoh.git.

1

Introduction

Assessing the dependence structure between node clusters in a network is one of the most critical
aspects of network time series analysis. Many models and frameworks have been developed to capture
between-clusters association (e.g., correlation, coherence, and causality). Most existing methods
characterize the dependence between two clusters through the dependence between (many) node pairs.
However, in many scenarios, the primary interest lies in understanding the dependence structure
between two groups of multivariate time series rather than individual processes. Figure 1 illustrates
this perspective using brain activity signals. In this experiment, local field potential (LFP) activity was
recorded from multiple electrodes implanted in different subregions of the hippocampus of rodents
(rats) as they performed a complex sequence memory task. Instead of focusing on coherence between
individual channels (electrodes), the main goal is to quantify time-varying functional interactions
between groups of electrodes in order to understand how information processing differs in these two
∗

Corresponding author: haibo.wu@kaust.edu.sa

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

