Interactive Cross-modal Learning
for Text-3D Scene Retrieval
Yanglin Feng1 , Yongxiang Li1 , Yuan Sun2 , Yang Qin1 , Dezhong Peng1,3 , Peng Hu1∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
2
National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Algorithms and Models
for Engineering Numerical Simulation, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
3
Tianfu Jincheng Laboratory, Chengdu, China.
fcyzfyl@163.com, rhythmli.scu@gmail.com, sunyuan_work@163.com,
qinyang.gm@gmail.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn, penghu.ml@gmail.com

Abstract
Text-3D Scene Retrieval (T3SR) aims to retrieve relevant scenes using linguistic
queries. Although traditional T3SR methods have made significant progress in
capturing fine-grained associations, they implicitly assume that query descriptions
are information-complete. In practical deployments, however, limited by the capabilities of users and models, it is difficult or even impossible to directly obtain a
perfect textual query suiting the entire scene and model, thereby leading to performance degradation. To address this issue, we propose a novel Interactive Text-3D
Scene Retrieval Method (IDeal), which promotes the enhancement of the alignment
between texts and 3D scenes through continuous interaction. To achieve this, we
present an Interactive Retrieval Refinement framework (IRR), which employs a
questioner to pose contextually relevant questions to an answerer in successive
rounds that either promote detailed probing or encourage exploratory divergence
within scenes. Upon the iterative responses received from the answerer, IRR adopts
a retriever to perform both feature-level and semantic-level information fusion,
facilitating scene-level interaction and understanding for more precise re-rankings.
To bridge the domain gap between queries and interactive texts, we propose an
Interaction Adaptation Tuning strategy (IAT). IAT mitigates the discriminability
and diversity risks among augmented text features that approximate the interaction
text domain, achieving contrastive domain adaptation for our retriever. Extensive
experimental results on three datasets demonstrate the superiority of IDeal. Code
is available at https://github.com/Yangl1nFeng/IDeal.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed natural language interfaces to embodied intelligence systems [1, 2,
3, 4, 5] become increasingly prevalent in our daily lives. This opens up further opportunities for
natural language-based interaction with intelligent agents, such as a user verbally instructing agents
to perform tasks in a specific scene. Before executing any task, an agent must first retrieve the scene
relevant to the user’s intent. This requirement has spurred recent works on Text-3D Scene Retrieval
(T3SR) [6, 7], which enables the retrieval of 3D point-cloud scenes using linguistic queries. Such
a language-scene alignment capability lays a critical foundation for enabling agents to generalize
across scenes and environments.
Although existing dedicated methods [6] achieve promising performance for T3SR by facilitating
fine-grained query text and scene understanding, such success often relies on the assumption that
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025)

