CATransformers: Carbon Aware Transformers
Through Joint Model-Hardware Optimization
Irene Wang1,2,∗ , Mostafa Elhoushi2 , H. Ekin Sumbul3 , Samuel Hsia2 , Daniel Jiang4 , Newsha
Ardalani2 , Divya Mahajan1 , Carole-Jean Wu2 , Bilge Acun2
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 FAIR at Meta, 3 Reality Labs at Meta, 4 Meta, ∗ Work done at Meta
irene.wang@gatech.edu acun@meta.com

Abstract
Machine learning solutions are rapidly adopted to enable a variety of key use
cases, from conversational AI assistants to scientific discovery. This growing
adoption is expected to increase the associated lifecycle carbon footprint, including
both operational carbon from training and inference and embodied carbon from
AI hardware manufacturing. We introduce CATransformers—the first carbonaware co-optimization framework for Transformer-based models and hardware
accelerators. By integrating both operational and embodied carbon into early-stage
design space exploration, CATransformers enables sustainability-driven model
architecture and hardware accelerator co-design that reveals fundamentally different
trade-offs than latency- or energy-centric approaches. Evaluated across a range
of Transformer models, CATransformers consistently demonstrates the potential
to reduce total carbon emissions—by up to 30%—while maintaining accuracy
and latency. We further highlight its extensibility through a focused case study
on multi-modal models. Our results emphasize the need for holistic optimization
methods that prioritize carbon efficiency without compromising model capability
and execution time performance. The source code of CATransformers is available
at https://github.com/facebookresearch/CATransformers.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) systems become more widespread across various industries, it is crucial to
take a closer examination of their carbon footprint and find strategies to mitigate it across the system
stack. Sustainable ML system design requires a holistic approach that considers both operational
carbon (energy used during training and inference) and embodied carbon (emissions from hardware
manufacturing and lifecycle) [GEH+ 22], which together contribute to total emissions. This work
tackles the question: How does incorporating carbon footprint metrics into optimization workflows
influence the design of ML models and hardware architectures as a co-optimization?
A fundamental challenge in designing sustainable AI systems stem from the tight coupling between
model architecture and hardware design, which together shape both operational and embodied carbon.
Model execution on a particular hardware determines runtime characteristics, such as compute
intensity and memory access patterns, which affect operational carbon, while hardware parameters
like chip area, memory hierarchy, and fabrication technology drive embodied carbon. Carbon
optimization requires joint model-hardware exploration, particularly during early accelerator design,
to uncover opportunities that align model demands with hardware capabilities in a carbon-efficient
way. Co-design is even more important for multi-modal workloads like vision-language models.
Each modality introduces distinct bottlenecks—e.g., vision transformers usually have compute-bound
workloads [DGC24], while text transformers have more memory-bound workloads [Fu24]. Co39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

