Cascaded Language Models for Cost-Effective
Human–AI Decision-Making

Claudio Fanconi
University of Cambridge
caf83@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
A challenge in human-AI decision-making is to balance three factors: the correctness of predictions, the cost of knowledge and reasoning complexity, and the
confidence about whether to abstain from automated answers or escalate to human experts. In this work, we present a cascaded LLM decision framework that
adaptively delegates tasks across multiple tiers of expertise – a base model for
initial candidate answers, a more capable and knowledgeable (but costlier) large
model, and a human expert for when the model cascade abstains. Our method
proceeds in two stages. First, a deferral policy determines whether to accept the
base model’s answer or regenerate it with the large model based on the confidence
score. Second, an abstention policy decides whether the cascade model response
is sufficiently certain or requires human intervention. Moreover, to overcome
static policies and accommodate changing task difficulty, we incorporate an online
learning mechanism which uses human feedback. We demonstrate this approach to
general question-answering (ARC-Easy, ARC-Challenge, and MMLU) and medical question-answering (MedQA and MedMCQA). Our results demonstrate that
our cascaded strategy outperforms single-model baselines in most cases, achieving higher accuracy while reducing costs and providing a principled approach to
handling abstentions.1

1

Introduction

Data-driven decision support has gained increasing traction in high-stakes fields such as healthcare
[Jin et al., 2024, Fan et al., 2024, Li et al., 2024], finance [Li et al., 2023a, Zhao et al., 2024], and
education [Xu et al., 2024]. For example, in the medical context, large language models (LLMs) can
facilitate accurate diagnoses and treatment recommendations that encode vast knowledge Kim et al.
[2024]. However, high accuracy in such complex settings often requires substantial computational
resources or multiple reasoning steps. Additionally, LLMs may hallucinate or generate incorrect
outputs with severe consequences. Effective human-AI collaboration should balance correctness,
cost, and abstention, ensuring AI-driven assistance integrates seamlessly with expert oversight.
The Challenge. A key challenge in effective human–AI collaboration is how to allocate computational and human resources efficiently—deciding when an automated model should answer, when
it should escalate to a lager and more capable model, and when it should defer to human expertise.
Naı̈ve strategies — such as always relying on the cheaper model or always trusting the more capable
one — fail to optimise this trade-off. The former increases the risk of errors and hallucinations, while
the latter inflates costs. Likewise, static deferral policies, fixed thresholds, or one-off calibrations
cannot adapt to changing task distributions or evolving model competence.
1

We provide the code for our experiments at https://github.com/fanconic/cascaded-llms

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

