Towards Accurate Time Series Forecasting via
Implicit Decoding

Xinyu Li1 , Yuchen Luo1 , Hao Wang2 , Haoxuan Li3,6 ,
Liuhua Peng1 , Feng Liu1 , Yandong Guo4 , Kun Zhang5,6 , Mingming Gong1,6∗
1
The University of Melbourne 2 Zhejiang University 3 Peking University 4 AI2 Robotics
5
Carnegie Mellon University 6 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
xl5@student.unimelb.edu.au,mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Recent booming time series models have demonstrated remarkable forecasting
performance. However, these methods often place greater focus on more effectively
modelling the historical series, largely neglecting the forecasting phase, which
generates long-term forecasts by separately predicting multiple time points. Given
that real-world time series typically consist of various long short-term dynamics,
independent predictions over individual time points may fail to express complex
underlying patterns and can lead to a lack of global views. To address these issues,
this work explores new perspectives from the forecasting phase and proposes a
novel Implicit Forecaster (IF) as an additional decoding module. Inspired by decomposition forecasting, IF adopts a more nuanced approach by implicitly predicting
constituent waves represented by their frequency, amplitude, and phase, thereby
accurately forming the time series. Extensive experimental results from multiple
real-world datasets show that IF can consistently boost mainstream time series
models, achieving state-of-the-art forecasting performance. Code is available at this
repository: https://github.com/rakuyorain/Implicit-Forecaster.

1

Introduction

Time Series Forecasting (TSF) is the task of predicting future trends and dynamics of time series
based on historical observations. It is essential for many real-world applications, including weather
forecasting [52, 28], energy management [21, 3], and traffic flow estimation [1, 32]. In the past few
years, the advancement of deep learning has enabled neural forecasting methods to take a significant
place in the TSF landscape. Neural networks, especially Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [10, 11],
are particularly effective on TSF due to their ability to capture sequential information. Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) [12, 51], with their strength in recognising intricate temporal structures and
local patterns, excel at extracting features from time series. By modelling dependencies between a
sequence of representations, Transformers have demonstrated superior ability in learning inter-series
[13] and intra-series [20] information, thus becoming state-of-the-art in TSF.
Despite these achievements, existing TSF methods primarily focus on improving the modelling of
historical time series, while more precisely translating the modelled features into future series during
the forecasting phase is rarely considered. Specifically, previous works typically use elaborately
designed architectures to learn and transform the input time series into complex representations, and
then leverage MLPs to predict these representations separately into the value of each future time step,
thereby generating the output series. We noticed that this scheme of independent prediction between
consecutive points might not be suitable for long-term forecasting, given that native MLPs lack a
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

