Fractional Langevin Dynamics for Combinatorial
Optimization via Polynomial-Time Escape

Shiyue Wang1,3† , Ziao Guo2† , Changhong Lu1 , Junchi Yan2,3 ∗
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Key Laboratory of MEA,
and Shanghai Key Laboratory of PMMP, East China Normal University
2
School of Computer Science & School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Shanghai Innovation Institute
{wangshiyue@stu,chlu@math}.ecnu.edu.cn

{ziao.guo,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Langevin dynamics (LD) and its discrete proposal have been widely applied in
the field of Combinatorial Optimization (CO). Both sampling-based and datadriven approaches have benefited significantly from these methods. However, LD’s
reliance on Gaussian noise limits its ability to escape narrow local optima, requires
costly parallel chains, and performs poorly in rugged landscapes or with non-strict
constraints. These challenges have impeded the development of more advanced
approaches. To address these issues, we introduce fractional Langevin dynamics
(FLD) for CO, replacing Gaussian noise with α-stable Lévy noise. FLD can escape
from local optima more readily via Lévy flights, and in multiple-peak CO problems
with high potential barriers it exhibits a polynomial escape time that outperforms
the exponential escape time of LD. Moreover, FLD coincides with LD when α = 2,
and by tuning α it can be adapted to a wider range of complex scenarios in the CO
field. We provide theoretical proof that our method offers enhanced exploration
capabilities and improved convergence. Experimental results on the Maximum
Independent Set, Maximum Clique, and Maximum Cut problems demonstrate
that incorporating FLD advances both sampling-based and data-driven approaches,
achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in most of the experiments. The
codes are publicly available at https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/FLD4CO.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization (CO) problems, which involve finding an optimal solution from a finite set
of possible configurations subject to a set of constraints, are of paramount importance and usefulness
across fields, e.g. logistics [45], scheduling [59], network design [4], and finance [39].
There has been growing interest in developing efficient algorithms for obtaining high-quality suboptimal solutions. Among these efforts, sampling-based methods have shown considerable promise
due to their simplicity, ability to balance speed and solution quality, and training-free property.
A fundamental approach is simulated annealing (SA) [28], which uses random local fluctuations
guided by Metropolis-Hastings updates [36, 23] and probabilistically explores the solution space.
Recent work [51] has demonstrated that incorporating Langevin dynamics (LD) and its discrete
proposal [69, 50] can vastly improve the sampling efficiency, thereby advancing sampling-based
approaches for CO. The core idea of LD is to leverage the gradient to guide the sampling in each
iteration, resulting in a more efficient searching process. However, there are certain limitations
∗
Correspondence author. † denotes equal contribution. This work was partly supported by National Key R&D
Program of China (Nos. 2021YFA1000300 and 2021YFA 100302) and National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 12331014, 62222607).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

