Geometric Algebra-Enhanced Bayesian Flow Network
for RNA Inverse Design

Rubo Wang1, 2 , Xingyu Gao1, 2∗, Peilin Zhao3
Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
wangrubo@hotmail.com, gxy9910@gmail.com, peilinzhao@sjtu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
With the development of biotechnology, RNA therapies have shown great potential.
However, different from proteins, the sequences corresponding to a single RNA
three-dimensional structure are more abundant. Most of the existing RNA design
methods merely take into account the secondary structure of RNA, or are only
capable of generating a limited number of candidate sequences. To address these
limitations, we propose a geometric-algebra-enhanced Bayesian Flow Network for
the inverse design of RNA, called RBFN. RBFN uses a Bayesian Flow Network
to model the distribution of nucleotide sequences in RNA, enabling the generation
of more reasonable RNA sequences. Meanwhile, considering the more flexible
characteristics of RNA conformations, we utilize geometric algebra to enhance
the modeling ability of the RNA three-dimensional structure, facilitating a better
understanding of RNA structural properties. In addition, due to the scarcity of
RNA structures and the limitation that there are only four types of nucleic acids,
we propose a new time-step distribution sampling to address the scarcity of RNA
structure data and the relatively small number of nucleic acid types. Evaluation
on the single-state fixed-backbone re-design benchmark and multi-state fixedbackbone benchmark indicates that RBFN can outperform existing RNA design
methods in various RNA design tasks, enabling effective RNA sequence design.

1

Introduction

Ribonucleic acid (RNA), as one of the fundamental biomolecule in life activities, not only undertakes
the function of genetic information transmission (such as mRNA, tRNA, and rRNA), but also
participates in complex biological processes such as gene expression regulation, protein synthesis,
and cell signal transduction through non-coding RNAs (such as miRNA, siRNA) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
The realization of its functions highly depends on the secondary structures (such as stem-loops,
pseudoknots) formed by its dynamic folding and the tertiary spatial conformation. RNA can be
used for drug target screening [6], vaccine development (such as the COVID-19 mRNA vaccine
[7]), and synthetic biology circuit design [8]. In addition, the application of RNA design in disease
treatment is becoming increasingly widespread. For example, pathogenic genes can be silenced
through siRNA [9], metabolic pathways [10] can be regulated by designing riboswitches [11], and
highly sensitive biosensing can be achieved by using aptamers.
Despite RNA’s critical biological significance, structural modeling research remains predominantly
protein-centric, as evidenced by recent advances in geometric deep learning [12, 13]. This disparity
arises from two key factors: there are a large number of protein three-dimensional structures in the
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

