Many LLMs Are More Utilitarian Than One

Anita Keshmirian1,4,*,† Razan Baltaji2,*,† Babak Hemmatian3 Hadi Asghari4,5 Lav R. Varshney2,6
1
Forward College 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 3 University of Nebraska, Lincoln
4
Technische Universität Berlin 5 Humboldt Institute for Internet and Society 6 Stony Brook University
*
Equal Contributions † Corresponding Authors

Abstract
Moral judgment is integral to large language models’ (LLMs) social reasoning.
As multi-agent systems gain prominence, it becomes crucial to understand how
LLMs function when collaborating compared to operating as individual agents.
In human moral judgment, group deliberation leads to a Utilitarian Boost: a
tendency to endorse norm violations that inflict harm but maximize benefits for
the greatest number of people. We study whether a similar dynamic emerges in
multi-agent LLM systems. We test six models on well-established sets of moral
dilemmas across two conditions: (1) Solo, where models reason independently,
and (2) Group, where they engage in multi-turn discussions in pairs or triads. In
personal dilemmas, where agents decide whether to directly harm an individual
for the benefit of others, all models rated moral violations as more acceptable
when part of a group, demonstrating a Utilitarian Boost similar to that observed
in humans. However, the mechanism for the boost in LLMs differed: While
humans in groups become more utilitarian due to heightened sensitivity to decision
outcomes, LLM groups showed diverse profiles, for example, reduced sensitivity
to norms or enhanced impartiality. We report model differences in when and how
strongly the boost manifests. We also discuss prompt and agent compositions that
enhance or mitigate the effect. We end with a discussion of the implications for AI
alignment, multi-agent design, and artificial moral reasoning. Code available at:
https://github.com/baltaci-r/MoralAgents

1

Introduction

Multi-agent systems (MAS) provide a key paradigm for decentralized decision-making and coordination among multiple autonomous entities, which is especially helpful in dynamic environments.
Incorporating Large Language Models (LLMs), systems referred to as LLM-MAS, feature agents
with enhanced capabilities in reasoning, communication, and knowledge access [1]. This integration
significantly expands the scope and complexity of tasks MAS can tackle, supporting more adaptive, flexible, and human-aligned agent behaviors [2]. However, integrating LLMs into MAS also
introduces new risks. When agents negotiate through iterative message passing or jointly refine
solutions, even minor alignment discrepancies can cascade into major emergent distortions. Bias
amplification [3], covert coordination protocols [4], knowledge drift [5], conflicting agreements [6],
and collusion [7, 8] phenomena may emerge, all of which remain invisible when each LLM agent is
evaluated in isolation. As LLM-MAS are deployed to tackle increasingly complex tasks, understanding how collective reasoning emerges from individual models is imperative for ensuring safety and
trustworthiness [9].
Recent work draws on insights from social psychology to investigate emergent distortions in grouplevel multi-agent LLM reasoning, demonstrating phenomena such as conformity [10, 11], belief
†

anita.keshmirian@gmail.com, baltaji@illinois.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

