Deeper with Riemannian Geometry: Overcoming
Oversmoothing and Oversquashing for Graph
Foundation Models
Li Sun∗
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing 100876, China
lsun@bupt.edu.cn
Ming Zhang
North China Electric Power University
Beijing 102206, China
zhangming@ncepu.edu.cn

Zhenhao Huang
North China Electric Power University
Beijing 102206, China
huangzhenhao@ncepu.edu.cn
Philip S. Yu
University of Illinois Chicago
IL 60607, USA
psyu@uic.edu

Abstract
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) are the building block of graph foundation models, but fundamentally suffer from oversmoothing and oversquashing.
There has recently been a surge of interest in fixing both issues. Existing efforts
primarily adopt global approaches, which may be beneficial in some regions but
detrimental in others, ultimately leading to the suboptimal expressiveness. In this
paper, we begin by revisiting oversquashing through a global measure – spectral
gap λ – and prove that the increase of λ leads to gradient vanishing with respect
to the input features, thereby undermining the effectiveness of message passing.
Motivated by such theoretical insights, we propose a local approach that adaptively
adjusts message passing based on local structures. To achieve this, we connect
local Riemannian geometry with MPNNs, and establish a novel nonhomogeneous
boundary condition to address both oversquashing and oversmoothing. Building on
the Robin condition, we design a GBN network with local bottleneck adjustment,
coupled with theoretical guarantees. Extensive experiments on homophilic and
heterophilic graphs show the expressiveness of GBN. Furthermore, GBN does not
exhibit performance degradation even when the network depth exceeds 256 layers.

1

Introduction

Recently, graph foundation models have attracted growing research interests [77; 12; 68; 61], offering
the pre-trainable and general-purpose deep architectures based on Message-Passing Neural Network
(MPNN). Against this backdrop, we revisit the fundamental issues of the core building block –
the MPNN itself: Oversmoothing [35; 40], which prevents MPNN from going deeper as other
typical neural architectures, and Oversquashing [1; 64], which refers to the difficulty in propagating
information from distant nodes and capturing the long-range dependencies.
In the literature, there has recently been a surge of interest in jointly addressing oversquashing and
oversmoothing. The former is caused by the topological “bottlenecks” in the graph structure [64],
while the latter can also be related to the structure [11; 44]. Accordingly, a primary solution is graph
rewriting, which conducts the structural refinement guided by Ricci curvature [39; 38; 20] or spectral
∗

Corresponding Author: Li Sun, lsun@bupt.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

