Optimistic Query Routing in Clustering-based
Approximate Maximum Inner Product Search

Sebastian Bruch
Northeastern University
Boston, MA, USA
s.bruch@northeastern.edu

Aditya Krishnan
Microsoft
New York, NY, USA
adkrishnan@microsoft.com

Franco Maria Nardini
ISTI-CNR
Pisa, Italy
francomaria.nardini@isti.cnr.it

Abstract
Clustering-based nearest neighbor search algorithms partition points into shards
to form an index, and search only a subset of shards to process a query. Even
though search efficacy is heavily influenced by the algorithm that identifies the
shards to probe, it has received little attention in the literature. We study routing in
clustering-based maximum inner product search, which includes cosine similarity
search. We unpack existing routers and notice the surprising role of optimism.
We then take a page from the sequential decision making literature and formalize
that insight following the principle of “optimism in the face of uncertainty.” In
particular, we present a framework that incorporates the moments of the distribution
of inner products within each shard to estimate the maximum inner product. We
then develop a practical instance of our algorithm that uses only the first two
moments to reach the same accuracy as state-of-the-art routers by probing up to
50% fewer points on benchmark datasets without compromising efficiency. Our
algorithm is also space-efficient: we design a sketch of the second moment whose
size is independent of the number of points and requires O(1) vectors per shard.

1

Introduction

A fundamental operation in many applications of machine learning is nearest neighbor search [Bruch,
2024]: Given m points denoted X ⊂ Rd , it finds the k closest points to a query q ∈ Rd , where
closeness is by vector similarity or distance. We focus on inner product, giving the problem of
Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS), which includes Cosine Similarity search as a special case:
(k)

S = arg max ⟨q, u⟩.

(1)

u∈X

As m or d grows, an exact solution is often difficult to obtain within a reasonable budget. The problem
is thus relaxed to its approximate variant, where we tolerate error to gain speed. The effectiveness of
Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search is characterized by recall or accuracy, defined as the
fraction of true nearest neighbors recalled: |S̃ ∩ S|/k, S̃ being the set returned by the ANN algorithm.
Clustering-based ANN search: ANN algorithms come in various flavors, from trees [Bentley, 1975,
Dasgupta and Sinha, 2015], LSH [Indyk and Motwani, 1998], to graphs [Malkov and Yashunin, 2020,
Jayaram Subramanya et al., 2019]. Refer to [Bruch, 2024] for a review of this subject. The method
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

