The quest for the GRAph Level autoEncoder (GRALE)

Paul Krzakala
LTCI & CMAP , Télécom Paris, IP Paris
Gabriel Melo
LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris
Florence d’Alché-Buc
LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris

Charlotte Laclau
LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris
Rémi Flamary
CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris

Abstract
Although graph-based learning has attracted a lot of attention, graph representation
learning is still a challenging task whose resolution may impact key application
fields such as chemistry or biology. To this end, we introduce GRALE, a novel
graph autoencoder that encodes and decodes graphs of varying sizes into a shared
embedding space. GRALE is trained using an Optimal Transport-inspired loss
that compares the original and reconstructed graphs and leverages a differentiable
node matching module, which is trained jointly with the encoder and decoder. The
proposed attention-based architecture relies on Evoformer, the core component of
AlphaFold, which we extend to support both graph encoding and decoding. We
show, in numerical experiments on simulated and molecular data, that GRALE
enables a highly general form of pre-training, applicable to a wide range of downstream tasks, from classification and regression to more complex tasks such as
graph interpolation, editing, matching, and prediction.1

1

Introduction

Graph representation learning. Graph-structured data are omnipresent in a wide variety of fields
ranging from social sciences to chemistry, which has always motivated an intense interest in graph
learning. Machine learning tasks related to graphs are mostly divided into two categories: node-level
tasks such as node classification/regression, clustering, or edge prediction, and graph-level tasks such
as graph classification/regression or graph generation/prediction [7, 38, 69, 28, 84]. This paper is devoted to graph-level representation learning, that is, unsupervised learning of a graph-level Euclidean
representation that can be used directly or fine-tuned for later tasks [25]. From the large spectrum of
existing representation learning methods, we focus on the AutoEncoder approach, as it natively features the possibility to decode a graph back from the embedding space. In this work, we illustrate that
this enables leveraging the learned representation in a variety of downstream tasks, ranging from classification/regression to more involved tasks such as graph interpolation, editing, matching or prediction.
From node-level AutoEncoders... Scrutinizing the literature, we observe that most existing works
on graph AutoEncoders provide node-level embeddings instead of one unique graph-level embedding
(See Fig. 1, left). In the following, we refer to this class of models as Node-Level AutoEncoders.
The most emblematic example is the celebrated VGAE model [36], where the encoder is a graph
1

Code available at https://github.com/KrzakalaPaul/GRALE

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

