ODG: Occupancy Prediction Using Dual Gaussians

Yunxiao Shi†

Yinhao Zhu† Shizhong Han† Jisoo Jeong† Amin Ansari‡
Hong Cai† Fatih Porikli†
†Qualcomm AI Research∗ ‡Qualcomm Technologies, Inc

{yunxshi,yinhaoz,shizhan,jisojeon,amina,hongcai,fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Occupancy prediction infers fine-grained 3D geometry and semantics from camera
images of the surrounding environment, making it a critical perception task for
autonomous driving. Existing methods either adopt dense grids as scene representation which is difficult to scale to high resolution, or learn the entire scene
using a single set of sparse queries, which is insufficient to handle the various
object characteristics. In this paper, we present ODG, a hierarchical dual sparse
Gaussian representation to effectively capture complex scene dynamics. Building
upon the observation that driving scenes can be universally decomposed into static
and dynamic counterparts, we define dual Gaussian queries to better model the
diverse scene objects. We utilize a hierarchical Gaussian transformer to predict the
occupied voxel centers and semantic classes along with the Gaussian parameters.
Leveraging the real-time rendering capability of 3D Gaussian Splatting, we also
impose rendering supervision with available depth and semantic map annotations
injecting pixel-level alignment to boost occupancy learning. Extensive experiments
on the Occ3D-nuScenes and Occ3D-Waymo benchmarks demonstrate our proposed method sets new state-of-the-art results while maintaining low inference
cost.

1

Introduction

3D spatial understanding forms the foundation of autonomous systems such as self-driving cars. 3D
object detection [57, 23, 34, 33] has been the primary task that outputs bounding boxes to capture
different entities in the scene. Concise as box representation is, it cannot deal with out-of-vocabulary
or irregularly-shaped objects (e.g. trash can on the side of road, excavator with arms deployed) which
is critical for driving safety. Calling for a unified 3D representation that can handle such cases, 3D
occupancy adopts a voxel grid to partition the scene and jointly predicts the occupancy state and
semantic labels of each voxel, which provides critical information for downstream planning [22].
Previous approaches have explored regular grids like voxel [58, 63], BEV ground plane [31, 61], and
tri-perspective plane [25] to represent the scene followed by dense classification. Such approaches do
not take into account the fact that most of the voxels are empty [3, 50] and allocate equal resource for
each one, which inevitably results in severe inefficiency. To overcome such drawbacks, another line
of research [47, 53] formulate the task of 3D occupancy as direct set prediction, effectively predicting
3D occupancy as set of sparse points from sparse latent vectors. Such sparse representation avoids
spending resource to model empty regions and improves scalability. Recent works [27, 4, 10] utilize
3D Gaussians instead of points which have more spatial context, and also leverage the real-time
rendering of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [28, 29] to either complement learning from occupancy
ground-truth or instead directly learn occupancy from 2D labels [59, 21] without relying on 3D
annotations. Such sparse query-based methods have shown great promises for occupancy prediction.
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

