Scaling and context steer LLMs along the same
computational path as the human brain

Joséphine Raugel
Meta AI
Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives
et Computationnelles (Inserm U960)
Ecole Normale Supérieure - PSL

Stéphane d’Ascoli
Meta AI

Valentin Wyart*
Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives
et Computationnelles (Inserm U960)
Ecole Normale Supérieure - PSL

Jérémy Rapin
Meta AI

Jean-Rémi King*
Meta AI
*shared senior authorship

Abstract
Recent studies suggest that the representations learned by large language models
(LLMs) are partially aligned to those of the human brain. However, whether and
why this alignment score arises from a similar sequence of computations remains
elusive. In this study, we explore this question by examining temporally-resolved
brain signals of participants listening to 10 hours of an audiobook. We study these
neural dynamics jointly with a benchmark encompassing 17 LLMs varying in size
and architecture type. Our analyses confirm that LLMs and the brain generate
representations in a similar order: specifically, activations in the initial layers of
LLMs tend to best align with early brain responses, while the deeper layers of
LLMs tend to best align with later brain responses. This brain-LLM alignment is
consistent across transformers and recurrent architectures. However, its emergence
depends on both model size and context length. Overall, this study sheds light
on the sequential nature of computations and the factors underlying the partial
convergence between biological and artificial neural networks.

Figure 1: Methods. A. Subjects listened to 10 hours of audio books in the MEG scanner. B. The
same text is input to an LLM, e.g. Llama 3-8B. Colors indicate layer depth. To compare this set of biological and artificial - neural embeddings, we fit a linear mapping W for each layer, and evaluate
its accuracy with a Pearson correlation metric: the alignment score Rlayer . C. Alignment score (Rlayer )
of 9 representative layers of Llama 3-8B, as a function of word-onset (t=0). D. The timestep of
peaking alignment scores (Tmax , x-axis) is plotted for each layer (y-axis). The resulting Temporal
score r and associated p are printed on the plot.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

