ACT as Human: Multimodal Large Language Model
Data Annotation with Critical Thinking
Lequan Lin 1 ∗ Dai Shi 1, 2
Jiawen Li 5

Andi Han 1, 3

Feng Chen 4

Qiuzheng Chen 5 †

Zhaoyang Li 5 Jiyuan Zhang 5 Zhenbang Sun 5
1
University of Sydney, Australia
2
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
3
Riken AIP, Japan
4
University of Adelaide, Australia
5
ByteDance, Australia

Junbin Gao 1

Abstract
Supervised learning relies on high-quality labeled data, but obtaining such data
through human annotation is both expensive and time-consuming. Recent work
explores using large language models (LLMs) for annotation, but LLM-generated
labels still fall short of human-level quality. To address this problem, we propose
the Annotation with Critical Thinking (ACT) data pipeline, where LLMs serve
not only as annotators but also as judges to critically identify potential errors.
Human effort is then directed towards reviewing only the most “suspicious” cases,
significantly improving the human annotation efficiency. Our major contributions
are as follows: (1) ACT is applicable to a wide range of domains, including natural
language processing (NLP), computer vision (CV), and multimodal understanding,
by leveraging multimodal-LLMs (MLLMs). (2) Through empirical studies, we
derive 7 insights on how to enhance annotation quality while efficiently reducing
the human cost, and then translate these findings into user-friendly guidelines. (3)
We theoretically analyze how to modify the loss function so that models trained on
ACT data achieve similar performance to those trained on fully human-annotated
data. Our experiments show that the performance gap can be reduced to less than
2% on most benchmark datasets while saving up to 90% of human costs.

1

Introduction

High-quality labeled data is essential for the success of supervised learning, but human annotation
remains costly and difficult to scale [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. While large language models (LLMs) have recently
emerged as an alternative for data annotation [6, 7, 8, 9, 10], the labels they generate often lack the
accuracy required for training reliable models [11, 12, 13]. The trade-off between annotation cost and
label quality leads to our research question: How can we incorporate LLMs into the data pipeline
to efficiently reduce human cost without compromising downstream training performance? To
address this challenge, we first propose the Annotation with Critical Thinking (ACT) data pipeline.
In this approach, an LLM handles the majority of annotation workloads, while a limited human
budget is strategically allocated to reviewing samples flagged as potentially erroneous by another
LLM-based error detector (the criticizer). Then, we provide a theoretical analysis of how to ensure
that models trained on ACT data are comparable to those trained on fully human-annotated data. An
illustration of the ACT data pipeline and downstream training is provided in Figure 1.
While the majority of LLM-based data pipelines solely focus on natural language processing (NLP)
[12, 14, 15, 16, 17], our method further extends to visual scenarios by leveraging multimodal-LLMs
∗
†

The work is done during Lequan Lin’s internship at ByteDance. # lequan.lin@sydney.edu.au.
Project lead.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

