VL-SAE: Interpreting and Enhancing Vision-Language
Alignment with a Unified Concept Set

1

Shufan Shen1,2 Junshu Sun1,2 Qingming Huang1,2 Shuhui Wang1∗
State Key Lab. of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{shenshufan22z, sunjunshu21s, wangshuhui}@ict.ac.cn qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
The alignment of vision-language representations endows current Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) with strong multi-modal reasoning capabilities. However, the
interpretability of the alignment component remains uninvestigated due to the
difficulty in mapping the semantics of multi-modal representations into a unified
concept set. To address this problem, we propose VL-SAE, a sparse autoencoder
that encodes vision-language representations into its hidden activations. Each neuron in its hidden layer correlates to a concept represented by semantically similar
images and texts, thereby interpreting these representations with a unified concept
set. To establish the neuron-concept correlation, we encourage semantically similar
representations to exhibit consistent neuron activations during self-supervised training. First, to measure the semantic similarity of multi-modal representations, we
perform their alignment in an explicit form based on cosine similarity. Second, we
construct the VL-SAE with a distance-based encoder and two modality-specific decoders to ensure the activation consistency of semantically similar representations.
Experiments across multiple VLMs (e.g., CLIP, LLaVA) demonstrate the superior
capability of VL-SAE in interpreting and enhancing the vision-language alignment.
For interpretation, the alignment between vision and language representations can
be understood by comparing their semantics with concepts. For enhancement, the
alignment can be strengthened by aligning vision-language representations at the
concept level, contributing to performance improvements in downstream tasks,
including zero-shot image classification and hallucination elimination. Codes are
available at https://github.com/ssfgunner/VL-SAE.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in multi-modal understanding and reasoning, largely attributed to the various training objectives [22, 41] and architectures [57, 27, 66, 65] that effectively align the semantics of vision and language representations. This
alignment mechanism serves as a core component of VLMs, enabling them to make predictions by
integrating information from both modalities [41, 34, 60, 27, 55, 17]. Nevertheless, current comprehension of the alignment mechanism remains insufficient [13, 49, 38, 2]. This limited comprehension
hinders our ability to analyze and address the misalignment cases, such as hallucinations [33, 26, 21].
To tackle this challenge, existing methods interpret representations of VLMs by mapping their semantics to concepts. However, these methods either solely focus on the vision [32, 2] or the language [38]
representations, as shown in Figure 1(a). It remains an open problem to interpret the vision-language
alignment, which requires not only understanding the representation semantics but also comparing
the semantics of both modalities in an interpretable manner [49].
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

