DREAM: Drafting with Refined Target Features and
Entropy-Adaptive Cross-Attention Fusion for
Multimodal Speculative Decoding

Yunhai Hu1 Tianhua Xia2∗ Zining Liu4∗ Rahul Raman1 Xingyu Liu2
Bo Bao3 Eric Sather3 Vithursan Thangarasa3 Sai Qian Zhang1,2
1
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
2
Tandon School of Engineering, New York University
3
Cerebras Systems Inc.
4
University of Pennsylvania
{yh5961, tx856, rr4549, xl5444, sai.zhang}@nyu.edu
zliu0@seas.upenn.edu
{bo.bao, eric.sather, vithu}@cerebras.net

Abstract
Speculative decoding (SD) has emerged as a powerful method for accelerating
autoregressive generation in large language models (LLMs), yet its integration into
vision-language models (VLMs) remains underexplored. We introduce DREAM,
a novel speculative decoding framework tailored for VLMs that combines three
key innovations: (1) a cross-attention-based mechanism to inject intermediate
features from the target model into the draft model for improved alignment, (2)
adaptive intermediate feature selection based on attention entropy to guide efficient
draft model training, and (3) visual token compression to reduce draft model
latency. DREAM enables efficient, accurate, and parallel multimodal decoding
with significant throughput improvement. Experiments across a diverse set of recent
popular VLMs, including LLaVA, Pixtral, SmolVLM and Gemma3, demonstrate
up to 3.6× speedup over conventional decoding and significantly outperform prior
SD baselines in both inference throughput and speculative draft acceptance length
across a broad range of multimodal benchmarks. The code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/SAI-Lab-NYU/DREAM.git.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance across diverse tasks, but their
inference speed remains limited due to the standard autoregressive process, which includes both
prefilling and decoding stages. To overcome this limitation, speculative decoding (SD) [48, 5, 19]
accelerates the autoregressive process by splitting it into a low-cost drafting stage and a parallel
verification stage, enabling multiple drafted tokens to be validated in a single pass through the target
LLM. This approach accelerates the decoding stage while preserving the output quality of the target
model through a mechanism of acceptance and rejection.
While these techniques have been extensively developed to accelerate inference in text-only LLMs [25,
24, 26, 4, 2, 55, 61, 40, 6, 50, 15], there has been limited work integrating SD into multimodal LMs
(MLLM) [20, 43], especially vision-language models (VLM) [10]. VLMs differ from their text-only
counterparts by requiring seamless integration of visual and textual information. This integration
process typically occurs in two stages: first, extracting meaningful representations from images, and
second, applying language reasoning capabilities to generate appropriate responses. For example, in
∗

Authors contributed equally; the order of authorship was assigned randomly.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

