Spectral Analysis of Diffusion Models with Application
to Schedule Design

Roi Benita
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion, Haifa, Israel
roibenita@campus.technion.ac.il

Michael Elad
Department of Computer Science
Technion, Haifa, Israel
elad@cs.technion.ac.il

Joseph Keshet
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion, Haifa, Israel
jkeshet@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have emerged as powerful tools for modeling complex
data distributions and generating realistic new samples. Over the years, advanced
architectures and sampling methods have been developed to make these models
practically usable. However, certain synthesis process decisions still rely on
heuristics without a solid theoretical foundation.
In our work, we offer a novel analysis of the DM’s inference process, introducing
a comprehensive frequency response perspective. Specifically, by relying on
Gaussianity assumption, we present the inference process as a closed-form spectral
transfer function, capturing how the generated signal evolves in response to the
initial noise. We demonstrate how the proposed analysis can be leveraged to design
a noise schedule that aligns effectively with the characteristics of the data. The
spectral perspective also provides insights into the underlying dynamics and sheds
light on the relationship between spectral properties and noise schedule structure.
Our results lead to scheduling curves that are dependent on the spectral content
of the data, offering a theoretical justification for some of the heuristics taken by
practitioners.

1

Introduction

Diffusion Models (DMs) have become powerful tools for generating high-quality, diverse signals,
with applications in image, audio, and video synthesis. Alongside their practical success and the
ability to handle complex distributions, some aspects of the diffusion processes still rely on heuristics
rooted in empirical experimentation. A key example is choosing an appropriate noise schedule for
the inference phase. Developing theoretical foundations for these heuristics may provide valuable
insights into the diffusion process itself, and enable greater adaptation to different setups. Our work
aims to provide such a theoretical backbone from a spectral perspective, as outlined below.
Our starting point lies in a well-established observation; while the continuous description of DMs via
SDE or the associated flow ODE [28] are mathematically well-founded, their practice necessarily
deviates from these theoretical foundations, introducing various errors [4, 24]. A major source of
error is discretization, which replaces the analytical formulations by their discrete-time counterparts.
Another source of error is the approximation error, originating from the gap between the ideal denoiser
and its neural network realization.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

