A Novel General Framework for Sharp Lower Bounds
in Succinct Stochastic Bandits
Guo Zeng
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
guo.zeng@student.unimelb.edu.au
Jean Honorio
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, and
ARC Training Centre in Optimisation Technologies, Integrated Methodologies, and Applications
jean.honorio@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Many online learning applications adopt the stochastic bandit problem with a linear
reward model, where the unknown parameter exhibits a succinct structure. We
study minimax regret lower bounds which allow us to know whether more efficient
algorithms can be proposed. We introduce a general definition of succinctness
and propose a novel framework for constructing minimax regret lower bounds
based on an information-regret trade-off. When applied to entry-sparse vector, our
framework sharpens a recent lower bound by [7]. We further apply our framework
to derive novel results. To the best of our knowledge, we provide the first lower
bounds for the group-sparse and low-rank matrix settings.

1

Introduction

Stochastic bandits [4] model online learning problems, where an agent is evaluated over its interactions
with an initially unknown and memory-less bandit machine. At each round t, the agent (stochastically)
plays an action At to the machine and (stochastically) receives a real-valued reward yt . The memoryless nature allows defining an optimal action that maximizes E[yt ], independent of the past interactions.
Against those optimal actions, the agent’s regret up to n rounds on a specific bandit instance can be
calculated. Assuming bounded single-round regret, it is desirable for algorithms to achieve sub-linear
regret rate o(n) across a class of bandit instances, called the assumption class.
In real-world applications like advertising recommendation [6] and personalized healthcare systems
[3], automated decision-making often involves high-dimensional data. To enable effective algorithm
design, one common modeling approach assumes a linear reward: E[yt ] = ⟨At , θ⟩, where the action
is represented by an associated data vector or matrix At , and the bandit instance by a parameter θ
of the same shape but with a succinct structure. For example, entry-sparse bandits—also known
as Lasso bandits or sparse linear bandits—assume that θ ∈ Rd has its number of non-zero entries
limited to s ≪ d [5]. Alternatively, if θ is organized into a matrix in Rd1 ×d2 , it may be constrained to
have a low rank s ≪ min(d1 , d2 ), to be group-sparse with no more than s ≪ d1 non-zero rows, or to
exhibit other structured forms [12]. We consider these bandits to be succinct linear bandits, differing
in how they impose succinct constraints on θ.
While upper bounds guarantee the regret growth of a specific algorithm across an assumption class,
minimax lower bounds apply to all possible algorithms on that assumption class, and are usually
established by identifying hard bandit instances tailored to any given algorithm. To illustrate, suppose
that At ∈ Rd is to be chosen from the standard basis {e1 , e2 , ..., ed } and θ ∈ Rd has only one
non-zero entry. When d > n, given any algorithm, there obviously exists a tailored θ to cause that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

