Performative Risk Control: Calibrating Models for
Reliable Deployment under Performativity

Victor Li1 , Baiting Chen2 , Yuzhen Mao3 , Qi Lei1 , and Zhun Deng4
1

New York University
University of California, Los Angeles
3
Stanford University
4
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
2

Abstract
Calibrating blackbox machine learning models to achieve risk control is crucial to
ensure reliable decision-making. A rich line of literature has been studying how
to calibrate a model so that its predictions satisfy explicit finite-sample statistical
guarantees under a fixed, static, and unknown data-generating distribution. However, prediction-supported decisions may influence the outcome they aim to predict,
a phenomenon named performativity of predictions, which is commonly seen in social science and economics. In this paper, we introduce Performative Risk Control,
a framework to calibrate models to achieve risk control under performativity with
provable theoretical guarantees. Specifically, we provide an iteratively refined calibration process, where we ensure the predictions are improved and risk-controlled
throughout the process. We also study different types of risk measures and choices
of tail bounds. Lastly, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework by
numerical experiments on the task of predicting credit default risk. To the best of
our knowledge, this work is the first one to study statistically rigorous risk control
under performativity, which will serve as an important safeguard against a wide
range of strategic manipulation in decision-making processes.1

1

Introduction

We have entered an era characterized by the ubiquitous deployment of increasingly complex models,
such as large language models (LLMs) with billions of parameters [1–3]. These models play
important roles in our daily lives, informing us, shaping our opinions, and deciding allocation of
societal resources. However, in most scenarios, these models can only be treated as a blackbox,
either because they are too complex to understand or simply because their details are kept private by
companies. Given their influence in today’s society and their blackbox nature, it is urgent to derive
new tools to ensure reliable deployment.
A recent line of work [4–6] has been investigating methods to calibrate the predictions of blackbox
machine learning models, generally known as (conformal) risk control. The goal is to ensure reliable
deployment by satisfying explicit, finite-sample statistical guarantees (either with high probability
or marginally) for controlling risk. The introduced frameworks are lightweight, agnostic to the
data-generating distribution, and do not require model refitting. Specifically, in (conformal) risk
control, a blackbox model f is given to us, and we need to post-process it using calibration data
in order to make our final predictions. The calibration process is governed by a low-dimensional
parameter λ (e.g., a threshold). For example, [5] and [6] study false negative rate (FNR) control in
1

Code for experiments here: https://github.com/livctr/rcpp.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

