Seemingly Redundant Modules Enhance Robust Odor
Learning in Fruit Flies

1

Haiyang Li1* Liao Yu2* Qiang Yu3† Yunliang Zang1,4†
Academy of Medical Engineering and Translational Medicine, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
4
Xiamen Intretech Inc, Xiamen, Fujian, China
haiyangli@tju.edu.cn
yuliao_16@buaa.edu.cn
yuqiang@tju.edu.cn
yunliangzang@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Biological circuits have evolved to incorporate multiple modules that perform
similar functions. In the fly olfactory circuit, both lateral inhibition (LI) and
neuronal spike frequency adaptation (SFA) are thought to enhance pattern separation for odor learning. However, it remains unclear whether these mechanisms
play redundant or distinct roles in this process. In this study, we present a computational model of the fly olfactory circuit to investigate odor discrimination
under varying noise conditions that simulate complex environments. Our results
show that LI primarily enhances odor discrimination in low- and medium-noise
scenarios, but this benefit diminishes and may reverse under higher-noise conditions. In contrast, SFA consistently improves discrimination across all noise levels.
LI is preferentially engaged in low- and medium-noise environments, whereas
SFA dominates in high-noise settings. When combined, these two sparsification
mechanisms enable optimal discrimination performance. This work demonstrates
that seemingly redundant modules in biological circuits can, in fact, be essential
for achieving optimal learning in complex contexts. The code is available at:
https://github.com/L-0cean/Fly-SNN.

1

Introduction

Biological redundancy is commonly observed in the brain, where different regions, pathways, or
mechanisms can perform similar functions [1–4]. Different motifs of biological redundancy may
exist; for instance, different modules may have evolved to fulfill similar roles, ensuring robust neural
functions under pathological conditions [5–8]. Alternatively, these mechanisms may be required to
achieve near-optimal learning in more complex environments. Comparative analyses of the roles
of putatively redundant modules in learning can clarify how the brain adapts and, in turn, inform
theories that guide neuromorphic design [9, 10]. For instance, core computational features of the fly
olfactory circuit have motivated the FlyLoRA architecture [11], which enhances task decoupling and
parameter efficiency.
The fly olfactory system, a canonical cerebellum-like circuit, is a tractable model for dissecting
neural computation owing to its relative simplicity and well-characterized anatomy and function
*
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

