Constant Bit-size Transformers Are Turing Complete

Qian Li∗
Shenzhen International Center For Industrial And Applied Mathematics,
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
Shenzhen, China
liqian.ict@gmail.com
Yuyi Wang∗
CRRC Zhuzhou Institute & Tengen Intelligence Institute
Zhuzhou, China
yuyiwang920@gmail.com

Abstract
We prove that any Turing machine running on inputs of arbitrary length can be
simulated by a constant bit-size transformer, as long as the context window is sufficiently long. This improves previous works, which require scaling up either the
model’s precision or the number of parameters on longer inputs. Furthermore, we
prove that the complexity class SPACE[s(n)] exactly characterizes the expressive
power of a constant bit-size transformer with a context window of length s(n).
Our approach relies on simulating Post machines, a Turing-complete computational model. Post machines can be modeled as automata equipped with a queue,
exhibiting computational behaviors naturally aligned with those of transformers.
The behavioral similarity between transformers and Post machines may offer new
insights into the mechanisms underlying the reasoning abilities of transformers.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) with chain-of-thought (CoT) steps [Achiam et al.,
2023, Gemini et al., 2023, Anthropic, 2024, Dubey et al., 2024, Guo et al., 2025] have demonstrated
exceptional capabilities across a wide range of complex reasoning tasks, such as mathematical
problem solving and code generation [Hendrycks et al., 2021, Jimenez et al., 2023, Rein et al., 2023].
These remarkable empirical successes raise a fundamental question: What enables transformers to
support such general reasoning capabilities, and what are the limits of this capability? Understanding
this question is not only of theoretical interest but also of practical significance for further enhancing
the reasoning abilities of transformers.
Motivated by this fundamental question, a line of theoretical works [Pérez et al., 2021, Bhattamishra
et al., 2020, Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023, 2024, Li et al., 2024, Qiu et al., 2024, Zubić et al., 2024,
Merrill and Sabharwal, 2025, Yang et al., 2025] have studied the reasoning abilities of transformers
through the lens of expressiveness. A central result from these works is that transformers (using CoT
steps) are Turing complete; that is, transformers have sufficient expressive power to simulate arbitrary
Turing machines (TMs). However, in all these results, the bit-size of the transformers (i.e., the total
number of bits representing the model) is not constant: either the precision bit [Pérez et al., 2021,
Bhattamishra et al., 2020, Merrill and Sabharwal, 2024, Qiu et al., 2024] or the embedding dimension
[Li et al., 2024] must grow with the input length, meaning that larger models are required to handle
longer inputs. This scaling requirement raises a fundamental barrier to approaching transformer-based
∗

The authors are listed in alphabetical order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

