On Evaluating Policies for Robust POMDPs

Merlijn Krale∗
Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
merlijn.krale@ru.nl

Eline M. Bovy∗
Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
eline.bovy@ru.nl

Thiago D. Simão
Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
t.simao@tue.nl

Maris F. L. Galesloot∗
Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
maris.galesloot@ru.nl

Nils Jansen
Ruhr-University Bochum & Radboud University
Bochum, Germany & Nijmegen, The Netherlands
n.jansen@rub.de

Abstract
Robust partially observable Markov decision processes (RPOMDPs) model sequential decision-making problems under partial observability, where an agent must
be robust against a range of dynamics. RPOMDPs can be viewed as a two-player
game between an agent, who selects actions, and nature, who adversarially selects
the dynamics. Evaluating an agent policy requires finding an adversarial nature
policy, which is computationally challenging. In this paper, we advance the evaluation of agent policies for RPOMDPs in three ways. First, we discuss suitable
benchmarks. We observe that for some RPOMDPs, an optimal agent policy can be
found by considering only subsets of nature policies, making them easier to solve.
We formalize this concept of solvability and construct three benchmarks that are
only solvable for expressive sets of nature policies. Second, we describe a new
method to evaluate agent policies for RPOMDPs by solving an equivalent MDP.
Third, we lift two well-known upper bounds from POMDPs to RPOMDPs, which
can be used to efficiently approximate the optimality gap of a policy and serve as
baselines. Our experimental evaluation shows that (1) our proposed benchmarks
cannot be solved by assuming naive nature policies, (2) our method of evaluating
policies is accurate, and (3) the upper bounds provide solid baselines for evaluation.

1

Introduction

Partially observable Markov decision processes [POMDPs; 25] are ubiquitous for representing
sequential decision-making problems under partial observability. POMDPs are used to represent
real-world problems, such as robotics [31], infrastructure maintenance [39, 38], and wildlife conservation [13]. Yet, to model such problems, the dynamics of the problem need to be precisely known,
which is often unrealistic [26, 57]. Robust MDPs [RMDP; 23, 43, 55] capture model uncertainty as
a two-player game between the agent, who picks actions, and nature, who adversarially picks the
dynamics of the model. RMDPs can effectively represent model uncertainty arising in reinforcement
learning [54, 11, 37] or from abstraction [1, 2, 32], but do not account for partial observability.
Robust POMDPs [RPOMDPs; 45] extend RMDPs with partial observability, and are thus more
expressive. However, finding and evaluating policies for RPOMDPs is hard: existing solvers must use
an extensive range of approximations to find and evaluate policies within reasonable time [53, 15, 9].
To test such RPOMDP solvers, we require an evaluation pipeline, such as shown in Figure 1. To start,
we need a set of benchmarks that allows us to investigate the limits of the solver. Once the solver
*

Joint main authorship.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

