On Optimal Steering to Achieve Exact Fairness

Mohit Sharma∗
Department of Computer Science
IIIT Delhi, India
mohits@iiitd.ac.in
Chiranjib Bhattacharyya
Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India
chiru@iisc.ac.in

Amit Jayant Deshpande
Microsoft Research India
amitdesh@microsoft.com

Rajiv Ratn Shah
Department of Computer Science
IIIT Delhi, India
rajivratn@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract
To fix the ‘bias in, bias out’ problem in fair machine learning, it is important to steer
feature distributions of data or internal representations of Large Language Models
(LLMs) to ideal ones that guarantee group-fair outcomes. Previous work on fair
generative models and representation steering could greatly benefit from provable
fairness guarantees on the model output. We define a distribution as ideal if the
minimizer of any cost-sensitive risk on it is guaranteed to have exact group-fair
outcomes (e.g., demographic parity, equal opportunity)—in other words, it has
no fairness-utility trade-off. We formulate an optimization program for optimal
steering by finding the nearest ideal distribution in KL-divergence, and provide
efficient algorithms for it when the underlying distributions come from well-known
parametric families (e.g., normal, log-normal).
Empirically, our optimal steering techniques on both synthetic and real-world
datasets improve fairness without diminishing utility (and sometimes even improve
utility). We demonstrate affine steering of LLM representations to reduce bias in
multi-class classification, e.g., occupation prediction from a short biography in
Bios dataset (De-Arteaga et al.). Furthermore, we steer internal representations of
LLMs towards desired outputs so that it works equally well across different groups.

1

Introduction

The importance of clean or ideal data in fair machine learning cannot be overstated. The principle of
bias in, bias out is widely recognised as a root cause of unfair outcomes in ML systems [16, 52, 62, 26].
Models trained on biased data tend to learn, perpetuate, and often amplify such biases. Importantly,
the problem of biased data extends beyond training: fairness-constrained training on biased data does
not guarantee fairness on (unbiased) test sets, and post-processing using biased validation data fails
to ensure fairness at deployment. Moreover, fairness audits based on biased assessment data can be
misleading and difficult to reverse [11, 4].
Fairness metrics such as demographic parity and equal opportunity are inherently functions of both
the model and the data distribution. Thus, unfair outcomes may be addressed either by adjusting the
model or by altering the data distribution. While prior work on fair in-processing aims to construct
an ideal model under fairness constraints [1, 29], our work focuses instead on identifying an ideal
data distribution that supports fairness. In this respect, our approach aligns most closely with the fair
pre-processing literature.
∗

Part of the work was done when the author was an intern at Microsoft Research India.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

