Unveiling Transformer Perception by
Exploring Input Manifolds

Alessandro Benfenati1a Alfio Ferrara1b Alessio Marta1c Davide Riva2d Elisabetta Rocchetti1b∗
a
Department of Environmental Science and Policy, b Department of Computer Science,
c
Department of Mathematics, d Department of Control and Computer Engineering
1
Università degli Studi di Milano, 2 Politecnico di Torino
{alessandro.benfenati, alfio.ferrara}@unimi.it
{alessio.marta, elisabetta.rocchetti}@unimi.it
{davide.riva}@polito.it
∗
Corresponding author

Abstract
This paper introduces a general method for the exploration of equivalence classes in
the input space of Transformer models. The proposed approach is based on sound
mathematical theory which describes the internal layers of a Transformer architecture as sequential deformations of the input manifold. Using eigendecomposition of
the pullback of the distance metric defined on the output space through the Jacobian
of the model, we are able to reconstruct equivalence classes in the input space
and navigate across them. Our method enables two complementary exploration
procedures: the first retrieves input instances that produce the same class probability distribution as the original instance—thus identifying elements within the
same equivalence class—while the second discovers instances that yield a different
class probability distribution, effectively navigating toward distinct equivalence
classes. Finally, we demonstrate how the retrieved instances can be meaningfully
interpreted by projecting their embeddings back into a human-readable format.
Disclaimer: This paper includes examples of sensitive and very offensive language
solely to illustrate the behavior of LLMs exploring the input space.

1

Introduction

In the literature, the investigation of the input space of Transformers relies on perturbations of input
data using heuristic or gradient-based criteria [24, 17, 14], or on the analysis of specific properties of
the embedding space [6] via the production of optimal robust explanations and counterfactuals. In
this paper, we propose a method for exploring the input space of Transformer models by identifying
equivalence classes with respect to their predictions. Our approach is based on sound mathematical
theory which describes the internal layers of a Transformer architecture as sequential deformations of
the input manifold. Using eigendecomposition of the pullback of the distance metric defined on the
output space through the Jacobian of the model, we are able to reconstruct equivalence classes in the
input space and navigate in and across them. The equivalence class consists of the counterimage of a
particular probability distribution: this means that the elements of an equivalence class, once fed to the
Transformer, will provide different realizations from the same probability distribution. Thanks to our
approach, we provide two different methods for exploring the embedding space: the Singular Metric
Equivalence Class (SiMEC) and the Singular Metric Exploration (SiMExp) algorithms. The first
allows for the identification of inputs within the same equivalence class. This means that, given two
data inputs x, x′ identified through the exploration process as belonging to the same equivalence class
and a class label C, our method guarantees that the Transformers will assign the same probability,
modulo numerical approximations, to that label for both inputs: p(C|x) ≈ p(C|x′ ).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

