PerceptionLM: Open-Access Data and Models for
Detailed Visual Understanding
Jang Hyun Cho1,2,∗,† , Andrea Madotto1,∗ , Effrosyni Mavroudi1,∗ , Triantafyllos
Afouras1,∗ , Tushar Nagarajan1,∗ , Muhammad Maaz3,∗,† , Yale Song1,∗ , Tengyu Ma1,∗ ,
Shuming Hu1,∗ , Suyog Jain1 , Miguel Martin1 , Huiyu Wang1 , Hanoona Rasheed3,† ,
Peize Sun1 , Po-Yao Huang1 , Daniel Bolya1 , Nikhila Ravi1 , Shashank Jain4 , Tammy
Stark4 , Shane Moon4 , Babak Damavandi4 , Vivian Lee1 , Andrew Westbury1 , Salman
Khan3 , Philipp Krähenbühl2 , Piotr Dollár1 , Lorenzo Torresani1,⋆ , Kristen
Grauman1,2,⋆ , Christoph Feichtenhofer1,⋆
1

∗

Meta 2 UT Austin 3 MBZUAI 4 Meta Reality Labs
Joint first author † Work done during internships at Meta ⋆ Project lead

Abstract
Vision-language models are integral to computer vision research, yet many highperforming models remain closed-source, obscuring their data, design and training
recipe. The research community has responded by using distillation from black-box
models to label training data, achieving strong benchmark results, at the cost of
measurable scientific progress. However, without knowing the details of the teacher
model and its data sources, scientific progress remains difficult to measure. In this
paper, we study building a Perception Language Model (PLM) in a fully open and
reproducible framework for transparent research in image and video understanding.
We analyze standard training pipelines without distillation from proprietary models
and explore large-scale synthetic data to identify critical data gaps, particularly
in detailed video understanding. To bridge these gaps, we release 2.8M humanlabeled instances of fine-grained video question-answer pairs and spatio-temporally
grounded video captions. Additionally, we introduce PLM–VideoBench, a suite
for evaluating challenging video understanding tasks focusing on the ability to
reason about “what”, “where”, “when”, and “how” of a video. We make our
work fully reproducible by providing data, training recipes, code and models at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/perception_models.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) are now a key part of computer vision research and are widely used
in both academia and industry. Many of the strongest performing VLMs are closed-source, meaning
their design, training methods, and the data they use are not publicly shared. To stay competitive,
the research community has started to catch up to the proprietary models by using a straightforward
approach — distillation from black-box models [1–5], where proprietary models are directly used to
label training data [3, 6, 7], directly leading to strong benchmark results.
Although distillation will unlock strong performance, there are two main issues for basic research.
First, it makes it hard to track scientific progress. Specifically, we cannot tell if better results on
benchmarks are due to advances in model design or training, or simply because the proprietary teacher
models were trained on the evaluation sets of widely used benchmarks or internal data collected to
resemble them — this information is not available. Second, the heavy reliance on distillation leads
to a fundamental misunderstanding of the effectiveness of current methods for training VLMs from
scratch. Several key questions remain unanswered, including the significance of each training stage,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

