C O IDO: Efficient Data Selection for Visual
Instruction Tuning via Coupled Importance-Diversity
Optimization

Yichen Yan1 , Ming Zhong1 , Qi Zhu1 , Xiaoling Gu2 , Jinpeng Chen3 , Huan Li1∗
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Computer Science (National Pilot Software Engineering School), BUPT
{yichen.yan, chime, lihuan.cs}@zju.edu.cn,
qizhu.zju.research@gmail.com, guxl@hdu.edu.cn, jpchen@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) rely heavily on instruction tuning to
align vision and language capabilities, yet the computational cost of training on
large-scale datasets remains a major bottleneck. Existing data selection methods
aim to mitigate this by selecting important and diverse subsets, but they often
suffer from two critical drawbacks: high computational overhead from processing
the entire dataset and suboptimal data selection due to separate treatment of importance and diversity. We introduce C O IDO, a novel dual-objective framework
that jointly optimizes data importance and diversity to overcome these challenges.
Unlike existing approaches that require costly evaluations across the whole dataset,
C O IDO employs a lightweight plug-in scorer. This scorer is trained on just a small
random subset of data to learn the distribution of the candidate set, drastically reducing computational demands. By leveraging a homoscedastic uncertainty-based
formulation, C O IDO effectively balances importance and diversity during training,
enabling the scorer to infer C O IDO scores for all samples. This unified scoring
approach allows for direct ranking and selection of the most valuable subsets,
completely avoiding the need for specialized algorithms. In our experiments, we
train the C O IDO Scorer using only 20% of randomly sampled data. Once trained,
C O IDO is applied to the entire dataset to select a 20% subset for instruction
tuning. On the widely used LLaVA-1.5-7B model across ten downstream tasks,
this selected subset achieves an impressive 98.2% of the performance of full-data
fine-tuning, on average. Moreover, C O IDO outperforms all competitors in terms
of both efficiency (lowest training FLOPs) and aggregated accuracy. Our code is
available at https://github.com/SuDIS-ZJU/CoIDO.

1

Introduction

Instruction tuning has become fundamental for aligning Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) with human intent, empowering models such as GPT-4o [1], Gemini [2], and LLaVA [3] to
handle diverse downstream tasks including visual question answering [4–6], image-text retrieval [7–9],
and visual grounding [10–12]. While large-scale visual instruction datasets (e.g., LLaVA-665K [13])
have enabled impressive performance, they introduce substantial redundancy, high computational
costs, and optimization inefficiencies. For example, fine-tuning a single epoch of LLaVA-1.5-7B
typically requires over 20 GPU hours on 8×A100 40GB GPUs [13]. Such computational demands
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

