Speculate Deep and Accurate:
Lossless and Training-Free Acceleration for
Offloaded LLMs via Substitute Speculative Decoding
Pei-Shuo Wang1 , Jian-Jia Chen*1 , Chun-Che Yang*1 , Chi-Chih Chang2 , Ning-Chi Huang1 ,
Mohamed S. Abdelfattah2 , and Kai-Chiang Wu1
1

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
2
Cornell University

Abstract
The immense model sizes of large language models (LLMs) challenge deployment
on memory-limited consumer GPUs. Although model compression and parameter
offloading are common strategies to address memory limitations, compression
can degrade quality, and offloading maintains quality but suffers from slow inference. Speculative decoding presents a promising avenue to accelerate parameter
offloading, utilizing a fast draft model to propose multiple draft tokens, which
are then verified by the target LLM in parallel with a single forward pass. This
method reduces the time-consuming data transfers in forward passes that involve
offloaded weight transfers. Existing methods often rely on pretrained weights
of the same family, but require additional training to align with custom-trained
models. Moreover, approaches that involve draft model training usually yield only
modest speedups. This limitation arises from insufficient alignment with the target
model, preventing higher token acceptance lengths. To address these challenges
and achieve greater speedups, we propose S UB S PEC, a plug-and-play method to accelerate parameter offloading that is lossless and training-free. SubSpec constructs
a highly aligned draft model by generating low-bit quantized substitute layers from
offloaded target LLM portions. Additionally, our method shares the remaining
GPU-resident layers and the KV-Cache, further reducing memory overhead and
enhance alignment. SubSpec achieves a high average acceptance length, delivering
9.1× speedup for Qwen2.5 7B on MT-Bench (8GB VRAM limit) and an average of
12.5× speedup for Qwen2.5 32B on popular generation benchmarks (24GB VRAM
limit). The code is available at https://github.com/NYCU-EDgeAi/subspec.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [1, 4, 37] have achieved widespread popularity in tasks ranging from
chat models to code generation. Local deployment of these models on consumer hardware offers
compelling advantages: data privacy, potential cost reductions compared to API access, freedom for
model customization, and direct control over the inference process [47].
The substantial memory requirement is the primary barrier to such local deployment. Popular open
source model families like Llama [15, 39], Qwen [42, 43], and DeepSeek [26] often exceed the
memory constraint in common consumer-level GPUs (typically ranging from 8GB to 24GB). For
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

