Incomplete Multi-view Deep Clustering with Data
Imputation and Alignment

Jiyuan Liu1 , Xinwang Liu1∗ , Xinhang Wan1 , Ke Liang1 , Weixuan Liang1
Sihang Zhou1 , Huijun Wu1 and Kehua Guo2
1
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China. 410072.
2
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. 410083.
liujiyuan13@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Incomplete multi-view deep clustering is an emerging research hot-pot to incorporate data information of multiple sources or modalities when parts of them are
missing. Most of existing approaches encode the available data observations into
multiple view-specific latent representations and subsequently integrate them for
the next clustering task. However, they ignore that the latent representations are
unique to a fixed set of data samples in all views. Meanwhile, the pair-wise similarities of missing data observations are also failed to utilize in latent representation
learning sufficiently, leading to unsatisfactory clustering performance. To address
these issues, we propose an incomplete multi-view deep clustering method with
data imputation and alignment. Assuming that each data sample corresponds to a
same latent representation among all views, it projects the latent representations
into feature spaces with neural networks. As a result, not only the available data
observations are reconstructed, but also the missing ones can be imputed accordingly. Moreover, a linear alignment measurement of linear complexity is defined
to compute the pair-wise similarities of all data observations, especially including
those of the missing. By executing the above two procedures iteratively, the discriminative latent representations can be learned and used to group the data into
categories with off-the-shelf clustering algorithms. In experiment, the proposed
method is validated on a set of benchmark datasets and achieves state-of-the-art
performances.

1

Introduction

With the development of electronical device and information technology, the data observations are
widely accumulated from different sources and modalities, collectively referred to as multi-view data
in academic communities. For instance, when making advertisement recommendation to Internet
users, the content provider would collect their personal details from multiple aspects in advance,
such as living habit, shopping record, etc. [1] In the diagnosis and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease,
multiple types of data are collected and analyzed along with a set of medical examinations, including
blood test, Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) examination, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computed
Tomography (CT), Positron Emission Tomography (PET), etc. [2] Therefore, how to integrate the
multi-view data effectively and efficiently is a critical problem. In this background, multi-view
clustering can explore the consensus and complementary information among different data views and
improve the performance over single-view clustering by large margins, catching a large volume of
attentions from researchers [3].
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

