Object-Centric Concept-Bottlenecks

David Steinmann1,2

Wolfgang Stammer1,2
Antonia Wüst1
1,2,3,4
Kristian Kersting
1
Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt; 2 Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI);
3
German Research Center for AI (DFKI); 4 Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Developing high-performing, yet interpretable models remains a critical challenge
in modern AI. Concept-based models (CBMs) attempt to address this by extracting
human-understandable concepts from a global encoding (e.g., image encoding)
and then applying a linear classifier on the resulting concept activations, enabling
transparent decision-making. However, their reliance on holistic image encodings
limits their expressiveness in object-centric real-world settings and thus hinders
their ability to solve complex vision tasks beyond single-label classification. To
tackle these challenges, we introduce Object-Centric Concept Bottlenecks (OCB),
a framework that combines the strengths of CBMs and pre-trained object-centric
foundation models, boosting performance and interpretability. We evaluate OCB on
complex image datasets and conduct a comprehensive ablation study to analyze key
components of the framework, such as strategies for aggregating object-concept
encodings. The results show that OCB outperforms traditional CBMs and allows
one to make interpretable decisions for complex visual tasks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of interpretable machine learning has made significant progress, particularly
through the development of interpretable-by-design models (Chen et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2020; Rudin
et al., 2021; Chattopadhyay et al., 2023b,a). These models are designed to provide explanations that
faithfully reflect the model’s internal reasoning, thereby improving user understanding and control.
One of the most prominent lines of research in this area is concept bottleneck models (CBMs) (Koh
et al., 2020; Stammer et al., 2021), which aim to ground a model’s internal representations in
semantically meaningful high-level concepts. The core idea is to decompose complex inputs, such as
images, into an interpretable concept encoding and to make predictions based on this concept-level
abstraction. To improve the practical applicability of this approach, many recent CBM methods have
leveraged the power of pretrained models, reducing the amount of required annotations and prior
knowledge (Oikarinen et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Bhalla et al., 2024; Yamaguchi et al., 2025).
While such recent advances have enhanced CBMs, their deployment has thus far been largely confined
to simpler tasks, such as single-label image classification. One reason for this limitation is that CBMs
typically extract concepts from an entire image, leading to a single, holistic encoding. However,
addressing more complex visual reasoning tasks (e.g., as illustrated in Fig. 1) requires a shift towards
object-based processing. Objects provide a natural and intuitive abstraction for visual reasoning,
as decomposing complex scenes into discrete, meaningful components simplifies the analysis of
structure and relations. Importantly, object-centric representations also enhance transparency by
supporting more detailed, human-aligned explanations.
Despite this, object-centricity has largely been overlooked in recent CBM research, particularly
in natural image domains. While earlier concept-based models working with synthetic data have
successfully integrated object-centric representations (Stammer et al., 2021, 2024b; Delfosse et al.,
2024), most SOTA CBM approaches for natural images continue to rely on image-level encodings.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

