Learning Intractable Multimodal Policies with
Reparameterization and Diversity Regularization

Ziqi Wang

Jiashun Liu

Ling Pan∗

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Traditional continuous deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms employ deterministic or unimodal Gaussian actors, which cannot express complex multimodal
decision distributions. This limitation can hinder their performance in diversitycritical scenarios. There have been some attempts to design online multimodal
RL algorithms based on diffusion or amortized actors. However, these actors
are intractable, making existing methods struggle with balancing performance,
decision diversity, and efficiency simultaneously. To overcome this challenge, we
first reformulate existing intractable multimodal actors within a unified framework,
and prove that they can be directly optimized by policy gradient via reparameterization. Then, we propose a distance-based diversity regularization that does not
explicitly require decision probabilities. We identify two diversity-critical domains,
namely multi-goal achieving and generative RL, to demonstrate the advantages of
multimodal policies and our method, particularly in terms of few-shot robustness.
In conventional MuJoCo benchmarks, our algorithm also shows competitive performance. Moreover, our experiments highlight that the amortized actor is a promising
policy model class with strong multimodal expressivity and high performance. Our
code is available at https://github.com/PneuC/DrAC

1

Introduction

Despite the remarkable progress in reinforcement learning (RL) for
continuous control and decision-making tasks [23, 55, 43], learning
multimodal policies remains challenging [20, 33, 48]. However,
most state-of-the-art RL algorithms predominantly employ deterministic or unimodal Gaussian policies [29, 39, 11, 14], which limits
their ability to capture the complex, multimodal decision distributions. However, real-world applications can have multiple goals,
making multimodality and decision diversity essential [13, 28, 41],
where unimodal policies can be brittle to perturbations in the environment. For example, given a navigation task in a maze with multiple
valid paths, unimodal policies typically converge to a single shortest
route, creating a critical vulnerability – when this route becomes obstructed during deployment, such policies fail catastrophically [26].
In contrast, a multimodal policy with high decision diversity can
learn varied navigation strategies, allowing it to adapt when faced
with unexpected obstacles. In zero-sum games, strategic diversity
that requires multimodal policies is also critical for agents to maintain robustness against adaptive opponents [31]. Additionally, RL
∗

Figure 1: Motivational examples. A multimodal policy
with maximized diversity can
achieve multiple goals and enable robustness against environmental changes.

Correspondence to: Ling Pan (lingpan@ust.hk)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

