Analyzing the Power of Chain of Thought
through Memorization Capabilities

Lijia Yu1 , Xiao-Shan Gao2, 3∗ , Lijun Zhang1, 3, 4
Institute of AI for Industries, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
SKLMS, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Key Laboratory of System Software of Chinese Academy of Sciences
1

Abstract
It has been shown that the chain of thought (CoT) can enhance the power of large
language models (LLMs) to solve certain mathematical reasoning problems. However, the capacity of CoT is still not fully explored. As an important instance, the
following basic question has not yet been answered: Does CoT expand the capability of transformers across all reasoning tasks? We demonstrate that reasoning with
transformers is essentially a memorization problem for reasoning datasets. Thus,
examining the power of CoT across all reasoning tasks amounts to analyzing the
memorization capabilities of CoT transformers. In this paper, we provide a complete description of the memorization capabilities of fixed-precision transformers,
with or without CoT, and give a negative answer to the aforementioned question.
Precisely, we first provide necessary and sufficient conditions for fixed-precision
transformers with and without CoT to memorize a finite reasoning dataset and
show that these two conditions do not imply each other. Then, we provide lower
and upper bounds for the number of parameters needed for transformers, with or
without CoT, to memorize a finite reasoning dataset with N elements, which are
Θ(N ) in all cases. This implies that there exist reasoning tasks for which CoT does
not enhance the reasoning power of transformers, leading to a negative answer to
the aforementioned question. Finally, we present the first results on memorizing
infinite reasoning datasets by CoT transformers and demonstrate that some simple
infinite datasets cannot be memorized by transformers, with or without CoT.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based LLMs [33] are the most powerful models in natural language processing, and
autoregressive transformer-based models [27, 4, 28, 14, 42] are the predominantly used forms, which
can solve a huge number of tasks by turning them into a sequence generation problem.
It has been shown that CoT [36] allows LLMs to generate a step-by-step “thinking” process, thus
improving the mathematical reasoning power of LLMs. Theoretical studies reached the same
conclusion. Log-precision transformers without CoT can only solve problem class TC0 [22], but
log-precision transformers with CoT can solve any P problem [21]. Transformers with CoT can
solve arithmetic problems and dynamic programming problems that cannot be solved by transformers
without CoT [8]. It was further shown that CoT also enhances the reasoning power of constant
precision transformers [16, 7].
These findings clearly illustrate the advantages of CoT in boosting the capability of transformers to
simulate certain algorithms by constructing transformers step by step according to the algorithm.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

