Removing Concepts from Text-to-Image Models
with Only Negative Samples

Hanwen Liu, Yadong Mu∗
Peking University
hanwenliu@msn.com, myd@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
This work introduces Clipout, a method for removing a target concept in pretrained text-to-image models. By randomly clipping units from the learned data
embedding and using a contrastive objective, models are encouraged to differentiate
these clipped embedding vectors. Our goal is to remove private, copyrighted,
inaccurate, or harmful concepts from trained models without the need for retraining.
This is achieved by considering only negative samples and generating them in a
bootstrapping-like manner, requiring minimal prior knowledge. Additionally,
theoretical analyses are provided to further understand our proposed Clipout.
Extensive experiments on text-to-image show that Clipout is simple yet highly
effective and efficient compared with previous state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning research is driven by scale. Powered by tremendous resources in computing
and data, large-scale models make it possible to connect the vision and language domains using
a single architecture (Radford et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), i.e., vision-language models
(VLMs). Modern text-to-image models (Ramesh et al., 2021; Yasunaga et al., 2023), such as the
famed generative model Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), are capable of high-quality and
diverse image synthesis based on a text prompt. For image-to-text tasks (Stefanini et al., 2023), based
on the large-scale data of image-text pairs, VLMs (Li et al., 2022b) can describe visual concepts of
an image in natural language. These studies continue to evolve and scale, leading to various cases in
real-world scenarios (Li et al., 2022a; Xu et al., 2025).
While the scaled-up models and datasets have made monumental progress, there is an increasing risk
that the learned concepts in the trained models may be used maliciously. By leveraging personalized
text-to-image techniques (Ruiz et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2023), personal portraits can be forged into
deepfakes (Shiohara and Yamasaki, 2022; Chen et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021) by text-to-image models,
and aided by these models, the art style of paintings can also be easily imitated without authorization
(Liang et al., 2023). Besides, since it is nearly impossible to carefully audit large-scale datasets,
models trained on these unfiltered data may present biased and harmful behaviors (Birhane et al.,
2021). These misuses of VLMs, especially text-to-image models, will severely violate the rights of
privacy and copyright, making the development of the scaling model go against its original intention.
A feasible solution to these issues is machine unlearning (Xu et al., 2024), which grants people the
right to be forgotten. The primary challenge behind machine unlearning is how to efficiently and
precisely unlearn the target concept from trained models. Early research work (Bourtoule et al., 2021;
Yan et al., 2022) focused on partitioning the dataset and model into several shards and sub-models,
and re-trained the sub-model corresponding to the target concept. However, these methods require
re-design of the model architecture, and cannot be applied to modern scaled-up vision-language
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

