Finite Sample Analysis of Linear Temporal Difference
Learning with Arbitrary Features

Zixuan Xie∗
University of Virginia
xie.zixuan@email.virginia.edu
Rohan Chandra
University of Virginia
rohanchandra@virginia.edu

Xinyu Liu∗
University of Virginia
xinyuliu@virginia.edu
Shangtong Zhang
University of Virginia
shangtong@virginia.edu

Abstract
Linear TD(λ) is one of the most fundamental reinforcement learning algorithms
for policy evaluation. Previously, convergence rates are typically established under
the assumption of linearly independent features, which does not hold in many
practical scenarios. This paper instead establishes the first L2 convergence rates for
linear TD(λ) operating under arbitrary features, without making any algorithmic
modification or additional assumptions. Our results apply to both the discounted
and average-reward settings. To address the potential non-uniqueness of solutions
resulting from arbitrary features, we develop a novel stochastic approximation
result featuring convergence rates to the solution set instead of a single point.

1

Introduction

Temporal difference learning (TD, Sutton [1988]) is a fundamental algorithm in reinforcement
learning (RL, Sutton and Barto [2018]), enabling efficient policy evaluation by combining dynamic
programming [Bellman, 1966] with stochastic approximation (SA, Benveniste et al. [1990], Kushner
and Yin [2003], Borkar [2009]). Its linear variant, linear TD(λ) [Sutton, 1988], emerges as a practical
extension, employing linear function approximation to tackle large or continuous state spaces where
tabular representations become impractical. Linear TD(λ) takes the dot product between features and
weights to compute the approximated value. Establishing theoretical guarantees for linear TD(λ),
particularly convergence rates, has been a major focus of research. Most existing works (Table 1),
however, require the features used in linear TD to be linearly independent. As argued in Wang and
Zhang [2024], this assumption is impractical in many scenarios. For example, in continual learning
with sequentially arriving data [Ring, 1994, Khetarpal et al., 2022, Abel et al., 2023], there is no way
to rigorously verify whether the features are independent or not. See Wang and Zhang [2024] for more
discussion on the restrictions of the feature independence assumptions. Furthermore, Dayan [1992],
Tsitsiklis and Roy [1996, 1999] also outline the elimination of the linear independence assumption as
a future research direction.
While efforts have been made to eliminate the linear independence assumption [Wang and Zhang,
2024], they only provide asymptotic (almost sure) convergence guarantees in the discounted setting.
By contrast, this paper establishes the first L2 convergence rates for linear TD(λ) with arbitrary
features in both discounted and average-reward settings. This success is enabled by a novel
stochastic approximation result (Theorem 3) concerning the convergence rates to a solution set instead
of a single point, driven by a novel Lyapunov function. This new result provides a unified approach
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

