Scalable Signature Kernel Computations via
Local Neumann Series Expansions

Matthew Tamayo-Rios
Seminar for Applied Mathematics & AI Center
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Alexander Schell
Department of Mathematics
Technical University of Munich, Germany

Rima Alaifari
Department of Mathematics
RWTH Aachen University, Germany

Abstract
The signature kernel [10] is a recent state-of-the-art tool for analyzing highdimensional sequential data, valued for its theoretical guarantees and strong empirical performance. In this paper, we present a novel method for efficiently computing
the signature kernel of long, high-dimensional time series via adaptively truncated
recursive local power series expansions. Building on the characterization of the
signature kernel as the solution of a Goursat PDE [17], our approach employs
tilewise Neumann-series expansions to derive rapidly converging power series
approximations of the signature kernel that are locally defined on subdomains
and propagated iteratively across the entire domain of the Goursat solution by
exploiting the geometry of the time series. Algorithmically, this involves solving a
system of interdependent Goursat PDEs via adaptively truncated local power series
expansions and recursive propagation of boundary conditions along a directed
graph in a topological ordering. This method strikes an effective balance between
computational cost and accuracy, achieving substantial performance improvements
over state-of-the-art approaches for computing the signature kernel. It offers (a) adjustable and superior accuracy, even for time series with very high roughness; (b)
drastically reduced memory requirements; and (c) scalability to efficiently handle very long time series (one million data points or more) on a single GPU. As
demonstrated in our benchmarks, these advantages make our method particularly
well-suited for rough-path-assisted machine learning, financial modeling, and signal processing applications involving very long and highly volatile sequential data.

1

Introduction

Time series data is ubiquitous in contemporary data science and machine learning, appearing in
diverse applications such as satellite communication, radio astronomy, health monitoring, climate
analysis, and language or video processing, among many others [21]. The sequential nature of
this data presents unique challenges, as it is characterised by temporal dependencies and resulting
structural patterns that must be captured efficiently to model and predict time-dependent systems and
phenomena with accuracy. Robust and scalable tools for handling such data in their full temporal
complexity are thus essential for advancing machine learning applications across these domains. One
particularly powerful approach in this direction is the signature kernel [10, 17], the Gram matrix of a
high-fidelity feature embedding rooted in rough path theory and stochastic analysis [14, 8], which has
gained relevance as an increasingly popular tool in the modern analysis of sequential data [11, 13].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

