Restoring Pruned Large Language Models via Lost
Component Compensation
Zijian Feng1
1

Hanzhang Zhou1
Lee Onn Mak2

Zixiao Zhu1
Tianjiao Li1
Jia Jim Deryl Chua2
2
1,∗
Gee Wah Ng
Kezhi Mao

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Home Team Science and Technology Agency (HTX), Singapore
{feng0119, hanzhang001, zixiao001}@e.ntu.edu.sg
{tianjiao.li, ekzmao}@ntu.edu.sg
{deryl_chua, mak_lee_onn, ng_gee_wah}@htx.gov.sg

Abstract
Pruning is a widely used technique to reduce the size and inference cost of large
language models (LLMs), but it often causes performance degradation. To mitigate
this, existing restoration methods typically employ parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT), such as LoRA, to recover the pruned model’s performance. However, most
PEFT methods are designed for dense models and overlook the distinct properties
of pruned models, often resulting in suboptimal recovery. In this work, we propose
a targeted restoration strategy for pruned models that restores performance while
preserving their low cost and high efficiency. We observe that pruning-induced
information loss is reflected in attention activations, and selectively reintroducing components of this information can significantly recover model performance.
Based on this insight, we introduce RestoreLCC (Restoring Pruned LLMs via
Lost Component Compensation), a plug-and-play method that contrastively probes
critical attention heads via activation editing, extracts lost components from activation differences, and finally injects them back into the corresponding pruned
heads for compensation and recovery. RestoreLCC is compatible with structured,
semi-structured, and unstructured pruning schemes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that RestoreLCC consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in both
general and task-specific performance recovery, without compromising the sparsity
or inference efficiency of pruned models 2 .

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success in various natural language
processing (NLP) tasks like commonsense reasoning, math problem solving, and text completion
[1, 2, 3]. However, their large parameter counts demand substantial computational resources for
deployment and inference. To democratize LLMs, pruning has emerged as a key technique to reduce
model size and accelerate inference [4]. Pruning typically involves two steps: weight pruning and
performance restoration. Weight pruning methods can be roughly categorized into structured pruning,
such as LLM-Pruner [5] and SlimGPT [6], semi-structured pruning, and unstructured pruning, such
as SparseGPT [7] and Wanda [4]. These methods estimate the importance of parameters and zero out
unimportant ones to reduce model size. Performance restoration is a critical step in mitigating the
∗
2

Corresponding author.
Code: https://github.com/zijian678/restorelcc/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

