Wasserstein Convergence of Critically Damped
Langevin Diffusions

Stanislas Strasman1∗

Sobihan Surendran1,2∗
Vincent Lemaire1

Claire Boyer3

Sylvain Le Corff1

Antonio Ocello4

1

Sorbonne Université and Université Paris Cité, CNRS, LPSM, F-75005 Paris, France
2
LOPF, Califrais’ Machine Learning Lab, Paris, France
3
LMO, Université Paris-Saclay, UMR CNRS 8628, Institut Universitaire de France, Orsay, France
4
CREST, ENSAE, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France

Abstract
Score-based Generative Models (SGMs) have achieved impressive performance
in data generation across a wide range of applications and benefit from strong
theoretical guarantees. Recently, methods inspired by statistical mechanics, in
particular, Hamiltonian dynamics, have introduced Critically-damped Langevin Diffusions (CLDs), which define diffusion processes on extended spaces by coupling
the data with auxiliary variables. These approaches, along with their associated
score-matching and sampling procedures, have been shown to outperform standard
diffusion-based samplers numerically. In this paper, we analyze a generalized
dynamic that extends classical CLDs by introducing an additional hyperparameter
controlling the noise applied to the data coordinate, thereby better exploiting the
extended space. We further derive a novel upper bound on the sampling error of
CLD-based generative models in the Wasserstein metric. This additional hyperparameter influences the smoothness of sample paths, and our discretization error
analysis provides practical guidance for its tuning, leading to improved sampling
performance.

1

Introduction

Recent surge in machine learning and artificial intelligence has driven substantial progress in generative modeling, particularly with the development of Score-based Generative Models (SGMs).
These models build on the foundational works in Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs)
by Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015); Song and Ermon (2019); Ho et al. (2020) and the advances in
score-matching techniques introduced by Hyvärinen and Dayan (2005); Vincent (2011).
Score-based Generative Models (SGMs). SGMs are probabilistic models designed to create
synthetic instances of a target distribution when only a genuine sample (e.g., a dataset of real-life
images) is accessible. First, the forward process involves progressively perturbing the training
distribution by adding noise to the data until its distribution approximately reaches an easy-to-sample
distribution π∞ . Then, the backward process involves learning to reverse this noising dynamics by
sequentially removing the noise. SGMs have quickly gained recognition for their ability to generate
high-quality synthetic data. Their applications span diverse areas, including computer vision (Li et al.,
2022; Lugmayr et al., 2022), natural language processing (Gong et al., 2023), and other domains
where realistic data generation is crucial. This growing body of work has been comprehensively
surveyed by Yang et al. (2023), highlighting the versatility and potential of diffusion models. In
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

