√

O( T ) Static Regret and Instance Dependent
Constraint Violation for Constrained Online Convex
Optimization

Rahul Vaze∗
School of Technology and Computer Science
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai
rahul.vaze@gmail.com
Abhishek Sinha
School of Technology and Computer Science
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai
abhishek.sinha@tifr.res.in

Abstract
The constrained version of the standard online convex optimization (OCO) framework, called COCO is considered, where on every round, a convex cost function
and a convex constraint function are revealed to the learner after it chooses the
action for that round. The objective is to simultaneously minimize the static regret
and cumulative constraint violation
(CCV). An algorithm √
is proposed that guar√
antees a static regret of O( T ) and a CCV of min{V , O( T log T )}, where V
depends on the distance between the consecutively revealed constraint sets, the
shape of constraint sets, dimension of action space and the diameter of the action
space. When constraint sets have additional√
structure, V = O(1).
√ Compared to
the state of the art results, static regret of O( T ) and CCV of O( T log T ), that
were universal, the new result on CCV is instance dependent, which is derived by
exploiting the geometric properties of the constraint sets.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the constrained version of the standard online convex optimization (OCO)
framework, called constrained OCO or COCO. In COCO, on every round t, the online algorithm
first chooses an admissible action xt ∈ X ⊂ Rd , and then the adversary chooses a convex loss/cost
function ft : X → R and a constraint function of the form gt (x) ≤ 0, where gt : X → R is a
convex function. Since gt ’s are revealed after the action xt is chosen, an online algorithm need not
necessarily take feasible actions on each round, and in addition to the static regret
T
T
X
X
Regret[1:T ] ≡ sup sup RegretT (x? ), where RegretT (x? ) ≡
ft (xt ) −
ft (x? ),
(1)
x? ∈X
{ft }T
t=1

t=1

t=1

an additional metric of interest is the total cumulative constraint violation (CCV) defined as
PT
?
CCV[1:T ] ≡
be the feasible set consisting of all admissible act=1 max(gt (xt ), 0). Let X
tions that satisfy all constraints gt (x) ≤ 0, t ∈ [T ]. Under the standard assumption that X ? is not
∗
Both authors acknowledge support of the Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India, under
project no. RTI4001 and Google India Research Award 2023.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

