Adversarial Generalization of Unfolding
(Model-based) Networks

Vicky Kouni
LAMSADE, Paris Dauphine - PSL Research University
vasiliki.kouni@dauphine.psl.eu

Abstract
Unfolding networks are interpretable networks emerging from iterative algorithms,
incorporate prior knowledge of data structure, and are designed to solve inverse
problems like compressed sensing, which deals with recovering data from noisy,
missing observations. Compressed sensing finds applications in critical domains,
from medical imaging to cryptography, where adversarial robustness is crucial
to prevent catastrophic failures. However, a solid theoretical understanding of
the performance of unfolding networks in the presence of adversarial attacks
is still in its infancy. In this paper, we study the adversarial generalization of
unfolding networks when perturbed with l2 -norm constrained attacks, generated
by the fast gradient sign method. Particularly, we choose a family of state-ofthe-art overaparameterized unfolding networks and deploy a new framework to
estimate their adversarial Rademacher complexity. Given this estimate, we provide
adversarial generalization error bounds for the networks under study, which are
tight with respect to the attack level. To our knowledge, this is the first theoretical
analysis on the adversarial generalization of unfolding networks. We further
present a series of experiments on real-world data, with results corroborating our
derived theory, consistently for all data. Finally, we observe that the family’s
overparameterization can be exploited to promote adversarial robustness, shedding
light on how to efficiently robustify neural networks.

1

Introduction

The advent of deep unfolding networks (DUNs) [17] ushered in a new paradigm for inverse problems
[37], by transforming iterative optimization algorithms into trainable neural architectures [39]. The
starting point of DUNs is that many of these algorithms can be written compactly in a neural network
formulation:
xk+1 = nonlinearity(linear_transform(xk ) + bias_term).
(∗)
In this paper, we are interested in the inverse problem of Compressed Sensing (CS) [44], modeling a
plethora of modern applications, from medical imaging and speech processing, to communication
systems and cryptography, where robustness is crucial for ensuring safe and reliable inference.
CS deals with recovering data from missing, noisy observations, given that the structure of the data
is sparse via some fixed transform (e.g. wavelets for images). To address CS, a popular approach
relies on formulating it as a LASSO optimization problem, and then using some iterative proximal
algorithm to solve it [8]. Since the output of the proximal algorithm at a given iteration can be written
as in (∗), the algorithm’s iterations can be treated as the layers of a DNN, so that the algorithm is
“unfolded” into said DNN [17]. While all parameters are fixed in the proximal algorithm, its unfolded
counterpart is treated as a structured DNN, with unknown and thus learnable parameters, e.g., the
sparsifying transform. As such, the sparse data model is inherited by DUNs [4, 24, 42], rendering
them as interpretable DNNs with superior reconstruction quality in reduced time [40, 41].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

