Gemstones: A Model Suite for Multi-Faceted Scaling
Laws
Sean McLeish1∗, John Kirchenbauer1 , David Yu Miller1 , Siddharth Singh1
Abhinav Bhatele1 , Micah Goldblum2 , Ashwinee Panda1 , Tom Goldstein1
1
University of Maryland, 2 Columbia University

Abstract
Scaling laws are typically fit using a family of models with a narrow range
of frozen hyperparameter choices. In this work we study scaling laws using
multiple architectural shapes and hyperparameter choices, highlighting their
impact on resulting prescriptions. As a primary artifact of our research, we
release the Gemstones: an open-source scaling law dataset, consisting of over
4000 checkpoints from transformers with up to 2 billion parameters and diverse
architectural shapes; including ablations over learning rate and cooldown. Our
checkpoints enable more complex studies of scaling, such as analyzing the
relationship between width and depth. By examining our model suite, we find
that the prescriptions of scaling laws can be highly sensitive to the experimental
design process and the specific model checkpoints used during fitting.
Code: github.com/mcleish7/gemstone-scaling-laws

1

Introduction

Existing works on scaling laws often restrict Transformer architectures to a small range of widthdepth ratios [Porian et al., 2024], train on a small number of tokens, and fix training hyperparameters such as cooldown schedule across training runs [Hoffmann et al., 2022]. These design
choices, in turn, can dramatically influence the resulting scaling laws. If a scaling law is sensitive to such design choices, then it may only be useful for practitioners implementing similar setups to those that produced the scaling law. In practice, practitioners often take guidance
from scaling laws that assume completely different design choices than their own implementation, often without understanding to degree to which these choices may impact optimal scaling.

Depth

Embedding
In this work, we produce a vast array of model
checkpoints for studying how model design
Decoder Block
and model selection impact scaling laws. Our
models, called the Gemstones because they are
Attention
Decoder Block
loosely based on scaled-down variants of the
…
MLP
Gemma architecture, vary in their parameter
count, width/depth ratio, training tokens, learnWidth
Decoder Block
ing rates, and cooldown schedules. By fitting
scaling laws to these checkpoints, we confirm
LM Head
that scaling law parameters and interpretations
Residual Connection
indeed depend strongly on the selection of models and fitting procedure used, and we quantify Figure 1: The meaning of width and depth. We
the degree to which these decisions impact pre- visualize a standard transformer architecture, highdictions. By exploiting the variation among our lighting the “width” as the size of the hidden dimension and the “depth” as the number of trans∗
Correspondence to: smcleish@umd.edu.
former blocks.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

