W EDGE: Synthesizing Performance Constraints for
Evaluating and Improving Code Efficiency

Jun Yang, Cheng-Chi Wang, Bogdan Alexandru Stoica, Kexin Pei
{juny,casperwang,bastoica,kpei}@uchicago.edu
Department of Computer Science, The University of Chicago

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have been increasingly used to optimize code
efficiency. Evaluating their effectiveness and further suggesting optimization
opportunities often rely on high-quality tests to demonstrate the performance bottlenecks presented in the program. However, existing approaches rely on a limited
set of hand-curated inputs or LLM-generated uninteresting length-stressing tests,
failing to reveal more nuanced optimization opportunities. We present W EDGE,
a framework for generating performance-stressing input given the program under test. W EDGE synthesizes explicit performance-characterizing constraints in
the form of branch conditions to partition the programs’ execution space into
performance-specific regions. When integrated with the coverage-guided fuzzer,
reaching different regions introduces explicit rewards for test generation to explore inefficient implementations. Our evaluation shows that W EDGE introduces
a significant slowdown compared to the tests in CodeContests and those claimed
to be optimized by existing approaches. From the utility perspective, integrating
our tests substantially improves the existing code optimization approaches that
rely on test-driven execution feedback. We release P ERF F ORGE, the performance
tests generated by W EDGE, to benchmark future approaches for efficient code
generation at https://github.com/UChiSeclab/perfforge.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown intriguing promise in optimizing code efficiency beyond
compiler techniques [1–9]. Evaluating the effectiveness of these LM-based code optimizations relies
on performance-stressing tests. For example, an optimization from recursion to iteration in Fibonacci
number calculation incurs only a negligible performance improvement when evaluated with a default
test (n = 3) that focuses on testing correctness, while a performance-stressing input (n = 40) reveals
the orders (106 ) of the larger gap. Moreover, as some approaches integrate execution feedback
to further optimize the code [3, 7, 10], running performance-stressing tests reveals more precise
optimization opportunities by exposing performance bottlenecks.
Unfortunately, most existing code optimization approaches still leverage correctness tests to evaluate
and suggest optimizations [3, 5, 7]. However, the correctness tests alone are often insufficient to
expose the inefficient code implementation. For example, existing tests in the common benchmarks,
e.g., HumanEval [11] has been shown to have limited scope and low complexity and thus fail to
adequately stress the code performance against more demanding conditions [12]. As a result, they are
also more susceptible to the noise introduced in the execution environment, thus failing to reliably
quantify the optimization and reveal insightful optimization opportunities.
To generate performance-stressing tests, recent works have started to leverage LLMs by prompting
them to generate test generators [12]. For example, EvalPerf [12] introduced a scale parameter to
control the input size, with the assumption that it is the key determining factor for performance39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

