Partial Correlation Network Estimation by
Semismooth Newton Methods
Dongwon Kim∗
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
dongwonida@snu.ac.kr

Sungdong Lee∗
Department of Medicine
National University of Singapore
sdlee23@nus.edu.sg

Joong-Ho Won
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
won.j@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We develop a scalable second-order algorithm for a recently proposed ℓ1 regularized pseudolikelihood-based partial correlation network estimation framework. While the latter method admits statistical guarantees and is inherently
scalable compared to likelihood-based methods such as graphical lasso, the currently available implementations rely only on first-order information and require
thousands of iterations to obtain reliable estimates even on high-performance supercomputers. In this paper, we further investigate the inherent scalability of the
framework and propose locally and globally convergent semismooth Newton methods. Despite the nonsmoothness of the problem, these second-order algorithms
converge at a locally quadratic rate, and require only a few tens of iterations in
practice. Each iteration reduces to solving linear systems of small dimensions or
linear complementary problems of smaller dimensions, making the computation
also suitable for less powerful computing environments. Experiments on both
simulated and real-world genomic datasets demonstrate the superior convergence
behavior and computational efficiency of the proposed algorithm, which position
our method as a promising tool for massive-scale network analysis sought for in,
e.g., modern multi-omics research.

1

Introduction

A partial correlation network refers to a graph in which each node (vertex) corresponds to a variable
and an edge between two nodes represents the partial corrrelation between the corresponding pair of
variables. Partial correlation is defined as the correlation coefficient between the residuals resulting
from the linear regression of each of the two variables with the rest of the variables, thereby measuring
the degree of association between the two adjusting for the effect of the remaining variables. Learning
partial correlation networks form data is particularly important in multi-omics studies of biological
systems, where spurious edges due to shared regulatory factors should be avoided to detect direct
biological interaction of causal implications [27, 24, 22].
Partial correlation network estimation is closely connected to covariance selection [6], which estimates
nonzero entries of the inverse covariance or precision matrix of the variables. This is because a
nonzero entry of the precision matrix implies a nonzero partial correlation between the corresponding
variables. Moreover, if normality of the data distribution is assumed, then the zero entries of the
precision matrix imply conditional independence. For this reason, when the number of variables is
large and it is reasonable to assume that the number of edges is small, the graphical lasso [8, 34] that
maximizes the Gaussian likelihood under ℓ1 penalty on the entries of the precision matrix or solve
the following optimization problem
minΘ∈Sp − log det Θ + tr(SΘ) + λ∥Θ−D ∥1 , λ > 0,
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

(1)

