Evaluating multiple models
using labeled and unlabeled data

Divya Shanmugam1* Shuvom Sadhuka2*
Manish Raghavan2,3 John Guttag2 Bonnie Berger2** Emma Pierson4**
1
Cornell University
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
4
University of California, Berkeley
*
Equal contribution, ** Equal supervision
divyas@cornell.edu ssadhuka@mit.edu

Abstract
It is difficult to evaluate machine learning classifiers without large labeled datasets,
which are often unavailable. In contrast, unlabeled data is plentiful, but not
easily used for evaluation. Here, we introduce Semi-Supervised Model Evaluation
(SSME), a method that uses both labeled and unlabeled data to evaluate machine
learning classifiers. The key idea is to estimate the joint distribution of ground
truth labels and classifier scores using a semi-supervised mixture model. The semisupervised mixture model allows SSME to learn from three sources of information:
unlabeled data, multiple classifiers, and probabilistic classifier scores. Once fit, the
mixture model enables estimation of any metric that is a function of classifier scores
and ground truth labels (e.g., accuracy or AUC). We derive theoretical bounds
on the error of these estimates, showing that estimation error decreases with the
number of classifiers and the amount of unlabeled data. We present experiments in
four domains where obtaining large labeled datasets is often impractical: healthcare,
content moderation, molecular property prediction, and text classification. Our
results demonstrate that SSME estimates performance more accurately than do
competing methods, reducing error by 5.1× relative to using labeled data alone
and 2.4× relative to the next best method.

1

Introduction

Large, labeled datasets are critical for evaluation in machine learning, but such datasets are often
prohibitively expensive or impossible to obtain [17, 24]. Exacerbating the challenge of evaluation,
the number of off-the-shelf classifiers has increased dramatically through the widespread usage of
model hubs. The modern machine learning practitioner thus has a myriad of trained models, but little
labeled data with which to evaluate them.
In many domains, unlabeled data is much more abundant than labeled data [8, 61, 49]. To take
advantage of this, we introduce Semi-Supervised Model Evaluation (SSME), a method that can
be used to evaluate multiple classifiers using both labeled and unlabeled data. The key idea is to
estimate the joint distribution of ground truth classes y and continuous classifier scores s using a
mixture model, where different components of the mixture model correspond to different classes.
The joint distribution allows us to evaluate performance on examples where we have access only to
each classifier’s scores, i.e. unlabeled examples. SSME can estimate any metric that is a function
of class labels and probabilistic predictions, including widely-used metrics like accuracy, expected
calibration error, AUC, and AUPRC. Concretely, we can evaluate a classifier on an unlabeled point
by using our estimate of P (y, s).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

