Transcending Cost-Quality Tradeoff in Agent Serving
via Session-Awareness
∗

Yanyu Ren1
Li Chen2,
Dan Li1,2
Xizheng Wang1
1
2
Zhiyuan Wu
Yukai Miao
Yu Bai2
1
2
Tsinghua University
Zhongguancun Laboratory
{ryy23, wang-xz22, wu-zy25}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
tolidan@tsinghua.edu.cn {lichen, miaoyk, baiyu}@zgclab.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Language Model (LLM) agents are capable of task execution across various domains by autonomously interacting with environments and refining LLM
responses based on feedback. However, existing model serving systems are not
optimized for the unique demands of serving agents. Compared to classic model
serving, agent serving has different characteristics: predictable request pattern,
increasing quality requirement, and unique prompt formatting. We identify a key
problem for agent serving: LLM serving systems lack session-awareness. They
neither perform effective KV cache management nor precisely select the cheapest
yet competent model in each round. This leads to a cost-quality tradeoff, and we
identify an opportunity to surpass it in an agent serving system.
To this end, we introduce AG S ERVE for AGile AGent SERVing. AG S ERVE
features a session-aware server that boosts KV cache reuse via Estimated-Timeof-Arrival-based eviction and in-place positional embedding calibration, a qualityaware client that performs session-aware model cascading through real-time quality
assessment, and a dynamic resource scheduler that maximizes GPU utilization.
With AG S ERVE, we allow agents to select and upgrade models during the session
lifetime, and to achieve similar quality at much lower costs, effectively transcending
the tradeoff. Extensive experiments on real testbeds demonstrate that AG S ERVE
(1) achieves comparable response quality to GPT-4o at a 16.5% cost. (2) delivers
1.8× improvement in quality relative to the tradeoff curve.

1

Introduction

Large Language Model (LLM) agents are revolutionizing task execution by incorporating agentic
workflows and refining responses through observational feedback from their surroundings [47, 27].
Gaining tremendous attention from both academia and industry, the application scenarios of LLMbased agents range from query agents that automatically extract information from large databases [39]
to embodied agents that carry out household activities following user commands [45, 60].
Despite the rapid development of LLM agents, the serving systems powering them are largely
dependent on existing LLM serving paradigms, which are not optimized for agent workflows. In a
typical LLM serving process, the model takes in human instructions and performs complex reasoning
to generate responses that satisfy human requirements. Compared to classic LLM serving, our
analysis shows that agent serving exhibits distinct characteristics:
• Predictable and High Frequency Interactions. Agents utilize lightweight plug-ins to generate
observations and initiate new requests at intervals of milliseconds [31, 29] after obtaining the
response. Additionally, the responses to agent requests are usually short (within 100 tokens).
The generation latency is also short and relatively constant.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

