Comparing Uniform Price and Discriminatory
Multi-Unit Auctions through Regret Minimization

Marius Potfer1,2

Vianney Perchet1,3

1

Crest (Fairplay joint team), ENSAE
EDF R&D
3
Criteo AI Lab
2

Abstract
Repeated multi-unit auctions, where a seller allocates multiple identical items over
many rounds, are common mechanisms in electricity markets and treasury auctions.
We compare the two predominant formats: uniform-price and discriminatory
auctions, focusing on the perspective of a single bidder learning to bid against
stochastic adversaries. We characterize the learning difficulty in each format,
showing that the regret scales similarly√for both auction formats under both fullinformation and bandit feedback, as Θ̃( T ) and Θ̃(T 2/3 ), respectively. However,
analysis beyond worst-case regret reveals structural differences:√uniform-price
auctions may admit faster learning rates, with regret scaling as Θ̃( T ) in settings
where discriminatory auctions remain at Θ̃(T 2/3 ). Finally, we provide a specific
analysis for auctions in which the other participants are symmetric and have unitdemand, and show that in these instances, a similar regret rate separation appears.

1

Introduction

Uniform price auctions and discriminatory auctions are widely used market mechanisms for the
allocation of resources. They have been widely implemented and studied for electricity markets
(Elmaghraby & Oren, 1999; Hortaçsu & Puller, 2008) and treasury auctions (Nyborg et al., 2002).
They are the most widespread simultaneous multi-unit auctions of identical goods (Krishna, 2009).
Uniform price and discriminatory auctions are both standard mechanisms that allocate items to
buyers willing to pay the most; their rules are identical except for the prices buyers pay. Since the two
mechanisms are so similar, they can easily replace each other and have been frequently compared
(De Keijzer et al., 2013). Their differences have been studied from several points of view: from their
efficiency in Ausubel et al., 2014, the revenue they generate for the auctioneer, to the expected social
welfare in different types of equilibria (Syrgkanis & Tardos, 2013).
Participating in these auctions can be challenging from a bidder’s standpoint since the bidding
process is not truthful (i.e., the best strategy depends on other buyers’ behavior). However, when
auctions occur repeatedly, buyers can improve their strategies over time using online learning
techniques; this is referred to as learning to bid (Feng et al., 2018). The performance of these online
learning strategies is often measured by regret, which compares the cumulative rewards with that of
the best fixed strategy in hindsight (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020). We propose to leverage this
online learning framework to quantify the difficulty of learning to bid optimally, therefore providing
a new approach to compare uniform and discriminatory price auctions.
Learning to bid in repeated multiunit auctions has recently been studied, both in the uniform pricing
case Brânzei et al., 2023 and Potfer et al., 2024, and in the discriminatory pricing case by Galgana
and Golrezaei, 2025. These works focus on adversarial bids and provide regret rates with similar
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

