Imitation Beyond Expectation Using Pluralistic
Stochastic Dominance
Ali Farajzadeh, Danyal Saeed, Syed M. Abbas, Rushit Shah, Aadirupa Saha, Brian D. Ziebart
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{afaraj5,dsaeed3,sabbas33,rshah231,aadirupa,bziebart}@uic.edu

Abstract
Imitation learning seeks to estimate policies reflecting the values of demonstrated
behaviors. Prevalent approaches learn to match or exceed the demonstrator’s
performance in expectation without knowing the demonstrator’s reward function.
Unfortunately, this does not induce pluralistic imitators that learn to support distinct
demonstrations. We reformulate imitation learning using stochastic dominance
over the demonstrations’ reward distribution across a range of reward functions as
our foundational aim. Our approach matches imitator policy samples (or support)
with demonstrations using optimal transport theory to define an imitation learning
objective over trajectory pairs. We demonstrate the benefits of pluralistic stochastic
dominance (PSD) for imitation in both theory and practice.

1

Introduction

When learning from demonstrations, behaviors reflecting individual preferences and capabilities are often demonstrated. Existing
imitation learning methods struggle to preserve these distinct behaviors while trying to improve beyond them. For example, inverse
reinforcement learning (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ziebart, 2010) and
discriminative imitation (Ratliff et al., 2006; Ho & Ermon, 2016)
methods seek to match or outperform (Syed & Schapire, 2007) the
demonstrations under a range of reward functions in expectation. As
shown in Figure 1, this can be achieved by an imitator that never
produces behavior that a demonstrator prefers over any of his or her
more preferable demonstrations.
We seek a stronger distributional guarantee of pluralistic stochastic
dominance (PSD)1 , which ensures the imitator a higher probability
of achieving any level of reward than the demonstration distribution
(i.e., stochastic dominance) for all reward functions (i.e., pluralism)
within some defined set. This requires the imitator to match or
improve upon the distinct properties of exceptional demonstrations
rather than focusing on the average of demonstrations—often by
randomizing between different modes (Figure 1). These guarantees
support more complex applications of imitator policies (e.g., sampling many candidate trajectories and selecting the best) beyond the
assumption that a single imitator trajectory is sampled and executed.
1

Code available at https://github.com/Ali199776/PSD.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

Figure 1: Dominance in expectation (green) guarantees
better performance than the
demonstration average for all
conical sum reward functions.
Pluralistic stochastic dominance (red) makes the distribution of rewards preferable by
guaranteeing a higher probability of achieving any reward.

