DoDo-Code: an Efficient Levenshtein Distance
Embedding-based Code for 4-ary IDS Channel

1

Alan J.X. Guo1, 2∗, Sihan Sun1 , Xiang Wei1 , Mengyi Wei1 , Xin Chen1, 2
Center for Applied Mathematics, KL-AAGDM, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
{jiaxiang.guo, sihansun, weixiang, mengyi.wei, chen_xin}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
With the emergence of new storage and communication methods, the insertion,
deletion, and substitution (IDS) channel has attracted considerable attention. However, many topics on the IDS channel and the associated Levenshtein distance
remain open, making the invention of a novel IDS-correcting code a hard task.
Furthermore, current studies on single-IDS-correcting code misalign with the requirements of applications which necessitates the correcting of multiple errors.
Compromise solutions have involved shortening codewords to reduce the chance
of multiple errors. However, the code rates of existing codes are poor at short
lengths, diminishing the overall storage density. In this study, a novel method is
introduced for designing high-code-rate single-IDS-correcting codewords through
deep Levenshtein distance embedding. A deep learning model is utilized to project
the sequences into embedding vectors that preserve the Levenshtein distances
between the original sequences. This embedding space serves as a proxy for the
complex Levenshtein domain, within which algorithms for codeword search and
segment correcting is developed. While the concept underpinning this approach is
straightforward, it bypasses the mathematical challenges typically encountered in
code design. The proposed method results in a code rate that outperforms existing
combinatorial solutions, particularly for designing short-length codewords.

1

Introduction

With the emergence of new storage and communication methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], insertion, deletion, and
substitution (IDS) channels over non-binary symbols have attracted significant attention. However,
applying existing IDS-correcting codes to practical applications is not straightforward and faces
challenges such as a low overall code rate and limited multiple error-correcting capabilities.
Most of the current IDS-correcting codes focus on correcting a single error [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] or a burst
of errors [11, 12, 13], with an emphasis on achieving asymptotic optimality in code rate. These codes
are typically varieties of the Varshamov-Tenengolts (VT) code [6, 14, 15, 16]. Codebook generation
has recently gained attention in specific tasks, such as the p-substitution-k-deletion code [17].
However, in most applications, the ability to correct multiple IDS errors is crucial. This is because
IDS errors may occur simultaneously at different positions along the codeword, and the likelihood
of insertion, deletion, and substitution can vary due to channel properties, making them unequal in
occurrence [18, 19].
To address the challenge of correcting multiple errors, a compromise approach is to employ segmented
error-correcting code, as proposed in previous studies [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 19]. The sequence is
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

