Beyond Masked and Unmasked:
Discrete Diffusion Models via Partial Masking

Chen-Hao Chao1 , Wei-Fang Sun2 , Hanwen Liang1 , Chun-Yi Lee3 , Rahul G. Krishnan1
1
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
2
NVIDIA AI Technology Center
3
National Taiwan University
{chchao, rahulgk}@cs.toronto.edu, cylee@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Masked diffusion models (MDM) are powerful generative models for discrete data
that generate samples by progressively unmasking tokens in a sequence. Each token
can take one of two states: masked or unmasked. We observe that token sequences
often remain unchanged between consecutive sampling steps; consequently, the
model repeatedly processes identical inputs, leading to redundant computation.
To address this inefficiency, we propose the Partial masking scheme (Prime),
which augments MDM by allowing tokens to take intermediate states interpolated
between the masked and unmasked states. This design enables the model to
make predictions based on partially observed token information, and facilitates
a fine-grained denoising process. We derive a variational training objective and
introduce a simple architectural design to accommodate intermediate-state inputs.
Our method demonstrates superior performance across a diverse set of generative
modeling tasks. On text data, it achieves a perplexity of 15.36 on OpenWebText,
outperforming previous MDM (21.52), autoregressive models (17.54), and their
hybrid variants (17.58), without relying on an autoregressive formulation. On
image data, it attains competitive FID scores of 3.26 on CIFAR-10 and 6.98 on
ImageNet-32, comparable to leading continuous generative models.

1

Introduction

Number of Idle Steps

Discrete data generation has been a central focus of
MDM
1,200
MDM-Prime
probabilistic modeling since the early development of
MDM-Prime
1,000
neural networks [1–3]. The goal is to build a model caMDM-Prime
pable of generating sequences of symbolic units, known
800
as tokens, which can represent words in natural lan600
guage data or pixels in images. The field has been
largely shaped by autoregressive models (ARM) (e.g.,
400
[4–6]), which capture the distribution of sequence data
200
by factorizing it according to a prespecified left-toright order. Recently, promising results from [7, 8]
0
have demonstrated that order-agnostic models, such as
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
Number of Sampling Steps
masked diffusion models (MDM) (e.g., [7–10]), can
be effectively extended to large-scale generation tasks, Figure 1: Number of idle steps during the
opening a new venue for discrete generative modeling. reverse diffusion processes of MDM and
MDM-Prime. The results are averaged over
Masked diffusion models are latent-variable generative
ten runs. ℓ is the sub-token sequence length.
models that introduce noise by progressively masking
tokens within a sequence over time. During the reverse diffusion process, masked tokens are
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

