RoboRefer: Towards Spatial Referring with Reasoning
in Vision-Language Models for Robotics

Enshen Zhou1,3∗, Jingkun An1∗, Cheng Chi3∗ ‡ † , Yi Han1,3 , Shanyu Rong2,3 , Chi Zhang2 ,
Pengwei Wang3 , Zhongyuan Wang3 , Tiejun Huang2,3 , Lu Sheng1†, Shanghang Zhang2,3†
1
School of Software, Beihang University
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University 3 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
zhouenshen@buaa.edu.cn anjingkun02@gmail.com chicheng@baai.ac.cn
lsheng@buaa.edu.cn shanghang@pku.edu.cn
Grasp the apple located in front of
the logo side of the leftmost cup.

Reasoning Process

Spatially Constrained Instruction
Pick the farthest sushi on the yellow
plate in the second-left column.
Single-step1: Locate farthest
sushi in the second column.
Single-step2: Locate yellow plate
on the in this column.

Reasoning Process

Spatially Constrained Instruction

Carry the apple to the nearest table,
aligned with the original apple row.

Place it between the plate nearest
to me and the soy sauce dish.

Single-step1: Locate plate
nearest to the observer.
Single-step2: Loate the
soy sauce dish.

Single-step3: Identify the free
space between these two objects.
Multi-Step Spatial Referring with Reasoning

Real-world Manipulation and Navigation

Figure 1: Spatial referring in complex 3D environments demands not only precise single-step spatial
understanding but also multi-step spatial reasoning to resolve intricate references step-by-step,
thereby enabling efficient control of diverse robots across tasks (e.g., manipulation, navigation).

Abstract
Spatial referring is a fundamental capability of embodied robots to interact with
the 3D physical world. However, even with the powerful pretrained vision language models (VLMs), recent approaches are still not qualified to accurately
understand the complex 3D scenes and dynamically reason about the instructionindicated locations for interaction. To this end, we propose RoboRefer, a 3D-aware
VLM that can first achieve precise spatial understanding by integrating a disentangled but dedicated depth encoder via supervised fine-tuning (SFT). Moreover,
RoboRefer advances generalized multi-step spatial reasoning via reinforcement
fine-tuning (RFT), with metric-sensitive process reward functions tailored for spatial referring tasks. To support SFT and RFT training, we introduce RefSpatial ,
a large-scale dataset of 20M QA pairs (2× prior), covering 31 spatial relations
(vs. 15 prior) and supporting complex reasoning processes (up to 5 steps). In
addition, we present RefSpatial-Bench , a challenging benchmark filling the gap
∗

Equal contribution

†

Corresponding author

‡

Project leader

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

