ELECTRA: A Cartesian Network for 3D Charge
Density Prediction with Floating Orbitals

Jonas Elsborg1,2∗ † Luca Thiede3,4∗
Alán Aspuru-Guzik3,4,5 Tejs Vegge1,2 Arghya Bhowmik1,2 †
1

2

Technical University of Denmark
CAPeX Pioneer Center for Accelerating P2X Materials Discovery
3
University of Toronto
4
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
5
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR)

Abstract
We present the Electronic Tensor Reconstruction Algorithm (ELECTRA) - an
equivariant model for predicting electronic charge densities using floating orbitals.
Floating orbitals are a long-standing concept in the quantum chemistry community
that promises more compact and accurate representations by placing orbitals freely
in space, as opposed to centering all orbitals at the position of atoms. Finding the
ideal placement of these orbitals requires extensive domain knowledge, though,
which thus far has prevented widespread adoption. We solve this in a data-driven
manner by training a Cartesian tensor network to predict the orbital positions along
with orbital coefficients. This is made possible through a symmetry-breaking
mechanism that is used to learn position displacements with lower symmetry than
the input molecule while preserving the rotation equivariance of the charge density
itself. Inspired by recent successes of Gaussian Splatting in representing densities
in space, we are using Gaussian orbitals and predicting their weights and covariance matrices. Our method achieves a state-of-the-art balance between computational efficiency and predictive accuracy on established benchmarks. Furthermore,
ELECTRA is able to lower the compute time required to arrive at converged DFT
solutions - initializing calculations using our predicted densities yields an average
50.72 % reduction in self-consistent field (SCF) iterations on unseen molecules.

1

Introduction

High-accuracy simulations for the design of materials and molecules at the atomic scale are most often
done with density functional theory (DFT) based simulations (Kohn & Sham, 1965), as DFT provides
a good balance between cost and accuracy for quantum mechanical simulations of matter (Marzari
et al., 2021). However, the O(n3 ) scaling of DFT still limits the system sizes and time scales that can
be simulated. Linear scaling ML surrogates, such as neural network potentials trained with a large
number of DFT simulations, can alleviate this problem by learning a direct mapping between atomic
structure and corresponding energy, forces, and other properties with accuracy similar to those from
DFT simulations (Friederich et al., 2021). This approach, although first envisioned three decades
ago (Blank et al., 1995), has become successful and popular in recent years based on multiple seminal
developments (Behler, 2021; Deringer et al., 2021; Unke et al., 2021c).
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors: jels@dtu.dk, arbh@dtu.dk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

