Exploring the limits of strong membership
inference attacks on large language models

Jamie Hayes1∗ Ilia Shumailov1 Christopher A. Choquette-Choo1
Matthew Jagielski1 Georgios Kaissis1 Milad Nasr1
Meenatchi Sundaram Muthu Selva Annamalai2 Niloofar Mireshghallah3 Igor Shilov4
Matthieu Meeus4 Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye4 Katherine Lee1
Franziska Boenisch5 Adam Dziedzic5 A. Feder Cooper6,7∗
1
4

Google DeepMind 2 University College London 3 University of Washington
Imperial College London 5 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
6
Stanford University 7 Microsoft Research

Abstract
State-of-the-art membership inference attacks (MIAs) typically require training
many reference models, making it difficult to scale these attacks to large pre-trained
language models (LLMs). As a result, prior research has either relied on weaker attacks that avoid training references (e.g., fine-tuning attacks), or on stronger attacks
applied to small models and datasets. However, weaker attacks have been shown to
be brittle and insights from strong attacks in simplified settings do not translate to
today’s LLMs. These challenges prompt an important question: are the limitations
observed in prior work due to attack design choices, or are MIAs fundamentally ineffective on LLMs? We address this question by scaling LiRA—one of the strongest
MIAs—to GPT-2 architectures ranging from 10M to 1B parameters, training references on over 20B tokens from the C4 dataset. Our results advance the understanding of MIAs on LLMs in four key ways. While (1) strong MIAs can succeed on pretrained LLMs, (2) their effectiveness, remains limited (e.g., AUC<0.7) in practical
settings. (3) Even when strong MIAs achieve better-than-random AUC, aggregate
metrics can conceal substantial per-sample MIA decision instability: due to training
randomness, many decisions are so unstable that they are statistically indistinguishable from a coin flip. Finally, (4) the relationship between MIA success and related
LLM privacy metrics is not as straightforward as prior work has suggested.

1

Introduction

In a membership inference attack (MIA), an adversary aims to determine whether a specific data
record was part of a model’s training set [53, 63]. MIAs pose a significant privacy risk to ML models,
but state-of-the-art attacks are often too computationally expensive to run at the scale of pre-trained
large language models (LLMs). This is because strong MIAs require training multiple reference
models to form membership predictions—and pre-training even one LLM is often prohibitively
expensive in research settings. As a result, current work makes one of two compromises: running
weaker attacks that avoid training reference models (e.g., attacks that fine-tune an LLM), or
running strong attacks that train small reference models on small datasets. However, both exhibit
notable limitations (Section 2). Weaker attacks are more practical, but they have been shown to be
brittle—often performing no better than random guessing [18, 21, 43]. Stronger attacks, when run in
simplified settings, fail to capture the complex dynamics of large-scale, pre-trained language models;
as a result, their insights do not reliably generalize to modern LLMs [38].
Results from both of these approaches leave key questions unanswered about the effectiveness of
MIAs on LLMs. In particular, are the fidelity issues of weaker attacks due to omitting reference
∗

Equal contribution; corresponding authors: jamhay@google.com, afedercooper@gmail.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

