CymbaDiff: Structured Spatial Diffusion for
Sketch-based 3D Semantic Urban Scene Generation
Li Liang1

Bo Miao2

Xinyu Wang1
1
2

Naveed Akhtar3

Jordan Vice1

Ajmal Mian1

The University of Western Australia
AIML, The University of Adelaide
3
The University of Melbourne

Abstract
Outdoor 3D semantic scene generation produces realistic and semantically rich
environments for applications such as urban simulation and autonomous driving.
However, advances in this direction are constrained by the absence of publicly
available, well-annotated datasets. We introduce SketchSem3D, the first large-scale
benchmark for generating 3D outdoor semantic scenes from abstract freehand
sketches and pseudo-labeled annotations of satellite images. SketchSem3D includes two subsets, Sketch-based SemanticKITTI and Sketch-based KITTI-360
(containing LiDAR voxels along with their corresponding sketches and annotated
satellite images), to enable standardized, rigorous, and diverse evaluations. We also
propose Cylinder Mamba Diffusion (CymbaDiff) that significantly enhances spatial
coherence in outdoor 3D scene generation. CymbaDiff imposes structured spatial ordering, explicitly captures cylindrical continuity and vertical hierarchy, and
preserves both physical neighborhood relationships and global context within the
generated scenes. Extensive experiments on SketchSem3D demonstrate that CymbaDiff achieves superior semantic consistency, spatial realism, and cross-dataset
generalization. The code and dataset will be available at https://github.com/Lillianresearch-hub/CymbaDiff.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling has demonstrated remarkable progress in the 2D and 3D domains, largely
fueled by the rapid development of diffusion models [1, 2, 3, 4]. In 3D, diffusion approaches have
significantly advanced 3D object synthesis [5, 6] and indoor scene generation [7, 8]. However,
generating large-scale 3D outdoor environments remains widely underexplored [9, 10, 11], as outdoor
urban scenes pose greater challenges due to their higher semantic diversity, complex spatial structures,
and dynamic contextual dependencies. Despite these challenges, synthesizing realistic and scalable
3D urban scenes is increasingly critical, as it underpins a wide range of emerging applications,
including city-scale simulation [12, 13] and autonomous driving [14, 15, 16, 17].
A few methods have recently surfaced for 3D outdoor scene generation [9, 10, 11, 18, 19], often
relying on bird’s-eye view (BEV) with only road data or multi-scale scene hierarchies to guide
generation. BEV-based approaches suffer from insufficient 3D structural information, limiting both
semantic richness and geometric fidelity. Meanwhile, modeling multi-scale scene hierarchies typically
requires generative models to repeatedly synthesize scenes at multiple spatial resolutions, increasing
both computational and structural complexity. Moreover, due to the lack of a public large-scale
benchmark, current approaches typically use self-curated and heavily preprocessed datasets for
evaluation [9], which fundamentally constrains rigorous benchmarking. Sketch-based methods [20,
21, 22, 23] have recently emerged as a promising paradigm for user-guided 3D generation, enabling
intuitive control through freehand drawings. However, their applicability remains confined to the
synthesis of isolated 3D objects or simple indoor scenes. Expanding sketch-based 3D reconstruction
to outdoor scenes is currently widely open. Challenges in this novel pursuit arise from complex
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

