GPLQ: A General, Practical, and Lightning QAT
Method for Vision Transformers

1

Guang Liang1,2,4
Xinyao Liu3
Jianxin Wu1,2∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
4
Zhongguancun Academy, Beijing, China

liangg@lamda.nju.edu.cn, liuxinyao@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) are essential in computer vision but are computationally intensive, too. Model quantization, particularly to low bit-widths like
4-bit, aims to alleviate this difficulty, yet existing Post-Training Quantization
(PTQ) and Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) methods exhibit significant limitations. PTQ often incurs substantial accuracy drop, while QAT achieves high
accuracy but suffers from prohibitive computational costs, limited generalization
to downstream tasks, training instability, and lack of open-source codebase. To
address these challenges, this paper introduces General, Practical, and Lightning
Quantization (GPLQ), a novel framework designed for efficient and effective ViT
quantization. GPLQ is founded on two key empirical insights: the paramount
importance of activation quantization and the necessity of preserving the model’s
original optimization “basin” to maintain generalization. Consequently, GPLQ employs a sequential “activation-first, weights-later” strategy. Stage 1 keeps weights
in FP32 while quantizing activations with a feature mimicking loss in only 1
epoch to keep it in the same “basin”, thereby preserving generalization. Stage
2 quantizes weights using a PTQ method. As a result, GPLQ is 100x faster
than existing QAT methods, lowers memory footprint to levels even below FP32
training, and achieves 4-bit model performance that is highly competitive with
FP32 models in terms of both accuracy on ImageNet and generalization to diverse
downstream tasks, including fine-grained visual classification and object detection.
We release an easy-to-use open-source toolkit supporting multiple vision tasks at
https://github.com/wujx2001/GPLQ.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformer (ViT) [6, 34] has emerged as the mainstream backbone network in computer
vision, but it demands substantial computational and memory resources. Model quantization is one of
the key techniques to address this challenge by reducing the numerical precision of model parameters
and/or activation values[18, 19]. However, existing quantization methods still faces challenges,
especially in low-bit (e.g., 4-bit) quantization.
Mainstream methods include Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) [25] and Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) [7]. PTQ has fast speed and low resource consumption, but often leads to large accuracy
drop under 4-bit quantization [20]. On the other hand, QAT simulates quantization operations during
training and enables higher accuracy than that of PTQ, or even higher than that of floating-point
models. Nevertheless, in this paper we will show that existing QAT methods have inherent limitations:
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

