Blending Complementary Memory Systems in
Hybrid Quadratic-Linear Transformers

Kazuki Irie1 Morris Yau2 Samuel J. Gershman1,3
Department of Psychology and Center for Brain Science,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
2
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA, USA
3
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
{kirie, gershman}@fas.harvard.edu, morrisy@mit.edu
1

Abstract
We develop hybrid memory architectures for general-purpose sequence processing neural networks, that combine key-value memory using softmax attention
(KV-memory) with fast weight memory through dynamic synaptic modulation (FWmemory)—the core principles of quadratic and linear transformers, respectively.
These two memory systems have complementary but individually limited properties: KV-memory offers precise retrieval but is constrained by quadratic complexity
in sequence length, while FW-memory supports arbitrarily long sequences and
enables more expressive computation but sacrifices precise recall. We propose and
compare three methods to blend these two systems into a single memory system,
differing in how and when input information is delivered to each system, to leverage
the strengths of both. We conduct experiments on general language modeling and retrieval tasks by training 340M- and 1.3B-parameter models from scratch, as well as
on synthetic algorithmic tasks designed to precisely illustrate the benefits of certain
hybrid methods over others. We also evaluate our hybrid memory systems on reinforcement learning in partially observable environments. Overall, we demonstrate
how a well-designed hybrid can overcome the limitations of its individual components, offering new insights into the design principle of neural memory systems.1

1

Introduction

Modern transformers come in two flavors. The standard or “quadratic transformer” (QT) [1] leverages
softmax attention over explicit key-value memory storage which enables precise memory retrieval [2],
while the length of sequences they can handle is limited in practice due to its quadratic computational
complexities (as reflected in our model terminology). On the other hand, “linear transformers”
(LT), also known as fast weight programmers (FWPs) [3, 4] sacrifice the precision of the softmax
function (the complexity bottleneck of QT), but in return they support the processing of arbitrarily
long sequences. Furthermore, some of their variants (called DeltaNet models [5–8]) enable more
expressive computations (e.g., certain types of state-tracking), which QTs struggle to perform [7–16].
While the unique advantages of quadratic and linear transformers may seem inherently incompatible
to achieve simultaneously, they are all desirable in an ideal general-purpose memory system. How
could we achieve multiple computational properties that are incompatible within a single system?
The brain’s apparent solution is to integrate multiple types of memory mechanisms; each with distinct
properties that meet specific demands under various constraints, thereby enabling flexible problem
1

Our code is public: https://github.com/kazuki-irie/hybrid-memory.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

