Efficiently Escaping Saddle Points under Generalized
Smoothness via Self-Bounding Regularity
Daniel Yiming Cao∗
August Y. Chen∗
Karthik Sridharan∗
Benjamin Tang∗
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
{dyc33, ayc74, ks999, bt283}@cornell.edu

Abstract
We study the optimization of non-convex functions that are not necessarily smooth
(gradient and/or Hessian are Lipschitz) using first order methods. Smoothness
is a restrictive assumption in machine learning in both theory and practice, motivating significant recent work on finding first order stationary points of functions
satisfying generalizations of smoothness with first order methods. We develop
a novel framework that lets us systematically study the convergence of a large
class of first-order optimization algorithms (which we call decrease procedures)
under generalizations of smoothness. We instantiate our framework to analyze the
convergence of first order optimization algorithms to first and second order stationary points under generalizations of smoothness. As a consequence, we establish
the first convergence guarantees for first order methods to second order stationary
points under generalizations of smoothness. We demonstrate that several canonical
examples fall under our framework, and highlight practical implications.

1

Introduction

A widely studied problem in machine learning (ML) and optimization is finding a First Order
Stationary Point (FOSP) of a generic function F with domain Rd , defined as follows:
Given a tolerance ε > 0, find w such that ∥∇F (w )∥ ≤ ε.

(1)

The methods of choice in theory and practice for this task are Gradient Descent (GD), Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD), and variants thereof. Under the additional assumption of (second-order)
smoothness on F , i.e. that the gradient ∇F is Lipschitz with parameter L > 0, this task is wellunderstood. In several settings – such as with access to exact gradients, stochastic gradients, HessianVector Products, and the exact Hessian – we have matching upper and lower bounds. The literature on
this problem is extensive; for a subset see e.g. Ghadimi and Lan (2013); Johnson and Zhang (2013);
Fang et al. (2018, 2019); Foster et al. (2019); Arjevani et al. (2020); Carmon et al. (2020, 2021).
However, for many non-convex functions F , FOSPs are uninformative. A significant and difficult
problem established in the literature for over a decade – which carries strong theoretical and practical
implications in optimization for machine learning – is establishing efficient rates for finding a Second
Order Stationary Point (SOSP). In many non-convex optimization problems such as Phase Retrieval
and Matrix Square Root (Ge et al., 2015; Jin et al., 2017; Ge et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2018), SOSPs
are global minima. Finding a SOSP is defined as follows:
√
Given a tolerance ε > 0, find w such that ∥∇F (w )∥ ≤ ε, ∇2 F (w ) ⪰ − εI ,
(2)
where ⪰ denotes the PSD order, I is the d × d identity matrix, and ∇2 F (w ) is the Hessian of F .2
Under the additional Hessian Lipschitz assumption, that the operator norm of the Hessian ∇2 F in
addition to the gradient ∇F is Lipschitz, this task is also well-understood. Under these regularity
∗
2

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
There are several definitions of a SOSP; see Remark 5 for why we use this definition here.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

