Controlled Visual Hallucination via Thalamus-Driven
Decoupling Network for Domain Adaptation of
Black-Box Predictors
Yuwu Lu∗ †
School of Artificial Intelligence
South China Normal University
Foshan, Guangdong, China
luyuwu2008@163.com

Chunzhi Liu†
School of Artificial Intelligence
South China Normal University
Foshan, Guangdong, China
2023024323@m.scnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain Adaptation of Black-box Predictors (DABP) transfers knowledge from a
labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain, without requiring access to
either source data or source model. Common practices of DABP leverage reliable
samples to suppress negative information about unreliable samples. However, there
are still some problems: i) Excessive attention to reliable sample aggregation leads
to premature overfitting; ii) Valuable information in unreliable samples is often
overlooked. To address them, we propose a novel spatial learning approach, called
Controlled Visual Hallucination via Thalamus-driven Decoupling Network (CVHTDN). Specifically, CVH-TDN is the first work that introduces the thalamus-driven
decoupling network in the visual task, relying on its connection with hallucination to control the direction of sample generation in feature space. CVH-TDN
is composed of Hallucination Generation (HG), Hallucination Alignment (HA),
and Hallucination Calibration (HC), aiming to explore the spatial relationship
information between samples and hallucinations. Extensive experiments confirm
that CVH-TDN achieves SOTA performance on four standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Traditional unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) adapts models trained on a fully labeled source
domain to an unlabeled target domain, aiming to alleviate the constraints of data collection and
annotation in training deep neural networks [1–5]. However, the application of UDA techniques is
limited in some scenarios like personal medical records, where access to source data is restricted due
to privacy-preserving policies. To solve this problem, source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) methods
[6–8] were introduced recently, which assume the availability of only unlabeled target domain data
and a pre-trained source model during adaptation. Although SFDA methods reduce the possibility
of privacy leaks by using the pre-trained source model instead of source data, certain generation
techniques like [9, 10] can potentially reconstruct the source data by learning from the source model.
Compared to UDA and SFDA settings, domain adaptation of black-box predictors (DABP) provides
better data privacy protection with more flexible portability, which adapts a model using only the
unlabeled target data and a black-box predictor trained on the source domain, e.g., an API service in
the cloud [11]. As demonstrated in Appendix A, we present a detailed exposition of the respective
processes and the differences among UDA, SFDA, and DABP.
∗
†

Corresponding author.
Both authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

