Counterfactual Image Editing
with Disentangled Causal Latent Space

Yushu Pan and Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Lab
Columbia University
{yushupan, eb}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
The process of editing an image can be naturally modeled as evaluating a counterfactual query: “What would an image look like if a particular feature had changed?”
While recent advances in text-guided image editing leverage powerful pre-trained
models to produce visually appealing images, they often lack counterfactual consistency – ignoring how features are causally related and how changing one may
affect others. In contrast, existing causal-based editing approaches offer solid
theoretical foundations and perform well in specific settings, but remain limited in
scalability and often rely on labeled data. In this work, we aim to bridge the gap
between causal editing and large-scale text-to-image generation through two main
contributions. First, we introduce Backdoor Disentangled Causal Latent Space
(BD-CLS), a new class of latent spaces that allows for the encoding of causal inductive biases. One desirable property of this latent space is that, even under weak
supervision, it can be shown to exhibit counterfactual consistency. Second, and
building on this result, we develop BD-CLS-Edit, an algorithm capable of learning
a BD-CLS from a (non-causal) pre-trained Stable Diffusion model. This enables
counterfactual image editing without retraining. Our method ensures that edits
respect the causal relationships among features, even when some features are unlabeled or unprompted and the original latent space is oblivious to the environment’s
underlying cause-and-effect relationships.

1

Introduction

Image editing is an important task in computer vision, which enables a counterfactual question:
"What would a given image be had a feature X changed from x to x′ ?" Addressing such questions
benefits generative models by realism, interpretability, fairness, generalizability, and transportability
[41, 6, 42, 5, 51, 63, 23, 31]. Earlier approaches to solving this problem typically consider inverting
images into a Latent Space (LS) and manipulating latent vectors leveraging correlations between
the labels of intervened features and images [53, 17, 26, 8]. Recently, text-guided image editing
methods leverage large-scale pre-trained models, such as CLIP, Stable Diffusion, and Rectified
Flows [45, 48, 15], to enable edits that align with general human common sense concepts, without
requiring model retraining [12, 18, 19, 7, 33, 28, 49]. These methods prioritize keeping the edited
image as close as possible to the original and maintaining non-edited features unchanged (called as
semantic invariance), but are often oblivious to the effects of the edited features on other features.
More recently, causal generative models have been proposed to capture causal effects in data [59,
60, 40, 57, 58]. By integrating Structural Causal Models (SCMs) with modern deep generative
architectures, these models can practically achieve high-quality causal image editing given observational image samples, corresponding feature labels, and a specified causal diagram under restricted
assumptions [47, 46, 13]. From a theoretical standpoint, these methods often (point-)estimate
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

