Looking Into the Water by Unsupervised Learning of
the Surface Shape

Ori Lifschitz
Hatter Department of Marine Technologies
Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
https://github.com/OriLifschitz/RDR-SuGrad
Tali Treibitz
Hatter Department of Marine Technologies
Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
ttreibitz@univ.haifa.ac.il

Dan Rosenbaum
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
danro@cs.haifa.ac.il

Abstract
We address the problem of looking into the water from the air, where we seek to
remove image distortions caused by refractions at the water surface. Our approach
is based on modeling the different water surface structures at various points in time,
assuming the underlying image is constant. To this end, we propose a model that
consists of two neural-field networks. The first network predicts the height of the
water surface at each spatial position and time, and the second network predicts the
image color at each position. Using both networks, we reconstruct the observed
sequence of images and can therefore use unsupervised training. We show that
using implicit neural representations with periodic activation functions (SIREN)
leads to effective modeling of the surface height spatio-temporal signal and its
derivative, as required for image reconstruction. Using both simulated and real data
we show that our method outperforms the latest unsupervised image restoration
approach. In addition, it provides an estimate of the water surface.

Figure 1: Surface waves distort the appearance of underwater scenes viewed from the air due to
refractions following Snell’s law as seen in the distorted frame on the left. Our method aims at
reconstructing the original scene and performs better than NDIR [11]. For example, the numbers
marked in blue and the grid marked in green. In addition, our method outputs the surface height. The
height presented on the right corresponds to the distorted frame on the left. Example taken from the
elephant dataset from [9].

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

