Convergence Rates of Constrained Expected
Improvement

Haowei Wang
National University of Singapore
Singapore
haowei_wang@u.nus.edu

Jingyi Wang
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
wang125@llnl.gov

Nai-Yuan Chiang
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
chiang7@llnl.gov

Zhongxiang Dai
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
China
daizhongxiang@cuhk.edu.cn

Szu Hui Ng
National University of Singapore
Singapore
isensh@nus.edu.sg

Cosmin G. Petra
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
petra1@llnl.gov

Abstract
Constrained Bayesian optimization (CBO) methods have seen significant success
in black-box optimization with constraints. One of the most commonly used
CBO methods is the constrained expected improvement (CEI) algorithm. CEI is a
natural extension of expected improvement (EI) when constraints are incorporated.
However, the theoretical convergence rate of CEI has not been established. In this
work, we study the convergence rate of CEI by analyzing its simple regret upper
bound. First, we show that when the objective function f and constraint function c
are assumed to each lie in a reproducing
kernel
CEIachieves
 1
 Hilbert space
 −ν(RKHS),
d+1
ν
−2
2
2ν+d
2ν+d
the convergence rates of O t log
log
(t) and O t
(t) for the
commonly used squared exponential and Matérn kernels (ν > 21 ), respectively.
Second, we show that when f is assumed to be sampled from Gaussian processes
(GPs), CEI achieves similar convergence rates with a high probability. Numerical
experiments are performed to validate the theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is an efficient method for optimizing expensive black-box functions
without derivatives. It leverages probabilistic surrogate models, most commonly Gaussian processes
(GPs), to balance exploration and exploitation in the search for optimal solutions [Frazier, 2018].
BO has found widespread success in diverse fields such as structural design [Mathern et al., 2021],
machine learning hyperparameter tuning [Wu et al., 2019], robotics [Calandra et al., 2016], fusion
design [Wang et al., 2024], etc.
While traditional BO is typically applied to unconstrained settings, many real-world problems involve
black-box constraints that must be satisfied. This has motivated growing interest in constrained
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

