Root Cause Analysis of Outliers with Missing
Structural Knowledge

William Roy Orchard∗
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
wo223@cam.ac.uk

Nastaran Okati∗
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany

Sergio Hernan Garrido Mejia
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Amazon
Tübingen, Germany
Patrick Blöbaum
Amazon
Tübingen, Germany

Dominik Janzing
Amazon
Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
The goal of Root Cause Analysis (RCA) is to explain why an anomaly occurred by
identifying where the fault originated. Several recent works model the anomalous
event as resulting from a change in the causal mechanism at the root cause, i.e., as
a soft intervention. RCA is then the task of identifying which causal mechanism
changed. In real-world applications, one often has either few or only a single sample
from the post-intervention distribution: a severe limitation for most methods, which
assume one knows or can estimate the distribution. However, even those that do
not are statistically ill-posed due to the need to probe regression models in regions
of low probability density. In this paper, we propose simple, efficient methods to
overcome both difficulties in the case where there is a single root cause and the
causal graph is a polytree. When one knows the causal graph, we give guarantees
for a traversal algorithm that requires only marginal anomaly scores and does
not depend on specifying an arbitrary anomaly score cut-off. When one does not
know the causal graph, we show that the heuristic of identifying root causes as
the variables with the highest marginal anomaly scores is causally justified. To
this end, we prove that anomalies with small scores are unlikely to cause those
with larger scores in polytrees and give upper bounds for the likelihood of causal
pathways with non-monotonic anomaly scores.

1

Introduction

When an anomaly occurs, it is essential to identify its root cause so that action can be taken to
resolve it. As such, Root Cause Analysis (RCA), has become a rich and rapidly developing area of
research, with wide ranging applications from meteorology [1], monitoring health [2, 3], industrial
fabrication [4], fraud detection [5], credit scoring [6], cloud applications [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] and
more [13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. Although many previous works have adopted a purely statistical approach to
RCA [18, 19, 20, 21, 22], relying on correlations, the fact that the goal is to take action distinguishes
∗

Authors contributed equally.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

