Unsupervised Federated Graph Learning

Lele Fu1 , Tianchi Liao1 , Sheng Huang1 , Bowen Deng1 , Chuanfu Zhang1 ,
Shirui Pan2 , Chuan Chen1∗
1
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia
{fulle,liaotch,huangsh253,dengbw3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
s.pan@griffith.edu.au, {zhangchf9,chenchuan}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated graph learning (FGL) is a privacy-preserving paradigm for modeling
distributed graph data, designed to train a powerful global graph neural network.
Existing FGL methods predominantly rely on label information during training,
effective FGL in an unsupervised setting remains largely unexplored territory. In
this paper, we address two key challenges in unsupervised FGL: 1) Local models
tend to converge in divergent directions due to the lack of shared semantic information across clients. Then, how to align representation spaces among multiple
clients is the first challenge. 2) Conventional federated weighted aggregation easily
results in degrading the performance of the global model, then which raises another challenge, namely how to adaptively learn the global model parameters. In
response to the two questions, we propose a tailored framework named FedPAM,
which is composed of two modules: Representation Space Alignment (RSA) and
Adaptive Global Parameter Learning (AGPL). RSA leverages a set of learnable
anchors to define the global representation space, then local subgraphs are aligned
with them through the fused Gromov-Wasserstein optimal transport, achieving the
representation space alignment across clients. AGPL stacks local model parameters
into third-order tensors, and adaptively integrates the global model parameters
in a low-rank tensor space, which facilitates to fuse the high-order knowledge
among clients. Extensive experiments on eight graph datasets are conducted, the
results demonstrate that the proposed FedPAM is superior over classical and SOTA
compared methods.

1

Introduction

In response to growing concerns over privacy protection [1, 2, 3], the storage of graph data is
becoming increasingly decentralized, where individual clients hold their own private subgraphs.
Nevertheless, distributed subgraphs result in the emergence of data silos, triggering data unavailability
and impeding the generalization of graph neural networks (GNNs) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. In this context,
federated graph learning (FGL) [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] has emerged as a paradigm that enables the
collaborative training of a powerful GNN across multiple clients, while maintaining the usability of
private subgraphs without compromising their confidentiality.
FGL has made substantial progress in recent years. In the context of graph-level tasks, studies
[15, 16, 17] primarily concentrate on handling the challenges arising from distributional heterogeneity.
For node-level tasks, considerable attentions [18, 9, 19] are devoted to defining the topological
heterogeneity in distributed subgraphs and overcoming its adverse effects on the effectiveness of
federated training. The existing approaches provide innovative insights and solid solutions for FGL.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

