TPP-SD: Accelerating Transformer Point Process
Sampling with Speculative Decoding

Shukai Gong1∗
Yiyang Fu2∗
Fengyuan Ran3∗
Quyu Kong4
Feng Zhou1†
1
Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin University of China
2
School of Information, Renmin University of China
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
4
Alibaba Group
1,2
{shukai_gong, fuyiyang2022201505, feng.zhou}@ruc.edu.cn
3
rfy_Reflow@whu.edu.cn
4
kongquyu.kqy@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
We propose TPP-SD, a novel approach that accelerates Transformer temporal
point process (TPP) sampling by adapting speculative decoding (SD) techniques
from language models. By identifying the structural similarities between thinning
algorithms for TPPs and speculative decoding for language models, we develop
an efficient sampling framework that leverages a smaller draft model to generate
multiple candidate events, which are then verified by the larger target model
in parallel. TPP-SD maintains the same output distribution as autoregressive
sampling while achieving significant acceleration. Experiments on both synthetic
and real datasets demonstrate that our approach produces samples from identical
distributions as standard methods, but with 2-6× speedup. Our ablation studies
analyze the impact of hyperparameters such as draft length and draft model size
on sampling efficiency. TPP-SD bridges the gap between powerful Transformer
TPP models and the practical need for rapid sequence sampling. Code is publicly
available at https://github.com/GONGSHUKAI/tppsd.

1

Introduction

Temporal point processes (TPPs) [6] are essential stochastic models for describing discrete event
occurrence patterns in continuous time. Classical models include the Poisson process [12], which is
history-independent, and the Hawkes process [10, 39, 37], which incorporates historical dependencies.
Recently, advancements in deep learning have facilitated the integration of deep models with point
processes, significantly enhancing their expressive capabilities in capturing history dependence [19].
Notable examples include models based on traditional RNNs [7], LSTMs [17], and Transformers [40,
36, 20]. RNN-type methods often suffer from vanishing or exploding gradients [26], limiting their
performance. In contrast, Transformer TPPs have gained popularity for their ability to capture
long-term dependencies and support parallel training.
Most current Transformer TPPs’ research focuses on enhancing model expressiveness and training
methodologies, with limited attention to improving sampling efficiency. Sampling from a learned
temporal point process is essential for synthesizing event sequence data, making predictions based
on observed history, validating model goodness-of-fit, and gaining insights into complex process
dynamics. The standard sampling procedure employs the thinning algorithm [15, 23], which simulates
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

