BayeSQP: Bayesian Optimization through Sequential
Quadratic Programming

Paul Brunzema Sebastian Trimpe
Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany
{brunzema, trimpe}@dsme.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
We introduce BayeSQP, a novel algorithm for general black-box optimization
that merges the structure of sequential quadratic programming with concepts
from Bayesian optimization. BayeSQP employs second-order Gaussian process
surrogates for both the objective and constraints to jointly model the function
values, gradients, and Hessian from only zero-order information. At each iteration,
a local subproblem is constructed using the GP posterior estimates and solved to
obtain a search direction. Crucially, the formulation of the subproblem explicitly
incorporates uncertainty in both the function and derivative estimates, resulting in
a tractable second-order cone program for high probability improvements under
model uncertainty. A subsequent one-dimensional line search via constrained
Thompson sampling selects the next evaluation point. Empirical results show that
BayeSQP outperforms state-of-the-art methods in specific high-dimensional settings.
Our algorithm offers a principled and flexible framework that bridges classical
optimization techniques with modern approaches to black-box optimization.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Bayesian optimization (BO) has emerged as a powerful framework for black-box
optimization ranging from applications in robotics [9, 6, 44] to hyperparameter tuning [55, 12] and
drug discovery [21, 40, 10]. To address high-dimensional problems emerging in these fields, a variety
of high-dimensional BO (HDBO) approaches have been proposed, including the use of local BO
(LBO) methods [15, 43] or methods that exploit specific structure in the objective [13]. Recently,
a growing debate has emerged over whether such HDBO methods are truly necessary, given that
appropriate scaling of the prior can already yield strong performance on certain high-dimensional
benchmarks [30, 67]. However, as shown by Papenmeier et al. [48], these approaches solve numerical
issues in the hyperparameter optimization of the Gaussian process (GP) surrogate but their success
can still be attributed to emerging local search behavior. We argue that it is not a matter of choosing
either HDBO approaches or standard approaches, but rather of leveraging recent advances in how to
achieve numerical stability also for HDBO methods.
Building on this perspective, we aim to integrate the strengths of established classical optimization
techniques within the HDBO framework. Specifically, we extend the widely-adopted local method
for HDBO GIBO [43, 45, 65, 16, 23]—which can be interpreted as combining BO with first-order
optimization methods—to LBO with second-order methods. We introduce BayeSQP, a novel algorithm
for black-box optimization that merges the structure of sequential quadratic programming (SQP) with
concepts from BO. BayeSQP employs GP surrogates for both the objective and constraints that jointly
model the function values, gradients, and Hessians from only zero-order information (Figure 1).
At each iteration, a local subproblem is constructed using the GP posterior estimates and solved to
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

