From Information to Generative Exponent:
Learning Rate Induces Phase Transitions in SGD

Konstantinos Christopher Tsiolis
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
kc.tsiolis@mail.utoronto.ca

Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
mousavi@cs.toronto.edu

Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
To understand feature learning dynamics in neural networks, recent theoretical
works have focused on gradient-based learning of Gaussian single-index models,
where the label is a nonlinear function of a latent one-dimensional projection of the
input. While the sample complexity of online SGD is determined by the information
exponent of the link function, recent works improved this by performing multiple
gradient steps on the same sample with different learning rates — yielding a
non-correlational update rule — and instead are limited by the (potentially much
smaller) generative exponent. However, this picture is only valid when these
learning rates are sufficiently large. In this paper, we characterize the relationship
between learning rate(s) and sample complexity for a broad class of gradient-based
algorithms that encapsulates both correlational and non-correlational updates. We
demonstrate that, in certain cases, there is a phase transition from an “information
exponent regime” with small learning rate to a “generative exponent regime” with
large learning rate. Our framework covers prior analyses of one-pass SGD and
SGD with batch reuse, while also introducing a new layer-wise training algorithm
that leverages a two-timescales approach (via different learning rates for each
layer) to go beyond correlational queries without reusing samples or modifying
the loss from squared error. Our theoretical study demonstrates that the choice of
learning rate is as important as the design of the algorithm in achieving statistical
and computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

A key aspect of deep learning theory is to understand how neural networks can adapt to underlying data
structure and achieve desirable statistical and computational complexity through their optimization
dynamics. Towards this goal, several works have focused on learning target functions that depend
on low-dimensional projections of data, such as single- and multi-index models. The complexity
of learning these models depends on assumptions on the data distribution and on the optimization
algorithm. For Gaussian data and online (also called one-pass) SGD on the squared loss, the number
of training samples/iterations needed to learn a single-index model depends on a property of the target
function known as the information exponent [BAGJ21]. Moreover, through computational lower
bounds, the information exponent governs the complexity of any Correlational Statistical Query
(CSQ) algorithm for learning single- and multi-index models [DNGL23, VE24]. Such an algorithm
interacts with data only through queries of the form yh(x) that lie within a fixed tolerance of their
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

