DETree: DEtecting Human-AI Collaborative Texts via
Tree-Structured Hierarchical Representation Learning
Yongxin He* 1,4

Shan Zhang* 2,3,4

Yixuan Cao†1,4

Lei Ma2,3,4

Ping Luo1,4

1

State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China
2
The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems, Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, CAS, Beijing, China

Abstract
Detecting AI-involved text is essential for combating misinformation, plagiarism,
and academic misconduct. However, AI text generation includes diverse collaborative processes (AI-written text edited by humans, human-written text edited by AI,
and AI-generated text refined by other AI), where various or even new LLMs could
be involved. Texts generated through these varied processes exhibit complex characteristics, presenting significant challenges for detection. Current methods model
these processes rather crudely, primarily employing binary classification (purely
human vs. AI-involved) or multi-classification (treating human-AI collaboration as
a new class). We observe that representations of texts generated through different
processes exhibit inherent clustering relationships. Therefore, we propose DETree,
a novel approach that models the relationships among different processes as a
Hierarchical Affinity Tree structure, and introduces a specialized loss function that
aligns text representations with this tree. To facilitate this learning, we developed
RealBench, a comprehensive benchmark dataset that automatically incorporates a
wide spectrum of hybrid texts produced through various human-AI collaboration
processes. Our method improves performance in hybrid text detection tasks and
significantly enhances robustness and generalization in out-of-distribution scenarios, particularly in few-shot learning conditions, further demonstrating the promise
of training-based approaches in OOD settings. Our code and dataset are available
at https://github.com/heyongxin233/DETree.

1

Introduction

With the widespread deployment of large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], AI-involved text
generation has become increasingly diverse, encompassing LLM-assisted refinement of human drafts,
human revision of LLM outputs, and collaborative generation involving multiple LLMs, among
other strategies. In practice, tolerance for AI involvement varies across scenarios. For example,
LLM-based editing may be acceptable in copywriting, whereas it is strictly prohibited in originalityfocused contexts. This necessitates detection methods that can identify not only whether AI is
involved, but also how it is involved and to what extent. Despite this need, existing AI-text detection
methods [6, 7, 8, 9] are typically developed and evaluated on specific datasets, focusing on binary
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: caoyixuan@ict.ac.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

