MARS: A Malignity-Aware Backdoor Defense in
Federated Learning
‡§

‡

Wei Wan1, , , Yuxuan Ning2, , Zhicong Huang3 , Cheng Hong3 , Shengshan Hu4 ,
∗
Ziqi Zhou5, , Yechao Zhang6 , Tianqing Zhu1 , Wanlei Zhou1 , Leo Yu Zhang7
1
Faculty of Data Science, City University of Macau
2
School of Computing, Australian National University 3 Ant Group
4
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
6
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
7
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
{weiwan,tqzhu,wlzhou}@cityu.edu.mo
Yuxuan.Ning@anu.edu.au
{zhicong.hzc,vince.hc}@antgroup.com
{zhouziqi,hushengshan}@hust.edu.cn
yech.zhang@gmail.com leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed paradigm aimed at protecting participant
data privacy by exchanging model parameters to achieve high-quality model training. However, this distributed nature also makes FL highly vulnerable to backdoor
attacks. Notably, the recently proposed state-of-the-art (SOTA) attack, 3DFed
(SP2023), uses an indicator mechanism to determine whether the backdoor models
have been accepted by the defender and adaptively optimizes backdoor models,
rendering existing defenses ineffective. In this paper, we first reveal that the failure of existing defenses lies in the employment of empirical statistical measures
that are loosely coupled with backdoor attacks. Motivated by this, we propose a
Malignity-Aware backdooR defenSe (MARS) that leverages backdoor energy (BE)
to indicate the malicious extent of each neuron. To amplify malignity, we further
extract the most prominent BE values from each model to form a concentrated
backdoor energy (CBE). Finally, a novel Wasserstein distance-based clustering
method is introduced to effectively identify backdoor models. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MARS can defend against SOTA backdoor attacks and
significantly outperforms existing defenses.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [26, 33, 29, 23] is a distributed machine learning paradigm that leverages
data distributed across multiple clients to train a high-quality global model without requiring data
to be shared with a third party. Due to its exceptional privacy-preserving features and efficient
utilization of decentralized data, FL has found widespread applications in fields such as healthcare [1],
education [10], finance [7], and even the military [2]. However, the distributed nature also makes it
highly susceptible to poisoning attacks [31, 36, 20, 24, 18]. Among these, Byzantine attacks aim to
degrade the global model accuracy, while backdoor attacks trigger malicious behavior (e.g., classify
any input as the attacker’s desired target class) only under specific conditions (e.g., a white patch in
the bottom right corner of an image). Because backdoor attacks do not affect the model’s performance
‡

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Work done during an internship at Ant Group.
* Corresponding author.
§

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

