Adaptive Defense against Harmful Fine-Tuning for
Large Language Models via Bayesian Data Scheduler

Zixuan Hu1 Li Shen2 Zhenyi Wang3 Yongxian Wei4 Dacheng Tao1∗
Nanyang Technological University 2 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
3
University of Central Florida 4 Tsinghua University
ZIXUAN014@e.ntu.edu.sg
mathshenli@gmail.com
zhenyi.wang@ucf.edu
weiyx23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
dacheng.tao@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Harmful fine-tuning poses critical safety risks to fine-tuning-as-a-service for large
language models. Existing defense strategies preemptively build robustness via
attack simulation but suffer from fundamental limitations: (i) the infeasibility of
extending attack simulations beyond bounded threat models due to the inherent
difficulty of anticipating unknown attacks, and (ii) limited adaptability to varying
attack settings, as simulation fails to capture their variability and complexity. To
address these challenges, we propose Bayesian Data Scheduler (BDS), an adaptive
tuning-stage defense strategy with no need for attack simulation. BDS formulates
harmful fine-tuning defense as a Bayesian inference problem, learning the posterior
distribution of each data point’s safety attribute, conditioned on the fine-tuning and
alignment datasets. The fine-tuning process is then constrained by weighting data
with their safety attributes sampled from the posterior, thus mitigating the influence
of harmful data. By leveraging the post hoc nature of Bayesian inference, the posterior is conditioned on the fine-tuning dataset, enabling BDS to tailor its defense to
the specific dataset, thereby achieving adaptive defense. Furthermore, we introduce
a neural scheduler based on amortized Bayesian learning, enabling efficient transfer
to new data without retraining. Comprehensive results across diverse attack and defense settings demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our approach. Code
is available at https://github.com/Egg-Hu/Bayesian-Data-Scheduler.

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning-as-a-service has become a widely adopted paradigm among mainstream LLM providers
(e.g., OpenAI2 ), enabling the delivery of customized language model solutions. In this paradigm,
users upload demonstration data representing their desired behaviors, and providers fine-tune the
foundational models on their behalf. Despite its growing adoption, recent red teaming studies have
uncovered a critical vulnerability: harmful fine-tuning [48, 29]. Harmful fine-tuning refers to that
the presence of even a small fraction of harmful data in user-provided datasets can cause fine-tuned
models to deviate from the safety alignment established during pre-training. This vulnerability
introduces a substantial attack surface and also undermines the reliability and quality of the service.
Existing defenses [29, 33, 52] primarily rely on a preemptive manner, aiming to build robustness
through attack simulation prior to fine-tuning. However, these defenses suffer from fundamental
limitations: (i) the infeasibility of extending attack simulations beyond bounded threat models due to
the inherent difficulty of anticipating unknown attacks; and (ii) limited adaptability to varying attack
∗
2

Corresponding author: Dacheng Tao
Fine-tuning API by OpenAI: https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/fine-tuning.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

