Reverse Engineering Human Preferences with
Reinforcement Learning

Lisa Alazraki∗
Imperial College London
Maximilian Mozes
Cohere

Tan Yi-Chern
Cohere

Jon Ander Campos
Cohere

Marek Rei
Imperial College London

Max Bartolo
Cohere

Abstract
The capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) are routinely evaluated by
other LLMs trained to predict human preferences. This framework—known as
LLM-as-a-judge—is highly scalable and relatively low cost. However, it is also
vulnerable to malicious exploitation, as LLM responses can be tuned to overfit
the preferences of the judge. Previous work shows that the answers generated
by a candidate-LLM can be edited post hoc to maximise the score assigned to
them by a judge-LLM. In this study, we adopt a different approach and use the
signal provided by judge-LLMs as a reward to adversarially tune models that
generate text preambles designed to boost downstream performance. We find that
frozen LLMs pipelined with these models attain higher LLM-evaluation scores
than existing frameworks. Crucially, unlike other frameworks which intervene
directly on the model’s response, our method is virtually undetectable. We also
demonstrate that the effectiveness of the tuned preamble generator transfers when
the candidate-LLM and the judge-LLM are replaced with models that are not used
during training. These findings raise important questions about the design of more
reliable LLM-as-a-judge evaluation settings. They also demonstrate that human
preferences can be reverse engineered effectively, by pipelining LLMs to optimise
upstream preambles via reinforcement learning—an approach that could find future
applications in diverse tasks and domains beyond adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

The LLM-as-a-judge framework has largely replaced human evaluation in the large-scale assessment
of LLMs [5, 42, 3, 17, 35, 40], with several widely used benchmarks now relying on this approach to
judge model performance across tasks [26, 20, 21, 30, 39, 40]. Judge-LLMs are trained to predict
human preferences, offering a scalable and cost-effective alternative to human annotations [26, 40].
However, prior work has shown that judge-LLMs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks aimed at
artificially boosting their scores [32, 34, 38]. In particular, it is possible to find text sequences
that, once appended to or substituted for a response, maximise the score awarded to it by a judge
[32, 34, 41]. This type of attack intervenes post hoc on the text being evaluated and can thus be
detected via human inspection or by computing the perplexity (PPL) of the modified response
[19, 32, 34].
In this study, we investigate a different, novel approach based on reward modelling w.r.t. the
judge-LLM’s evaluation scores, testing both its effectiveness and detectability. Specifically, we use
∗

Work done while at Cohere. Correspondence to lisa.alazraki20@imperial.ac.uk.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

