Calibrating Translation Decoding with Quality
Estimation on LLMs
Di Wu

Yibin Lei
Christof Monz
University of Amsterdam
{d.wu, y.lei, c.monz}@uva.nl

Abstract
Neural machine translation (NMT) systems typically employ maximum a posteriori
(MAP) decoding to select the highest-scoring translation from the distribution.
However, recent evidence highlights the inadequacy of MAP decoding, often resulting in low-quality or even pathological hypotheses as the decoding objective is only
weakly aligned with real-world translation quality. This paper proposes to calibrate
hypothesis likelihood with translation quality from a distributional view by directly
optimizing their Pearson correlation, thereby enhancing decoding effectiveness.
With our method, translation with large language models (LLMs) improves substantially after limited training (2K instances per direction). This improvement is
orthogonal to those achieved through supervised fine-tuning, leading to substantial
gains across a broad range of metrics and human evaluations. This holds even
when applied to top-performing translation-specialized LLMs fine-tuned on highquality translation data, such as Tower, or when compared to recent preference
optimization methods, like CPO. Moreover, the calibrated translation likelihood
can directly serve as a strong proxy for translation quality, closely approximating
or even surpassing some state-of-the-art translation quality estimation models, like
CometKiwi. Lastly, our in-depth analysis demonstrates that calibration enhances
the effectiveness of MAP decoding, thereby enabling greater efficiency in realworld deployment. The resulting state-of-the-art translation model, which covers
10 languages, along with the accompanying code and human evaluation data, has
been released: https://github.com/moore3930/calibrating-llm-mt.

1

Introduction

The training of neural machine translation (NMT) has long been formulated as a maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) problem, and maximum a posteriori decoding (MAP) is a common decision rule,
aiming to identify the highest-scoring translation. However, recent findings in NMT suggest that such
a system has serious flaws. One particularly counterintuitive issue is the beam search curse [Koehn
and Knowles, 2017, Murray and Chiang, 2018, Ott et al., 2018, Kumar and Sarawagi, 2019], where
translation quality deteriorates as search approximations improve and higher-probability hypotheses
are possibly worse translations.
Ott et al. [2018] explain this as a calibration issue. There is a generally low correlation between
hypothesis likelihood and quality beyond a certain likelihood value. The flaws of poorly calibrated
translation models can be categorized into two main aspects: First, their performance tends to be
suboptimal, as better hypotheses may remain hidden within the distribution mass, inaccessible to
MAP decoding [Ott et al., 2018]. Second, likelihood, as a key measure of uncertainty, can serve as a
valuable indicator of translation errors within the output at test time [Wang et al., 2020, Fomicheva
et al., 2020]; however, poorly calibrated models cannot effectively support this use.
Prior studies have tried to mitigate this miscalibration issue by introducing an additional optimization
step during inference time, as shown in Figure 1 (top), known as quality-aware decoding (QAD) [Fer39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

