Temporal-Difference Variational Continual Learning

Luckeciano C. Melo∗ 1,2
Alessandro Abate† 2
Yarin Gal† 1
2
OATML, University of Oxford
OXCAV, University of Oxford

1

Abstract
Machine Learning models in real-world applications must continuously learn new
tasks to adapt to shifts in the data-generating distribution. Yet, for Continual Learning (CL), models often struggle to balance learning new tasks (plasticity) with
retaining previous knowledge (memory stability). Consequently, they are susceptible to Catastrophic Forgetting, which degrades performance and undermines the
reliability of deployed systems. In the Bayesian CL literature, variational methods
tackle this challenge by employing a learning objective that recursively updates
the posterior distribution while constraining it to stay close to its previous estimate.
Nonetheless, we argue that these methods may be ineffective due to compounding
approximation errors over successive recursions. To mitigate this, we propose new
learning objectives that integrate the regularization effects of multiple previous
posterior estimations, preventing individual errors from dominating future posterior
updates and compounding over time. We reveal insightful connections between
these objectives and Temporal-Difference methods, a popular learning mechanism
in Reinforcement Learning and Neuroscience. Experiments on challenging CL
benchmarks show that our approach effectively mitigates Catastrophic Forgetting,
outperforming strong Variational CL methods.

1

Introduction

Accuracy

A fundamental aspect of robust Machine LearnPermutedMNIST-Hard
ing (ML) models is to learn from non-stationary
Method
1.00
Online MLE
VCL
N-Step TD-VCL
sequential data. In this scenario, two main propBatch MLE
VCL CoreSet
TD( )-VCL
erties are necessary: first, models must learn
0.95
from new incoming data — potentially from a
different task -– with satisfactory asymptotic per0.90
formance and sample complexity. This capability is called plasticity. Second, they must retain
0.85
the knowledge from previously learned tasks,
known as memory stability. When this does not
0.80
happen, and the performance of previous tasks
degrades, the model suffers from Catastrophic
0.75 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Forgetting [1, 2]. These two properties are the
Number of Observed Tasks
central core of Continual Learning (CL) [3, 4],
Figure
1:
Average
accuracy across observed
being strongly relevant for ML systems susceptasks
in
the
PermutedMNIST-Hard
benchmark.
tible to test-time distributional shifts.
The TD-VCL approach, proposed in this work,
Given the critical importance of this topic, ex- leads to a substantial improvement against stantensive literature addresses the challenges of CL dard VCL and non-variational approaches.
in traditional ML methods [3, 5, 2, 6] and, more
∗
†

Correspondence to: luckeciano.carvalho.melo@cs.ox.ac.uk
Denotes equal supervision.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

