SAFE X: Analyzing Vulnerabilities of MoE-Based
LLMs via Stable Safety-critical Expert Identification

Zhenglin Lai1∗, Mengyao Liao1∗, Bingzhe Wu1†∗
Dong Xu , Zebin Zhao1 , Zhihang Yuan2 , Chao Fan1 , Jianqiang Li1†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shenzhen University 2 ByteDance Inc.
1

Abstract
Large language models with Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures achieve efficiency and scalability, yet their routing mechanisms introduce safety alignment
challenges insufficiently addressed by techniques developed for dense models. In
this work, the MoE-specific safety risk of positional vulnerability—that safetyaligned behaviors rely on specific expert modules—is formalized and systematically
analyzed. An analytical framework, SAFE X, is presented to robustly identify, characterize, and validate safety-critical experts via a stability-based expert selection
procedure, and to decompose them into two functional groups: the Harmful Content Detection Group (HCDG), which specializes in identifying and recognizing
harmful content within user inputs, and the Harmful Response Control Group
(HRCG), which specializes in controlling and enforcing model behaviors to generate appropriate safety responses. Expert-level interventions are conducted to
probe causality and to test mitigation. Targeted masking of SAFE X-selected experts reveals that safety behavior is highly concentrated. On Qwen3-30B-A3B,
configured with 48 MoE-FFN layers and 128 experts per layer under top-8 routing (48 × 128 = 6,144 experts in total), disabling 12 selected experts reduces
the refusal rate by 22%. In addition, lightweight adaptation is performed using
LoRA under three configurations—the HRCG, the union of HCDG and HRCG,
and all experts—and the resulting updates are composed through negative weight
merging targeted at the HRCG, leading to improved refusal under adversarial
prompts without full-model retraining. These results establish positional vulnerability as a distinct MoE-specific safety challenge and provide a practical, computeefficient pathway for expert-level safety interventions within routed architectures
(https://github.com/Bearisbug/SAFEx).

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) using Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures, such as Mixtral [1],
DeepSeek-R1 [2], and Qwen3-MoE [3], have achieved significant progress on complex tasks by
routing inputs across specialized experts, greatly improving efficiency and scalability. However, the
particular architecture of MoE-based models raises unique and underexplored safety issues.
Recent works on safety research of MoE-based LLMs have started to emerge [4, 5], yet remain
nascent and primarily focus on exploiting MoE-specific architectural vulnerabilities to attack LLM
models. For example, BadMoE [6] identifies and exploits rarely activated experts, referred to as
“dormant experts”, to successfully execute effective adversarial attacks, highlighting significant safety
vulnerabilities inherent to MoE-based architectures. However, these existing studies predominantly
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding authors: wubingzheagent@gmail.com, lijq@szu.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

