DGH: Dynamic Gaussian Hair
∗

Junying Wang1,2
1

(a) Static Hair

Yuanlu Xu2 Edith Tretschk2 Ziyan Wang2 Anastasia Ianina2
Aljaz Bozic2 Ulrich Neumann1 Tony Tung2

University of Southern California

(b) Deformed Hair

2

Meta Reality Labs Research

(c) Dynamic Hair

(d) Novel View Synthesis

Figure 1. Dynamic Gaussian Hair (DGH) is a framework that learns dynamic deformation and photorealistic
novel-view synthesis of arbitrary hairstyles driven by head motions, while respecting upper-body collision. At
runtime, given a hairstyle and head motion (a), DGH infers initial hair deformations (b), refines the deformations
with dynamics (c), and generates 3D Gaussian Splats to achieve photorealistic novel-view synthesis (d).

Abstract
The creation of photorealistic dynamic hair remains a major challenge in digital
human modeling because of the complex motions, occlusions, and light scattering. Existing methods often resort to static capture and physics-based models
that do not scale as they require manual parameter fine-tuning to handle the diversity of hairstyles and motions, and heavy computation to obtain high-quality
appearance. In this paper, we present Dynamic Gaussian Hair (DGH), a novel
framework that efficiently learns hair dynamics and appearance. We propose: (1) a
coarse-to-fine model that learns temporally coherent hair motion dynamics across
diverse hairstyles; (2) a strand-guided optimization module that learns a dynamic
3D Gaussian representation for hair appearance with support for differentiable
rendering, enabling gradient-based learning of view-consistent appearance under
motion. Unlike prior simulation-based pipelines, our approach is fully data-driven,
scales with training data, and generalizes across various hairstyles and head motion
sequences. Additionally, DGH can be seamlessly integrated into a 3D Gaussian
avatar framework, enabling realistic, animatable hair for high-fidelity avatar representation. DGH achieves promising geometry and appearance results, providing a
scalable, data-driven alternative to physics-based simulation and rendering. Our
project page: https://junyingw.github.io/paper/dgh

1

Introduction

Realistic, high-fidelity dynamic hair modeling and rendering are crucial for creating realistic avatars
in animation and AR/VR applications. Adding hair dynamics can significantly enhance the realism
of animated characters, as hair deformation and high-order motion effects contribute to physical
∗

Work performed during an internship at Meta Reality Labs Research

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

