Strategic Classification with Non-Linear Classifiers

Benyamin Trachtenberg, Nir Rosenfeld
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
{benyamint, nirr} @cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
In strategic classification, the standard supervised learning setting is extended to
support the notion of strategic user behavior in the form of costly feature manipulations made in response to a classifier. While standard learning supports a
broad range of model classes, the study of strategic classification has, so far, been
dedicated mostly to linear classifiers. This work aims to expand the horizon by
exploring how strategic behavior manifests under non-linear classifiers and what
this implies for learning. We take a bottom-up approach showing how non-linearity
affects decision boundary points, classifier expressivity, and model class complexity.
Our results show how, unlike the linear case, strategic behavior may either increase
or decrease effective class complexity, and that the complexity decrease may be
arbitrarily large. Another key finding is that universal approximators (e.g., neural
nets) are no longer universal once the environment is strategic. We demonstrate empirically how this can create performance gaps even on an unrestricted model class.

1

Introduction

Strategic classification considers learning in a setting where users modify their features in response
to a deployed classifier to obtain positive predictions [3, 4, 16]. This setting aims to capture a natural
tension that can arise between a system aiming to maximize accuracy and its users who seek favorable
outcomes. Such a tension is well-motivated across diverse applications, including loan approval,
university admission, job hiring, welfare and education programs, and medical services. The field has
drawn much attention since its introduction, leading to advances along multiple learning fronts such as
generalization [6, 33, 36], optimization [25], loss functions [24, 26], and extensions [11, 14, 18, 30].
However, despite over a decade of effort, research in strategic classification remains predominantly
focused on linear classification. Due to the inherent challenges of strategic learning, this focus has
been reasonable, given that linearity has the benefit of inducing a simple form of strategic behavior
that permits tractable analysis. Yet, since many realistic applications—including those mentioned
above—make regular use of non-linear models, we believe that it is important to establish a better understanding of how non-linearity shapes strategic behavior, and how behavior in turn affects learning.
Our paper therefore aims to extend the study of strategic classification to the non-linear regime.
Our first observation is that non-linear classifiers induce qualitatively different behavior than linear
ones in the strategic setting. Consider first the structure induced by standard linear classifiers.
Generally, users in strategic classification are assumed to best-respond to the classifier by modifying
their features in a way that maximizes utility (from prediction) minus costs (from modification). For
a linear classifier h coupled with the common choice of an ℓ2 cost, modifications x 7→ xh manifest
as a projection of x onto the linear decision boundary of h as long as it incurs less than a unit cost.
This simple form has several implications. First, note that all points ‘move’ in the same direction,
making strategic behavior, in effect, one-dimensional. Second, the region of points that move forms a
band of unit distance on the negative side of h. This means that the set of points classified as positive
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

