Fisher meets Feynman: score-based
variational inference with a product of experts

Diana Cai1 , Robert M. Gower1 , David M. Blei2 , Lawrence K. Saul1
1
Flatiron Institute 2 Columbia University

Abstract
We introduce a highly expressive yet distinctly tractable family for black-box
variational inference (BBVI). Each member of this family is a weighted product
of experts (PoE), and each weighted expert in the product is proportional to a
multivariate t-distribution. These products of experts can model distributions with
skew, heavy tails, and multiple modes, but to use them for BBVI, we must be
able to sample from their densities. We show how to do this by reformulating
these products of experts as latent variable models with auxiliary Dirichlet random
variables. These Dirichlet variables emerge from a Feynman identity, originally
developed for loop integrals in quantum field theory, that expresses the product of
multiple fractions (or in our case, t-distributions) as an integral over the simplex.
We leverage this simplicial latent space to draw weighted samples from these
products of experts—samples which BBVI then uses to find the PoE that best
approximates a target density. Given a collection of experts, we derive an iterative
procedure to optimize the exponents that determine their geometric weighting in the
PoE. At each iteration, this procedure minimizes a regularized Fisher divergence
to match the scores of the variational and target densities at a batch of samples
drawn from the current approximation. This minimization reduces to a convex
quadratic program, and we prove under general conditions that these updates
converge exponentially fast to a near-optimal weighting of experts. We conclude by
evaluating this approach on a variety of synthetic and real-world target distributions.

1

Introduction

The goal of variational inference (VI) is to approximate an intractable probability density p by the
best-matching density q from some simpler parameterized family Q [4, 23, 53]. VI is typically used
when it is difficult to draw samples from p, but often there exists a “black-box” way to compute the
gradient of log p (that is, the score) at any point in the domain of RD [28, 42]. Each such gradient
evaluation provides a wealth of information—considerably more than what is provided by a mere
sample—and for this reason a growing number of researchers have begun to investigate score-based
methods for black-box VI (BBVI) [6, 7, 36, 37]. This direction of research is also motivated by the
remarkable successes of score-based methods for generative modeling [18, 19, 47–49].
Despite this allure, score-based BBVI still faces many challenges. There are inherent trade-offs that
arise between the expressivity of the variational family Q and its ease of use. For BBVI it must
be tractable to evaluate and draw samples from each q ∈ Q; it must also be tractable to optimize
over Q and find its best approximation to the target p. These trade-offs must be managed by any
practitioner of BBVI. At the same time, researchers need more than methods which are merely
practical. BBVI replaces an intractable problem in inference by a more tractable one in optimization,
but still the challenge remains to prove theoretical guarantees for the optimizations that arise in this
framework [3, 11, 24, 57].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

