Adversarial Graph Fusion for Incomplete Multi-view
Semi-supervised Learning with Tensorial Imputation

1

Zhangqi Jiang1
Tingjin Luo1,∗
Xu Yang2
Xinyan Liang3
2
National University of Defense Technology Southeast University 3 Shanxi University
sxdxjzq@gmail.com, tingjinluo@hotmail.com, xuyang_palm@seu.edu.cn
liangxinyan48@163.com

Abstract
View missing remains a significant challenge in graph-based multi-view semisupervised learning, hindering their real-world applications. To address this issue,
traditional methods introduce a missing indicator matrix and focus on mining partial
structure among existing samples in each view for label propagation (LP). However,
we argue that these disregarded missing samples sometimes induce discontinuous
local structures, i.e., sub-clusters, breaking the fundamental smoothness assumption
in LP. Consequently, such a Sub-Cluster Problem (SCP) would distort graph fusion
and degrade classification performance. To alleviate SCP, we propose a novel
incomplete multi-view semi-supervised learning method, termed AGF-TI. Firstly,
we design an adversarial graph fusion scheme to learn a robust consensus graph
against the distorted local structure through a min-max framework. By stacking
all similarity matrices into a tensor, we further recover the incomplete structure
from the high-order consistency information based on the low-rank tensor learning.
Additionally, the anchor-based strategy is incorporated to reduce the computational
complexity. An efficient alternative optimization algorithm combining a reduced
gradient descent method is developed to solve the formulated objective, with
theoretical convergence. Extensive experimental results on various datasets validate
the superiority of our proposed AGF-TI as compared to state-of-the-art methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/ZhangqiJiang07/AGF_TI.

1

Introduction

Multi-view data encodes complementary information from heterogeneous sources or modalities,
significantly enhancing the performance of downstream tasks, such as autonomous driving [1, 2] and
precision health [3, 4]. However, such heterogeneity between different views brings challenges for
supervision signal (label) annotation, making the label scarcity problem widespread in practice. For
example, diagnosing Alzheimer’s Disease requires several physicians to jointly consider information
from clinical records, Neuro-imaging scans, fluid biomarker readings, etc., to make informed decisions [5, 6]. Leveraging extrinsic semantic information from data geometric structure, graph-based
multi-view semi-supervised learning (GMvSSL) has been studied intensively and used in various
applications [7–13]. In general, GMvSSL methods describe sample relationships using graphs and
rely on the smoothness assumption [14]–that samples sharing the same label are likely to lie on the
same manifold–to “propagate” label information across the graph.
Since existing GMvSSL approaches all focus on the extension of single-view semi-supervised learning
methods to multi-view scenarios with late or early fusion strategies, most of them typically presume
that all views are available for every sample. However, multi-view data in real applications frequently
suffers from the miss of certain views due to machine failure or accessibility issues [15–18]. Learning
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

