Weak-Shot Keypoint Estimation via Keyness and
Correspondence Transfer

Junjie Chen1

Zeyu Luo1 Zezheng Liu1 Wenhui Jiang1 Li Niu2∗ Yuming Fang1
1
Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{chenjunjie,2202320619,2202426552,wenhui}@jxufe.edu.cn,
ustcnewly@sjtu.edu.cn, fangyuming@jxufe.edu.cn

Abstract
Keypoint estimation is a fundamental task in computer vision, but generally requires large-scale annotated data for training. Few-shot and unsupervised keypoint
estimation are prevalent economical paradigms, but the former still requires annotations for extensive novel classes while the latter only supports for single class.
In this paper, we focus on the task of weak-shot keypoint estimation, where multiple novel classes are learned from unlabeled images with the help of labeled base
classes. The key problem is what to transfer from base classes to novel classes,
and we propose to transfer keyness and correspondence, which essentially belong
to comparing entities and thus are class-agnostic and class-wise transferable. The
keyness compares which pixel in the local region is more key, which can guide
the keypoints of novel classes to move towards the local maximum (i.e., obtaining
precise keypoints). The correspondence compares whether the two pixels belongs
to the same semantic part, which can activate the keypoints of novel classes by
reinforcing the consistency between two paired images. Extensive experiments
and analyses on large-scale benchmark MP-100 demonstrate our effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Keypoint estimation is a fundamental computer vision task and has extensive applications in real
world, including intelligent interaction [65], behavioural analysis [2] and augmented reality [46].
Although existing keypoint estimation methods [1, 5, 53] have achieved great success, they usually
require large-scale annotated data of all classes for fully supervised learning. As a consequence, the
expensive annotation dramatically limits category-wise expansion and wider application.
Few-shot learning and unsupervised learning are two prevalent paradigms to economize annotations.
As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), few-shot keypoint estimation [69, 59, 9] greatly reduces the number of
labeled images of novel classes (i.e., novel object categories), and unsupervised keypoint estimation
[64, 79, 17] reduces the annotations of target class. However, few-shot methods still requires nonnegligible annotations for each novel class, and thus the annotation cost can become substantially
high with a large number of novel classes. Unsupervised methods only focuses on single class, and
is difﬁcult to promise that the discovered keypoints are desired. Thus, it would be more practicable
if we can learn desired keypoints from unlabeled images for multiple novel classes.
In this paper, we follow the paradigm of weak-shot learning [7, 38, 8, 26] and explore the task of
weak-shot keypoint estimation. Weak-shot learning has achieved promising success in economizing
annotations for various tasks, including classiﬁcation [7], detection [38, 80, 32], segmentation [8,
22, 26, 3, 81], and so on [61]. Speciﬁcally in keypoint estimation, we would like to learn keypoints
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

