Generalization Bounds for Model-based
Algorithm Configuration

1

Zhiyang Chen1 Hailong Yao2,3∗ Xia Yin1
Tsinghua University 2 University of Science and Technology Beijing
3
Key Laboratory of Advanced Materials and Devices
for Post-Moore Chips, Ministry of Education of China

Abstract
Algorithm configuration, which involves selecting algorithm parameters based on
sampled problem instances, is a crucial step in applying modern algorithms such as
SAT solvers. Although prior work has attempted to understand the theoretical foundations of algorithm configuration, we still lack a comprehensive understanding of
why practical algorithm configurators exhibit strong generalization performances
in real-world scenarios. In this paper, through the lens of machine learning theory, we provide an algorithm-dependent generalization bound for the widely used
model-based algorithm configurators under mild assumptions. Our approach is
based on the algorithmic stability framework for generalization bounds. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first generalization bound that applies to a model
closely approximating practical model-based algorithm configurators.

1

Introduction

Many algorithms used in practice contain a large number of parameters that need to be tuned by
users. For example, modern SAT and mixed-integer programming solvers generally have dozens
of parameters that define the search strategy. A set of carefully tuned parameters may provide
over 1000× performance improvement compared with default settings [1]. Therefore, selecting
algorithm parameters, a.k.a., algorithm configuration (AC), is a crucial step in applying parameterized
algorithms.
Tuning parameters manually is usually time-consuming and highly dependent on the user’s experience.
Much prior work has been devoted to designing automatic AC methods. Due to the high intrinsic
complexities of modern algorithms, these methods generally treat AC as a black-box optimization
problem. The AC problem can be formally stated as follows: Given a parameterized1 algorithm A
with parameter space Θ, a set of problem instances I1 , . . . , Im independently sampled from some
probabilistic distribution D, and a metric function u(θ, I) that measures the performance of parameter
θ ∈PΘ on instance I (e.g., running time), find a parameter configuration θ̃ ∈ Θ that optimizes
m
1
i=1 u(θ̃, Ii ). Here, D can be regarded as an application-specific model of problem instances,
m
e.g., a uniform distribution over mixed-integer programs formulating facility location instances. We
hope the found configuration θ̃ performs well on distribution D, i.e., with optimized EI∼D [u(θ̃, I)].
Various AC methods have been proposed to tackle this problem [2, 3, 4]. One of the most popular
methods is the so-called sequential model-based optimization (SMBO), which exploits a surrogate
model to fit the landscape of the performance metric function, and iteratively samples configurations
with promising predicted performances. See Schede et al. [5] for a comprehensive survey.
∗

Corresponding author. E-mail: hailongyao@ustb.edu.cn
By parameterized algorithms, we mean the algorithms contain tunable parameters (a.k.a. hyper-parameters
in machine learning), instead of algorithms in the context of parameterized complexity theory.
1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

