Improving Generative Behavior Cloning via
Self-Guidance and Adaptive Chunking

Junhyuk So∗1 , Chiwoong Lee∗2 , Shinyoung Lee2 , Jungseul Ok1,2 , Eunhyeok Park1,2
1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
2
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence
POSTECH, South Korea
{junhyukso,chiwoonglee,shinyoung,jungseul,eh.park}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Generative Behavior Cloning (GBC) is a simple yet effective framework for robot
learning, particularly in multi-task settings. Recent GBC methods often employ
diffusion policies with open-loop (OL) control, where actions are generated via
a diffusion process and executed in multi-step chunks without replanning. While
this approach has demonstrated strong success rates and generalization, its inherent
stochasticity can result in erroneous action sampling, occasionally leading to
unexpected task failures. Moreover, OL control suffers from delayed responses,
which can degrade performance in noisy or dynamic environments. To address
these limitations, we propose two novel techniques to enhance the consistency and
reactivity of diffusion policies: (1) self-guidance, which improves action fidelity by
leveraging past observations and implicitly promoting future-aware behavior; and
(2) adaptive chunking, which selectively updates action sequences when the benefits
of reactivity outweigh the need for temporal consistency. Extensive experiments
show that our approach substantially improves GBC performance across a wide
range of simulated and real-world robotic manipulation tasks. Our code is available
at https://github.com/junhyukso/SGAC.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancement of generative models [1, 2, 3, 4] across a wide range of domains [5, 6, 7, 8],
their adoption in robot learning is also accelerating [9, 10, 11, 12]. One compelling direction is
Generative Behavior Cloning (GBC), which reinterprets the classic problem of Behavioral Cloning
(BC) [13] using the modern generative models. In traditional BC, expert demonstrations, pairs of
observed states and corresponding actions, are collected to train a model that maps observations to
actions. GBC extends this idea by leveraging the strong generalization capabilities of state-of-the-art
generative models to learn this mapping more effectively. Recent studies [14, 9, 10] show that
GBC can handle complex sequential decision-making tasks across diverse environments using only
supervised signals, greatly simplifies sample collection and training process without the need of
intricate reinforcement learning.
Among recent trends, one particularly notable line of research is the Diffusion Policy model [9]. By
adapting the score-based diffusion process originally developed for vision tasks, this approach enables
sequential action generation through iterative refinement in a stochastic action space. This method
has demonstrated significantly higher success rates compared to prior works [15, 16], representing
a promising direction in BC. In particular, the integration of open-loop (OL) control, where a
single observation is used to generate a sequence of future actions, combined with the powerful
generalization capability of diffusion models, leads to improved temporal consistency, higher effective
*

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

