Estimating Model Performance Under Covariate Shift
Without Labels
Jakub Białek∗
NannyML NV
Belgium
jakub@nannyml.com

Juhani Kivimäki∗
University of Helsinki
Finland
juhani.kivimaki@helsinki.fi

Wojtek Kuberski∗
NannyML NV
Belgium
wojtek@nannyml.com

Nikolaos Perrakis∗
NannyML NV
Belgium
nikos@nannyml.com

Abstract
After deployment, machine learning models often experience performance degradation due to shifts in data distribution. It is challenging to assess post-deployment
performance accurately when labels are missing or delayed. Existing proxy methods, such as data drift detection, fail to measure the effects of these shifts adequately.
To address this, we introduce a new method for evaluating binary classification
models on unlabeled tabular data that accurately estimates model performance
under covariate shift and call it Probabilistic Adaptive Performance Estimation
(PAPE). It can be applied to any performance metric defined with elements of the
confusion matrix. Crucially, PAPE operates independently of the original model,
relying only on its predictions and probability estimates, and does not need any
assumptions about the nature of covariate shift, learning directly from data instead.
We tested PAPE using over 900 dataset-model combinations from the US census
data, assessing its performance against several benchmarks through various metrics. Our findings show that PAPE outperforms other methodologies, making it a
superior choice for estimating the performance of binary classification models.

1

Introduction

The final step in the machine learning (ML) model development process is to evaluate the model on
an unseen dataset, known as test set. Successful performance on this dataset, indicating potential
business value, typically leads to the model’s deployment to production. The model’s performance
on the production data is expected to match the performance measured on the test set [1]. Yet, this
assumption often fails due to data distribution shifts that lead to model performance degradation [2].
Therefore, ongoing monitoring of the model’s performance is essential to ensure it continues to meet
expected outcomes. However, measuring real-time performance is challenging in many scenarios
because true labels are either unavailable or significantly delayed.
In scenarios where labels are unavailable, performance is commonly estimated using proxy methods
that primarily monitor changes in the input data distribution [3]. However, such changes in input data
often have only a minimal effect on the model’s actual performance [4], and even when there is a
notable effect, it might not be harmful [5]. Additionally, the methods used to measure changes in the
input distribution typically provide estimates in units that do not correspond to performance metrics.
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

