LLM-Driven Treatment Effect Estimation Under
Inference Time Text Confounding

Yuchen Ma, Dennis Frauen, Jonas Schweisthal & Stefan Feuerriegel
Munich Center for Machine Learning
LMU Munich
yuchen.ma@lmu.de

Abstract
Estimating treatment effects is crucial for personalized decision-making in
medicine, but this task faces unique challenges in clinical practice. At training time,
models for estimating treatment effects are typically trained on well-structured
medical datasets that contain detailed patient information. However, at inference
time, predictions are often made using textual descriptions (e.g., descriptions with
self-reported symptoms), which are incomplete representations of the original patient information. In this work, we make three contributions. (1) We show that the
discrepancy between the data available during training time and inference time can
lead to biased estimates of treatment effects. We formalize this issue as an inference
time text confounding problem, where confounders are fully observed during training time but only partially available through text at inference time. (2) To address
this problem, we propose a novel framework for estimating treatment effects that
explicitly accounts for inference time text confounding. Our framework leverages
large language models (LLMs) together with a custom doubly robust learner to
mitigate biases caused by the inference time text confounding. (3) Through a series
of experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework in real-world
applications.

1

Introduction

Estimating the conditional average treatment effect (CATE) is crucial for personalized medicine [14].
A growing number of machine learning methods have been developed for this purpose [e.g., 4, 6, 7,
28, 29, 33, 39, 42, 43, 47, 54, 62]. When estimating CATEs from observational data, it is necessary
to account for confounders – i.e., variables that influence both treatment and outcome. If confounders
are not properly adjusted for, the estimated treatment effects may not reflect the true causal effect and
are thus biased [48].
The standard setting for CATE estimation typically assumes that the same set of confounders
is observed at training time and at inference time [e.g., 39, 54]. However, this assumption is
often violated in real-world clinical practice. At training time, comprehensive information about
confounders is typically available via well-curated medical datasets, such as clinical registries or
trial data, where structured patient records ensure that confounders are systematically recorded. At
inference time, however, information about confounders may be only partially observed or entirely
missing due to differences in data collection methods, resource constraints, or changes in clinical
workflow. In other words, there is a discrepancy: at inference time, the CATE is often predicted
from incomplete representations of the original patient information such as textual descriptions with
self-reported symptoms.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

