Steering When Necessary: Flexible Steering Large
Language Models with Backtracking
Zifeng Cheng∗, Jinwei Gan∗, Zhiwei Jiang†,
Cong Wang, Yafeng Yin, Xiang Luo, Yuchen Fu, Qing Gu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
chengzf@nju.edu.cn, ganjw@smail.nju.edu.cn, jzw@nju.edu.cn,
cw@smail.nju.edu.cn, yafeng@nju.edu.cn,
{luoxiang,yuchenfu}@smail.nju.edu.cn, guq@.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable performance across
many generation tasks. Nevertheless, effectively aligning them with desired behaviors remains a signiﬁcant challenge. Activation steering is an effective and
cost-efﬁcient approach that directly modiﬁes the activations of LLMs during the
inference stage, aligning their responses with the desired behaviors and avoiding
the high cost of ﬁne-tuning. Existing methods typically indiscriminately intervene
to all generations or rely solely on the question to determine intervention, which
limits the accurate assessment of the intervention strength. To this end, we propose
the Flexible Activation Steering with Backtracking (FASB) framework, which dynamically determines both the necessity and strength of intervention by tracking
the internal states of the LLMs during generation, considering both the question
and the generated content. Since intervening after detecting a deviation from the
desired behavior is often too late, we further propose the backtracking mechanism
to correct the deviated tokens and steer the LLMs toward the desired behavior. Extensive experiments on the TruthfulQA dataset and six multiple-choice datasets
demonstrate that our method outperforms baselines. Our code will be released at
https://github.com/gjw185/FASB.

1

Introduction

Number

Large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023; Brown et al.,
2020) have achieved great success in text generation. However, the gen- 400
350
erated text still contains harmful information, hallucinations, and other 300
250
misleading content. Therefore, controlling LLMs to produce trustwor- 200
150
thy, reliable, and other desired outputs remains a challenge. Existing 10050
0 0.0-0.2 0.2-0.3 0.3-0.4 0.4-0.5 0.5-0.6 0.6-1.0
methods often use instruction tuning (Wei et al., 2022), Reinforcement
Truthfulness
Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Bai et al., 2022), and prompt
engineering (Brown et al., 2020) to control LLMs. Unfortunately, these Figure 1: The truthfulmethods often require large-scale datasets and expensive ﬁne-tuning ness probability distribution of questions in the
costs to achieve desired results.
TruthfulQA dataset as deRecently, activation steering or representation engineering (Zou et al., tected by the classiﬁer.
2023; Rimsky et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; Turner et al., 2023; Cheng
et al., 2025) has been proposed to control the outputs of LLMs by directly modifying their internal activations during inference, thereby avoiding the high cost associated
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

