Stochastic Gradients under Nuisances
Facheng Yu∗

Ronak Mehta

Alex Luedtke

Zaid Harchaoui

University of Washington

Abstract
Stochastic gradient optimization is the dominant learning paradigm for a variety of
scenarios, from classical supervised learning to modern self-supervised learning.
We consider stochastic gradient algorithms for learning problems whose objectives rely on unknown nuisance parameters, and establish non-asymptotic convergence guarantees. Our results show that, while the presence of a nuisance
can alter the optimum and upset the optimization trajectory, the classical stochastic gradient algorithm may still converge under appropriate conditions, such as
Neyman orthogonality. Moreover, even when Neyman orthogonality is not satisfied, we show that an algorithm variant with approximately orthogonalized updates (with an approximately orthogonalized gradient oracle) may achieve similar
convergence rates. Examples from orthogonal statistical learning/double machine
learning and causal inference are discussed.

1

Introduction

Machine learning, statistics, and causal inference rely on risk minimization problems of the form


min L0 (θ) := EZ∼P [ℓ0 (θ; Z)] ,
(1)
θ∈Θ

where Θ ⊆ Rd is a parameter space, Z is a Z-valued random variable, and ℓ0 : Θ × Z → R is a
loss function. The quantity ℓ0 (θ; z) describes the performance of a model parametrized by θ ∈ Θ
on a test example z ∈ Z. Given only an oracle that provides a stochastic gradient estimate of the
objective (1), practitioners are able to train models ranging from linear functions on tabular data to
billion-parameter neural networks on vision and language data.
The success of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms [Amari, 1993, Bottou and Le Cun,
2005, Bottou and Bousquet, 2007, Ward et al., 2020] has motivated an abundance of work on
their theoretical properties under various algorithmic and risk conditions, such as class separability [Soudry et al., 2018], random reshuffling [Gürbüzbalaban et al., 2021], decomposable objectives
[Schmidt et al., 2017, Vaswani et al., 2019], quantization noise [Gorbunov et al., 2020], and noise
dominance [Sclocchi and Wyart, 2024]. This success has been fueled by machine learning and
AI software libraries such as JAX, PyTorch, TensorFlow, and others, which offer a wide range of
SGD variants, as long as a loss function can be clearly specified. The gradient is then evaluated
automatically on a mini-batch of datapoints and used for stochastic updates.
Though powerful, this recipe takes one thing for granted: that the learner can always compute the
risk (or an unbiased estimate thereof). Indeed, many complex learning problems rely on a risk
function that is only partially specified up to a class
L := {L( · , g) : g ∈ G} ,

(2)

where G is a possibly infinite-dimensional set and L : Θ × G → R is a function of both the target
parameter θ ∈ Θ and an unknown nuisance parameter g ∈ G.
∗

email: fachengy@uw.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

