Rationalized All-Atom Protein Design
with Unified Multi-Modal Bayesian Flow

Hanlin Wu1 Yuxuan Song1,2 Zhe Zhang1,2 Zhilong Zhang1
Hao Zhou1B Wei-Ying Ma1 Jingjing Liu1
1
Institute of AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Tsinghua University
wuhl24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{songyuxuan,zhouhao,jjliu}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Designing functional proteins is a critical yet challenging problem due to the intricate interplay between backbone structures, sequences, and side-chains. Current approaches often decompose protein design into separate tasks, which can lead to accumulated errors, while recent efforts increasingly focus on all-atom protein design.
However, we observe that existing all-atom generation approaches suffering from
an information shortcut issue, where models inadvertently infer sequences from
side-chain information, compromising their ability to accurately learn sequence
distributions. To address this, we introduce a novel rationalized information flow
strategy to eliminate the information shortcut. Furthermore, motivated by the advantages of Bayesian flows over differential equation–based methods, we propose the
first Bayesian flow formulation for protein backbone orientations by recasting orientation modeling as an equivalent hyperspherical generation problem with antipodal
symmetry. To validate, our method delivers consistently exceptional performance
in both peptide and antibody design tasks. Our code, checkpoint, and designed
PDBs can be found in https://github.com/GenSI-THUAIR/ProBayes.

1

Introduction

Proteins are fundamental to life, carrying out essential functions in biological processes [Clark and
Pazdernik, 2012, Whitford, 2013]. Designing functional protein stands as a grand scientific challenge
with great potential to modulate life processes Notin et al. [2024]. Prevalent approaches to protein
design often decompose this task into a set of more manageable sub-problems, i.e. generating partial
protein components (e.g. backbone), and subsequently designing the remaining components (e.g.
sequence and side-chain) conditioned on those generated sub-units [Watson et al., 2023, Yim et al.,
2023a, Bose et al., 2023, Lin and AlQuraishi, 2023].
However, in such a loosely connected pipeline, each compartment can only capture a partial protein
component, which may lead to an incongruous whole. Furthermore, the three-dimensional structure of
protein is simultaneously determined by both the backbone and the side chain [Schulz and Schirmer,
2013] while each model in pipelines can only capture and design a partial protein component.
Moreover, early fixed inaccurate partial components accumulate and propagate errors downstream
[Kong et al., 2023]. These issues all call for a unified end-to-end all-atom protein design model.
Understandably, achieving all-atom modeling is inherently challenging, due to dependency between
the sequence and the coordinates (namely, the number and arrangement of side-chain atoms vary with
the sequence. e.g. Lysine residue has four side-chain rigid groups while the Valine residue only has
1

Correspondence to Hao Zhou (zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

