Vocabulary-Guided Gait Recognition

Panjian Huang1 , Saihui Hou1∗, Chunshui Cao2 , Xu Liu2 , Yongzhen Huang1,2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
2
WATRIX.AI
“The way we extract gait features depends a lot on how we understand a gait.”

initial contact
0° view angle
…
Wearing a coat
loading response

VLMs

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Gait Network

human gait silhouette

Vocabulary Base

Vocabulary Space

Gait Samples

Gait Space

Figure 1: Vocabulary-guided gait recognition aims to explore gait concepts through human vocabularies with VLMs where the vocabulary features enable to guide the gait network learning.
Specifically, the universal vocabulary space (e.g., initial contact) can guide the gait network to derive
the corresponding semantic gait features, thereby yielding a more universal gait space for practicality.

Abstract
What is a gait? Appearance-based gait networks consider a gait as the human shape
and motion information from images. Model-based gait networks treat a gait as the
human inherent structure from points. However, the considerations remain vague
for humans to comprehend truly. In this work, we introduce a novel paradigm
Vocabulary-Guided Gait Recognition, dubbed Gait-World, which attempts to
explore gait concepts through human vocabularies with Vision-Language Models
(VLMs). Although VLMs have achieved the remarkable progress in various
vision tasks, the cognitive capability regarding gait modalities remains limited.
The success element in Gait-World is the proper vocabulary prompt where this
paradigm carefully selects gait cycle actions as Vocabulary Base, bridging the
gait and vocabulary feature spaces and further promoting human understanding
for the gait. How to extract gait features? Although previous gait networks
have made significant progress, learning solely from gait modalities on limited
gait databases makes it difficult to learn universal gait features for practicality.
Therefore, we propose the first Gait-World model, dubbed α-Gait, which guides
the gait network learning with vocabulary knowledge from VLMs. However, due
to the heterogeneity of the modalities, directly integrating vocabulary and gait
features is highly challenging as they reside in different embedding spaces. To
address the issues, α-Gait designs Vocabulary Relation Mapper and Gait Finegrained Detector to map and establish vocabulary relations in the gait space for
detecting corresponding gait features. Extensive experiments on CASIA-B, CCPG,
SUSTech1K, Gait3D and GREW reveal the potential value and research directions
of vocabulary information from VLMs in the gait field.

1

Introduction

Gait recognition aims to identify individuals based on walking patterns across complex covariates,
e.g., cross-view and cross-clothing scenarios [1]. As fundamental paradigms, appearance-based
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

