Reasoning Models Sometimes Output Illegible Chains
of Thought

Arun Jose∗
Independent

Abstract
Language models trained via outcome-based reinforcement learning (RL) to reason
using chain-of-thought (CoT) have shown remarkable performance. Monitoring
such a model’s CoT may allow us to understand its intentions and detect potential
malicious behavior. However, to be effective, this requires that CoTs are legible
and faithful. We evaluate the legibility of CoTs in state-of-the-art reasoning models.
We find that many reasoning models such as R1 and QwQ often produce illegible
CoTs (mixing nonsensical phrases, random words, and non-English characters)
before returning to perfect coherence in their final responses, while Claude models
notably exhibit higher legibility. Across 14 models, we observe that larger models
within the same training paradigm tend to produce more illegible reasoning. Prefill
experiments show that truncating reasoning at a legibility threshold reduces accuracy by 53%, suggesting that illegible portions contribute to performance despite
being difficult to monitor. Illegibility increases with question difficulty, suggesting
that CoT monitoring may be less reliable precisely when most needed. We discuss
potential hypotheses for these results, including steganography, vestigial tokens,
and training artifacts. Our findings suggest that current approaches to CoT monitoring may be vulnerable to the emergence of outcome-based RL, particularly as
models face increasingly complex tasks.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) can reason through Chain-of-Thought (CoT) to explore and solve
complex tasks with higher accuracy. This is further amplified in reasoning models — LLMs trained
with outcome-based reinforcement learning (RL) such as OpenAI o1/o3 [OpenAI et al., 2024, OpenAI,
2025], DeepSeek R1 [DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025], and Claude Opus 4 and Sonnet 4 [Anthropic,
2025a,b]. This increased reliance on CoTs may offer benefits for AI safety: by monitoring a
model’s CoT reasoning, we can understand the model’s decision making process and potentially
catch malicious or misaligned behavior [Greenblatt et al., 2024a, Baker et al., 2025, Marks et al.,
2025].
The effectiveness of CoT monitoring depends on CoT legibility and faithfulness. If CoTs don’t
accurately represent important reasons behind model responses, monitoring may provide false security
[Turpin et al., 2023]. If models reason in formats difficult for humans or trusted AIs [Greenblatt
et al., 2024b] to understand, they may engage in undesirable behavior without detection, undermining
monitoring and control measures [Greenblatt, 2025]. Previous research showed that non-reasoning
models perform poorly on tests of faithfulness [Turpin et al., 2023], and that current reasoning
models perform better [Chua and Evans, 2025], albeit plateauing before saturation [Chen et al.,
2025]. Optimizing models for answer correctness has been shown to make their CoTs less legible to
a time-constrained human evaluator [Kirchner et al., 2024]. Indeed, in DeepSeek-AI et al. [2025],
the authors observe that R1-Zero, another model trained with outcome-based RL, often produced
∗

Correspondence to jozdien@gmail.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

