Training-Free Test-Time Adaptation via Shape and
Style Guidance for Vision-Language Models

Shenglong Zhou1 , Manjiang Yin2 , Leiyu Sun1 , Shicai Yang1 , Di Xie1∗, Jiang Zhu1
1

2

Hikvision Research Institute
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Test-time adaptation with pre-trained vision-language models shows impressive
zero-shot classification abilities, and training-free methods further improve the
performance without any optimization burden. However, existing training-free
test-time adaptation methods typically rely on entropy criteria to select the visual
features and update the visual caches, while ignoring the generalizable factors,
such as shape-sensitive and style-insensitive factors. In this paper, we propose a
novel shape and style guidance method (SSG) for training-free test-time adaptation
in vision-language models, aiming to highlight the shape-sensitive (SHS) and styleinsensitive (STI) factors. Specifically, SSG perturbs the raw test image with shape
and style corruption operations, and measures the prediction difference between
the raw and corrupted ones as perturbed prediction difference (PPD). Based on
the PPD measurement, SSG reweights the high-confidence visual features and
corresponding predictions, aiming to highlight the effect of SHS and STI factors
during the test-time procedure. Furthermore, SSG takes both PPD and entropy
into consideration to update the visual cache, aiming to maintain the stored sample
with high entropy and generalizable factors. Extensive experimental results on
out-of-distribution and cross-domain benchmark datasets demonstrate that our
proposed SSG consistently outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods while
also exhibiting promising computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated impressive effectiveness in downstream vision
tasks, such as classification and generation. As the representative model, CLIP [1] is trained on
extensive noisy image-text pairs to achieve multi-modality alignment, and leverages the learned
embedding space to enable zero-shot image classification. Through the learned embedding space,
images can be directly recognized by matching image features with text embeddings from different
classes. Nevertheless, CLIP still faces challenges when encountering domain and distribution
shifts during test-time inference. As a common real-world scenario, out-of-distribution (OOD)
issues compromise CLIP’s ability to maintain consistent cross-modal feature alignment, resulting in
degraded performance.
To mitigate the out-of-distribution issues, test-time adaptation [2–6] is introduced to improve the
model’s generalization ability. Test-time adaptation only demands the unlabeled data stream to adapt
the model during inference, which is beneficial for real-world utilization. Recently, along with the
rapid development of large-scale vision-language models, studies about the test-time adaptation of
vision-language models have been popular. As a pioneering work, Test-time Prompt Tuning [7]
(TPT) is proposed to learn an adaptive prompt from the single test data, which is built on random
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

