Shallow Flow Matching for Coarse-to-Fine
Text-to-Speech Synthesis

1

Dong Yang1* , Yiyi Cai2 , Yuki Saito1 , Lixu Wang3 , Hiroshi Saruwatari1
The University of Tokyo, 2 Independent Researcher, 3 Nanyang Technological University
*
ydqmkkx@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose Shallow Flow Matching (SFM), a novel mechanism that enhances
flow matching (FM)-based text-to-speech (TTS) models within a coarse-to-fine
generation paradigm. Unlike conventional FM modules, which use the coarse
representations from the weak generator as conditions, SFM constructs intermediate
states along the FM paths from these representations. During training, we introduce
an orthogonal projection method to adaptively determine the temporal position
of these states, and apply a principled construction strategy based on a singlesegment piecewise flow. The SFM inference starts from the intermediate state
rather than pure noise, thereby focusing computation on the latter stages of the FM
paths. We integrate SFM into multiple TTS models with a lightweight SFM head.
Experiments demonstrate that SFM yields consistent gains in speech naturalness
across both objective and subjective evaluations, and significantly accelerates
inference when using adaptive-step ODE solvers. Demo and codes are available at
https://ydqmkkx.github.io/SFMDemo/.

1

Introduction

Text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis has advanced with generative algorithms in recent years, particularly
autoregressive (AR) [45, 25, 22, 49, 38, 46], diffusion [33, 12, 48, 2, 24], and flow matching
(FM) [23, 13, 15, 10, 30, 7, 42] methods. TTS models typically contain a front-end for processing
contextual information and a back-end for speech synthesis. Due to the strong temporal alignment
between texts and speech, many diffusion- or FM-based TTS models adopt a coarse-to-fine generation
paradigm: a weak generator first produces coarse representations conditioned on the input context,
which are then refined by the diffusion or FM module into high-quality mel-spectrograms, and finally
converted into audio waveforms by a vocoder. There are two main approaches to the weak generator.
One [33, 13, 15, 30] follows traditional TTS designs, where a non-autoregressive encoder and an
alignment module [35, 19] jointly generate coarse mel-spectrograms when aligning encoder outputs
with target mel-spectrograms. The other [2, 8, 9, 31, 51] employs an AR large language model (LLM)
as a context processor and weak generator to generate discrete speech tokens, which are transformed
into continuous mel-spectrograms by a diffusion or FM module.
FM has gained increasing attention due to its efficiency and high-quality generation in TTS. In
conventional coarse-to-fine FM-based TTS models, coarse representations are used as conditions
for the flow module. However, the generation still starts from pure noise, resulting in a suboptimal
allocation of modeling capacity. Since the coarse representations already encode a significant portion
of the overall semantic and acoustic structure, modeling the early stage from noise becomes redundant
and contributes little to the quality of the final output. To deal with this issue, DiffSinger [27] has
introduced a shallow diffusion mechanism on singing voice synthesis (SVS) and TTS. It uses a simple
mel-spectrogram decoder, with the diffusion module starting generation at a shallow step based on the
output of the decoder. Therefore, we extend the idea of shallow diffusion mechanism (with the name)
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

