Effortless, Simulation-Efficient Bayesian Inference
using Tabular Foundation Models

Julius Vetter1,2 * Manuel Gloeckler1,2 * Daniel Gedon1,2 † Jakob H. Macke1,2,3 †
1

Machine Learning in Science, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
2
Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen, Germany
3
Department Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
Simulation-based inference (SBI) offers a flexible and general approach to performing Bayesian inference: In SBI, a neural network is trained on synthetic
data simulated from a model and used to rapidly infer posterior distributions for
observed data. A key goal for SBI is to achieve accurate inference with as few
simulations as possible, especially for expensive simulators. In this work, we
address this challenge by repurposing recent probabilistic foundation models for
tabular data: We show how tabular foundation models—specifically TabPFN—can
be used as pre-trained autoregressive conditional density estimators for SBI. We
propose Neural Posterior Estimation with Prior-data Fitted Networks (NPE-PFN)
and show that it is competitive with current SBI approaches in terms of accuracy
for both benchmark tasks and two complex scientific inverse problems. Crucially, it
often substantially outperforms them in terms of simulation efficiency, sometimes
requiring orders of magnitude fewer simulations. NPE-PFN eliminates the need
for selecting and training an inference network and tuning its hyperparameters.
We also show that it exhibits superior robustness to model misspecification and
can be scaled to simulation budgets that exceed the context size limit of TabPFN.
NPE-PFN provides a new direction for SBI, where training-free, general-purpose
inference models offer efficient, easy-to-use, and flexible solutions for a wide range
of stochastic inverse problems.

1

Introduction

Simulation has long been a cornerstone of scientific inquiry [1, 2] and is becoming increasingly
relevant as researchers tackle ever more complex scientific questions and systems [3]. Simulators
often depend on parameters that are challenging or impossible to measure experimentally. Bayesian
inference provides a general framework for identifying such parameters by estimating posterior
distributions over parameters. However, classical methods such as Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) require evaluations of the associated model likelihoods, which can be computationally
demanding or prohibitive for complex numerical simulators.
The field of simulation-based inference (SBI), or likelihood-free inference, aims to address this
challenge by enabling Bayesian inference without requiring access to likelihoods. The basic idea
*

Equal contribution.
Joint supervision.
{firstname.lastname}@uni-tuebingen.de
Code available at https://github.com/mackelab/npe-pfn.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

