DC4GS: Directional Consistency-Driven Adaptive
Density Control for 3D Gaussian Splatting

Moonsoo Jeong1
Dongbeen Kim2
Minseong Kim3
Sungkil Lee1,2,3,∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
3
Department of Immersive Media Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
{moonsoo101, rlaehdqls021, leon0106, sungkil}@skku.edu

1

Abstract
We present a Directional Consistency (DC)-driven Adaptive Density Control (ADC)
for 3D Gaussian Splatting (DC4GS). Whereas the conventional ADC bases its
primitive splitting on the magnitudes of positional gradients, we further incorporate
the DC of the gradients into ADC, and realize it through the angular coherence
of the gradients. Our DC better captures local structural complexities in ADC,
avoiding redundant splitting. When splitting is required, we again utilize the DC
to define optimal split positions so that sub-primitives best align with the local
structures than the conventional random placement. As a consequence, our DC4GS
greatly reduces the number of primitives (up to 30% in our experiments) than the
existing ADC, and also enhances reconstruction fidelity greatly.

1

Introduction
Primitive count

1700 K -

AbsGS
AbsGS + DC4GS

1500 K -

1300 K -

AbsGS

D-SSIM: 0.173

AbsGS + DC4GS (Ours)

D-SSIM: 0.163

1200 K -

1000 K -

800 K -

Iteration

(a) Evolution of primitive counts during training

Ground Truth (GT)

(b) Rendering quality improvement in high-frequency details

Figure 1: Comparison of AbsGS [38] and our Directional Consistency-driven density control (DC4GS)
in terms of (a) primitive counts during training and (b) reconstruction quality. DC4GS saturates
much earlier (here, 6k iterations) than the AbsGS does. Upon convergence, it achieves a significant
reduction in primitive counts (here, 30%) and high-quality splits as well, resulting in much higher
reconstruction quality (b) for high-frequency details (here, see the red inset).
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) can synthesize high-quality renderings well, even from sparse point
clouds [14]. Its efficiency stems from its adaptive density control (ADC) that leverages 2D positional
gradients, derived from reconstruction loss, indicating how effectively the observations of the input
signals are represented. When the primitives in fact are likely to require finer details (i.e., overreconstruction), the ADC spawns new primitives by splitting coarse ones where they matter most.
∗

Corresponding author.
Code is available at https://github.com/cgskku/dc4gs.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

