Principled Fine-tuning of LLMs from User-Edits:
A Medley of Preference, Supervision, and Reward

Dipendra Misra‹˚
Databricks Mosaic Research

Aldo Pacchiano‹
Boston University

Ta-Chung Chi
Databricks Mosaic Research

Ge Gao
Google DeepMind

Abstract
We study how to fine-tune LLMs using user-edit deployment data consisting of
a set of context, an agent’s response, and user edits. This deployment data is
naturally generated by users in applications such as LLMs-based writing assistants
and coding agents. The natural origin of user edits makes it a desired source for
adapting and personalizing of LLMs. In this setup, there emerges a unification of
various feedback types namely preferences, supervised labels, and cost that are
typically studied separately in the literature. In this paper, we initiate the theoretical
investigation of learning from user edits. We first derive bounds for learning
algorithms that learn from each of these feedback types. We prove that these
algorithms have different trade-offs depending upon the user, data distribution,
and model class. We then propose a simple ensembling procedure to jointly
learn from these feedback types. On two domains from Gao et al. [21], we show
our ensembling procedure outperforms these methods that learn from individual
feedback. Further, we show that our proposed procedure can robustly adapt to
different user-edit distributions at test time.

1

Introduction

Post-training of LLMs has become a critical step in developing large language models (LLMs)
in recent times. In particular, high-quality data is a valuable artifact for making LLMs useful for
domains of interest. Modern approaches typically employ annotators to label a variety of feedback
ranging from full human written gold responses to labeling binary preferences [17, 37]. However,
these approaches are inherently expensive. In contrast, some recent works have attempted to use
deployment logs generated by natural interactions of users with LLM Agents to improve these
models [15, 21, 25]. In particular, for a broad class of LLM applications such as coding and writing
assistants, user edits [19, 21] form a natural mode of feedback found in deployment logs. Motivated
by this, we study how to fine-tune LLMs to a given task using user-edits in deployment logs.
Consider the application in Figure 1 where an LLM agent is being used as a writing assistant. In any
given session, a user can query the agent at any time to solve a task such as generating an email given
a short description. If the LLM’s response is unsatisfactory, the user typically edits the response
to fix the deficiencies. For example, the user may prefer a certain writing style that the base LLM
agent may not be tailored to generate. We emphasize that these edits are naturally generated by
the users making it easy to scale this feedback. Further, since the user has a stake in solving their
own problem, we can assume that the edit feedback is of reasonable quality. In contrast, in RLHF
applications, feedback such as pairwise preference is collected by hiring annotators to label a pair of
˚

DM and AP contributed equally and are listed alphabetically. GG contributed before joining DeepMind.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

