A Data-Driven Prism: Multi-View Source Separation
with Diffusion Model Priors
Sebastian Wagner-Carena1,2,∗
swagnercarena@flatironinstitute.org

Aizhan Akhmetzhanova1,3,∗
aakhmetzhanova@g.harvard.edu

Sydney Erickson4
sydney3@stanford.edu
1

Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute
2
Center for Data Science, New York University
3
Department of Physics, Harvard University
4
Department of Physics, Stanford University

Abstract
A common challenge in the natural sciences is to disentangle distinct, unknown
sources from observations. Examples of this source separation task include deblending galaxies in a crowded field, distinguishing the activity of individual neurons from overlapping signals, and separating seismic events from an ambient
background. Traditional analyses often rely on simplified source models that fail
to accurately reproduce the data. Recent advances have shown that diffusion models can directly learn complex prior distributions from noisy, incomplete data. In
this work, we show that diffusion models can solve the source separation problem without explicit assumptions about the source. Our method relies only on
multiple views, or the property that different sets of observations contain different linear transformations of the unknown sources. We show that our method
succeeds even when no source is individually observed and the observations are
noisy, incomplete, and vary in resolution. The learned diffusion models enable
us to sample from the source priors, evaluate the probability of candidate sources,
and draw from the joint posterior of the source distribution given an observation.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on a range of synthetic problems
as well as real-world galaxy observations.

1

Introduction

For scientific data, pristine, isolated observations are rare: images of galaxies come blended with
other luminous sources [1–3], electrodes measuring brain activity sum multiple neurons [4–6], and
seismometers registering earthquakes contend with a constant seismic background [7, 8]. Additionally, the observations are often incomplete and collected by a heterogeneous set of instruments,
each with unique resolutions. The corrupted data is rarely directly usable. Instead, leveraging these
datasets for scientific discovery requires solving a source separation problem to either learn the unknown source prior [9, 10] or constrain the posteriors for individual sources given an observation [1,
6, 7]. In this work, we address the general challenge of multi-view source separation (MVSS).
Most source separation methods, including ICA-based methods [11–13], non-negative matrix factorization methods [14–16], and template-fitting methods [17–19], require strong prior assumptions
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

