Language Modeling by Language Models

Junyan Chengα∗ Peter Clarkβ Kyle Richardsonβ
Allen Institute for AIβ Dartmouth Collegeα
jc.th@dartmouth.edu kyler@allenai.org
https://github.com/allenai/genesys

Abstract
Can we leverage LLMs to model the process of discovering novel language model
architectures? Inspired by real research, we propose a multi-agent LLM approach
that simulates the conventional stages of research, from ideation and literature
search (proposal stage) to design implementation (code generation), generative
pre-training, and downstream evaluation (verification). Using ideas from scaling
laws, our system Genesys employs a Ladder of Scales approach; new designs
are proposed, adversarially reviewed, implemented, and selectively verified at
increasingly larger model scales (14M∼350M parameters) with a narrowing budget
(the number of models we can train at each scale). To help make discovery
efficient and factorizable, Genesys uses a novel genetic programming backbone,
which we show has empirical advantages over commonly used direct prompt
generation workflows (e.g., ∼86% percentage point improvement in successful
design generation, a key bottleneck). We report experiments involving 1,162
newly discovered designs (1,062 fully verified through pre-training) and find the
best designs to be highly competitive with known architectures (e.g., outperform
GPT2, Mamba2, etc., on 6/9 common benchmarks). We couple these results with
comprehensive system-level ablations and formal results, which give broader
insights into the design of effective autonomous LLM-driven discovery systems.

1

Introduction

Automated scientific discovery (ASD) (Langley, 1987; Wang et al., 2023), which aims to simulate all
aspects of the conventional research process — from ideation/system design to experiment execution,
has the promise of changing the way that research is performed by making it more accessible, efficient,
and less error-prone. However, while many new large language model (LLM)-driven ASD systems
have been recently proposed, including AI Scientist (Lu et al., 2024a; Yamada et al., 2025) and others
(Liu et al., 2024b; Jansen et al., 2025b; Schmidgall et al., 2025b), much of this work focuses on
open-ended research with unclear goals and where discoveries are hard to verify. This motivates the
development of new tasks that address foundational challenges in ASD, tasks that are broad in scope
and address impactful research problems, but that have clear goals and criteria for success.
In this paper, we focus on discovery in machine learning and ask: Can we model the process of discovering novel language model architectures that improve on the standard transformer architecture?
While transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) remain the de facto standard architecture for language
models, research into alternative architectures (Dao & Gu, 2024; Sun et al., 2024, 2023; Peng et al.,
2024) and transformer variants (Tay et al., 2022b) remains an active and important area of research
with connections to the mature field of neural architecture search (NAS) (Elsken et al., 2019). In
contrast to open-ended research tasks, architecture research involves a clear goal (i.e., producing an
executable architecture design) and offers many metrics for evaluating success. It also introduces
∗

Work done during an internship at the Allen Institute for AI.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

