Entropic Time Schedulers for Generative Diffusion
Models
Dejan Stančević ∗
Radboud University

Florian Handke
Ghent University

Luca Ambrogioni
Radboud University

Abstract
The practical performance of generative diffusion models depends on the appropriate choice of the noise scheduling function, which can also be equivalently
expressed as a time reparameterization. In this paper, we present a time scheduler
that selects sampling points based on entropy rather than uniform time spacing,
ensuring that each point contributes an equal amount of information to the final generation. We prove that this time reparameterization does not depend on the initial
choice of time. Furthermore, we provide a tractable exact formula to estimate this
entropic time for a trained model using the training loss without substantial overhead. Alongside the entropic time, inspired by the optimality results, we introduce a
rescaled entropic time. In our experiments with mixtures of Gaussian distributions
and ImageNet, we show that using the (rescaled) entropic times greatly improves
the inference performance of trained models. In particular, we found that the image
quality in pretrained EDM2 models, as evaluated by FID and FD-DINO scores, can
be substantially increased by the rescaled entropic time reparameterization without
increasing the number of function evaluations, with greater improvements in the few
NFEs regime. Code is available at https://github.com/DejanStancevic/
Entropic-Time-Schedulers-for-Generative-Diffusion-Models.

1

Introduction

Generative diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), and especially score-based diffusion
models, have achieved state-of-the-art performance in image (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach
et al., 2022; Song et al., 2021) and video generation (Ho et al., 2022; Singer et al., 2022). Generative
diffusion models are obtained by reverting a forward diffusion process, which injects noise into the
distribution of the data until all information has been lost. In practice, the performance of these
models is highly dependent on the choice of a noise scheduling function that regulates the rate of
noise-injection (Song et al., 2022). In most commonly used models, a change of noise scheduling
is mathematically equivalent to a change of time parameterization. From a theoretical perspective,
the choice of time parametrization, or equivalently of noise scheduling, is not constrained by theory
since any change of time in the forward process is automatically corrected in reverse dynamics (Song
et al., 2021). However, as explained above, the choice of time is very important practically since it
affects both the temporal weighting during training and the discretization scheme during inference.
Consequently, an ’incorrect’ choice of time variable can lead to severe inefficiencies due to the undersampling of some temporal windows and the redundant over-sampling of others. This is particularly
problematic since recent theoretical and experimental work suggested that ’generative decisions’
tend to be clustered in critical time windows (Li & Chen, 2024), which have been connected to
∗

dejan.stancevic@donders.ru.nl

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

