Universal Cross-Tokenizer Distillation via
Approximate Likelihood Matching

Benjamin Minixhofer 0x43 Ivan Vulić 0x43 Edoardo M. Ponti 0x45,0x43
0x43
0x45
University of Cambridge
University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Distillation has shown remarkable success in transferring knowledge from a Large
Language Model (LLM) teacher to a student LLM. However, current distillation
methods require similar tokenizers between the teacher and the student, restricting
their applicability to only a small subset of teacher–student pairs. In this work, we
develop a principled cross-tokenizer distillation method to solve this crucial deficiency. Our method is the first to enable effective distillation across fundamentally
different tokenizers, while also substantially outperforming prior methods in all
other cases. We verify the efficacy of our method on three distinct use cases. First,
we show that viewing tokenizer transfer as self-distillation enables unprecedentedly
effective transfer across tokenizers, including rapid transfer of subword models to
the byte-level. Transferring different models to the same tokenizer also enables
ensembling to boost performance. Secondly, we distil a large maths-specialised
LLM into a small general-purpose model with a different tokenizer, achieving
competitive maths problem-solving performance. Thirdly, we use our method to
train state-of-the-art embedding prediction hypernetworks for training-free tokenizer transfer. Our results unlock an expanded range of teacher–student pairs for
distillation, enabling new ways to adapt and enhance interaction between LLMs.

1

Introduction

Even the latest, most powerful Large Language Models (LLMs) still operate on tokens, and therefore
require a tokenizer — a manually designed component which turns text into a sequence of tokens.
Most currently available language models use subword tokenization (Sennrich et al., 2016; Kudo &
Richardson, 2018), where each token is a word, or part of a word. Even though subword tokenizers
are currently dominant, they are heterogeneously implemented: when a model is released, it often
comes with its own tokenizer which has distinct properties such as the actual tokens it comprises (its
vocabulary) and which method is used to segment text into these tokens (its tokenization function).
Furthermore, there has been a recent trend away from subwords toward models using vocabularies
consisting of characters (Tay et al., 2022; Nawrot et al., 2023) or bytes (e.g. Xue et al., 2022; Yu
et al., 2023; Pagnoni et al., 2024). This exemplifies the wildly diverse landscape of tokenization.
On the other hand, distillation (Buciluǎ et al., 2006; Hinton et al., 2015) has emerged as a powerful
paradigm for creating effective language models by training them based on the signal from another
model. However, existing distillation methods require similar tokenizers between the teacher and the
student. In particular, most prior methods require the teacher and student to represent their input in the
same way, i.e., that their tokenizer is equivalent (e.g., Gu et al., 2024; Ko et al., 2024). Some recent
methods relax this requirement by developing heuristics to incorporate information from the teacher
alongside a main objective (e.g., next-token prediction), making progress toward enabling distillation
across similar (but not equivalent) tokenizers (Zhang et al., 2024b; Wan et al., 2024; Boizard et al.,
2025). Nonetheless, this requirement still limits their applicability to a rather small subset of the
possible teacher–student pairs. In this work, we develop a cross-tokenizer distillation method to solve
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

