Rethinking Fair Federated Learning from
Parameter and Client View
Kaiqi Guan1† , Wenke Huang1† , Xianda Guo1 ,
Yueyang Yuan1 , Bin Yang1 , Mang Ye1∗
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
{guankaiqi, wenkehuang, yemang}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning is a promising technique that enables collaborative machine
learning while preserving participant privacy. With respect to multi-party collaboration, achieving performance fairness acts as a critical challenge in federated
systems. Existing explorations mainly focus on considering all parameter-wise
fairness and consistently protecting weak clients to achieve performance fairness
in federation. However, these approaches neglect two critical issues. 1) Parameter
Redundancy: Redundant parameters that are unnecessary for fairness training may
conflict with critical parameters update, thereby leading to performance degradation. 2) Persistent Protection: Current fairness mechanisms persistently enhance
weak clients throughout the entire training cycle, hindering global optimization
and causing lower performance alongside unfairness. To address these, we propose a strategy with two key components: First, parameter adjustment with mask
and rescale which discarding redundant parameter and highlight critical ones,
preserving key parameter updates and decrease conflict. Second, we observe
that the federated training process exhibits distinct characteristics across different
phases. We propose a dynamic aggregation strategy that adaptively weights clients
based on local update directions and performance variations. Empirical results on
single-domain and cross-domain scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed solution and the efficiency of crucial modules. The code is available at
https://github.com/guankaiqi/FedPW.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a collaborative machine learning framework [26, 57, 30, 27, 58, 19]
that enables multiple clients to jointly train a global model [38, 31, 18] without sharing raw data.
Clients process data locally and periodically send model updates to the server, which aggregates these
updates into a global model. This training paradigm effectively addresses data island and privacy
issues. However, due to data heterogeneity [58, 23], intermittent client participation, and system
heterogeneity, the model is prone to unfairness, which diminishes FL’s generalization capability.
Improving performance fairness [47, 19] is a central research focus in federated learning. Existing
approaches can be categorized into three types: client selection [16, 42], weight allocation [39, 35,
48], and personalized local models [33]. For instance, to enhance the performance of underperforming
clients, the federated server may assign them larger aggregation weights, amplifying their influence
†

Equal Contribution.

* Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

