Differentiable Generalized Sliced Wasserstein Plans
Laetitia Chapel∗
IRISA – L’Institut Agro Rennes-Angers
Rennes, France.
laetitia.chapel@irisa.fr

Romain Tavenard∗
Université de Rennes 2 – IRISA
Rennes, France.
romain.tavenard@univ-rennes2.fr

Samuel Vaiter
CNRS & Université Côte d’Azur
Laboratoire J. A. Dieudonné
Nice, France.
samuel.vaiter@cnrs.fr

Abstract
Optimal Transport (OT) has attracted significant interest in the machine learning
community, not only for its ability to define meaningful distances between probability distributions – such as the Wasserstein distance – but also for its formulation
of OT plans. Its computational complexity remains a bottleneck, though, and
slicing techniques have been developed to scale OT to large datasets. Recently, a
novel slicing scheme, dubbed min-SWGG, lifts a single one-dimensional plan back
to the original multidimensional space, finally selecting the slice that yields the
lowest Wasserstein distance as an approximation of the full OT plan. Despite its
computational and theoretical advantages, min-SWGG inherits typical limitations
of slicing methods: (i) the number of required slices grows exponentially with the
data dimension, and (ii) it is constrained to linear projections. Here, we reformulate
min-SWGG as a bilevel optimization problem and propose a differentiable approximation scheme to efficiently identify the optimal slice, even in high-dimensional
settings. We furthermore define its generalized extension for accommodating
to data living on manifolds. Finally, we demonstrate the practical value of our
approach in various applications, including gradient flows on manifolds and highdimensional spaces, as well as a novel sliced OT-based conditional flow matching
for image generation – where fast computation of transport plans is essential.

1

Introduction

Optimal Transport (OT) has emerged as a foundational tool in modern machine learning, primarily
due to its capacity to provide meaningful comparisons between probability distributions. Rooted in the
seminal works of Monge [38] and Kantorovich [27], OT introduces a mathematically rigorous framework that defines distances, such as the Wasserstein distance, that have demonstrated high performance
in various learning tasks. Used as a loss function, it is now the workhorse of learning problems ranging
from classification, transfer learning or generative modelling, see [39] for a review. One of the key advantages of OT lies in its dual nature: it also constructs an optimal coupling or transport plan between
distributions. This coupling reveals explicit correspondences between samples, enabling a wide range
of applications. For example, OT has proven valuable in shape matching [10], color transfer [47, 49],
domain adaptation [14], and, more recently, in generative modeling through conditional flow matching [45, 54], where it provides an alignment between the data distribution and samples from a prior.
∗

equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

