SWE-RL: Advancing LLM Reasoning via
Reinforcement Learning on Open Software Evolution

Yuxiang Wei12 Olivier Duchenne1 Jade Copet1 Quentin Carbonneaux1
Lingming Zhang2 Daniel Fried13 Gabriel Synnaeve1 Rishabh Singh1 Sida I. Wang1
1

Meta AI

2

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 3 Carnegie Mellon University
Q ywei40@illinois.edu Q sida@meta.com
https://github.com/facebookresearch/swe-rl

Abstract
The recent DeepSeek-R1 release has demonstrated the immense potential of reinforcement learning (RL) in enhancing the general reasoning capabilities of large
language models (LLMs). While DeepSeek-R1 and other follow-up work primarily
focus on applying RL to competitive coding and math problems, this paper introduces SWE-RL, the first approach to scale RL-based LLM reasoning for real-world
software engineering. Leveraging a lightweight rule-based reward (e.g., the similarity score between ground-truth and LLM-generated solutions), SWE-RL enables
LLMs to autonomously recover a developer’s reasoning processes and solutions
by learning from extensive open-source software evolution data—the record of
entire software development cycles, including code snapshots, code changes, and
events such as issues and pull requests. Trained on top of Llama 3, our resulting
reasoning model, Llama3-SWE-RL-70B, achieves a 41.0% solve rate on SWEbench Verified—a human-verified collection of real-world GitHub issues. To our
knowledge, this is the best performance reported for medium-sized (<100B) LLMs
to date, even comparable to leading proprietary LLMs like GPT-4o. Surprisingly,
despite performing RL solely on software evolution data, Llama3-SWE-RL has
even emerged with generalized reasoning skills. For example, it shows improved
results on five out-of-domain tasks, namely, function coding, library use, code
reasoning, mathematics, and general language understanding, whereas a supervisedfinetuning baseline even leads to performance degradation on average. Overall,
SWE-RL opens up a new direction to improve the reasoning capabilities of LLMs
through reinforcement learning on massive software engineering data.

1

Introduction

The application of large language models (LLMs) to software engineering (SE) tasks has received
significant attention, with researchers exploring their potential to automate various complex SE tasks,
such as library-level and complex code generation (Zhuo et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024), real-world
bug/issue resolution (Xia and Zhang, 2022; Jimenez et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024c), and software
testing (Deng et al., 2023; Jain et al., 2024a). Among these tasks, SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2023)—
a benchmark for solving real-world software issues—has emerged as a focal point of research efforts,
and researchers have proposed various agentic (Yang et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2024b; Gauthier,
2024) and pipeline-based (Xia et al., 2024; Örwall, 2024; Zhang et al., 2024) methods to push LLMs’
real-world issue solving capability. However, most current techniques rely on powerful proprietary
LLMs like GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024a) or Claude-3.5-Sonnet (Anthropic, 2024a), where advancements
are driven more by enhanced prompting strategies than by improvements in the underlying LLM.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

