Homogeneous Algorithms Can Reduce Competition in
Personalized Pricing

Nathanael Jo
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
nathanjo@mit.edu
Ashia Wilson
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ashia@mit.edu

Kathleen A. Creel
Northeastern University
k.creel@northeastern.edu
Manish Raghavan
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
mragh@mit.edu

Abstract
Firms’ algorithm development practices are often homogeneous. Whether firms
train algorithms on similar data or rely on similar pre-trained models, the result is
correlated predictions. In the context of personalized pricing, correlated algorithms
can be viewed as a means to collude among competing firms, but whether or not this
conduct is legal depends on the mechanisms of achieving collusion. We investigate
the precise mechanisms through a formal game-theoretic model. Indeed, we find
that (1) higher correlation diminishes consumer welfare and (2) as consumers
become more price sensitive, firms are increasingly incentivized to compromise
on the accuracy of their predictions in exchange for coordination. We demonstrate
our theoretical results in a stylized empirical study where two firms compete
using personalized pricing algorithms. Our results demonstrate a new mechanism
for achieving collusion through correlation, which allows us to analyze its legal
implications. Correlation through algorithms is a new frontier of anti-competitive
behavior that is largely unconsidered by US antitrust law.

1

Introduction

Firms increasingly use algorithms for personalized pricing, charging some consumers more than
others for the same good or service based on their perceived willingness to pay [59, 34, 4]. For
example, a recent lawsuit against DoorDash alleged that the company charges Apple users more in
delivery fees [51] and travel websites use browser information to charge US-based customers more
[40]. Rather than targeting prices to individuals, a strategy called “first-degree price discrimination,”
firms segment consumers based on their characteristics and charge different prices to each segment,
i.e., “third-degree price discrimination” [56, 48]. Today, firms use machine learning to segment
consumers into more targeted categories [18]. For example, ridesharing competitors Uber and Lyft
offer discounts to a subset of consumers based on algorithmic segmentation (see Figure 7).
Competing firms seek accurate personalized prices in order to better predict customers’ willingness to
pay. Offering a low price to a consumer willing to pay more means missing surplus value; offering a
high price to a consumer unwilling to pay it means missing a sale altogether. However, if personalized
prices are correlated between firms, firms are insulated from the competitive cost of their mistakes: if
a firm failed to offer a discount, a correlated competitor is likely to also not offer a discount to that
consumer [14]. In other words, firms can benefit from correlated prices.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

