Seg4Diff: Unveiling Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
in Text-to-Image Diffusion Transformers

Chaehyun Kim1
Heeseong Shin1
Eunbeen Hong1
Heeji Yoon1
2
3,†
Anurag Arnab
Paul Hongsuck Seo
Sunghwan Hong
Seungryong Kim1,†
1
2
3
KAIST AI
Korea University
ETH Zürich AI Center, CVG, PRS
https://cvlab-kaist.github.io/Seg4Diff

MM-Attention
I2I

I2T

T2I

T2T

Emergent semantic grounding

“Three cats and one dog
sitting on the grass.”

three cats

Generated image

Mask Alignment

Pretrained DiT
sky

one dog

MM-DiT Block
dog

cat

Semantic grounding expert
grass

MM-DiT Block

Unsupervised
segmentation

⋯

Open-vocabulary
segmentation

three cats

one dog

Generated image

Boosting segmentation and generation

Figure 1: We introduce Seg4Diff, a systematic framework designed to analyze and enhance the
emergent semantic grounding capabilities of multi-modal diffusion transformer (MM-DiT) blocks in
text-to-image diffusion transformers (DiTs). Here, semantic grounding expert refers to a specific
MM-DiT block responsible for establishing semantic alignment between text and image features.

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models excel at translating language prompts into photorealistic images by implicitly grounding textual concepts through their cross-modal
attention mechanisms. Recent multi-modal diffusion transformers extend this by
introducing joint self-attention over concatenated image and text tokens, enabling
richer and more scalable cross-modal alignment. However, a detailed understanding of how and where these attention maps contribute to image generation remains
limited. In this paper, we introduce Seg4Diff (Segmentation for Diffusion), a
systematic framework for analyzing the attention structures of MM-DiT, with a
focus on how specific layers propagate semantic information from text to image.
Through comprehensive analysis, we identify a semantic grounding expert layer,
a specific MM-DiT block that consistently aligns text tokens with spatially coherent image regions, naturally producing high-quality semantic segmentation
masks. We further demonstrate that applying a lightweight fine-tuning scheme
with mask-annotated image data enhances the semantic grouping capabilities of
these layers and thereby improves both segmentation performance and generated
image fidelity. Our findings demonstrate that semantic grouping is an emergent
property of diffusion transformers and can be selectively amplified to advance both
segmentation and generation performance, paving the way for unified models that
bridge visual perception and generation.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

