Smooth Quadratic Prediction Markets

Enrique Nueve
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado Boulder
enrique.nueveiv@colorado.edu

Bo Waggoner
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado Boulder
bwag@colorado.edu

Abstract
When agents trade in a Duality-based Cost Function prediction market, they collectively implement the learning algorithm Follow-The-Regularized-Leader [Abernethy et al., 2013]. We ask whether other learning algorithms could be used to
inspire the design of prediction markets. By decomposing and modifying the
Duality-based Cost Function Market Maker’s (DCFMM) pricing mechanism, we
propose a new prediction market, called the Smooth Quadratic Prediction Market,
the incentivizes agents to collectively implement general steepest gradient descent.
Relative to the DCFMM, the Smooth Quadratic Prediction Market has a better
worst-case monetary loss for AD securities while preserving axiom guarantees such
as the existence of instantaneous price, information incorporation, expressiveness,
no arbitrage, and a form of incentive compatibility. To motivate the application
of the Smooth Quadratic Prediction Market, we independently examine agents’
trading behavior under two realistic constraints: bounded budgets and buy-only
securities. Finally, we provide an introductory analysis of an approach to facilitate
adaptive liquidity using the Smooth Quadratic Prediction Market. Our results
suggest future designs where the price update rule is separate from the fee structure,
yet guarantees are preserved.

1

Introduction

What are Prediction Markets? Prediction markets allow traders to buy and sell securities whose
payoffs depend on the realization of future events [Hanson, 2003]. Prediction market platforms
such as Kalshi and Polymarket on average move millions of dollars per event-based market. In this
work, we examine prediction markets that trade Arrow-Debreu (AD) securities, which pay $1 if
a particular state of the world is reached and $0 otherwise [Arrow, 1964]. Given a finite random
variable Y = {y1 , . . . , yd } over d mutually exclusive and exhaustive outcomes, AD securities are
designed to elicit a full probability distribution with respect to Y, reflected by the current prices of
the securities.
Duality-based CFMM The work of Abernethy et al. [2013] introduced a general framework for
designing automated prediction markets over combinatorial or infinite state outcome spaces named
the Duality-based Cost Function Market Maker (DCFMM). As stated by Abernethy et al. [2013],
“An automated market maker is a market institution that adaptively sets prices for each security
and is always willing to accept trades at these prices.” The DCFMM satisfies the desirable market
axioms of no arbitrage, bounded worst-case loss, information incorporation, expressiveness, incentive
compatibility, and efficient computability. The DCFMM over the last decade has been examined in
numerous works such as Abernethy et al. [2014], Devanur et al. [2015], Frongillo and Waggoner
[2017], Frongillo et al. [2023]. A core observation of Abernethy et al. [2013] is that the DCFMM
uses Follow-The-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) to set prices for securities, by interpreting past trades
as loss vectors. Although not our main contribution, as it has been hinted at in the literature before by
Devanur et al. [2015], to our knowledge, we are the first to formally show (in Appendix C) a tight
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

