Revisiting End-to-End Learning with Slide-level
Supervision in Computational Pathology

Wenhao Tang∗1,2

Rong Qin∗2

Heng Fang3

Xiang Li†1,2
1

Fengtao Zhou4

Hao Chen4

Ming-Ming Cheng†1,2

Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (Shenzhen Futian)
2
VCIP, School of Computer Science, Nankai University
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
∗

Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author.

Abstract
Pre-trained encoders for offline feature extraction followed by multiple instance
learning (MIL) aggregators have become the dominant paradigm in computational
pathology (CPath), benefiting cancer diagnosis and prognosis. However, performance limitations arise from the absence of encoder fine-tuning for downstream
tasks and disjoint optimization with MIL. While slide-level supervised end-to-end
(E2E) learning is an intuitive solution to this issue, it faces challenges such as high
computational demands and suboptimal results. These limitations motivate us to
revisit E2E learning. We argue that prior work neglects inherent E2E optimization
challenges, leading to performance disparities compared to traditional two-stage
methods. In this paper, we pioneer the elucidation of optimization challenge caused
by sparse-attention MIL and propose a novel MIL called ABMILX. ABMILX
mitigates this problem through global correlation-based attention refinement and
multi-head mechanisms. With the efficient multi-scale random patch sampling
strategy, an E2E trained ResNet with ABMILX surpasses SOTA foundation models under the two-stage paradigm across multiple challenging benchmarks, while
remaining computationally efficient (< 10 RTX3090 GPU hours). We demonstrate
the potential of E2E learning in CPath and calls for greater research focus in this
area. The code is here.

1

Introduction

Computational pathology [15, 53, 14] (CPath) is an interdisciplinary field that combines pathology,
gigapixel image analysis, and computer science to develop computational methods for analyzing and
interpreting pathological images (whole slide images, WSIs or slides). This field leverages advanced
algorithms, machine learning, and artificial intelligence techniques to assist pathologists in tasks
such as cancer sub-typing [25, 66], grading [6], and prognosis [63, 65]. Due to clinical demands and
the challenge of pixel-level annotation in gigapixel pathological images, CPath typically focuses on
slide-level learning. However, analyzing such gigapixel images in slide-level presents significant
challenges in terms of efficiency and performance.
To address these challenges, Campanella et al. [7] proposed a two-stage paradigm based on multiple
instance learning (MIL) [41], allowing efficient WSI analysis without fine-grained annotations. This
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

