Breaking the Discretization Barrier of Continuous
Physics Simulation Learning

Fan Xu1∗ , Hao Wu2∗ , Nan Wang3† , Lilan Peng4 , Kun Wang5† , Wei Gong1† , Xibin Zhao2†
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Tsinghua University
3
Beijing Jiaotong University 4 Southwest Jiaotong University 5 Nanyang Technological University
∗
Equal Contribution, † Corresponding author
Main Contact: markxu@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The modeling of complicated time-evolving physical dynamics from partial observations is a long-standing challenge. Particularly, observations can be sparsely
distributed in a seemingly random or unstructured manner, making it difficult to
capture highly nonlinear features in a variety of scientific and engineering problems. However, existing data-driven approaches are often constrained by fixed
spatial and temporal discretization. While some researchers attempt to achieve
spatio-temporal continuity by designing novel strategies, they either overly rely on
traditional numerical methods or fail to truly overcome the limitations imposed
by discretization. To address these, we propose CoPS, a purely data-driven methods, to effectively model continuous physics simulation from partial observations.
Specifically, we employ multiplicative filter network to fuse and encode spatial
information with the corresponding observations. Then we customize geometric
grids and use message-passing mechanism to map features from original spatial
domain to the customized grids. Subsequently, CoPS models continuous-time
dynamics by designing multi-scale graph ODEs, while introducing a Markov-based
neural auto-correction module to assist and constrain the continuous extrapolations.
Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that CoPS advances the state-of-the-art
methods in space-time continuous modeling across various scenarios. The source
code is available at https://github.com/Sunxkissed/CoPS.

1

Introduction

Achieving accurate global modeling and forecasting of a complex time-evolving physical system from
a limited number of observations has been a long-standing challenge [5, 52, 11]. This has widespread
applications in chaotic physical systems such as geophysics [12, 38], atmospheric science [9, 40], and
fluid dynamics [56, 29, 55, 4], et al. For instance, in meteorology and oceanography, sensors are often
deployed in areas with scarce or non-existent network connectivity. This renders the analysis and
modeling of the system a formidable obstacle. From empirical knowledge, dynamical systems can be
fully described by complicated and not yet fully elucidated partial differential equations (PDEs) [16].
Traditional numerical methods such as finite element [13] and finite volume [2] methods excessively
rely on prior knowledge of essential PDEs and suffer from high time complexity, making it difficult to
accommodate the increasing demands for grid granularity. Recently, data-driven approaches partially
overcome these by integrating advanced neural networks to directly learn dynamic latent features
with high nonlinearity from existing observations or simulations.
Although data-driven methods [18, 31, 45] have the capacity to learn complex relationships from
observations, they still have serious limitations in changeable actual scenes. One significant challenge
in modeling physical fields from partial observations is that the field may not adhere to a Cartesian
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

