Retrv-R1: A Reasoning-Driven MLLM Framework
for Universal and Efficient Multimodal Retrieval
Lanyun Zhu1
1

Deyi Ji2

Tianrun Chen3

City University of Hong Kong

2

Tencent

Haiyang Wu2
3

Shiqi Wang1†

Zhejiang University

Abstract
The success of DeepSeek-R1 demonstrates the immense potential of using reinforcement learning (RL) to enhance LLMs’ reasoning capabilities. This paper
introduces Retrv-R1, the first R1-style MLLM specifically designed for multimodal
universal retrieval, achieving higher performance by employing step-by-step reasoning to produce more accurate retrieval results. We find that directly applying
the methods of DeepSeek-R1 to retrieval tasks is not feasible, mainly due to (1)
the high computational cost caused by the large token consumption required for
multiple candidates with reasoning processes, and (2) the instability and suboptimal
results when directly applying RL to train for retrieval tasks. To address these
issues, Retrv-R1 introduces an information compression module with a details
inspection mechanism, which enhances computational efficiency by reducing the
number of tokens while ensuring that critical information for challenging candidates is preserved. Furthermore, a new training paradigm is proposed, including
an activation stage using a retrieval-tailored synthetic CoT dataset for more effective optimization, followed by RL with a novel curriculum reward to improve
both performance and efficiency. Incorporating these novel designs, Retrv-R1
achieves SOTA performance, high efficiency, and strong generalization ability, as
demonstrated by experiments across multiple benchmarks and tasks. Project page.

1

Introduction

Information retrieval is a key direction in AI with broad applications, such as search engines [9, 5]
and retrieval-augmented generation [28, 63]. Early work primarily focused on retrieval for single,
fixed-format data types, such as text-to-text [76, 40], text-to-image [10, 73], and image-to-image
retrieval [4, 51]. To improve efficiency and facilitate real-world deployment, recent efforts [59, 38, 34]
have increasingly emphasized universal multimodal retrieval, where a single model is required to
handle diverse retrieval tasks and data modalities simultaneously. Earlier work in this setting typically
employs small foundation models such as CLIP, while more recent methods [38, 34, 77, 27] explore
leveraging stronger Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to achieve further improvements,
taking advantage of their rich pretrained knowledge and strong generalization capabilities.
Some retrieval methods [27, 77] apply MLLMs by leveraging their embeddings for similarity comparison, but their effectiveness and robustness are often unsatisfactory due to the imprecision of
embeddings and similarity computations. Other approaches [34, 38] formulate retrieval as a questionanswering (QA) task by constructing an input instruction from the query and candidates, prompting
the MLLM to generate the retrieval result. These methods achieve improved performance by exploiting the strong QA capabilities of MLLMs. However, they typically rely on the MLLM to directly
generate the result without any explicit reasoning process, which limits their ability to handle complex
cases. Moreover, the supervised fine-tuning (SFT) strategies commonly used to train retrieval MLLMs
†

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

