Harnessing the Computation Redundancy in ViTs to
Boost Adversarial Transferability
Zhiyuan Wang2♣ † Zeliang Zhang1♣ Chao Huang1 Susan Liang1
Yunlong Tang1 Chenliang Xu1
1
University of Rochester 2 University of California, Santa Barbara

Jiani Liu1♣
♣

Equal contribution listed alphabetically

†

Project lead (

:

hust0426@gmail.com)

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have demonstrated impressive performance across
a range of applications, including many safety-critical tasks. Many previous
studies have observed that adversarial examples crafted on ViTs exhibit higher
transferability than those crafted on CNNs, indicating that ViTs contain structural
characteristics favorable for transferable attacks. In this work, we take a further step
to deeply investigate the role of computational redundancy brought by its unique
characteristics in ViTs and its impact on adversarial transferability. Specifically, we
identify two forms of redundancy, including the data-level and model-level, that can
be harnessed to amplify attack effectiveness. Building on this insight, we design
a suite of techniques, including attention sparsity manipulation, attention head
permutation, clean token regularization, ghost MoE diversification, and learning to
robustify before the attack. A dynamic online learning strategy is also proposed to
fully leverage these operations to enhance the adversarial transferability. Extensive
experiments on the ImageNet-1k dataset validate the effectiveness of our approach,
showing that our methods significantly outperform existing baselines in both
transferability and generality across diverse model architectures, including different
variants of ViTs and mainstream Vision Large Language Models (VLLMs). Our
code1 is publicly released at https://github.com/Trustworthy-AI-Group/
TransferAttack under the name LL2S.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformers (ViTs), empowered by self-attention, have achieved state-of-the-art performance
in various domains, including face forgery detection [Zhuang et al., 2022], 3D semantic segmentation
for autonomous driving [Ando et al., 2023], and disease progression monitoring [Mbakwe et al.,
2023], many of which are safety-critical. While deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be
vulnerable to imperceptible adversarial perturbations [Szegedy et al., 2013], most existing work
focuses on general-purpose attacks and defenses, often tailored to convolutional architectures [Zhu
et al., 2024a, Wang and Farnia, 2023, Wang et al., 2020, 2021a, Carlini and Wagner, 2017]. However,
ViTs differ fundamentally from CNNs in representation and structure [Naseer et al., 2021, Raghu
et al., 2021], leaving a gap in understanding their unique vulnerabilities. Designing attack strategies
that leverage the distinctive properties of ViTs is essential for both exposing their weaknesses and
building more robust models for real-world deployment [Song et al., 2025a].
Although adversarial perturbations can be crafted using a white-box model (i.e., a surrogate model),
numerous studies have demonstrated their threat to black-box models (i.e., victim models) due to a
phenomenon known as adversarial transferability [Zhou et al., 2018, Li et al., 2020]. Compared to
white-box attacks, black-box adversarial attacks, some of which leverage transferability, typically
show lower performance but offer greater practicality in real-world applications [Huang et al., 2024,
1

The development version is available at https://github.com/JennnyL/RedunAttack-ViT.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

