Enhanced Cyclic Coordinate Descent Methods for
Elastic Net Penalized Linear Models
Zishan Shao∗
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University
zs89@duke.edu

Yixiao Wang∗ †
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University
yw676@duke.edu
Ting Jiang
Department of Electrical
& Computer Engineering
Duke University
tj147@duke.edu

Aditya Devarakonda
Department of Computer Science
Wake Forest University
devaraa@wfu.edu

Abstract
We present a novel enhanced cyclic coordinate descent (ECCD) framework for
solving generalized linear models with elastic net constraints that reduces training
time in comparison to existing state-of-the-art methods. We redesign the CD
method by performing a Taylor expansion around the current iterate to avoid
nonlinear operations arising in the gradient computation. By introducing this
approximation we are able to unroll the vector recurrences occurring in the CD
method and reformulate the resulting computations into more efficient batched
computations. We show empirically that the recurrence can be unrolled by a
tunable integer parameter, s, such that s > 1 yields performance improvements
without affecting convergence, whereas s = 1 yields the original CD method. A
key advantage of ECCD is that it avoids the convergence delay and numerical
instability exhibited by block coordinate descent. Finally, we implement our
proposed method in C++ using Eigen to accelerate linear algebra computations.
Comparison of our method against existing state-of-the-art solvers show consistent
performance improvements of 3× in average for regularization path variant on
diverse benchmark datasets. Our implementation is available at https://github.
com/Yixiao-Wang-Stats/ECCD.

1

Introduction

Generalized linear model (GLM) is a cornerstone of modern machine learning and statistics with
applications demanding both variable selection and regularization. Among the various penalties, the
elastic-net [1], which combines ℓ1 and ℓ2 regularization, has attracted significant interest because it
not only promotes sparsity but also alleviates some of the limitations inherent in using either penalty
alone, especially in high-dimensional settings. The coordinate descent (CD) algorithm has become a
popular method for optimizing such models due to its simplicity and effectiveness, typically updating
a subset of model parameters at a time [2].
Despite the widespread success of coordinate-wise updates, block generalization for training GLMs
have encountered numerical stability issues especially for large block sizes. Existing approaches
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Correspondence: yw676@duke.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

