A Gradient Guided Diffusion Framework for Chance
Constrained Programming

Boyang Zhang
School of Advanced Interdisciplinary Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing 100049, China
zhangboyang23@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Zhiguo Wang∗
Department of Mathematics
Sichuan University
Chengdu 610065, China
wangzhiguo@scu.edu.cn

Ya-Feng Liu∗
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Mathematics and Information Networks
School of Mathematical Sciences
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing 102206, China
yafengliu@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Chance constrained programming (CCP) is a powerful framework for addressing
optimization problems under uncertainty. In this paper, we introduce a novel
Gradient-Guided Diffusion-based Optimization framework, termed GGDOpt,
which tackles CCP through three key innovations. First, GGDOpt accommodates
a broad class of CCP problems without requiring the knowledge of the exact
distribution of uncertainty—relying solely on a set of samples. Second, to address
the nonconvexity of the chance constraints, it reformulates the CCP as a sampling
problem over the product of two distributions: an unknown data distribution
supported on a nonconvex set and a Boltzmann distribution defined by the objective
function, which fully leverages both first- and second-order gradient information.
Third, GGDOpt has theoretical convergence guarantees and provides practical
error bounds under mild assumptions. By progressively injecting noise during the
forward diffusion process to convexify the nonconvex feasible region, GGDOpt
enables guided reverse sampling to generate asymptotically optimal solutions.
Experimental results on synthetic datasets and a waveform design task in wireless
communications demonstrate that GGDOpt outperforms existing methods in both
solution quality and stability with nearly 80% overhead reduction.
Our code is available at https://github.com/boyangzhang2000/GGDOpt.

1

Introduction

1.1

Problem formulation

Chance constrained programming (CCP) is an efficient modeling paradigm for optimization problems
with uncertain constraints, which finds wide applications in diverse fields, such as finance (Bonami
and Lejeune [2009]), robot control (Calafiore and Campi [2006]), and wireless communications
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

