Towards Physical Understanding in Video Generation:
A 3D Point Regularization Approach

Yunuo Chen1,2∗, Junli Cao1,2 , Vidit Goel2 , Sergei Korolev2 ,
Chenfanfu Jiang1 , Jian Ren2 , Sergey Tulyakov2 , Anil Kag2
1
University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Snap Inc.

Abstract
We present a novel video generation framework that integrates 3-dimensional
geometry and dynamic awareness. To achieve this, we augment 2D videos with
3D point trajectories and align them in pixel space. The resulting 3D-aware video
dataset, PointVid, is then used to fine-tune a latent diffusion model, enabling it to
track 2D objects with 3D Cartesian coordinates. Building on this, we regularize
the shape and motion of objects in the video to eliminate undesired artifacts, e.g.,
non-physical deformation. Consequently, we enhance the quality of generated RGB
videos and alleviate common issues like object morphing, which are prevalent in
current video models due to a lack of shape awareness. With our 3D augmentation
and regularization, our model is capable of handling contact-rich scenarios such as
task-oriented videos, where 3D information is essential for perceiving shape and
motion of interacting solids. Our method can be seamlessly integrated into existing
video diffusion models to improve their visual plausibility.

1

Introduction

The recent development of video diffusion models has attracted significant research interests and seen
tremendous progress [5, 35, 15]. With vast amounts of training data and sophisticated architectures,
video models have greatly improved in expressiveness and aesthetics [6, 37]. Today, state-of-the-art
video models can realistically represent content from the real world with high creativity, enabling
various applications in the entertainment industry and scientific research [27]. However, existing
video diffusion models primarily focus on improving the appearance of content and the smoothness
of motion. The models are trained in a way to understand the movements of 2-dimensional pixels,
where the object movements in 3D space is approximated through the changing of RGB values.
As a result, the underlying 3-dimensional shapes and motions, which represent how objects truly exist
in the physical world, are not learned well in the existing video generation models. Even worse, we
observe that when the video diffusion models neglect the underlying 3D information, they struggle
to understand how objects occupy space, change shape and location, and interact with each other,
which is essential for generating videos with complex motion. For instance, imaging a situation when
perceiving a scene with a human performing specific tasks, e.g., hands tying shoelaces, viewpoint
projection and occlusion make it impossible to capture the true 3D shape of the hand and the shoelaces
using 2D pixels, complicating the modeling of how they make contact. Without understanding the
underlying geometry, objects in the video may change shape arbitrarily or even appear and disappear
suddenly, leading to the common issue of object morphing (as example results from prior arts in
Figure 1). This problem is exacerbated for complex objects like humans; without 3D awareness,
limbs and body parts may move unnaturally or change shape abruptly, resulting in dislocated arms or
twisted bodies.
∗

Work done during internship at Snap Inc.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

