AtlasGS: Atlanta-world Guided Surface
Reconstruction with Implicit Structured Gaussians

Xiyu Zhang1∗ Chong Bao1∗ Yipeng Chen1 Hongjia Zhai1 Yitong Dong1
Hujun Bao1 Zhaopeng Cui1 Guofeng Zhang1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
ScanNet

2DGS

ScanNet++

MonoSDF

MatrixCity

Ours

2DGS

Ours

ManhattanSDF

Replica

Ours

Ours

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison of indoor and outdoor reconstruction. For each scene, we
visualize both the reconstructed geometry and the surface normals. As highlighted by the orange
boxes, our method generates significantly smoother surfaces while capturing finer geometric details,
clearly outperforming the compared methods.

Abstract
3D reconstruction of indoor and urban environments is a prominent research
topic with various downstream applications. However, existing geometric priors
for addressing low-texture regions in indoor and urban settings often lack global
consistency. Moreover, Gaussian Splatting and implicit SDF fields often suffer from
discontinuities or exhibit computational inefficiencies, resulting in a loss of detail.
To address these issues, we propose an Atlanta-world guided implicit-structured
Gaussian Splatting that achieves smooth indoor and urban scene reconstruction
while preserving high-frequency details and rendering efficiency. By leveraging the
Atlanta-world model, we ensure the accurate surface reconstruction for low-texture
regions, while the proposed novel implicit-structured GS representations provide
smoothness without sacrificing efficiency and high-frequency details. Specifically,
we propose a semantic GS representation to predict the probability of all semantic
regions and deploy a structure plane regularization with learnable plane indicators
for global accurate surface reconstruction. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in both indoor and urban
scenes, delivering superior surface reconstruction quality.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

