An Analysis of Causal Effect Estimation using
Outcome Invariant Data Augmentation

Uzair Akbar∗ Niki Kilbertus
Georgia Tech
TU Munich
Helmholtz AI

Hao Shen
TU Munich
Fortiss GmbH

Krikamol Muandet
Rational Intelligence
CISPA

Bo Dai
Georgia Tech
Google DeepMind

Abstract
The technique of data augmentation (DA) is often used in machine learning for
regularization purposes to better generalize under i.i.d. settings. In this work, we
present a unifying framework with topics in causal inference to make a case for the
use of DA beyond just the i.i.d. setting, but for generalization across interventions
as well. Specifically, we argue that when the outcome generating mechanism
is invariant to our choice of DA, then such augmentations can effectively be
thought of as interventions on the treatment generating mechanism itself. This
can potentially help to reduce bias in causal effect estimation arising from hidden
confounders. In the presence of such unobserved confounding we typically make
use of instrumental variables (IVs)—sources of treatment randomization that are
conditionally independent of the outcome. However, IVs may not be as readily
available as DA for many applications, which is the main motivation behind
this work. By appropriately regularizing IV based estimators, we introduce the
concept of IV-like (IVL) regression for mitigating confounding bias and improving
predictive performance across interventions even when certain IV properties are
relaxed. Finally, we cast parameterized DA as an IVL regression problem and
show that when used in composition can simulate a worst-case application of
such DA, further improving performance on causal estimation and generalization
tasks beyond what simple DA may offer. This is shown both theoretically for the
population case and via simulation experiments for the finite sample case using a
simple linear example. We also present real data experiments to support our case.

1

Introduction

A classical problem in machine learning is that of regression—using i.i.d. samples from some fixed,
unknown distribution PX,Y , we predict outcome Y values for unlabeled treatment X values. The use
of regularization techniques is crucial for this task to achieve good generalization from training to
test data [1]. Data augmentation (DA) [2, 3] is one such method, where each sample is randomly
perturbed multiple times to grow the dataset size. However, these regression models cannot generally
be interpreted causally as the statistical relationship between X and Y may arise from shared common
causes, known as confounders, rather than from X influencing Y . Removing such confounders
requires independently assigning values of X during data generation, known as an intervention [4, 5].
Unfortunately, we seldom have access to the data generation process to be able to intervene on
variables. A common workaround is to use auxiliary variables to correct for unobserved confounders
[6–8]. One such approach is that of instrumental variables (IVs) that represent certain conditional independences in the system which can be used to identify the causal effect of X on Y [9–11]. Alas, IVs
too are generally hard to find in many popular applications such as computer vision and natural language processing, motivating the need for more accessible ways to mitigate unobserved confounding.
∗

Part of work done while at Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems and TU Munich.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

