Gated Integration of Low-Rank Adaptation
for Continual Learning of Large Language Models

Yan-Shuo Liang, Jia-Rui Chen and Wu-Jun Li∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University, P. R. China
{liangys,jiaruichen2005}@smail.nju.edu.cn, liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Continual learning (CL), which requires the model to learn multiple tasks sequentially, is crucial for large language models (LLMs). Recently, low-rank adaptation (LoRA), one of the most representative parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT)
methods, has gained increasing attention in CL of LLMs. However, most existing CL methods based on LoRA typically expand a new LoRA branch to learn
each new task and force the new and old LoRA branches to influence old tasks
equally, potentially leading to forgetting. In this work, we propose a new method,
called gated integration of low-rank adaptation (GainLoRA), for CL of LLMs.
GainLoRA expands a new LoRA branch for each new task and introduces gating
modules to integrate the new and old LoRA branches. Furthermore, GainLoRA
leverages the new gating module to minimize the influence from the new LoRA
branch to old tasks, effectively mitigating forgetting and improving the model’s
overall performance. Experimental results on CL benchmarks demonstrate that
GainLoRA outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/liangyanshuo/gainlora.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL), which requires the model to learn multiple tasks sequentially, is crucial
for large language models (LLMs) [48]. Specifically, although existing LLMs have demonstrated
strong performance for a wide range of tasks [4, 8, 53, 54, 73] with extensive pre-trained knowledge
and further fine-tuning strategies, they may lose knowledge acquired from old tasks when learning
multiple tasks sequentially. This phenomenon, known as catastrophic forgetting [36, 41, 59, 61],
highlights the need for developing effective CL methods for LLMs. Existing CL methods can be
categorized into two main categories. The first category [45] assumes that task identities are available
during inference, while the second category [32, 75] tackles a more difficult and practical setting
where task identities are unavailable during inference.
Recently, low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [21], one of the most representative parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods, has gained increasing attention in the CL of LLMs [3, 61]. Specifically,
by reparameterizing pre-trained weights in a low-rank form, LoRA updates only a limited number
of parameters to adapt LLMs to a downstream task, making the fine-tuning process much more
efficient than updating all parameters of LLMs [17]. This efficiency also benefits CL, making LoRA
increasingly popular in CL of LLMs.
Most existing CL methods based on LoRA [32, 75] typically expand a new LoRA branch for learning
each new task while freezing all old LoRA branches. In this way, they avoid forgetting caused by
directly updating the LoRA parameters of old tasks. However, to handle the practical CL scenario
∗

Wu-Jun Li is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

