MixSignGraph: A Sign Sequence is Worth Mixed
Graphs of Nodes

Shiwei Gan†

Yafeng Yin†∗ Zhiwei Jiang†

Lei Xie†

Sanglu Lu†

Hongkai Wen‡

†

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
‡
Department of Computer Science, The University of Warwick, UK
{sw,yafeng,jzw,lxie,sanglu}@nju.edu.cn hongkai.wen@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent advances in sign language research have benefited from CNN-based backbones, which are primarily transferred from traditional computer vision tasks (e.g.,
object detection, image recognition). However, these CNN-based backbones usually excel at extracting features like contours and texture, but may struggle with
capturing sign-related features. To capture such sign-related features, SignGraph
model extracts the cross-region sign features by building the Local Sign Graph
(LSG) module and the Temporal Sign Graph (TSG) module. However, we emphasize that although capturing cross-region dependencies can improve sign language
performance, it may degrade the representation quality of local regions. To mitigate
this, we introduce MixSignGraph, which represents sign sequences as a group of
mixed graphs for feature extraction. Specifically, besides the LSG module and
TSG module that model the intra-frame and inter-frame cross-regions features,
we design a simple yet effective Hierarchical Sign Graph (HSG) module, which
enhances local region representations following the extraction of cross-region features, by aggregating the same-region features from different-granularity feature
maps of a frame, i.e., to boost discriminative local features. In addition, to further
improve the performance of gloss-free sign language task, we propose a simple
yet counter-intuitive Text-based CTC Pre-training (TCTC) method, which generates pseudo gloss labels from text sequences for model pre-training. Extensive
experiments conducted on the current five sign language datasets demonstrate that
MixSignGraph surpasses the most current models on multiple sign language tasks
across several datasets, without relying on any additional cues. Code and models
are available at: https://github.com/gswycf/SignLanguage.

1

Introduction

Advancements in computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP) technologies have
significantly facilitated the development of sign language (SL) research, including Sign Language
Recognition (SLR) and Sign Language Translation (SLT). The SLR task encompasses Isolated SLR
(ISLR) (1) and Continuous SLR (CSLR) (2; 3; 4), aiming to recognize isolated or continuous signs
as corresponding glosses or gloss sequences. While the SLT task focuses on translating continuous
signs into spoken language (5). In the current SL framework, the standard approach first uses 2D/3D
CNN-based backbones to extract visual features (6; 7; 8), then employs temporal modules (5; 9; 10)
to capture dynamic changes in sign frames, and finally adopts a Connectionist Temporal Classification
(CTC) decoder to obtain the gloss sequence or a translation model to generate the spoken sentence.
Unlike other CV tasks where contour and texture representations are crucial, SL tasks need to focus
on both manual and non-manual features, particularly the collaboration of these cues in different
∗

Yafeng Yin is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

