GuardReasoner-VL:
Safeguarding VLMs via Reinforced Reasoning

Yue Liu1,2,3 , Shengfang Zhai3 , Mingzhe Du4,3
Yulin Chen3 , Tri Cao3 , Hongcheng Gao3 , Cheng Wang3
Xinfeng Li4 , Kun Wang4 , Junfeng Fang3 , Jiaheng Zhang3 , Bryan Hooi2,3
1
Integrative Sciences and Engineering Programme, NUS Graduate School
2
Institute of Data Science, NUS
3
Department of Computer Science, School of Computing, NUS
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, NTU
yliu@u.nus.edu

Abstract
To enhance the safety of VLMs, this paper introduces a novel reasoning-based
VLM guard model dubbed GuardReasoner-VL. The core idea is to incentivize the
guard model to deliberatively reason before making moderation decisions via online
RL. First, we construct GuardReasoner-VLTrain, a reasoning corpus with 123K
samples and 631K reasoning steps, spanning text, image, and text-image inputs.
Then, based on it, we cold-start our model’s reasoning ability via SFT. In addition,
we further enhance reasoning regarding moderation through online RL. Concretely,
to enhance diversity and difficulty of samples, we conduct rejection sampling
followed by data augmentation via the proposed safety-aware data concatenation.
Besides, we use a dynamic clipping parameter to encourage exploration in early
stages and exploitation in later stages. To balance performance and token efficiency,
we design a length-aware safety reward that integrates accuracy, format, and token
cost. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our model. Remarkably,
it surpasses the runner-up by 19.27% F1 score on average, as shown in Figure 1.
We release data, code, and models (3B/7B) of GuardReasoner-VL1 .
Warning: This Paper Contains Potentially Harmful Content.

1

Introduction

Built upon large language models (LLMs), vision-language models (VLMs) achieve remarkable
success in a wide range of real-world applications such as computer use [73], deep research [77],
embodied AI [13], etc. However, when deploying VLMs in safety-critical domains such as education
[11], finance [86], or government, they remain vulnerable to manipulations and attacks [52, 21, 53, 41].
To alleviate this problem, safety alignment methods [51, 101] are proposed by training VLMs to
align with human values and expectations. While effective, it imposes the alignment tax [27, 42],
compromising the fundamental capabilities of models, such as creativity, helpfulness, and reasoning.
To mitigate this drawback, VLM guard models [15, 10, 30] are developed to safeguard VLMs without
direct modifications to the victim VLMs. For example, VLMGuard [15] detects malicious text-image
prompts using unlabeled data. In addition, LLaMA Guard 3-Vision [10] moderates both text-image
1
2

https://github.com/yueliu1999/GuardReasoner-VL
Jiaheng Zhang and Bryan Hooi are corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

