Fractional Diffusion Bridge Models
Gabriel Nobis ∗
Fraunhofer HHI
Rembert Daems
Ghent University–imec
FlandersMake–MIRO

Maximilian Springenberg ∗
Fraunhofer HHI
Christoph Knochenhauer
Technical University of Munich

Tolga Birdal †
Imperial College London

Arina Belova
Fraunhofer HHI
Manfred Opper
Technical University of Berlin
University of Potsdam
University of Birmingham

Wojciech Samek †
Fraunhofer HHI
Technical University of Berlin

Abstract
We present Fractional Diffusion Bridge Models (FDBM), a novel generative diffusion bridge framework driven by an approximation of the rich and non-Markovian
fractional Brownian motion (fBM). Real stochastic processes exhibit a degree of
memory effects (correlations in time), long-range dependencies, roughness and
anomalous diffusion phenomena that are not captured in standard diffusion or
bridge modeling due to the use of Brownian motion (BM). As a remedy, leveraging a recent Markovian approximation of fBM (MA-fBM), we construct FDBM
that enable tractable inference while preserving the non-Markovian nature of fBM.
We prove the existence of a coupling-preserving generative diffusion bridge and
leverage it for future state prediction from paired training data. We then extend
our formulation to the Schrödinger bridge problem and derive a principled loss
function to learn the unpaired data translation. We evaluate FDBM on both tasks:
predicting future protein conformations from aligned data, and unpaired image
translation. In both settings, FDBM achieves superior performance compared to
the Brownian baselines, yielding lower root mean squared deviation (RMSD) of
Cα atomic positions in protein structure prediction and lower Fréchet Inception
Distance (FID) in unpaired image translation.

1

Introduction

Stochastic differential equations (SDEs) offer a natural framework for modeling the inherent randomness and continuous-time dynamics of real-world systems [1, 2]. This is precisely why they
serve as the backbone of state-of-the-art generative diffusion models [3–5]. Traditionally, these
models assume noise driven by standard Brownian motion (BM) [6–8], which is Markovian with
independent increments [9]. However, this choice is motivated by mathematical tractability and
simplicity rather than faithfulness and ﬁdelity to real-world data. Empirical data, particularly in
complex systems such as proteins, often exhibit long-range temporal dependencies, heavy-tailed behaviors, and intricate dynamics that are poorly captured by memoryless processes [10]. A generative
process, lacking temporal dependencies, may lead to insufﬁcient approximations of such intricate
data, due to the absence of modeled memory effects. These limitations have motivated recent efforts to explore generative models with non-standard noise sources [11–18]. Our work extends
*

Equal contribution; † Shared senior authorship
corresponding authors: {gabriel.nobis, maximilian.springenberg}@hhi.fraunhofer.de

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

