Diversity-oriented Deep Multi-modal Clustering

Yanzheng Wang#,

Xin Yang#,

Yujun Wang,

Shizhe Hu∗ ,

Mingliang Xu∗

School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University, China

Abstract
Deep multi-modal clustering (DMC) aims to explore the correlated information
from different modalities to improve the clustering performance. Most existing
DMCs attempt to investigate the consistency or/and complementarity information
by fusing all modalities, but this will lead to the following challenges: 1) Information conflicts between modalities emerge. 2) Information-rich modalities may be
weakened. To address the above challenges, we propose a diversity-oriented deep
multi-modal clustering (DDMC) method, where the core is dominant modality
enhancement instead of multi-modal fusion. Specifically, we select the modality
with the highest average silhouette coefficient as the dominant modality, then learn
the diversity information between the dominant madality and the remaining ones
with diversity learning, and finally enhance the dominant modality for clustering.
Extensive experiments show the superiority of the proposed method over several
compared DMC methods. To our knowledge, this is the first work to perform
multi-modal clustering by enhancing the dominant modality instead of fusion.

1

Introduction

Deep multi-modal clustering (DMC) aims to integrate data from multiple modalities (e.g., image,
text, audio, etc.) to classify the data through unsupervised learning. DMC combines the feature
extraction ability of deep learning and the clustering idea of unsupervised learning, which is an
important direction of multi-modal data analysis at present, and has achieved excellent performance
in many fields, such as the medical field [1–3], autonomous driving and intelligent transportation
[4, 5], and recommendation systems [6–8].
Related Works. At present, almost all DMCs cluster by fusion method. Based on different fusion
stages, DMCs can be roughly divided into the following three categories: 1) Feature-level fusion:
these methods [9–13] extract the features of different modalities and connect them into a single
high-dimensional feature vector, which is used as a single input for clustering or feature learning.
For example: Zhou and Shen [10] propose a method that first use an adversarial regularizer to align
modalities, and then perform an attention fusion on all modalities, so as to quantify the importance
of different modalities. 2) Decision-level fusion: these methods [14–16] first obtain independent
modeling of each modality, obtain their own output or clustering results, and then fuse these results
in the final stage. For example, Meng et al.[14] conduct the features of different modalities in
their respective clustering layers for depression regression training, and linearly weighted sums the
prediction results of each modality to obtain the fusion result as the final output result. 3) Mixed-level
fusion: these methods [17–19] combine the output of a single mode prediction through feature-level
fusion. For example, Morales et al.[17] train a separate model for each modality, then get the
predictions for each modality, and finally train a new model on these new vectors to output the final
prediction.
#
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author (ieshizhehu@gmail.com)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

