Safe RLHF-V: Safe Reinforcement Learning
from Multi-modal Human Feedback
Jiaming Ji1,2 , Xinyu Chen1 , Rui Pan1 , Han Zhu3 , Jiahao Li1 , Donghai Hong1,2 , Boyuan Chen1 , Jiayi
Zhou1,2 , Kaile Wang1 , Juntao Dai1 , Chi-Min Chan3 , Sirui Han3 , Yike Guo3 , and Yaodong Yang1,*
2

1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) are essential for building generalpurpose AI assistants; however, they pose increasing safety risks. How can we
ensure safety alignment of MLLMs to prevent undesired behaviors? Going further,
it is critical to explore how to fine-tune MLLMs to preserve capabilities while
meeting safety constraints. Fundamentally, this challenge can be formulated as a
min-max optimization problem. However, existing datasets have not yet disentangled single preference signals into explicit safety constraints, hindering systematic
investigation in this direction. Moreover, it remains an open question whether such
constraints can be effectively incorporated into the optimization process for multimodal models. In this work, we present the first exploration of the Safe RLHF-V
– the first multimodal safety alignment framework. The framework consists of:
(I) BeaverTails-V, the first open-source dataset featuring dual preference annotations for helpfulness and safety, supplemented with multi-level safety labels
(minor, moderate, severe); (II) Beaver-Guard-V, a multi-level guardrail system
to proactively defend against unsafe queries and adversarial attacks. Applying the
guard model over five rounds of filtering and regeneration significantly enhances
the precursor model’s overall safety by an average of 40.9%. (III) Based on dual
preference, we initiate the first exploration of multi-modal safety alignment
within a constrained optimization. Experimental results demonstrate that Safe
RLHF effectively improves both model helpfulness and safety. Specifically, Safe
RLHF-V enhances model safety by 34.2% and helpfulness by 34.3%.1

1

Introduction

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) are pivotal for developing general-purpose AI assistants
[1, 2]. By using visual instruction tuning on foundation models [3], MLLMs can effectively handle
complex multimodal tasks. However, recent research highlights that images can implicitly induce
MLLMs to generate harmful content, exposing vulnerabilities that are less pronounced in purely
LLMs. What is worse, fine-tuning MLLMs can lead to the forgetting of safety alignment previously
learned by the backbone LLMs [4, 5]. Consequently, improving the safety of MLLMs to align with
human preference is a major concern at present [6]. So, as MLLMs continue to advance, emerging
studies reveal a critical challenge:
How can we ensure the safety alignment of MLLMs? This is under exploration.
So, we need to answer: Which type of preference data and what optimization are effective?
1

Email: jiamg.ji@gmail.com, yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn, ∗ Corresponding author.
All of datasets, models, and code can be found at https://github.com/SafeRLHF-V.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

