CALM-PDE: Continuous and Adaptive Convolutions
for Latent Space Modeling of Time-dependent PDEs
Jan Hagnberger∗ Daniel Musekamp1

Mathias Niepert1,2

Machine Learning and Simulation Lab, Institute for Artificial Intelligence, University of Stuttgart
1
International Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS)
2
Stuttgart Center for Simulation Science (SimTech)

Abstract
Solving time-dependent Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) using a densely
discretized spatial domain is a fundamental problem in various scientific and engineering disciplines, including modeling climate phenomena and fluid dynamics.
However, performing these computations directly in the physical space often incurs
significant computational costs. To address this issue, several neural surrogate
models have been developed that operate in a compressed latent space to solve the
PDE. While these approaches reduce computational complexity, they often use
Transformer-based attention mechanisms to handle irregularly sampled domains,
resulting in increased memory consumption. In contrast, convolutional neural
networks allow memory-efficient encoding and decoding but are limited to regular
discretizations. Motivated by these considerations, we propose CALM-PDE, a
model class that efficiently solves arbitrarily discretized PDEs in a compressed
latent space. We introduce a novel continuous convolution-based encoder-decoder
architecture that uses an epsilon-neighborhood-constrained kernel and learns to
apply the convolution operator to adaptive and optimized query points. We demonstrate the effectiveness of CALM-PDE on a diverse set of PDEs with both regularly
and irregularly sampled spatial domains. CALM-PDE is competitive with or outperforms existing baseline methods while offering significant improvements in
memory and inference time efficiency compared to Transformer-based methods.

1

Introduction

Many scientific problems, such as climate modeling and fluid mechanics, rely on simulating physical
systems, often involving solving spatio-temporal Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). In recent
years, Machine Learning (ML) models have been successfully used to approximate the solution
of PDEs (Lu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Brandstetter et al., 2022; Chen & Wu, 2024), offering
several advantages over classical numerical PDE solvers. For instance, ML models offer a data-driven
approach that is applicable even if the underlying physics is (partially) unknown, can generate
solutions more efficiently (Li et al., 2021b; Tompson et al., 2017), and are inherently differentiable
by design, which is often not the case for numerical solvers (Takamoto et al., 2022).
Practical applications usually require a densely discretized spatial domain Ω, leading to more than
1M spatial points per timestep. For example, ML-based weather forecasting models typically operate
on a spatial domain of 720 × 1440 points or pixels (Pathak et al., 2022). Learning the solution of
∗

Corresponding author: j.hagnberger@gmail.com
The source code of CALM-PDE is available on GitHub: https://github.com/jhagnberger/calm-pde

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

