Hogwild! Inference:
Parallel LLM Generation via Concurrent Attention
Gleb Rodionov† ∗ Roman Garipov∗ Alina Shutova∗ George Yakushev∗ Erik Schultheis∗
Yandex
HSE University HSE University
HSE University
IST Austria
Yandex
Yandex
Yandex
Vage Egiazarian
IST Austria

Anton Sinitsin
Yandex

Denis Kuznedelev
Yandex

Dan Alistarh‡
IST Austria

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated the ability to tackle increasingly complex tasks through advanced reasoning, long-form content generation,
and tool use. Solving these tasks often involves long inference-time computations.
In human problem solving, a common strategy to expedite work is collaboration: by
dividing the problem into sub-tasks, exploring different strategies concurrently, etc.
Recent research has shown that LLMs can also operate in parallel by implementing
explicit cooperation frameworks, such as voting mechanisms or the explicit creation of independent sub-tasks that can be executed in parallel. However, each of
these frameworks may not be suitable for all types of tasks, which can hinder their
applicability. In this work, we propose a different design approach: we run LLM
“workers” in parallel , allowing them to synchronize via a concurrently-updated
attention cache and prompt these workers to decide how best to collaborate. Our
approach allows the LLM instances to come up with their own collaboration strategy for the problem at hand, all the while “seeing” each other’s memory in the
concurrent KV cache. We implement this approach via Hogwild! Inference: a
parallel LLM inference engine where multiple instances of the same LLM run in
parallel with the same attention cache, with “instant” access to each other’s memory.1 Hogwild! Inference takes advantage of Rotary Position Embeddings (RoPE)
to avoid recomputation while improving parallel hardware utilization. We find that
modern reasoning-capable LLMs can perform inference with shared Key-Value
cache out of the box, without additional fine-tuning.

1

Introduction

Many recent advancements of Large Language Models can be attributed to their ability to perform
inference-time computations to improve performance [Suzgun et al., 2022, Snell et al., 2024, Beeching
et al., Muennighoff et al., 2025]. This includes chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning [Wei et al.,
2022, Kojima et al., 2022, Zhang et al., 2022, Yao et al., 2023, Lightman et al., 2023], long-form
generation [Bai et al., 2024] and interacting with external tools [Schick et al., 2023, Qin et al., 2023,
Yao et al., 2022, Shen et al., 2023]. Popular LLM-based services have capabilities for reasoning and
tool use [OpenAI et al., 2024, Google DeepMind, 2025, Anthropic, 2024]. At the same time, several
reasoning-capable open-access LLMs have recently been released to the public [DeepSeek-AI et al.,
2025, Qwen Team, 2025, Yang et al., 2024, Muennighoff et al., 2025, Ye et al., 2025].
Using these models to solve complex problems often requires long sequential computations, that is,
generating text token-by-token. However, many reasoning problems are not sequential. Leveraging
this intuition, several recent works propose parallel inference strategies that allow multiple LLMs
1
†

Our implementation is available at https://github.com/eqimp/hogwild_llm .
Corresponding author: rodionovgleb@yandex-team.ru. ∗ Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

‡ Senior author.

