Anchor-based Maximum Discrepancy for
Relative Similarity Testing

Zhijian Zhou, Liuhua Peng, Xunye Tian, Feng Liu∗
The University of Melbourne, Australia
{zhijianzhou.ml, xunyetian.ml, fengliu.ml}@gmail.com
liuhua.peng@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
The relative similarity testing aims to determine which of the distributions, P or
Q, is closer to an anchor distribution U. Existing kernel-based approaches often
test the relative similarity with a fixed kernel in a manually specified alternative
hypothesis, e.g., Q is closer to U than P. Although kernel selection is known to be
important to kernel-based testing methods, the manually specified hypothesis poses
a significant challenge for kernel selection in relative similarity testing: Once the
hypothesis is specified first, we can always find a kernel such that the hypothesis is
rejected. This challenge makes relative similarity testing ill-defined when we want
to select a good kernel after the hypothesis is specified. In this paper, we cope with
this challenge via learning a proper hypothesis and a kernel simultaneously, instead
of learning a kernel after manually specifying the hypothesis. We propose an
anchor-based maximum discrepancy (AMD), which defines the relative similarity
as the maximum discrepancy between the distances of (U, P) and (U, Q) in a space
of deep kernels. Based on AMD, our testing incorporates two phases. In Phase I,
we estimate the AMD over the deep kernel space and infer the potential hypothesis.
In Phase II, we assess the statistical significance of the potential hypothesis, where
we propose a unified testing framework to derive thresholds for tests over different
possible hypotheses from Phase I. Lastly, we validate our method theoretically and
demonstrate its effectiveness via extensive experiments on benchmark datasets.
Codes are publicly available at: https://github.com/tmlr-group/AMD.

1

Introduction

Assessing differences between distributions is an important research area in machine learning,
especially for tasks that often involve various distributions, e.g., different training and test data
distributions in many real-world scenarios [1]. For such tasks, two-sample testing has been developed
as a principled method to assess whether two distributions are identical [2]. However, it becomes less
effective when the task requires comparing three or more distributions. For example, in scenarios
where multiple models are available for a given test dataset, selecting the model trained on data most
similar to the test data is essential for optimal performance. Additionally, in studies with generative
data, including those arising from generative models [3], adversarial attacks [4], data augmentation
[5] and machine generated text detection [6], a key challenge is to assess relative similarity between
different generative data distributions and the original data distribution.
Fortunately, relative similarity testing provides a framework to assess which of the distributions, P or
Q, is closer to the anchor distribution U; in practice, these distributions are typically unknown, and we
can only observe samples from them. Existing methods evaluate the relative similarity between the
pairs (U, P) and (U, Q) by comparing the discrepancy between their distances, d(U, P) and d(U, Q).
∗

Correspondence to Feng Liu (fengliu.ml@gmail.com).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

