Generation as Search Operator for Test-Time Scaling
of Diffusion-Based Combinatorial Optimization

1

Yang Li12† , Lvda Chen1† , Haonan Wang1 , Runzhong Wang1 , Junchi Yan12 ∗
School of Computer Science & School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute
{yanglily,chenlvda,greedycow,runzhong.wang,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/GenSCO

Abstract
While diffusion models have shown promise for combinatorial optimization (CO),
their inference-time scaling cost-efficiency remains relatively underexplored. Existing methods improve solution quality by increasing denoising steps, but the
performance often becomes saturated quickly. This paper proposes GenSCO to
systematically scale diffusion solvers by an orthogonal dimension of inference-time
computation beyond denoising step expansion, i.e., search-driven generation. GenSCO takes generation as a search operator rather than a complete solving process,
where each operator cycle combines solution disruption (via local search operators)
and diffusion sampling, enabling iterative exploration of the learned solution space.
Rather than over-refining current solutions, this paradigm encourages the model
to leave local optima and explore a broader area of the solution space, ensuring a
more consistent scaling effect. The search loop is supported by a search-friendly
solution-enhancement training procedure that incorporates a rectified flow model
learning to establish diffusion trajectories between suboptimal solutions and the
optimal ones. The flow model is empowered by a lightweight transformer architecture to learn neural ODEs that linearize solution trajectories, accelerating
convergence of the scaling effect with efficiency. The resulting enhanced scaling
efficiency and practical scalability lead to synergistic performance improvements.
Extensive experiments show that GenSCO delivers performance improvements
by orders of magnitude over previous state-of-the-art neural methods. Notably,
GenSCO even achieves significant speedups compared to the state-of-the-art classic
mathematical solver LKH3, delivering a 141× speedup to reach 0.000% optimality
gap on TSP-100, and approximately a 10× speedup to reach 0.02% on TSP-500.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial Optimization (CO), which seeks optimal solutions in discrete spaces under complex
constraints, underpins critical applications in vehicle routing [1, 2, 3], chip design [4, 5], and drug
discovery [6]. However, the NP-hard nature of many CO problems renders them computationally
intractable, traditionally requiring hand-crafted heuristics that demand substantial domain expertise and time to design. Recent advances in deep learning have revolutionized this landscape by
automating heuristic design through data-driven neural solvers [7, 1, 8, 9, 10]. These ML-based
approaches minimize human intervention while achieving competitive or superior solution quality and
solving speed, particularly for instances following structured distributions. By learning generalizable
frameworks directly from data, they also adapt seamlessly to unseen problem variants.
∗
Correspondence author. † denotes equal contribution. Runzhong Wang is currently affiliated with MIT; part
of this work was done when he was at SJTU.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

