gAttention Sinks:
A ‘Catch, Tag, Release’ Mechanism for Embeddings

Stephen Zhang, Mustafa Khan, Vardan Papyan
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
{stephenn.zhang, mr.khan}@mail.utoronto.ca, vardan.papyan@utoronto.ca

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) often concentrate their attention on a few specific
tokens referred to as attention sinks. Common examples include the first token, a
prompt-independent sink, and punctuation tokens, which are prompt-dependent.
While the tokens causing the sinks often lack direct semantic meaning, the presence
of the sinks is critical for model performance, particularly under model compression
and KV-caching. Despite their ubiquity, the function, semantic role, and origin of
attention sinks—especially those beyond the first token—remain poorly understood.
In this work, we conduct a comprehensive investigation demonstrating that attention
sinks: catch a sequence of tokens, tag them using a common direction in embedding
space, and release them back into the residual stream, where tokens are later
retrieved based on the tags they have acquired. Probing experiments reveal these
tags carry semantically meaningful information, such as the truth of a statement.
These findings extend to reasoning models, where the mechanism spans more
heads and explains greater variance in embeddings, or recent models with querykey normalization, where sinks remain just as prevalent. To encourage future
theoretical analysis, we introduce a minimal problem which can be solved through
the ‘catch, tag, release’ mechanism, and where it emerges through training.

1

Introduction

1.1

‘Catch, Tag, Release’ in Aquatic Conservation

In marine biology, the ‘catch, tag, release’ mechanism is a vital tool for tracking fish populations.
A fish is caught, fitted with a tracking tag encoding critical information, and then released back
into the water stream, where it can be monitored over time. This process enables researchers to
understand migration patterns and ecosystem interactions. Remarkably, LLMs exhibit a strikingly
similar mechanism when processing tokens. To understand why, we first examine a recent discovery
in LLM research.
1.2

The Prevalence of Attention Sinks

In many models, tokens often focus disproportionately on a select few positions in the sequence.
Xiao et al. [2024] identified the first token as a common focal point, referring to it as an attention
sink. Follow-up studies have shown that, beyond this fixed sink, additional ones can emerge based on
the input – often appearing on punctuation [Yu et al., 2024, Sun et al., 2024, Cancedda, 2024].
Preserving these sinks has proven critical for retaining model performance in several key areas,
including KV-caching [Xiao et al., 2024, Liu et al., 2024, Guo et al., 2024b, Willette et al., 2024],
quantization [Lin et al., 2024, Son et al., 2024], and pruning [Zhang and Papyan, 2025a]. Motivated
by these findings, researchers have begun to investigate the following question.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

