PlanarGS: High-Fidelity Indoor 3D Gaussian
Splatting Guided by Vision-Language Planar Priors

Xirui Jin∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Boying Li †
Monash University
boying.li@monash.edu

Renbiao Jin∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Danping Zou†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
dpzou@sjtu.edu.cn

Wenxian Yu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Three-dimensional Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has recently emerged as an efficient representation for novel-view synthesis, achieving impressive visual quality.
However, in scenes dominated by large and low-texture regions, common in indoor environments, the photometric loss used to optimize 3DGS yields ambiguous
geometry and fails to recover high-fidelity 3D surfaces. To overcome this limitation, we introduce PlanarGS, a 3DGS-based framework tailored for indoor scene
reconstruction. Specifically, we design a pipeline for Language-Prompted Planar
Priors (LP3) that employs a pretrained vision-language segmentation model and
refines its region proposals via cross-view fusion and inspection with geometric
priors. 3D Gaussians in our framework are optimized with two additional terms:
a planar prior supervision term that enforces planar consistency, and a geometric
prior supervision term that steers the Gaussians toward the depth and normal cues.
We have conducted extensive experiments on standard indoor benchmarks. The
results show that PlanarGS reconstructs accurate and detailed 3D surfaces, consistently outperforming state-of-the-art methods by a large margin. Project page:
https://planargs.github.io

1

Introduction

Image-based 3D modeling is a long-standing challenge in the computer vision community, aiming to
recover the 3D scene from a collection of images [42]. It serves as a fundamental component for a
wide range of applications, including computer graphics, augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR), and
robotics. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [18] has emerged as a promising approach to
modeling the 3D world. Given pictures captured from different viewpoints, 3DGS optimizes both
the appearance and the geometry (scale, rotation, and position) of 3D Gaussian spheres to enforce
the rendered image to be as close as possible to the real image captured in the target viewpoint. The
appearance similarity, described by a photometric loss, plays in key role in the 3DGS training process.
Despite its impressive visual quality of view rendering, 3DGS still struggles to reconstruct a highfidelity 3D surface model in scenes where large low-texture regions exist. Such kind of scenes are
commonly seen in indoor environments. Lack of textures makes using the appearance cue as the
supervision signal alone difficult to resolve the geometric ambiguities, resulting in inaccurate or
false geometric reconstruction. To resolve such ambiguity, the recent method PGSR [4] applies the
multi-view geometric consistency constraint to enhance the smoothness in areas with weak textures.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

