Metis: A Foundation Speech Generation Model
with Masked Generative Pre-training

Yuancheng Wang, Jiachen Zheng, Junan Zhang, Xueyao Zhang, Huan Liao, Zhizheng Wu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
yuanchengwang@link.cuhk.edu.cn, wuzhizheng@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
We introduce Metis, a foundation model for unified speech generation. Unlike previous task-specific or multi-task models, Metis follows a pre-training and fine-tuning
paradigm. It is pre-trained on large-scale unlabeled speech data using masked
generative modeling and then fine-tuned to adapt to diverse speech generation tasks.
Specifically, 1) Metis utilizes two discrete speech representations: SSL tokens
derived from speech self-supervised learning (SSL) features, and acoustic tokens
directly quantized from waveforms. 2) Metis performs masked generative pretraining on SSL tokens, utilizing 300K hours of diverse speech data, without any
additional condition. 3) Through fine-tuning with task-specific conditions, Metis
achieves efficient adaptation to various speech generation tasks while supporting
multimodal input, even when using limited data and trainable parameters. Experiments demonstrate that Metis can serve as a foundation model for unified speech
generation: Metis outperforms state-of-the-art task-specific or multi-task systems
across five speech generation tasks, including zero-shot text-to-speech, voice conversion, target speaker extraction, speech enhancement, and lip-to-speech, even
with fewer than 20M trainable parameters or 300 times less training data. Audio
samples are are available at https://metis-demo.github.io/. We release the
code and model checkpoints at https://github.com/open-mmlab/Amphion.

1

Introduction

Advancing a unified framework capable of addressing diverse tasks is a central research objective
within the domain of artificial intelligence. In natural language processing [1, 2, 3] and computer
vision [4, 5, 6], foundation models leveraging large-scale self-supervised pre-training have demonstrated remarkable adaptability across a wide spectrum of downstream tasks. However, in the
domain of speech generation, this potential remains underexplored. A unified speech can integrate
various speech generation technologies, such as text-to-speech [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], voice conversion [13, 14, 15, 16], and speech enhancement [17, 18, 19]. This integration reduces redundant
development, facilitates broader applications across diverse domains, and enhances the efficiency of
human-machine interaction.
Previous speech generation models are mostly expert models that require extensive task-specific
designs [7, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. UniAudio [26] and SpeechX [27] are pioneering works that
attempt to use autoregressive language models for multiple speech generation tasks. However, they
require a large amount of paired training data for each task and face challenges in extending to
new tasks based on pre-trained models. In addition, the autoregressive approach leads to suboptimal
results in certain tasks and is relatively inefficient.
In this paper, we address the research question of how to design a unified speech generation
framework that leverages large-scale unlabeled speech data for pre-training and efficiently adapts
to diverse speech generation tasks through fine-tuning. Inspired by previous two-stage speech
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

