Revisiting Bi-Linear State Transitions
in Recurrent Neural Networks
M.Reza Ebrahimi
Qualcomm AI Research
ebrahimi@qti.qualcomm.com

Roland Memisevic
Qualcomm AI Research ∗
rmemisev@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
The role of hidden units in recurrent neural networks is typically seen as modeling
memory, with research focusing on enhancing information retention through gating
mechanisms. A less explored perspective views hidden units as active participants
in the computation performed by the network, rather than passive memory stores.
In this work, we revisit bilinear operations, which involve multiplicative interactions between hidden units and input embeddings. We demonstrate theoretically
and empirically that they constitute a natural inductive bias for representing the
evolution of hidden states in state tracking tasks. These are the simplest type of
tasks that require hidden units to actively contribute to the behavior of the network.
We also show that bilinear state updates form a natural hierarchy corresponding to
state tracking tasks of increasing complexity, with popular linear recurrent networks
such as Mamba residing at the lowest-complexity center of that hierarchy.

1

Introduction

State tracking is a fundamental requirement for performing sequential decision-making tasks, in
which future actions depend on the consequences of past actions. The consequences of past actions
are usually not directly observable, making state tracking a key ingredient in virtually every realworld multi-step interaction between an agent and its environment. This includes multi-hop dialogue,
end-to-end learned robot control, and recent “agentic LLM” use-cases, in which a language model is
trained to interact with an API.
While state tracking is an ill-defined concept in general, a common way to define it formally, which
shall suffice for the purpose of this work, is to treat it as the task of correctly representing the
arbitrary-length sequence of states that a state machine takes on in response to observing a given
sequence of inputs. This is equivalent to modeling Finite Automata (FA), or regular languages, in the
Chomsky hierarchy of formal languages (Chomsky, 1956; Hopcroft et al., 2006).
Although state tracking is a seemingly simple task for neural networks to learn, many models are
surprisingly bad at learning it from data. The reason for its simplicity is that the task admits a
simple inductive decomposition: For each input in the sequence, it suffices to update an internal
representation of the state inferred from all inputs seen previously. As a result, it is possible, in
principle, to learn state tracking for sequences of arbitrary length by simply learning the appropriate
state transitions for every (input, state)-pair from the training data.
However, in practice, this requires an inductive bias towards the input-by-input state update, which is
not present in many models. For example, many popular sequence models, such as the Transformer
cannot learn to perform state tracking (Dziri et al., 2023; Anil et al., 2022; Abbe et al., 2024) on
sequences longer than the training data. This includes very large, pre-trained Transformer-based
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

