Neural Correlates of Serial Dependence: Synaptic
Short-term Plasticity Orchestrates Repulsion and
Attraction
Xiuning Zhang1
xiuning_zhang@outlook.com

Xincheng Lu1
lvxc24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Nihong Chen2∗
nihongch@m.scnu.edu.cn

Yuanyuan Mi1∗
miyuanyuan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Serial dependence reflects how recent sensory history shapes current perception,
producing two opposing biases: repulsion, where perception is repelled from recent
stimuli, and attraction, where perception is drawn toward them. Repulsion typically
occurs at the sensory perception stage, while attraction arises at the post-perception
stage. To uncover the neural basis of these effects, we developed a two-layer
continuous attractor neural network model incorporating synaptic short-term plasticity (STP). The lower layer, dominated by synaptic depression, models sensory
processing and drives repulsion due to sustained neurotransmitter depletion. The
higher layer, dominated by synaptic facilitation, models post-perception processing
and drives attraction by sustained high neurotransmitter release probability. Our
model successfully explains the serial dependence phenomena observed in the
visual orientation judgment experiments, highlighting STP as the critical mechanism, with its time constants defining the temporal windows of repulsion and
attraction. Furthermore, the model provides a neural foundation for the Bayesian
interpretation of serial dependence. This study advances our understanding of how
the neural system leverages STP to balance sensitivity in sensory perception with
stability in post-perceptual cognition.

1

Introduction

The visual world casts dynamic images on the retina. From moment to moment, internal and external
noise fluctuates across changes in lighting, occlusion, and viewpoint in the environment. Yet we
perceive coherence and stability in the world. Serial dependence is an intrinsic mechanism through
which our visual system exploits temporal correlations and contextual redundancies by merging
similar stimuli that slightly change over time. The visual system harnesses this autocorrelation by
inducing positive serial dependencies, drawing the current perception towards the recent history.
Through continuous serial dependencies, cognition compensates for variability in sensory input,
stabilizing what would otherwise be a noisy and discontinuous experience of the world [1, 2, 3, 4].
In contrast to the positive serial dependence, negative dependence is widely documented. Examples
of negative serial dependence are well-known phenomena of visual adaptation and aftereffects [5, 6],
e.g., a vertical grating appears to tilt clockwise after exposure to counterclockwise orientations. Such
∗
Corresponding authors. 1 Department of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China. 2 Key Laboratory of Brain, Cognition and Education Sciences, Ministry of Education; School of
Psychology, Center for Studies of Psychological Application; Guangdong Key Laboratory of Mental Health and
Cognitive Science, Philosophy and Social Science Laboratory of Reading and Development in Children and
Adolescents; South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510631, China.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

