DeblurDiff: Real-World Image Deblurring with
Generative Diffusion Models
Lingshun Kong1,∗ , Jiawei Zhang2 , Dongqing Zou3 , Fu Lee Wang4 ,
Jimmy S. Ren4 , Xiaohe Wu5 , Jiangxin Dong1 , Jinshan Pan1,†
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 SenseTime Research 3 PBVR
4
Hong Kong Metropolitan University 5 Harbin Institute of Technology

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved significant progress in image generation and the
pre-trained Stable Diffusion (SD) models are helpful for image deblurring by providing clear image priors. However, directly using a blurry image or pre-deblurred
one as a conditional control for SD will either hinder accurate structure extraction
or make the results overly dependent on the deblurring network. In this work,
we propose a Latent Kernel Prediction Network (LKPN) to achieve robust realworld image deblurring. Specifically, we co-train the LKPN in latent space with
conditional diffusion. The LKPN learns a spatially variant kernel to guide the
restoration of sharp images in the latent space. By applying element-wise adaptive
convolution (EAC), the learned kernel is utilized to adaptively process the blurry
feature, effectively preserving the information of the blurry input. This process
thereby more effectively guides the generative process of SD, enhancing both the
deblurring efficacy and the quality of detail reconstruction. Moreover, the results at
each diffusion step are utilized to iteratively estimate the kernels in LKPN to better
restore the sharp latent by EAC in the subsequent step. This iterative refinement
enhances the accuracy and robustness of the deblurring process. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art
image deblurring methods on both benchmark and real-world images.

1

Introduction

Image deblurring aims to recover a sharp image from a blurry observation. Blurring can be caused
by various factors, such as camera shake and high-speed movement of the photographed objects.
This task is challenging as only the blurry images are available and the blur might be non-uniform.
Traditional deblurring methods [17, 16] have made significant progress by utilizing hand-crafted
features and priors. However, these methods often struggle to handle complex blur patterns and may
produce unsatisfactory results.
Numerous learning-based approaches [25, 3, 31, 1] have been inclined to employ a variety of
convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures. Compared with traditional algorithms, CNNs
have demonstrated remarkable success. However, the convolution operation is a spatially invariant
local operation, which cannot effectively model the spatially variant characteristics of image content
and the global contexts for image deblurring. To address the limitations of CNNs, Transformers [32,
27, 12, 10] have been increasingly applied to image deblurring and have achieved commendable
performance.
∗
†

This project is done during the internship at SenseTime Research.
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

