Graph Neural Network Based Action Ranking for
Planning

Rajesh Mangannavar
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
mangannr@oregonstate.edu
Alan Fern
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
alan.fern@oregonstate.edu

Stefan Lee
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
leestef@oregonstate.edu
Prasad Tadepalli
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
prasad.tadepalli@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to learn relational policies for classical planning
based on learning to rank actions. We introduce a new graph representation that
explicitly captures action information and propose a Graph Neural Network (GNN)
architecture augmented with Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) to learn action rankings.
Unlike value-function based approaches that must learn a globally consistent
function, our action ranking method only needs to learn locally consistent ranking.
Our model is trained on data generated from small problem instances that are easily
solved by planners and is applied to significantly larger instances where planning
is computationally prohibitive. Experimental results across standard planning
benchmarks demonstrate that our action-ranking approach not only achieves better
generalization to larger problems than those used in training but also outperforms
multiple baselines (value function and action ranking) methods in terms of success
rate and plan quality.

1

Introduction

Classical planning tackles the problem of finding action sequences to achieve goals in deterministic
environments. While traditional planners can solve small problems optimally using search and
heuristics, they often struggle with scalability in complex problems [2, 17]. This has motivated
research into learning general relational policies from small solved problems, which can then be
applied to significantly larger instances [23]. The key insight behind learning-based planning is that
optimal solutions to small problems often reveal patterns that generalize to bigger problems. For
example, in Blocks World, solutions to 4 block problems can teach a policy to stack blocks bottom-up
that generalizes to problems with 20 or more blocks. The advantage of relational learning is its ability
to capture compositional structure, which in turn enable strong generalization [30, 6] [4, 9].
Learning approaches in automated planning have traditionally focused on learning heuristic functions
to guide search algorithms. These methods typically learn a value function that estimates the distance
to the goal and integrate it within classical search algorithms like A* or greedy best-first search. The
learned heuristics help focus the search but still require explicit search during plan execution.
Recently, several neural approaches have been proposed in the planning domain. Some methods
learn value functions to guide search processes [22, 1], while others learn value functions that induce
greedy policies by selecting actions leading to states with minimum estimated cost-to-go [24, 23].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

