Counterfactual Reasoning for Steerable Pluralistic
Value Alignment of Large Language Models

Hanze Guo1∗,† Jing Yao2† Xiao Zhou134‡
Xiaoyuan Yi2 Xing Xie2
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance
4
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE
{ghz, xiaozhou}@ruc.edu.cn jingyao@microsoft.com

Abstract
As large language models (LLMs) become increasingly integrated into applications
serving users across diverse cultures, communities, and demographics, it is critical
to align LLMs with pluralistic human values beyond average principles (e.g., HHH).
In psychological and social value theories such as Schwartz’s Value Theory, pluralistic values are represented by multiple value dimensions paired with various priorities. However, existing methods encounter two challenges when aligning with such
fine-grained value objectives: 1) they often treat multiple values as independent
and equally important, ignoring their interdependence and relative priorities (value
complexity); 2) they struggle to precisely control nuanced value priorities, especially those underrepresented ones (value steerability). To handle these challenges,
we propose COUPLE, a COUnterfactual reasoning framework for PLuralistic
valuE alignment. It introduces a structural causal model (SCM) to feature complex
interdependency and prioritization among features, as well as the causal relationship between high-level value dimensions and behaviors. Moreover, it applies
counterfactual reasoning to generate outputs aligned with any desired value objectives. Benefitting from explicit causal modeling, COUPLE also provides better
interpretability. We evaluate COUPLE on two datasets with different value systems
and demonstrate that COUPLE advances other baselines across diverse types of
value objectives. Our code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/COUPLE.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4] have demonstrated remarkable performance across a wide
range of tasks [5, 6, 7]. As they are increasingly deployed in applications serving users from diverse
cultures, communities, and demographics, the challenge of aligning LLMs with diverse human values
has become into the spotlight [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. However, most prior efforts mainly focus on
universal human values such as helpfulness, honesty, and harmlessness (HHH) [14, 15, 16, 17], and
struggle to capture diverse values held by different individuals and communities [18, 19, 20, 21].
Therefore, it is crucial to explore pluralistic value alignment, ensuring that LLMs provide service
that is not only helpful but also resonate with the distinctive value priorities of diverse users.
As studied in psychology and social science [22, 23, 24], human values are inherently multidimensional, e.g., Schwartz’s Value Theory [22] recognizes 10 basic value dimensions. Individuals
∗

Work is done during the internship at Microsoft.
Equal contribution.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

