Regret Analysis of Average-Reward Unichain MDPs
via an Actor-Critic Approach

Swetha Ganesh
Purdue University, USA
ganesh49@purdue.edu

Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University, USA
vaneet@purdue.edu

Abstract
Actor-Critic methods are widely used for their scalability, yet existing theoretical
guarantees for infinite-horizon average-reward Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
often rely on restrictive ergodicity assumptions. We propose NAC-B,
√ a Natural
Actor-Critic with Batching, that achieves order-optimal regret of Õ( T ) in infinitehorizon average-reward MDPs under the unichain assumption, which permits both
transient states and periodicity. This assumption is among the weakest under
which the classic policy gradient theorem remains valid for average-reward settings.
NAC-B employs function approximation for both the actor and the critic, enabling
scalability to problems with large state and action spaces. The use of batching
in our algorithm helps mitigate potential periodicity in the MDP and reduces
stochasticity in gradient estimates, and our analysis formalizes these benefits
through the introduction of the constants Chit and Ctar , which characterize the rate
at which empirical averages over Markovian samples converge to the stationary
distribution.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) involves an agent interacting with an unknown environment to maximize long-term rewards. It has been successfully applied to diverse areas such as traffic engineering,
resource allocation, and ride-sharing [18, 11, 5]. RL problems are commonly framed as episodic,
discounted, or (infinite-horizon) average-reward; the average-reward setting is especially suited to
real-world tasks due to its ability to better capture long-term behavior.
Our focus is on the average-reward Markov Decision Process (MDP) setting, where a key measure
of algorithmic performance is expected regret. [7] established
that for a broad class of MDPs, any
√
algorithm incurs expected regret lower bounded by Ω( T ), where T is the time horizon. Many
existing regret analyses in this setting assume ergodicity, a strong assumption that simplifies analysis
by ensuring fast mixing to a stationary distribution, but is often difficult to verify or justify in practice.
In the absence of ergodicity, existing algorithms are typically designed for model-based or tabular
settings, with computational complexity that scales with |S| and |A|, the cardinalities of the state
and action spaces, respectively. These requirements are prohibitive for environments with large or
continuous state and action spaces. Although linear MDPs reduce improves dependence on |S|, they
still rely on strong structural assumptions, namely, linearity of the transition dynamics and reward
functions. Moreover, value-based methods in such settings often remain computationally expensive
due to the need to maximize over all actions at each iteration.
To overcome these limitations, a promising alternative is the use of Policy Gradient (PG) methods,
which directly optimize parameterized policies, often modeled by neural networks, via gradient
descent. While PG methods have shown strong empirical performance, most theoretical analyses
assume ergodicity. In contrast, our work develops PG methods that do not rely on ergodicity.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

