Stitch and Tell: A Structured Multimodal Data
Augmentation Method for Spatial Understanding

Hang Yin1 , Xiaomin He2 , PeiWen Yuan1 , Yiwei Li1 , Jiayi Shi1 ,
Wenxiao Fan1 , Shaoxiong Feng3 , Kan Li1†
1
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
3
Xiaohongshu Inc
{yh,peiwenyuan,liyiwei,shijiayi,wenxiaofan,likan}@bit.edu.cn
{2401210613}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {shaoxiongfeng2023}@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing vision-language models often suffer from spatial hallucinations, i.e.,
generating incorrect descriptions about the relative positions of objects in an image.
We argue that this problem mainly stems from the asymmetric properties between
images and text. To enrich the spatial understanding ability of vision-language
models, we propose a simple, annotation-free, plug-and-play method named Stitch
and Tell (abbreviated as SiTe), which injects structured spatial supervision into
multimodal data. It constructs stitched image–text pairs by stitching images along
a spatial axis and generating spatially-aware captions or question answer pairs
based on the layout of stitched image, without relying on costly advanced models
or human involvement. We evaluate SiTe across three architectures including
LLaVA-v1.5-7B, LLaVA-Qwen2-1.5B and HALVA-7B, two training datasets, and
thirteen benchmarks. Experiments show that SiTe improves spatial understanding
tasks such as MMEPosition (+5.50%) and Spatial-MM (+4.19%), while maintaining
or improving performance on general vision-language benchmarks. Our findings
suggest that explicitly injecting spatially-aware structure into training data offers an
effective way to mitigate spatial hallucinations and improve spatial understanding,
while preserving general vision-language capabilities.

1

Introduction

Spatial understanding, the ability to comprehend and interpret the relationships between objects in a
space, is essential for tasks such as visual question answering, navigation, and embodied AI [1, 45, 40].
However, most existing vision-language models still struggle to understand and reason about spatial
relationships [19, 34, 5, 39], which leads to spatial hallucination problems.
We argue that the spatial hallucination problem is primarily caused by the implicit modality gap,
that is, while images contain rich multidimensional spatial features, their paired captions tend to
be relatively sparse. We investigated existing large-scale multi-modal datasets, such as Conceptual
Captions [28], COCO [18], VQA [1], and SBU Captions [24], and observed only a small fraction of
samples contain explicit spatial information (see Table 1). As shown in Figure 1, the spatially-aware
data means the samples whose captions include clear spatial information (e.g., “to the left of", “in
front of”). During training, the model aligns visual content with limited linguistic descriptions, which
may constrain its ability to capture latent spatial structures from the image alone.
This further motivates the need to introduce spatial information directly into the text. However,
collecting spatial annotations through crowd-sourcing is both difficult and expensive. It often
demands a carefully designed annotation interface and large-scale annotation efforts involving skilled
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

