FRAM: Frobenius-Regularized Assignment Matching
with Mixed-Precision Computing
Binrui Shen1,2 , Yuan Liang3 , and Shengxin Zhu∗4,5
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Laboratory of Mathematics and Complex Systems, MOE, Beijing
Normal University, Beijing 100875, P.R. China
2
Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai 519087, P.R. China
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, P.R. China
4
Research Centers for Mathematics, Advanced Institute of Natural Science, Beijing Normal
University, Zhuhai 519087, P.R. China
5
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research and Application for Data
Science, BNU-HKBU United International College, Zhuhai 519087, P.R. China
binrui.shen@bnu.edu.cn, l.y@mail.bnu.edu.cn, Shengxin.Zhu@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph matching, usually cast as a discrete Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP),
aims to identify correspondences between nodes in two graphs. Since QAP is NPhard, many methods its discrete constraints by projecting the discrete feasible set
onto its convex hull and solving the resulting continuous problem. However, these
relaxations inevitably enlarge the feasible set and introduce two errors: sensitivity
to numerical scales and geometric misalignment between the relaxed and original
feasible domains. To address these issues, we propose a novel relaxation framework
to reformulate the projection step as a Frobenius-Regularized Linear Assignment
(FRA) problem. This formulation incorporates a tunable regularization term to
curb the inflation of the feasible region and ensure numerical scale invariance. To
solve the FRA efficiently, we introduce a scaling algorithm for doubly stochastic
normalization. Leveraging its favorable computational properties, we design a
theoretically grounded, accelerated mixed-precision algorithm. Building on these
components, we propose Frobenius-Regularized Assignment Matching (FRAM),
which approximates the QAP solution through a sequence of FRA problems. Extensive CPU experiments show that FRAM consistently outperforms all baselines.
On GPUs, with mixed precision, FRAM achieves up to a 370× speedup over its
FP64 CPU implementation without sacrificing accuracy.

1

Introduction

Graph matching aims to find correspondences between graphs that share potential relationships. It can
be used in various fields of intelligent information processing, e.g., image similarity detection [33],
graph similarity computation [19, 20], knowledge graph alignment [40], autonomous driving [36],
vision-language model alignment [30], point cloud registration [10], deep neural network fusion [25],
multi-object tracking [14], and COVID-19 disease mechanism study [13]. However, graph matching
is an NP-hard discrete optimization problem [32] and computationally prohibitive for large-scale
instances.
To scale up the graph matching problem, many relaxation methods were proposed [2, 5, 12, 21,
27, 34]. These methods relax the discrete problem to a continuous domain and then project the
∗

Communication author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

