State Space Prompting via Gathering and Spreading
Spatio-Temporal Information for Video Understanding

Jiahuan Zhou1 , Kai Zhu1 , Zhenyu Cui1 , Zichen Liu1 , Xu Zou2∗, Gang Hua3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074,China
3
Amazon.com, Inc, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
jiahuanzhou@pku.edu.cn, zhukai2022@ruc.edu.cn
{cuizhenyu,lzc20180720}@stu.pku.edu.cn, zx@zoux.me, ganghua@gmail.com

1

Abstract
Recently, pre-trained state space models have shown great potential for video
classification, which sequentially compresses visual tokens in videos with linear
complexity, thereby improving the processing efficiency of video data while maintaining high performance. To apply powerful pre-trained models to downstream
tasks, prompt learning is proposed to achieve efficient downstream task adaptation
with only a small number of fine-tuned parameters. However, the sequentially
compressed visual prompt tokens fail to capture the spatial and temporal contextual
information in the video, thus limiting the effective propagation of spatial information within a video frame and temporal information between frames in the state
compression model and the extraction of discriminative information. To tackle the
above issue, we proposed a State Space Prompting (SSP) method for video understanding, which combines intra-frame and inter-frame prompts to aggregate and
propagate key spatiotemporal information in the video. Specifically, an Intra-Frame
Gathering (IFG) module is designed to aggregate spatial key information within
each frame. Besides, an Inter-Frame Spreading (IFS) module is designed to spread
discriminative spatio-temporal information across different frames. By adaptively
balancing and compressing key spatio-temporal information within and between
frames, our SSP effectively propagates discriminative information in videos in a
complementary manner. Extensive experiments on four video benchmark datasets
verify that our SSP significantly outperforms existing SOTA methods by 2.76%
on average while reducing the overhead of fine-tuning parameters. The code is
available at https://github.com/zhoujiahuan1991/NeurIPS2025-SSP.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the Vision Transformer (ViT) has demonstrated its promising performance in video
understanding due to its powerful attention-based context modelling capabilities [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10]. However, the computational cost of the attention mechanism, which increases quadratically with
the length of the input data, incurs huge computational and memory costs, especially when processing
long video sequences. To achieve efficient video processing, a state space modelling method,
called VideoMamba, is introduced to achieve comparable performance to the ViT while maintaining
linear computational complexity [11, 12]. Despite some progress in model pre-training[13, 14, 15],
it still suffers from the heavy overhead of downstream task adaptation through parameter finetuning. Therefore, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) has aroused extensive attention to achieve
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

