Magical: Medical Lay Language Generation via
Semantic Invariance and Layperson-tailored
Adaptation

Weibin Liao♣♠† , Tianlong Wang♣† , Yinghao Zhu♢ ,
Yasha Wang♣♠∗ , Junyi Gao♡§∗ , Liantao Ma♣♠∗
♣
National Engineering Research Center For Software Engineering, Peking University
♠
School of Computer Science, Peking University
♢
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
♡
Centre for Medical Informatics, University of Edinburgh
§
Health Data Research UK
{liaoweibin, tianlong.wang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, malt@pku.edu.cn
https://github.com/tianlwang/Magical.git

Abstract
Medical Lay Language Generation (MLLG) plays a vital role in improving the
accessibility of complex scientific content for broader audiences. Recent literature
to MLLG commonly employ parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods such as LowRank Adaptation (LoRA) to fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) using
paired expert-lay language datasets. However, LoRA struggles with the challenges
posed by multi-source heterogeneous MLLG datasets. Specifically, through a
series of exploratory experiments, we reveal that standard LoRA fail to meet the
requirement for semantic fidelity and diverse lay-style generation in MLLG task. To
address these limitations, we propose Magical, an asymmetric LoRA architecture
tailored for MLLG under heterogeneous data scenarios. Magical employs a shared
matrix A for abstractive summarization, along with multiple isolated matrices B for
diverse lay-style generation. To preserve semantic fidelity during the lay language
generation process, Magical introduces a Semantic Invariance Constraint
to mitigate semantic subspace shifts on matrix A. Furthermore, to better adapt to
diverse lay-style generation, Magical incorporates the Recommendation-guided
Switch, an externally interface to prompt the LLM to switch between different
matrices B. Experimental results on three real-world lay language generation
datasets demonstrate that Magical consistently outperforms prompt-based methods,
vanilla LoRA, and its recent variants, while also reducing trainable parameters by
31.66%.

1

Introduction

Medical Lay Language Generation (MLLG) [1] shared task surrounds the abstractive summarization
and lay-style generation of biomedical articles, aiming to generate readable, accessible summaries for
non-expert audiences [2]. This task addresses a critical barrier: the highly specialized language used
in clinical and biomedical literature often limits public understanding and reduces patient adherence
to medical advice in clinical settings. By translating complex medical content into lay-friendly
language, MLLG promotes equitable access to life-related knowledge [3–5], supporting the broader
† Equal Contribution. ∗ Corresponding Authors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

