Rewind-to-Delete: Certified Machine Unlearning for
Nonconvex Functions
Siqiao Mu
Department of Engineering Sciences and Applied Mathematics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
siqiaomu2026@u.northwestern.edu
Diego Klabjan
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
d-klabjan@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Machine unlearning algorithms aim to efficiently remove data from a model without retraining it from scratch, in order to remove corrupted or outdated data or
respect a user’s “right to be forgotten." Certified machine unlearning is a strong theoretical guarantee based on differential privacy that quantifies the extent to which
an algorithm erases data from the model weights. In contrast to existing works in
certified unlearning for convex or strongly convex loss functions, or nonconvex
objectives with limiting assumptions, we propose the first, first-order, black-box
(i.e., can be applied to models pretrained with vanilla gradient descent) algorithm
for unlearning on general nonconvex loss functions, which unlearns by “rewinding"
to an earlier step during the learning process before performing gradient descent on
the loss function of the retained data points. We prove (ϵ, δ) certified unlearning
and performance guarantees that establish the privacy-utility-complexity tradeoff
of our algorithm, and we prove generalization guarantees for functions that satisfy
the Polyak-Lojasiewicz inequality. Finally, we demonstrate the superior performance of our algorithm compared to existing methods, within a new experimental
framework that more accurately reflects unlearning user data in practice.

1

Introduction

Machine unlearning, or data deletion from models, refers to the problem of removing the influence of
some data from a trained model without the computational expenses of completely retraining it from
scratch [6]. This research direction has become highly relevant in the last few years, due to increasing
concern about user privacy and data security as well as the growing cost of retraining massive deep
learning models on constantly updated datasets. For example, recent legislation that protects a user’s
“Right to be Forgotten,” including the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), and the Canadian Consumer Privacy Protection Act
(CPPA), mandate that users be allowed to request removal of their personal data, which may be stored
in databases or memorized by models [38]. In addition, machine unlearning has practical implications
for removing the influence of corrupted, outdated, or mislabeled data [28, 35].
The typical goal of machine unlearning algorithms is to yield a model that resembles the model
obtained from a full retrain on the updated dataset after data is removed. This requirement is
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

