Efficient Spectral Control of
Partially Observed Linear Dynamical Systems

Anand Brahmbhatt1∗ Gon Buzaglo1∗ Sofiia Druchyna1∗ Elad Hazan1,2∗
1

Computer Science Department, Princeton University
2
Google DeepMind Princeton

Abstract
We propose a new method for the problem of controlling linear dynamical systems under partial observation and adversarial disturbances. Our new algorithm,
Double Spectral Control (DSC), matches the best known regret guarantees while
exponentially improving runtime complexity over previous approaches in its dependence on the system’s stability margin. Our key innovation is a two-level spectral
approximation strategy, leveraging double convolution with a universal basis of
spectral filters, enabling efficient and accurate learning of the best linear dynamical
controllers.

1

Introduction

Control theory is a decades-old branch of applied mathematics concerned with designing systems
that maintain desirable behavior over time, with applications ranging from robotics and aerospace to
economics and biology. Recently, it has been adopted by the machine learning community through
the lens of online learning, enabling new approaches to sequential decision making in systems with
latent state and feedback.
A central model in control theory, and increasingly in reinforcement learning and sequence prediction,
is the linear dynamical system (LDS), where the hidden state xt ∈ Rd evolves linearly in response to
control inputs ut ∈ Rn and adversarial disturbances wt , and only partial observations yt ∈ Rp are
available:
xt+1 = Axt + But + wt ,
yt = Cxt .

(1)

where ut ∈ Rn is the control input, wt ∈ Rd is an adversarial disturbance, and yt ∈ Rp is a partial
observation of the latent state.
At each round t, the learner observes yt , selects a control ut , and incurs a convex loss ct (yt , ut ),
where the loss functions ct are chosen by an adaptive adversary. This setting extends the classical
Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) and Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) [22], which assumes
known dynamics, full observation, and stochastic Gaussian noise. In contrast, our setting accounts
for arbitrary time-varying convex losses, adversarial disturbances, and partial observations. This
adversarial setup with partial information falls under the framework of online nonstochastic control,
see e.g. [19]. We focus on the setting where the system matrices (A, B, C) are known and timeinvariant.
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically. Emails: {ab7728,gon.buzaglo,sd0937,ehazan}@princeton.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

