DGS-LRM: Real-Time Deformable 3D Gaussian
Reconstruction From Monocular Videos
Chieh Hubert Lin1,2 Zhaoyang Lv1 Songyin Wu1,3 Zhen Xu1 Thu Nguyen-Phuoc1
Hung-Yu Tseng1
Julian Straub1 Numair Khan1 Lei Xiao1 Ming-Hsuan Yang1,2
Yuheng Ren1 Richard Newcombe1 Zhao Dong1 Zhengqin Li1
1

Meta

2

UC Merced

3

UC Santa Barbara

DGS-LRM
(infer 0.6 sec)

Posed Monocular Video @ 24 FPS

Deformable 3DGS + Scene Flow

Figure 1: Our proposed Deformable Gaussian Splats Large Reconstruction Model (DGS-LRM) takes
posed monocular videos as input and predicts deformable 3D Gaussians in a single feedforward pass.
Our approach enables both novel view synthesis and 2D/3D tracking, as illustrated on the right.

Abstract
We introduce the Deformable Gaussian Splats Large Reconstruction Model (DGSLRM), the first feed-forward method predicting deformable 3D Gaussian splats
from a monocular posed video of any dynamic scene. Feed-forward scene reconstruction has gained significant attention for its ability to rapidly create digital
replicas of real-world environments. However, most existing models are limited to
static scenes and fail to reconstruct the motion of moving objects. Developing a
feed-forward model for dynamic scene reconstruction poses significant challenges,
including the scarcity of training data and the need for appropriate 3D representations and training paradigms. To address these challenges, we introduce several key
technical contributions: an enhanced large-scale synthetic dataset with ground-truth
multi-view videos and dense 3D scene flow supervision; a per-pixel deformable 3D
Gaussian representation that is easy to learn, supports high-quality dynamic view
synthesis, and enables long-range 3D tracking; and a large transformer network
that achieves real-time, generalizable dynamic scene reconstruction. Qualitative
and quantitative experiments demonstrate that DGS-LRM achieves dynamic scene
reconstruction quality comparable to optimization-based methods, while significantly outperforming the previous predictive dynamic reconstruction method on
real-world examples. Its predicted physically grounded 3D deformation is accurate
and can be readily adapted for long-range 3D tracking tasks, achieving performance
on par with state-of-the-art monocular video 3D tracking methods.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

