On the Stability and Generalization of Meta-Learning:
the Impact of Inner-Levels

Wenjun Ding1,2 , Jingling Liu1,∗ , Lixing Chen3,4 , Xiu Su5 , Tao Sun6 , Fan Wu1 , Zhe Qu1,2,∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
2
Xiangjiang Laboratory
3
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration Technologies for Information Security
5
Big Data Institute, Central South University
6
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology
{234712240,jinglingliu,xiusu1994,zhe_qu}@csu.edu.cn,
lxchen@sjtu.edu.cn, suntao.saltfish@outlook.com

Abstract
Meta-learning has achieved significant advancements, with generalization emerging
as a key metric for evaluating meta-learning algorithms. While recent studies have
mainly focused on training strategies, data-split methods, and tightening generalization bounds, they often ignore the impact of inner-levels on generalization. To
bridge this gap, this paper focuses on several prominent meta-learning algorithms
and establishes two generalization analytical frameworks for them based on their
inner-processes: the Gradient Descent Framework (GDF) and the Proximal Descent
Framework (PDF). Within these frameworks, we introduce two novel algorithmic
stability definitions and derive the corresponding generalization bounds. Our findings reveal a trade-off of inner-levels under GDF, whereas PDF exhibits a beneficial
relationship. Moreover, we highlight the critical role of the meta-objective function
in minimizing generalization error. Inspired by this, we propose a new, simplified
meta-objective function definition to enhance generalization performance. Many
real-world experiments support our findings and show the improvement of the new
meta-objective function.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning has been proven to be a powerful paradigm for extracting well-generalization from
previous tasks and quickly learning new tasks [1]. It has received increasing attention in many
machine learning applications such as few-shot learning [2], robust learning [3], and natural language
processing [4]. The key idea of meta-learning is to improve the learning ability of agents through a
learning-to-learn process. In recent years, optimization-based meta-learning algorithms have emerged
as a popular approach [5–8]. These studies formulate the problem as a bi-level optimization problem
and have demonstrated impressive performance across various domains, drawing significant attention
from the research community. In particular, at the outer-level, it trains a meta-learner to extract
task-shared knowledge from meta-training tasks. At the inner-level, a basic model, which is initialized
using the meta-parameters, adapts to each task by taking Q inner-level gradient updates, where the Q
times inner-level update is commonly called an inner-process [5, 9–11].
Despite the remarkable success of meta-learning, its theoretical understanding of generalization
remains largely unexplored. Recent studies have primarily focused on analyzing the effect of training
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

