dKV-Cache: The Cache for Diffusion
Language Models

Xinyin Ma

Runpeng Yu Gongfan Fang Xinchao Wang∗
National University of Singapore

maxinyin@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Diffusion Language Models (DLMs) have been seen as a promising competitor
for autoregressive language models (ARs). However, diffusion language models have long been constrained by slow inference. A core challenge is that their
non-autoregressive architecture and bidirectional attention preclude the key–value
cache that accelerates decoding. We address this bottleneck by proposing a KVcache-like mechanism, delayed KV-Cache, for the denoising process of DLMs.
Our approach is motivated by the observation that different tokens have distinct
representation dynamics throughout the diffusion process. Accordingly, we propose a delayed and conditioned caching strategy for key and value states. We
design two complementary variants to cache key and value step-by-step: (1) dKVCache-Decode, which provides almost lossless acceleration, and even improves
performance on long sequences, suggesting that existing DLMs may under-utilise
contextual information during inference. (2) dKV-Cache-Greedy, which has aggressive caching with reduced lifespan, achieving higher speed-ups with quadratic
time complexity at the cost of some performance degradation. dKV-Cache, in
final, achieves from 2-10× speedup in inference, largely narrowing the gap between ARs and DLMs. We evaluate our dKV-Cache on several benchmarks,
delivering acceleration across general language understanding, mathematical, and
code-generation benchmarks. Experiments demonstrate that cache can also be used
in DLMs, even in a training-free manner from current DLMs. The code is available
at https://github.com/horseee/dKV-Cache.

1

Introduction

Diffusion language models (DLMs) [3, 25] have recently emerged as an alternative paradigm for text
generation, inspired by the success of diffusion models in continuous domains like images [15, 48]
and videos [28, 5]. Unlike autoregressive transformers (ARs) [14, 43, 12] that generate text leftto-right at a time, a diffusion language model produces text by gradually refining a sequence of
initially noisy tokens or masked tokens into a coherent output [24, 29]. Recent advancements in
diffusion-based language models have underscored their versatility across both continuous [21]
and discrete formulations [40, 3]. In particular, discrete diffusion models have shown competitive
performance in language modeling [37], attracting growing interest for their potential to achieve
faster decoding than traditional ARs while maintaining comparable generation quality.
One notable advantage of diffusion language models is their potential to decode an arbitrary number
of tokens in parallel [49], whereas ARs require one forward pass per generated token. This parallel
decoding paradigm offers the potential for improved wall-clock inference time and higher throughput.
However, despite their theoretical efficiency, current DLMs remain substantially slower than ARs
in practice. This inefficiency is primarily due to two factors: the incompatibility of DLMs with the
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

