Class-wise Balancing Data Replay for Federated
Class-Incremental Learning

Zhuang Qi1 , Ying-Peng Tang2 , Lei Meng1,∗, Han Yu2 , Xiaoxiao Li3,4 , Xiangxu Meng1
1
School of Software, Shandong University, China
2
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Canada
4
Vector Institute, Canada
z_qi@mail.sdu.edu.cn, yingpeng.tang@ntu.edu.sg, lmeng@sdu.edu.cn,
han.yu@ntu.edu.sg, xiaoxiao.li@ece.ubc.ca, mxx@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Class Incremental Learning (FCIL) aims to collaboratively process
continuously increasing incoming tasks across multiple clients. Among various
approaches, data replay has become a promising solution, which can alleviate
forgetting by reintroducing representative samples from previous tasks. However,
their performance is typically limited by class imbalance, both within the replay
buffer due to limited global awareness and between replayed and newly arrived
classes. To address this issue, we propose a class-wise balancing data replay
method for FCIL (FedCBDR), which employs a global coordination mechanism for
class-level memory construction and reweights the learning objective to alleviate
the aforementioned imbalances. Specifically, FedCBDR has two key components:
1) the global-perspective data replay module reconstructs global representations
of prior task in a privacy-preserving manner, which then guides a class-aware and
importance-sensitive sampling strategy to achieve balanced replay; 2) Subsequently,
to handle class imbalance across tasks, the task-aware temperature scaling module
adaptively adjusts the temperature of logits at both class and instance levels based
on task dynamics, which reduces the model’s overconfidence in majority classes
while enhancing its sensitivity to minority classes. Experimental results verified
that FedCBDR achieves balanced class-wise sampling under heterogeneous data
distributions and improves generalization under task imbalance between earlier
and recent tasks, yielding a 2%-15% Top-1 accuracy improvement over six stateof-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning paradigm that enables collaborative training
of a shared global model across multiple data sources [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. It periodically performs
parameter-level interaction between clients and the server instead of gathering clients’ data, which
can enhance data privacy while leveraging the diversity of distributed data sources to build a more
generalized global model [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. This mechanism makes it widely applicable to various
fields [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. Building upon this foundation, Federated Class-Incremental Learning
(FCIL) extends FL by introducing dynamic data streams where clients sequentially encounter different
task classes under non-independent and identically distributed data [17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. However,
this amplifies the inherent complexities of FL, as the global model must integrate heterogeneous and
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

