NEP: Autoregressive Image Editing via Next Editing
Token Prediction

Huimin Wu1
Xiaojian Ma1
Haozhe Zhao2
Yanpeng Zhao1
Qing Li1
1
2
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
Peking University
Project website: nep-bigai.github.io

Input

Mask

Ground truth

MagicBrush

NEP (ours)

"add tall shrubs"

"erase the sheeps"

Figure 1: Our approach avoids full-image generation and does not introduce unintended
changes as the previous diffusion-model-based editing approach [58].

Abstract
Text-guided image editing involves modifying a source image based on a language
instruction and, typically, requires changes to only small local regions. However,
existing approaches generate the entire target image rather than selectively regenerate only the intended editing areas. This results in (1) unnecessary computational
costs and (2) a bias toward reconstructing non-editing regions, which compromises
the quality of the intended edits. To resolve these limitations, we propose to formulate image editing as Next Editing-token Prediction (NEP) based on autoregressive
image generation, where only regions that need to be edited are regenerated, thus
avoiding unintended modification to the non-editing areas. To enable any-region
editing, we propose to pre-train an any-order autoregressive text-to-image (T2I)
model. Once trained, it is capable of zero-shot image editing and can be easily
adapted to NEP for image editing, which achieves a new state-of-the-art on widely
used image editing benchmarks. Moreover, our model naturally supports test-time
scaling (TTS) through iteratively refining its generation in a zero-shot manner.

1

Introduction

Text-driven image editing aims to modify a source image following a given language instruction.
Typically, modifications are confined to small local regions (editing regions) while most of the image
remains unchanged (non-editing regions). A predominant paradigm for solving the task is through
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

