B LOCK D ECODER: Boosting ASR Decoders
with Context and Merger Modules

Darshan Prabhu
Department of CSE
IIT Bombay
darshanp@cse.iitb.ac.in

Preethi Jyothi
Department of CSE
IIT Bombay
pjyothi@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
Attention-based encoder decoder models remain a popular choice for state-of-the-art
automatic speech recognition (ASR). These models combine a powerful audio
encoder that extracts rich acoustic features with a decoder that autoregressively
produces the ASR output. The decoder handles two critical tasks: (1) building
rich text-only context and (2) merging acoustic information from the encoder
to ensure the predictions remain faithful to the audio. We observe a systematic
pattern across the attention distributions of decoder layers in prior architectures:
the initial layers direct most attention towards building textual context, while the
later layers largely focus on merging acoustic and textual information for the final
predictions. Leveraging this key insight, we propose B LOCK D ECODER, a novel
decoder architecture comprising two distinct components: a text encoder that
is purely text-based, and a M ERGER that combines information from the audio
encoder and text encoder to generate output tokens. Unlike traditional decoders,
the M ERGER autoregressively predicts a sequence of K tokens within a block of
size K, while relying on the same precomputed contextual information from both
text and audio encoders across the block. This design choice allows for the efficient
reuse of encoder representations. The separation of the decoder into the text encoder
and the M ERGER promotes modularity and more flexible control of parameters via
the number of text encoder and M ERGER layers. As a result, B LOCK D ECODER
yields a significant speedup (∼ 2x) compared to traditional decoders, across diverse
datasets, languages, and speech tasks, without any degradation in performance. The
code is available at https://github.com/csalt-research/blockdecoder.

1

Introduction

Several prominent state-of-the-art automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems are derived from
attention-based encoder-decoder architectures [1]. While the audio encoder’s role in these architectures
is to transform input speech into acoustically-rich representations, the decoder autoregressively
generates text by combining acoustic information from the encoder with previously predicted
text. Numerous variants of the encoder have been explored for ASR in prior work, ranging from
self-supervised architectures [2, 3] to convolutionally-enriched ASR pipelines [4, 5, 6, 7]. In contrast,
there have been relatively fewer innovations of the ASR decoder.
The ASR decoder comprises Transformer [8] layers with both self-attention and cross-attention modules. The self-attention module attends to previous tokens at a given time-step, and the cross-attention
module attends to speech representations from the audio encoder. We analyze the behaviour of both
these attention modules across all decoder layers and make the following key observations: (1) Self-attention increasingly focuses on local context as we progress deeper into the decoder: As shown in Figure 1, the attention weights in the initial decoder layers are well-distributed across the entire sequence.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

