BridgeVLA: Input-Output Alignment for Efficient 3D
Manipulation Learning with Vision-Language Models

Peiyan Li1,2,3,∗, Yixiang Chen1,3 , Hongtao Wu2,∗,† , Xiao Ma2,∗ , Xiangnan Wu1
Yan Huang1,3,4,†, Liang Wang1,3 , Tao Kong2 , Tieniu Tan1,3,5
1
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
ByteDance Seed 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
FiveAges 5 Nanjing University

Abstract
Recently, leveraging pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) for building
vision-language-action (VLA) models has emerged as a promising approach to
effective robot manipulation learning. However, only few methods incorporate
3D signals into VLMs for action prediction, and they do not fully leverage the
spatial structure inherent in 3D data, leading to low data efficiency. In this paper,
we introduce a new paradigm for constructing 3D VLAs. Specifically, we first
pre-train the VLM backbone to take 2D images as input and produce 2D heatmaps
as output. Using this pre-trained VLM as the backbone, we then fine-tune the
entire VLA model while maintaining alignment between inputs and outputs by:
(1) projecting raw point cloud inputs into multi-view images, and (2) predicting
heatmaps before generating the final action. Extensive experiments show that
the resulting model, BridgeVLA, can learn 3D manipulation both efficiently and
effectively. BridgeVLA outperforms state-of-the-art baselines across three simulation benchmarks. In RLBench, it improves the average success rate from 81.4%
to 88.2%. In COLOSSEUM, it demonstrates significantly better performance in
challenging generalization settings, boosting the average success rate from 56.7%
to 64.0%. In GemBench, it surpasses all the comparing baseline methods in terms
of average success rate. In real-robot experiments, BridgeVLA outperforms a stateof-the-art baseline method by 32% on average. It generalizes robustly in multiple
out-of-distribution settings, including visual disturbances and unseen instructions.
Remarkably, it is able to achieve a success rate of 95.4% on 10+ tasks with only 3
trajectories per task, while other VLA methods such as π0 fail completely. Project
Website: https://bridgevla.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Leveraging pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) [3, 43, 2, 24] for developing large visionlanguage-action (VLA) models has become a promising method for learning generalizable and robust
manipulation policies [26, 4, 17, 31, 7]. However, most VLA models only incorporate 2D image
inputs and require extensive efforts on data collection. On the other hand, 3D robot policies leverage
3D structural priors in model design and demonstrate exceptional sample efficiency in learning
complex 3D robot manipulation tasks [39, 25, 13–15]. Can we develop a unified 3D VLA model
which combines the effectiveness of VLA models with the efficiency from 3D policies?
∗
†

Project lead
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

