What Do Latent Action Models Actually Learn?

Chuheng Zhang*1 , Tim Pearce*1 , Pushi Zhang1 , Kaixin Wang1 , Xiaoyu Chen2 ,
Wei Shen3 , Li Zhao1 , Jiang Bian1
1
Microsoft Research 2 Tsinghua University 3 Independent Researcher
*
Equal contribution: zhangchuheng123@live.com, timpearce@microsoft.com

Abstract
Latent action models (LAMs) aim to learn action-relevant changes from unlabeled
videos by compressing changes between frames as latents. However, differences
between video frames can be caused by controllable changes as well as exogenous
noise, leading to an important concern – do latents capture the changes caused
by actions or irrelevant noise? This paper studies this issue analytically, presenting a linear model that encapsulates the essence of LAM learning, while being
tractable. This provides several insights, including connections between LAM and
principal component analysis (PCA), desiderata of the data-generating policy, and
justification of strategies to encourage learning controllable changes using data
augmentation, data cleaning, and auxiliary action-prediction. These findings are
validated through numerical simulations, as well as experiments in more realistic
settings. This investigation is the first to rigorously investigate how the structure of
observations, actions, and noise influence LAM learning.

1

Introduction

Latent action models (LAMs) aim to infer controllable action changes from streams of image
observations in an unsupervised manner (Rybkin et al., 2018; Menapace et al., 2021). This is valuable
because action-labeled data is typically expensive to source, while unlabeled videos are abundant.
Hence, it offers a route for embodied AI systems to learn from large unlabeled datasets, for instance
using the inferred latent actions as targets for pre-training a policy, while a small amount of labeled
data can be used to learn a mapping from latent to real action controls (Ye et al., 2024). This has
proven effective in learning from videos of 2D video games, robotics, and even broadcast tennis
footage (Menapace et al., 2021; Schmidt and Jiang, 2023; Bruce et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024b; Ye
et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024; Cui et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2025).
The success of such LAM-based recipes relies on the inferred latent action labels mapping to the
real control action signals of interest. However, there is concern that this may not always be the
case. For example, there is an intuition that LAM’s inferred latent ‘actions’ simply compress
differences between consecutive frames, even when control actions are not the cause of those
differences (McCarthy et al., 2024). As such, LAMs may only succeed in domains where the cause of
changes between observations can be fully attributed to the control action. A further point of dispute
is whether a bottleneck is required (Schmidt and Jiang, 2023).
To study these issues and more, this paper conducts a theoretical analysis of a linear version of LAM.
By retaining the architecture of recent LAM models, but swapping deep neural network components
with simpler linear layers, we preserve the fundamental challenge of LAM training in an analytically
tractable form. Our analysis of linear LAM firstly provides precise insights into when inferred
latent actions capture true control signals compared to noise, as well as what information is captured
by different components within LAM. Surprisingly, our analysis also reveals additional issues not
currently known to the LAM community – related to the over-parametrization property of LAM
and the randomness of data-generation policy. Finally, we propose and study potential solutions to
ameliorate these issues – data augmentation and predicting action as an auxiliary task.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

