Concentration and excess risk bounds for imbalanced
classification with synthetic oversampling

Touqeer Ahmad1 , Mohammadreza M. Kalan1 , François Portier1 , Gilles Stupfler2
1
2

Univ Rennes, Ensai, CNRS, CREST—UMR 9194, F-35000 Rennes, France
Univ Angers, CNRS, LAREMA, SFR MATHSTIC, F-49000 Angers, France

Abstract
Synthetic oversampling of minority examples using S MOTE and its variants is a
leading strategy for addressing imbalanced classification problems. Despite the success of this approach in practice, its theoretical foundations remain underexplored.
We develop a theoretical framework to analyze the behavior of S MOTE and related
methods when classifiers are trained on synthetic data. We first derive a uniform
concentration bound on the discrepancy between the empirical risk over synthetic
minority samples and the population risk on the true minority distribution. We then
provide a nonparametric excess risk guarantee for kernel-based classifiers trained
using such synthetic data. These results lead to practical guidelines for better parameter tuning of both S MOTE and the downstream learning algorithm. Numerical
experiments are provided to illustrate and support the theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

The problem of imbalanced classification arises when one of the classes of interest, often referred to
as the minority class, is significantly underrepresented relative to the other classes. In such settings,
standard classification algorithms tend to produce trivial decision rules that favor the majority class,
often ignoring the minority class altogether. Designing algorithms that perform well under class
imbalance has become a key challenge in modern machine learning [Chawla et al., 2004, He and
Garcia, 2009, Lemaitre et al., 2017, Spelmen and Porkodi, 2018, Feng et al., 2021].
There are two main families of methods to tackle this problem. Model-level approaches modify the
training objective, often by reweighting the loss function to penalize misclassification of the minority
class more heavily. Several theoretical developments support this direction, including work on
cost-sensitive learning [Menon et al., 2013, Xu et al., 2020, Aghbalou et al., 2024], Neyman-Pearson
classification [Rigollet and Tong, 2011, Tong, 2013, Kalan and Kpotufe, 2024] and applications to
deep learning models [Cao et al., 2019, Byrd and Lipton, 2019].
By contrast, data-level approaches modify the training data by applying resampling techniques [Kubat
and Matwin, 1997, Chawla et al., 2002, Mani and Zhang, 2003, Barandela et al., 2004, Lemaitre
et al., 2017], either by reducing the size of the majority class (undersampling) or by augmenting
the minority class with synthetic data (oversampling). Their key advantage is compatibility with
off-the-shelf machine learning algorithms and standard validation strategies, such as cross-validation.
While undersampling can reduce computational complexity in training well-specified parametric
models [Wang, 2020, Chen et al., 2025], it risks discarding valuable information. Oversampling,
however, seeks to mitigate imbalance by generating new synthetic examples for the minority class.
The seminal oversampling algorithm, known as S MOTE (Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique)
[Chawla et al., 2002], generates new samples by interpolating between a minority instance and its
nearest minority class neighbors. A different proposal called Kernel Density Estimation-based
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

