Treatment Effect Estimation for Optimal
Decision-Making

Dennis Frauen∗
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning

Valentyn Melnychuk
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning

Jonas Schweisthal
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge

Stefan Feuerriegel
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning

Abstract
Decision-making in various fields, such as medicine, is heavily based on conditional
average treatment effects (CATEs). Practitioners commonly make decisions by
checking whether the estimated CATE is positive, even though the decision-making
performance of modern CATE estimators (meta-learners) is poorly understood. In
this paper, we study optimal decision-making based on two-stage meta-learners
(e.g., DR-learner), which estimate CATE via a second-stage regression. We show
that these meta-learners can be suboptimal when used for decision-making in
common settings where the second-stage regression is over a restricted function
class (e.g., when using regularization or employing fairness/interpretability constraints). Intuitively, this occurs because such estimators prioritize CATE accuracy
in regions far away from the decision boundary, which is ultimately irrelevant to
decision-making. As a remedy, we propose a novel two-stage learning objective
that re-targets the CATE to balance CATE estimation error and decision performance. We then propose a neural method that optimizes an adaptively-smoothed
approximation of our learning objective. Finally, we confirm the effectiveness of
our method both empirically and theoretically.

1

Introduction

Data-driven decision-making across various fields, such as medicine [19], public policy [1, 39], and
marketing [58], relies on understanding how treatments affect different individuals and groups. This
heterogeneity in the treatment effect across individuals is typically quantified through the conditional
average treatment effect (CATE). Then, a common approach from practice to obtain decisions from a
CATE is thresholding: individuals with positive CATE receive treatment, while those with negative
CATE do not [13]. For example, in medicine, clinicians typically administer treatments to the subset
of patients who are expected to benefit from the intervention [37].
However, despite being widely used in practice, the optimality properties of such a thresholding
approach for decision-making are unclear. We argue that minimizing estimation error and optimizing
∗

Correspondence to: frauen@lmu.de

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

