MoESD: Unveil Speculative Decoding’s Potential for
Accelerating Sparse MoE

Zongle Huang1,3

Lei Zhu2 Zongyuan Zhan2 Ting Hu2 Weikai Mao2
Yongpan Liu1,3† Tianyu Zhang2†
1
Tsinghua University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 BNRist

Xianzhi Yu2

{huangzl23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {ypliu}@tsinghua.edu.cn
{zhulei168,zhanzongyuan,huting35,maoweikai,yuxianzhi,zhangtianyu59}@huawei.com

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success across many
applications, with Mixture of Experts (MoE) models demonstrating great potential.
Compared to traditional dense models, MoEs achieve better performance with less
computation. Speculative decoding (SD) is a widely used technique to accelerate
LLM inference without accuracy loss, but it has been considered efficient only for
dense models. In this work, we first demonstrate that, under medium batch sizes,
MoE surprisingly benefits more from SD than dense models. Furthermore, as MoE
becomes sparser – the prevailing trend in MoE designs – the batch size range where
SD acceleration is expected to be effective becomes broader. To quantitatively
understand tradeoffs involved in SD, we develop a reliable modeling based on
theoretical analyses. While current SD research primarily focuses on improving
acceptance rates of algorithms, changes in workload and model architecture can
still lead to degraded SD acceleration even with high acceptance rates. To address
this limitation, we introduce a new metric target efficiency that characterizes these
effects, thus helping researchers identify system bottlenecks and understand SD
acceleration more comprehensively. For scenarios like private serving, this work
unveils a new perspective to speed up MoE inference, where existing solutions
struggle. Experiments on different GPUs show up to 2.29x speedup for Qwen257B-A14B at medium batch sizes and validate our theoretical predictions.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed remarkable success in Large Language Models (LLMs), with Mixture
of Experts (MoE) architectures showing tremendous potential. Unlike dense models use a single
feed-forward network (FFN) to process all inputs, MoE models replace the FFN with multiple
specialized "expert" networks plus a router that selectively activates only a few experts for each input
token. Such sparsity in structure enables MoEs with more parameters to achieve higher computational
efficiency, and multiple state-of-the-art LLMs, such as DeepseekV3 [1] and Qwen2.5-Max [2], are
all MoEs. MoE model architectures are evolving toward larger scales with increased sparsity [3, 4, 1]
and more balanced workload distribution among experts [5, 6].
Speculative decoding (SD) is a lossless technique to accelerate LLM inference, but conventional
wisdom suggests that its efficacy diminishes when applied to MoEs. In SD, a smaller draft model is
introduced to rapidly generate multiple candidate tokens, while the larger target model verifies these
predictions in parallel, preserving only correctly speculated tokens. For dense models’ inference, the
time taken to generate a single token and verify multiple ones is roughly the same, as both tasks require
the full set of parameters to be loaded once. Therefore, SD gains acceleration through fewer forward
† Corresponding Author.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

