Conditional Representation Learning
for Customized Tasks
Honglin Liu1 , Chao Sun2 , Peng Hu1 , Yunfan Li1∗, Xi Peng1,3∗
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
2
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Algorithms and Models
for Engineering Numerical Simulation, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
{TristanLiuHL, penghu.ml, yunfanli.gm, pengx.gm}@gmail.com
{sunchao}@aircas.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Conventional representation learning methods learn a universal representation that
primarily captures dominant semantics, which may not always align with customized downstream tasks. For instance, in animal habitat analysis, researchers
prioritize scene-related features, whereas universal embeddings emphasize categorical semantics, leading to suboptimal results. As a solution, existing approaches
resort to supervised fine-tuning, which however incurs high computational and
annotation costs. In this paper, we propose Conditional Representation Learning
(CRL), aiming to extract representations tailored to arbitrary user-specified criteria.
Specifically, we reveal that the semantics of a space are determined by its basis,
thereby enabling a set of descriptive words to approximate the basis for a customized feature space. Building upon this insight, given a user-specified criterion,
CRL first employs a large language model (LLM) to generate descriptive texts to
construct the semantic basis, then projects the image representation into this conditional feature space leveraging a vision-language model (VLM). The conditional
representation better captures semantics for the specific criterion, which could be
utilized for multiple customized tasks. Extensive experiments on classification and
retrieval tasks demonstrate the superiority and generality of the proposed CRL. The
code is available at XLearning-SCU/2025-NeurIPS-CRL.

1

Introduction

Representation learning aims at extracting meaningful patterns from raw data to create representations
that are easier to understand and process. Its impact spans a wide range of downstream tasks, such as
classification and retrieval. In classification, representation learning enhances the discrimination and
linear separability of features, significantly improving performance across diverse data modalities,
including images [29], text [41], and video [59]. Similarly, in retrieval tasks, representation learning
underpins efficient and accurate query-to-item matching, as evidenced by developments in image
retrieval [18] and cross-modal retrieval [50]. In recent years, driven by self-supervision techniques
such as contrastive learning [6, 23, 19, 7, 71] and mask prediction [9, 22, 73, 61], representation learning methods have undergone rapid advancements, leading to substantial performance improvements
across various fields, including graph [42], point-cloud [64], and skeleton [65].
Though remarkable progress has been made, a crucial yet often overlooked question remains: What
underlying criterion governs the learned representation? In fact, most existing representation
learning methods inherently impose an implicit criterion. Previous research [56] has demonstrated
∗

Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

