SEGA: Shaping Semantic Geometry for Robust
Hashing under Noisy Supervision

Yiyang Gu1∗, Bohan Wu1∗ , Qinghua Ran2 , Rong-Cheng Tu3 , Xiao Luo4† ,
Zhiping Xiao5† , Wei Ju1 , Dacheng Tao3 , Ming Zhang1†
1

State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, PKU-Anker LLM Lab, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 UCLA 5 University of Washington
{yiyanggu,wxtpku,juwei,mzhang_cs}@pku.edu.cn,
rqh143@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{rongcheng.tu,dacheng.tao}@ntu.edu.sg,
xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu, patxiao@uw.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of learning hash codes from noisy supervision,
which is a practical yet challenging task. This problem is important in extensive
real-world applications such as image retrieval and cross-modal retrieval. However,
most of the existing methods focus on label denoising to address this problem,
but ignore the geometric structure of the hash space, which is critical for learning
stable hash codes. Towards this end, this paper proposes a novel framework
named Semantic Geometry Shaping (SEGA) that explicitly refines the semantic
geometry of hash space. Specifically, we first learn dynamic class prototypes as
semantic anchors and cluster hash embeddings around these prototypes to keep
structural stability. We then leverage both the energy of predicted distributions and
structure-based divergence to estimate the uncertainty of instances and calibrate the
supervision in a soft manner. Moreover, we introduce structure-aware interpolation
to improve the class boundaries. To verify the effectiveness of our design, we give
the theoretical analysis for the proposed framework. Experiments on a range of
widely-used retrieval datasets justify the superiority of our SEGA over extensive
strong baselines under noisy supervision.

1

Introduction

Deep hashing methods are significant for large-scale and efficient information retrieval. The goal
of these approaches is to generate compact binary codes retaining good semantic similarity [56].
In the past few years, supervised deep hashing has performed well in various retrieval tasks, such
as image retrieval and multi-modal retrieval [34, 4, 35, 69, 32]. However, label noise is still an
outstanding challenge when it comes to practical applications [50, 20, 31]. In real-world datasets,
labels are often incomplete, ambiguous, or incorrect [68, 60, 18]. These problems may stem from
inconsistent human annotations, noisy web collection, loose category definitions, and intrinsic
semantic ambiguity [23, 65]. The discrete property of hash codes makes this problem worse. Hashing
models are sensitive to noisy supervision, where small label errors can cause large output shifts. This
leads to fragmented representations and unstable similarity preservation [47]. When supervision
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

