RobotSmith: Generative Robotic Tool Design
for Acquisition of Complex Manipulation Skills

Chunru Lin1*∗, Haotian Yuan1* , Yian Wang1* , Xiaowen Qiu1 , Tsun-Hsuan Wang2 ,
Minghao Guo2 , Bohan Wang3 , Yashraj Narang4 , Dieter Fox4 , Chuang Gan1,5
1
2
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
4
5
National University of Singapore
NVIDIA
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Endowing robots with tool design abilities is critical for enabling them to solve
complex manipulation tasks that would otherwise be intractable. While recent
generative frameworks can automatically synthesize task settings, such as 3D
scenes and reward functions, they have not yet addressed the challenge of tooluse scenarios. Simply retrieving human-designed tools might not be ideal since
many tools (e.g., a rolling pin) are difficult for robotic manipulators to handle.
Furthermore, existing tool design approaches either rely on predefined templates
with limited parameter tuning or apply generic 3D generation methods that are not
optimized for tool creation. To address these limitations, we propose RobotSmith,
an automated pipeline that leverages the implicit physical knowledge embedded
in vision-language models (VLMs) alongside the more accurate physics provided
by physics simulations to design and use tools for robotic manipulation. Our
system (1) iteratively proposes tool designs using collaborative VLM agents, (2)
generates low-level robot trajectories for tool use, and (3) jointly optimizes tool
geometry and usage for task performance. We evaluate our approach across a
wide range of manipulation tasks involving rigid, deformable, and fluid objects.
Experiments show that our method consistently outperforms strong baselines in
terms of both task success rate and overall performance. Notably, our approach
achieves a 50.0% average success rate, significantly surpassing other baselines
such as 3D generation (21.4%) and tool retrieval (11.1%). Finally, we deploy
our system in real-world settings, demonstrating that the generated tools and their
usage plans transfer effectively to physical execution, validating the practicality
and generalization capabilities of our approach.2

1

Introduction

Tool use is a fundamental capability of intelligent agents [16, 49, 47], enabling them to extend their
physical affordances to accomplish tasks that would otherwise be unattainable. In both biological
and artificial systems, the ability to use tools is critical for performing complex interactions with the
environment, particularly under morphological or task-specific constraints [60, 35, 13, 18]. For robots
operating in unstructured settings, developing robust tool-use behaviors is essential for achieving
general-purpose manipulation capabilities.
Recently, a number of generative frameworks for robotic manipulation have emerged [54, 51, 9, 53,
12, 20, 23, 32], demonstrating strong potential to scale up data collection and task generalization.
However, these frameworks have overlooked tool-use scenarios, as they typically rely on retrieving
∗
2

denotes equal contribution
Project page: https://umass-embodied-agi.github.io/RobotSmith/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

