Trust Region Constrained Measure Transport in Path
Space for Stochastic Optimal Control and Inference

Denis Blessing†, 1 Julius Berner∗, 2 Lorenz Richter∗, 3, 4 Carles Domingo-Enrich∗, 5
Yuanqi Du6 Arash Vahdat2 Gerhard Neumann1
1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 2 NVIDIA 3 Zuse Institute Berlin 4 dida
5
Microsoft Research New England 6 Cornell University

Abstract
Solving stochastic optimal control problems with quadratic control costs can be
viewed as approximating a target path space measure, e.g. via gradient-based
optimization. In practice, however, this optimization is challenging in particular if
the target measure differs substantially from the prior. In this work, we therefore
approach the problem by iteratively solving constrained problems incorporating
trust regions that aim for approaching the target measure gradually in a systematic
way. It turns out that this trust region based strategy can be understood as a geometric annealing from the prior to the target measure, where, however, the incorporated
trust regions lead to a principled and educated way of choosing the time steps
in the annealing path. We demonstrate in multiple optimal control applications
that our novel method can improve performance significantly, including tasks in
diffusion-based sampling, transition path sampling, and fine-tuning of diffusion
models.

1

Introduction

Even though the theory of stochastic optimal control (SOC) dates back several decades [12, 49], it
has recently attracted renewed interest within the machine learning community. Building on novel
formulations that are well-suited for gradient-based optimization (see [40] for an overview) and
drawing connections to diffusion models [15, 36, 92], recent work has led to significant progress in
the numerical approximation of high-dimensional control problems using neural networks [42, 87].
Related problems are crucial in many practical applications, ranging from sampling problems (e.g.,
in statistical physics [48, 68], Bayesian statistics [54, 85], and reinforcement learning [24]) to finetuning of diffusion models [38, 41, 132]. In this work, we aim to further advance SOC approximation
methods by taking inspiration from trust region methods used in optimization [1, 88, 93, 110, 123],
resulting in a principled framework from the perspective of measure transport in path space.
Stochastic optimal control. SOC problems (with quadratic control costs) describe optimization
problems of the form
min E
u∈U

Z T
0

1
∥u∥2 + f
2




 u
dXs = (b + σu) (Xsu , s)ds + σ(s)dWs
(Xsu , s) ds + g(XTu ) with
X0 ∼ p0 ,

(1)

where one optimizes the control u of the stochastic differential equation (SDE). Since the law of
the SDE solution X u induces a so-called path measure Pu on the space of continuous trajectories
(specifying how likely a certain trajectory is), finding the optimal control is equivalent to finding
an optimal target path space measure Q. From the SOC literature it is known that the likelihood of
†

Correspondence to denis.blessing@kit.edu.

∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

