Open-Reasoner-Zero: An Open Source Approach to
Scaling Up Reinforcement Learning on the Base Model

Jingcheng Hu12∗ Yinmin Zhang2 Qi Han2
Daxin Jiang2 Xiangyu Zhang2 Heung-Yeung Shum1
1
Tsinghua University 2 StepFun
{hujingcheng, zhangyinmin, hanqer}@stepfun.com
GitHub: https://github.com/Open-Reasoner-Zero/Open-Reasoner-Zero
HuggingFace: https://huggingface.co/Open-Reasoner-Zero.

Abstract
We introduce Open-Reasoner-Zero, the first open source implementation of largescale reasoning-oriented RL training on the base model focusing on scalability,
simplicity and accessibility. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that a
minimalist approach, vanilla PPO with GAE (λ = 1, γ = 1) and straightforward
rule-based rewards, without any KL regularization, is sufficient to scale up both
benchmark performance and response length, replicating the scaling phenomenon
observed in DeepSeek-R1-Zero. Using the same base model, Qwen2.5-32B base,
as DeepSeek-R1-Zero-Qwen-32B, our implementation achieves superior performance across AIME2024, MATH500, and GPQA Diamond, while demonstrating
remarkable efficiency—requiring only 1/10 of the training steps compared to the
DeepSeek-R1-Zero pipeline. We validate that this recipe generalizes well across
diverse training domains and different model families without algorithmic modifications. Moreover, our analysis not only covers training dynamics and ablation
for critical design choices, but also quantitatively shows how the learned critic
in Reasoner-Zero training effectively identifies and devalues repetitive response
patterns, yielding more robust advantage estimations and enhancing training stability. Embracing the principles of open-source, we release our source code, training
data, and various model weights, fostering reproducibility and encouraging further
exploration of the properties of related models.

1

Introduction

Large-scale reinforcement learning (RL) training of language models on reasoning tasks has emerged
as a promising paradigm for mastering complex problem-solving skills. Recent breakthroughs,
particularly OpenAI’s o1 [1] and DeepSeek’s R1-Zero [2], have demonstrated remarkable training
time scaling: as the training computation scales up, both the model’s benchmark performance and
response length consistently and steadily increase without any sign of saturation. Inspired by these
advancements, we aim to explore this new scaling phenomenon by conducting large-scale RL training,
even applying it directly to base models, an approach we refer to as Reasoner-Zero training.
In this work, we introduce Open-Reasoner-Zero (ORZ), the first open-source implementation of
large-scale reasoning-oriented RL training on large language models (LLMs) with our empirical
best practices, designed to be robust, scalable and simple-to-follow. Under Reasoner-Zero paradigm,
∗

The work was done during Jingcheng Hu’s internship at StepFun. This research is supported in part by the
National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2023ZD0121300), and National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62495092)
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

