Training-Free Safe Text Embedding Guidance for
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models

Byeonghu Na1 Mina Kang1 Jiseok Kwak1 Minsang Park1
Jiwoo Shin1 SeJoon Jun1 Gayoung Lee2 Jin-Hwa Kim2,3 Il-Chul Moon1,4
1
KAIST, 2 NAVER AI Lab, 3 SNU AIIS, 4 summary.ai
{byeonghu.na,kasong13,jskwak,pagemu,natu33,sjmathy,icmoon}@kaist.ac.kr,
{gayoung.lee,j1nhwa.kim}@navercorp.com

Abstract
Text-to-image models have recently made significant advances in generating realistic and semantically coherent images, driven by advanced diffusion models and
large-scale web-crawled datasets. However, these datasets often contain inappropriate or biased content, raising concerns about the generation of harmful outputs when
provided with malicious text prompts. We propose Safe Text embedding Guidance
(STG), a training-free approach to improve the safety of diffusion models by guiding the text embeddings during sampling. STG adjusts the text embeddings based
on a safety function evaluated on the expected final denoised image, allowing the
model to generate safer outputs without additional training. Theoretically, we show
that STG aligns the underlying model distribution with safety constraints, thereby
achieving safer outputs while minimally affecting generation quality. Experiments
on various safety scenarios, including nudity, violence, and artist-style removal,
show that STG consistently outperforms both training-based and training-free baselines in removing unsafe content while preserving the core semantic intent of input
prompts. Our code is available at https://github.com/aailab-kaist/STG.
Warning: This paper contains model-generated content that may be disturbing.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in text-to-image models have received considerable attention for their ability to
generate realistic images that semantically align with given text prompts [30, 32, 34, 44]. These
advances have largely been driven by the development of diffusion models [9, 33] and the availability of large-scale datasets collected through web crawling [5, 37]. However, this approach to
data collection often includes inappropriate or biased content, raising the risk that text-to-image
models may generate images containing unsafe concepts, such as sexual content, violence, bias, or
copyright infringement [3, 4]. Additionally, the concept of safe can be defined in commercial settings,
e.g., avoiding any intellectual property violations embodied by a certain style. Moreover, what is
considered safe can vary widely depending on individual sensitivities, cultural contexts, and social
norms, making it challenging to define a universally safe model [27, 42]. This highlights the need for
safe generation methods that can adapt to diverse perspectives and account for individual perceptions.
To address these challenges, several safe generation methods for diffusion models have been proposed
in recent years. Concept unlearning approaches fine-tune the weights of the diffusion model to forget
the unsafe content [13, 22, 25, 28, 49]. While this can be an effective way to remove unsafe concepts,
it also presents a challenge in maintaining the original generative capabilities of the model. In addition,
these methods require carefully curated safety-annotated text-image datasets for training, along with
significant computational resources, which can limit their adaptability to diverse perspectives.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

