Amplifying Prominent Representations in
Multimodal Learning via Variational
Dirichlet Process
Tsai Hor Chan∗
University of Pennsylvania
Tsaihor.Chan@PennMedicine.upenn.edu

Feng Wu∗
University of Hong Kong
fengwu96@connect.hku.hk

Yihang Chen
University of Hong Kong
yihangc@connect.hku.hk
Lequan Yu†
University of Hong Kong
lqyu@hku.hk

Guosheng Yin
University of Hong Kong
gyin@hku.hk

Abstract
Developing effective multimodal fusion approaches has become increasingly essential in many real-world scenarios, such as health care and finance. The key
challenge is how to preserve the feature expressiveness in each modality while
learning cross-modal interactions. Previous approaches primarily focus on the
cross-modal alignment, while over-emphasis on the alignment of marginal distributions of modalities may impose excess regularization and obstruct meaningful
representations within each modality. The Dirichlet process (DP) mixture model is
a powerful Bayesian non-parametric method that can amplify the most prominent
features by its richer-gets-richer property, which allocates increasing weights to
them. Inspired by this unique characteristic of DP, we propose a new DP-driven
multimodal learning framework that automatically achieves an optimal balance
between prominent intra-modal representation learning and cross-modal alignment.
Specifically, we assume that each modality follows a mixture of multivariate Gaussian distributions and further adopt DP to calculate the mixture weights for all the
components. This paradigm allows DP to dynamically allocate the contributions of
features and select the most prominent ones, leveraging its richer-gets-richer property, thus facilitating multimodal feature fusion. Extensive experiments on several
multimodal datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our model over other
competitors. Ablation analysis further validates the effectiveness of DP in aligning
modality distributions and its robustness to changes in key hyperparameters. Code
is anonymously available at https://github.com/HKU-MedAI/DPMM.git

1

Introduction

Multimodal learning aims to aggregate information from multiple modalities to generate meaningful
representations for downstream tasks. It has been widely explored in the context of vision-language
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

