Online Inverse Linear Optimization:
Efficient Logarithmic-Regret Algorithm,
Robustness to Suboptimality, and Lower Bound

Shinsaku Sakaue∗
CyberAgent
Tokyo, Japan
shinsaku.sakaue@gmail.com

Taira Tsuchiya
The University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP
Tokyo, Japan
tsuchiya@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Han Bao∗
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
Tokyo, Japan
bao.han@ism.ac.jp

Taihei Oki
Hokkaido University
Hokkaido, Japan
oki@icredd.hokudai.ac.jp

Abstract
In online inverse linear optimization, a learner observes time-varying sets of feasible actions and an agent’s optimal actions, selected by solving linear optimization
over the feasible actions. The learner sequentially makes predictions of the agent’s
true linear objective function, and their quality is measured by the regret, the cumulative gap between optimal objective values and those achieved by following the
learner’s predictions.
A seminal work by Bärmann et al. (2017) obtained a regret
√
bound of O( T ), where T is the time horizon. Subsequently, the regret bound has
been improved to O(n4 ln T ) by Besbes et al. (2021, 2025) and to O(n ln T ) by
Gollapudi et al. (2021), where n is the dimension of the ambient space of objective
vectors. However, these logarithmic-regret methods are highly inefficient when T is
large, as they need to maintain regions specified by O(T ) constraints, which represent possible locations of the true objective vector. In this paper, we present the first
logarithmic-regret method whose per-round complexity is independent of T ; indeed,
it achieves the best-known bound of O(n ln T ). Our method is strikingly simple:
it applies the online Newton step (ONS) to appropriate exp-concave loss functions.
Moreover, for the case where the agent’s
actions are possibly suboptimal, we estab√
lish a regret bound of O(n ln T + ∆T n ln T ), where ∆T is the cumulative suboptimality of the agent’s actions. This bound is achieved by using MetaGrad, which
runs ONS with Θ(ln T ) different learning rates in parallel. We also present a lower
bound of Ω(n), showing that the O(n ln T ) bound is tight up to an O(ln T ) factor.

1

Introduction

Optimization problems serve as forward models of various processes and systems, ranging from
human decision-making to natural phenomena. In real-world applications, the true objective function
of such models is rarely known a priori. This motivates the problem of inferring the objective function
from observed optimal solutions, or inverse optimization. Early work in this area emerged from geophysics, aiming at estimating subsurface structure from seismic wave data [11, 53]. Subsequently, inverse optimization has been extensively studied [2, 13, 14, 28], applied across various domains, such as
* This work was primarily conducted during the period when SS was affiliated with the University of Tokyo

and RIKEN AIP, and HB with Kyoto University and OIST.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

