S ILENCER: From Discovery to Mitigation of Self-Bias
in LLM-as-Benchmark-Generator
Peiwen Yuan1 , Yiwei Li1 , Shaoxiong Feng2†, Xinglin Wang1 , Yueqi Zhang1 ,
Jiayi Shi1 , Chuyi Tan1 , Boyuan Pan2 , Yao Hu2 , Kan Li1†
1
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Xiaohongshu Inc
{peiwenyuan,liyiwei,wangxinglin,zhangyq,shijiayi,tanchuyi,likan}@bit.edu.cn
{shaoxiongfeng2023}@gmail.com {panboyuan,xiahou}@xiaohongshu.com

Abstract
LLM-as-Benchmark-Generator methods have been widely studied as a supplement
to human annotators for scalable evaluation, while the potential biases within
this paradigm remain underexplored. In this work, we systematically define and
validate the phenomenon of inflated performance in models evaluated on their
self-generated benchmarks, referred to as self-bias, and attribute it to sub-biases
arising from question domain, language style, and wrong labels. On this basis, we
propose S ILENCER, a general framework that leverages the heterogeneity between
multiple generators at both the sample and benchmark levels to neutralize bias and
generate high-quality, self-bias-silenced benchmark. Experimental results across
various settings demonstrate that S ILENCER can suppress self-bias to near zero,
significantly improve evaluation effectiveness of the generated benchmark (with an
average improvement from 0.655 to 0.833 in Pearson correlation with high-quality
human-annotated benchmark), while also exhibiting strong generalizability.

1

Introduction

The rapid evolution of large language models (LLMs) (Guo et al., 2025; OpenAI, 2025) has led
to three key trends in evaluation: (1) benchmarks saturate more quickly, increasing the demand
for continual benchmark construction (Wang et al., 2024); (2) LLMs are applied to a wider range
of downstream tasks, amplifying the need for more customized benchmarks (Chang et al., 2024);
(3) as LLMs achieve and even surpass human capability, ever greater intelligence is demanded of
benchmark generators (Patel et al., 2025). Traditional human-centered benchmark construction
paradigm struggles to meet these demands due to high annotation costs and the inherent ceiling of
human intelligence. To address this, LLM-as-Benchmark-Generator has been proposed as a potential
paradigm (Huang et al., 2024; Farchi et al., 2024; Maheshwari et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2025) for
automatically constructing customizable benchmarks that are scalable in difficulty based on LLMs.
However, the potential biases in LLM-generated benchmarks remain underexplored, which may lead
to unreliable evaluation results. In this work, we investigate the self-bias of LLM-as-BenchmarkGenerator, a phenomenon where LLMs tend to achieve overestimated performance on benchmarks
they generate themselves. Specifically, we first introduce a formal and quantifiable definition of
self-bias B, and then empirically demonstrate its widespread presence across various LLMs and
evaluation tasks. To gain a deeper understanding of the origin of self-bias, we heuristically disentangle
B into three contributors: question domain bias B q , language style bias B s , and wrong label bias B l .
Investigative experiments show that the three sub-biases collectively contribute to self-bias, with their
relative contributions ordered as B l > B q > B s .
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

