Concept Incongruence:
An Exploration of Time and Death in Role Playing

Xiaoyan Bai

Ike Peng*

Aditya Singh*

Chenhao Tan

University of Chicago
smallyan@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Consider this prompt “Draw a unicorn with two horns”. Should large language
models (LLMs) recognize that a unicorn has only one horn by definition and ask
users for clarifications, or proceed to generate something anyway? We introduce
concept incongruence to capture such phenomena where concept boundaries clash
with each other, either in user prompts or in model representations, often leading
to under-specified or mis-specified behaviors. In this work, we take the first
step towards defining and analyzing model behavior under concept incongruence.
Focusing on temporal boundaries in the ROLE -P LAY setting, we propose three
behavioral metrics—abstention rate, conditional accuracy, and answer rate—to
quantify model behavior under incongruence due to the role’s death. We show that
models fail to abstain after death and suffer from an accuracy drop compared to the
N ON -ROLE -P LAY setting. Through probing experiments, we identify two main
causes: (i) unreliable encoding of the “death” state across different years, leading to
unsatisfactory abstention behavior, and (ii) role playing causes shifts in the model’s
temporal representations, resulting in accuracy drops. We leverage these insights to
improve consistency in the model’s abstention and answer behaviors. Our findings
suggest that concept incongruence leads to unexpected model behaviors and point
to future directions on improving model behavior under concept incongruence.1

1

Introduction

Large language models provide a simple interface for anyone to control their behavior through
arbitrary natural language instructions [5, 39]. Such a general interface often leads to “conflicting”
demands. An example is asking the model to role-play Marilyn Monroe (d. 1962) while simultaneously requesting information about current politics. The lifespan of the character clashes with
the expectation that the agent knows political information from the twentieth century. We call such
clashes concept incongruence: two or more concept boundaries specified (implicitly or explicitly)
in the prompt are incongruent with each other. We propose three levels of concept incongruence
(illustrated in Figure 1):
I-A Between human concepts in the prompt. In addition to the unicorn example, another one can be
“Propose a system where prices are determined by market forces but always remain stable.”, a
seemingly reasonable task yet impossible to complete. This is an instance of mis-specification
because it is impossible to complete the task without resolving the incongruence, although
ChatGPT generates “a unicorn with two horns” anyway.
*
1

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/ChicagoHAI/concept-incongruence.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

