Feed-Forward Bullet-Time Reconstruction of Dynamic
Scenes from Monocular Videos
Hanxue Liang1,2∗, Jiawei Ren1,3∗, Ashkan Mirzaei1,4∗, Antonio Torralba1,5 ,
Ziwei Liu3 , Igor Gilitschenski4 , Sanja Fidler1,4,6 ,
Cengiz Oztireli2 , Huan Ling1,4,6 , Zan Gojcic1†, Jiahui Huang1†
1

NVIDIA, 2 University of Cambridge, 3 Nanyang Technological University,
4
University of Toronto, 5 MIT, 6 Vector Institute
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/bullet-timer/

Abstract
Recent advancements in static feed-forward scene reconstruction have demonstrated significant progress in high-quality novel view synthesis. However, these
models often struggle with generalizability across diverse environments and fail to
effectively handle dynamic content. We present BTimer (short for BulletTimer),
the first motion-aware feed-forward model for real-time reconstruction and
novel view synthesis of dynamic scenes. Our approach reconstructs the full scene
in a 3D Gaussian Splatting representation at a given target (‘bullet’) timestamp by
aggregating information from all the context frames. Such a formulation allows
BTimer to gain scalability and generalization by leveraging both static and dynamic
scene datasets. Given a casual monocular dynamic video, BTimer reconstructs
a bullet-time1 scene within 150ms on 256 × 256 resolution while reaching stateof-the-art performance on both static and dynamic scene datasets, even compared
with optimization-based approaches.

1

Introduction

LPIPS

Multi-view reconstruction and novel-view syn(Bubble size represents Rendering FPS)
0.4
thesis are long-standing challenges in comHyperNeRF
0.3
4D-GS
NSFF
puter vision, with numerous applications rang0.2
PGDVS
ing from AR/VR to simulation and content cre0.1
MonoNeRF
ation. While significant progress has been made
Casual-FVS
DynamicNeRF
in reconstructing static scenes, dynamic scene
Ours
RoDynRF
0
0.25
1
10
100
reconstruction from monocular videos remains
Per-Scene Optimization Time (hours)
challenging due to the inherently ill-posed nature of reasoning about dynamics from limited
Figure 1: Rendering quality vs. speed. Our
observations [2].
model can reconstruct and render dynamic scenes
Current methods for static scene reconstruc- at a much faster speed than existing approaches
tion can be broadly divided into two cate- with a competitive quality. Numbers are reported
gories: optimization-based [3, 4] and feed- on NVIDIA Dynamic Scene Dataset [1]
forward [5, 6] approaches. However, extending
both of these to dynamic scenes is not straightforward. To reduce the ambiguities of scene dynamics,
many optimization-based methods aim to constraint the problem with data priors such as depth and
∗ †
1

/ : Equal contribution/advising.
In this paper, we define bullet-time as the instantiation of a 3D scene frozen at a given/fixed timestamp t.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

