SynBrain: Enhancing Visual-to-fMRI Synthesis via
Probabilistic Representation Learning

Weijian Mai1,2∗, Jiamin Wu1,3†, Yu Zhu1 , Zhouheng Yao1 , Dongzhan Zhou1 ,
Andrew F. Luo2 , Qihao Zheng1 , Wanli Ouyang1,3 , Chunfeng Song1,4
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Shanghai Innovation Institute

Abstract
Deciphering how visual stimuli are transformed into cortical responses is a fundamental challenge in computational neuroscience. This visual-to-neural mapping
is inherently a one-to-many relationship, as identical visual inputs reliably evoke
variable hemodynamic responses across trials, contexts, and subjects. However,
existing deterministic methods struggle to simultaneously model this biological
variability while capturing the underlying functional consistency that encodes
stimulus information. To address these limitations, we propose SynBrain, a generative framework that simulates the transformation from visual semantics to
neural responses in a probabilistic and biologically interpretable manner. SynBrain introduces two key components: (i) BrainVAE models neural representations as continuous probability distributions via probabilistic learning while
maintaining functional consistency through visual semantic constraints; (ii) A
Semantic-to-Neural Mapper acts as a semantic transmission pathway, projecting visual semantics into the neural response manifold to facilitate high-fidelity
fMRI synthesis. Experimental results demonstrate that SynBrain surpasses stateof-the-art methods in subject-specific visual-to-fMRI encoding performance. Furthermore, SynBrain adapts efficiently to new subjects with few-shot data and
synthesizes high-quality fMRI signals that are effective in improving data-limited
fMRI-to-image decoding performance. Beyond that, SynBrain reveals functional
consistency across trials and subjects, with synthesized signals capturing interpretable patterns shaped by biological neural variability. Our code is available at
https://github.com/MichaelMaiii/SynBrain.

1

Introduction

Understanding how the human brain transforms visual stimuli into structured patterns of neural activity
remains one of the fundamental challenges in computational neuroscience [37, 24, 18, 54]. This task,
commonly referred to as brain visual encoding, seeks to model the functional mapping from external
visual perception to spatially distributed neural responses across the cortex, uncovering how high-level
visual semantics are represented in neural populations [31, 32, 4]. In recent years, functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) has emerged as a dominant modality for brain encoding. As a noninvasive
neuroimaging technique, fMRI measures blood-oxygen-level-dependent signals as indirect proxies
for neuronal activity with high spatial resolution [38]. By translating visual inputs into fMRImeasured neural patterns, brain encoding models not only advance our understanding of human visual
perception but also lay the groundwork for applications in neural decoding [35, 8, 47, 49, 28, 34, 60],
cognitive modeling [63, 66], and brain–machine interfaces [13, 26].
∗
†

This work was done during his internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Corresponding Author (wujiamin1@pjlab.org.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

