ForgerySleuth: Empowering Multimodal Large
Language Models for Image Manipulation
Detection
Zhihao Sun1,2 , Haoran Jiang1,2 , Haoran Chen1,2 , Yixin Cao1,2 , Xipeng Qiu1,2 ,
Zuxuan Wu1,2† , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
https://github.com/sunzhihao18/ForgerySleuth

Abstract
Multimodal large language models have unlocked new possibilities for various
multimodal tasks. However, their potential in image manipulation detection remains
unexplored. When directly applied to the IMD task, M-LLMs often produce
reasoning texts that suffer from hallucinations and overthinking. To address this,
we propose ForgerySleuth, which leverages M-LLMs to perform comprehensive
clue fusion and generate segmentation outputs indicating specific regions that are
tampered with. Moreover, we construct the ForgeryAnalysis dataset through the
Chain-of-Clues prompt, which includes analysis and reasoning text to upgrade the
image manipulation detection task. A data engine is also introduced to build a largerscale dataset for the pre-training phase. Our extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of ForgeryAnalysis and show that ForgerySleuth significantly
outperforms existing methods in generalization, robustness, and explainability.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in multimodal large language models (M-LLMs) [1] have unlocked new
possibilities across a variety of tasks, propelling advancements in numerous traditional research
fields [2, 3, 4]. Despite these advancements, few attempts have been made to enhance the ability of
multimodal large language models on the image manipulation detection task (IMD). In fact, with the
rise of advanced image generation and editing tools, both creative and malicious alterations to visual
content have become increasingly difficult to detect. As a result, identifying manipulated images has
become essential for maintaining the integrity of digital media [5, 6, 7].
While appealing, directly applying M-LLMs for IMD produces results in text, which falls short even
compared with traditional IMD methods that are able to generate segmentation masks to highlight
tampered regions. In addition, M-LLMs are often prone to hallucinations and overthinking, making
them unreliable for precise manipulation detection. For instance, as shown in Figure 1 (a), M-LLMs
may incorrectly identify non-tampered regions, such as the “fish” area, as altered. This highlights the
need to enhance the reasoning capabilities of M-LLMs for tampered region detection. Furthermore,
M-LLMs, pre-trained on vast datasets, excel in recognizing authentic image patterns and world
knowledge, yet lack the ability to combine low-level statistical features to pinpoint manipulation
evidence, which has proven crucial for IMD [8, 9, 10, 11].
In this paper, we explore how to unleash the power of M-LLMs for IMD tasks. We introduce carefully
designed modules that empower an M-LLM as an IMD expert, named ForgerySleuth. ForgerySleuth
†: corresponding author.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

