Comparator-Adaptive Φ-Regret: Improved Bounds,
Simpler Algorithms, and Applications to Games

Soumita Hait∗
University of Southern California
hait@usc.edu

Ping Li∗
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
pinglee@stu.sufe.edu.cn

Haipeng Luo∗
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Mengxiao Zhang∗
University of Iowa
mengxiao-zhang@uiowa.edu

Abstract
In the classic expert problem, Φ-regret measures the gap between the learner’s
total loss and that achieved by applying the best action transformation ϕ ∈ Φ. A
recent work by Lu et al. [2025] introduces an adaptive algorithm whose regret
against a comparator ϕ depends on a certain sparsity-based complexity measure
of ϕ, (almost) recovering and interpolating optimal bounds for standard regret
notions such as external, internal, and swap regret. In this work, we propose a
general idea to achieve an even better comparator-adaptive Φ-regret bound via
much simpler algorithms compared to Lu et al. [2025]. Specifically, we discover a
prior distribution over all possible binary transformations and show that it suffices
to achieve prior-dependent regret against these transformations. Then, we propose
two concrete and efficient algorithms to achieve so, where the first one learns over
multiple copies of a prior-aware variant of the Kernelized MWU algorithm of
Farina et al. [2022b], and the second one learns over multiple copies of a prioraware variant of the BM-reduction [Blum and Mansour, 2007]. To further showcase
the power of our methods and the advantages over [Lu et al., 2025] besides the
simplicity and better regret bounds, we also show that our second approach can be
extended to the game setting to achieve accelerated and adaptive convergence rate
to Φ-equilibria for a class of general-sum games. When specified to the special
case of correlated equilibria, our bound improves over the existing ones from
Anagnostides et al. [2022a,b].

1

Introduction

Expert problem [Freund and Schapire, 1997] is one of the most fundamental online learning problems,
where a learner repeatedly hedges over d experts with the goal of being comparative to a strong
benchmark. More concretely, in each round t, the learner proposes a distribution pt ∈ ∆(d) over d
experts and suffers loss ⟨pt , ℓt ⟩ where ℓt ∈ [0, 1]d is a loss vector decided by an adversary. Consider
a benchmark that always applies a fixed linear transformation ϕ : ∆(d) 7→ ∆(d) to the learner’s
strategy and thus suffers loss ⟨ϕ(pt ), ℓt ⟩ in round t. The regret of the learner against ϕ is then defined
PT
as Reg(ϕ) ≜ t=1 ⟨pt − ϕ(pt ), ℓt ⟩, that is, the difference between the learner’s total loss and that
of the benchmark. Given a class of linear transformations Φ, the learner’s Φ-regret is defined as
maxϕ∈Φ Reg(ϕ) [Greenwald and Jafari, 2003]. With an appropriate choice of Φ, this general notion
of Φ-regret subsumes many well-studied regret notions in the literature, such as external regret,
internal regret, and swap regret.
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

