Variational Task Vector Composition

Boyuan Zhang1 Yingjun Du2 Xiantong Zhen3 Ling Shao1∗
1
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, School of Engineering Science,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
VIS Lab, University of Amsterdam
3
Central Research Institute, United Imaging Healthcare, Co., Ltd.
zhangboyuan23@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Task vectors capture how a model changes during fine-tuning by recording the
difference between pre-trained and task-specific weights. The composition of task
vectors, a key operator in task arithmetic, enables models to integrate knowledge
from multiple tasks without incurring significant additional inference costs. In this
paper, we propose variational task vector composition (VTVC), where composition
coefficients are taken as latent variables and estimated in a Bayesian inference
framework. Unlike previous methods that operate at the task level, our framework
focuses on sample-specific composition. Motivated by the observation of structural
redundancy in task vectors, we introduce a Spike-and-Slab prior that promotes
sparsity and aims to preserve the most informative components. To further address
the high variance and sampling inefficiency in sparse, high-dimensional spaces, we
develop a gated sampling mechanism that constructs a controllable posterior by filtering the composition coefficients based on both uncertainty and importance. This
yields a more stable and interpretable variational framework by deterministically
selecting reliable task components, reducing sampling variance while improving
transparency and generalization. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art average performance across a diverse range of benchmarks,
including image classification and natural language understanding. These findings
highlight the practical value of our approach, offering a new, efficient, and effective
framework for task vector composition.

1

Introduction

Task vectors represent the difference between a model’s pre-trained and fine-tuned weights, capturing
the changes during fine-tuning on specific tasks. Using task vectors, task arithmetic [17] enables
simple and efficient model editing. The composition of task vectors, a key operator in task arithmetic,
enables models to integrate knowledge from multiple tasks without increasing additional inference
costs. Task vector composition has demonstrated strong performance across a variety of domains,
including computer vision [14], natural language processing [41, 23, 13], and multimodal learning
[16, 26]. This approach provides a practical solution for knowledge integration and model editing
[48, 44, 53, 46].
In recent years, the composition of task vectors has been widely studied to improve efficiency and
controllability [52]. Some works focus on improving task vector representations by redesigning spaces
and developing parameterization techniques to better capture the relationships between tasks [30, 9].
Others extend the functional scope of task vectors to reduce computational overhead [41, 14, 15].
Advances in composition methods also enable more effective integration of knowledge across multiple
∗

Corresponding Author (ling.shao@ieee.org)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

