Can LLMs Reason Over Non-Text Modalities in a
Training-Free Manner? A Case Study with In-Context
Representation Learning

Tianle Zhang1∗, Wanlong Fang2,1∗, Jonathan Woo5,6∗, Paridhi Latawa7 ,
Deepak A. Subramanian7 , Alvin Chan1,3,4†.
1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
AI-X, Interdisciplinary Graduate Programme, Nanyang Technological University
3
Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University
4
Centre of AI in Medicine (C-AIM), Nanyang Technological University
5
University of Toronto, 6 Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
7
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2

Abstract
The remarkable performance of Large Language Models (LLMs) can be enhanced
with test-time computation, which relies on external tools and even other deep
learning models. However, existing approaches for integrating non-text modality
representations into LLMs typically require additional costly supervised training,
restricting on-the-fly adaptation to new domains and modalities. In this work, we
explore the feasibility of integrating representations from non-text foundational
models (FMs) into text-based LLMs in a training-free manner. We propose InContext Representation Learning (ICRL) as a proof-of-concept to allow LLMs
to adaptively utilize non-text modality representations with few-shot learning.
Unlike traditional in-context learning, which incorporates text-label pairs, ICRL
replaces text inputs with FM representations, enabling the LLM to perform multimodal inference without fine-tuning. We evaluate ICRL on a suite of tasks in
the molecular domain, investigating three core research questions: (i) how to
map FM representations into LLMs in a training-free manner, (ii) what factors
influence ICRL performance, and (iii) what mechanisms underlie the effectiveness
of ICRL. To the best of our knowledge, ICRL is the first training-free framework
for integrating non-text modality representations into text-based LLMs, presenting
a promising direction for adaptable, multi-modal generalization.3

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable versatility in leveraging test-time
computation [57, 48], allowing them to dynamically adapt to new tasks and perform complex reasoning without additional training. A key extension of this capability is their ability to integrate external
tools, including other deep learning models [4, 10], to enhance their problem-solving potential.
Existing multi-agent frameworks allow LLMs to incorporate predictions from external models during
inference, expanding their applicability to complex, multi-step tasks [49, 24]. Despite the advances,
these methods typically use only the final outputs of external models, limiting the effective use of
their internal knowledge [25, 49]. To address this, recent efforts have explored enabling LLMs to
leverage intermediate representations from external models. A promising direction involves allowing
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author. Email: guoweialvin.chan@ntu.edu.sg
3
Our code is available at https://github.com/ztlmememe/LLMxFM_ICRL.

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

