Online Feedback Efficient Active Target Discovery
in Partially Observable Environments

Anindya Sarkar∗, Binglin Ji∗, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
{anindya, binglin.j, yvorobeychik}@wustl.edu,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis, USA

Abstract
In various scientific and engineering domains, where data acquisition is
costly—such as in medical imaging, environmental monitoring, or remote sensing—strategic sampling from unobserved regions, guided by prior observations, is
essential to maximize target discovery within a limited sampling budget. In this
work, we introduce Diffusion-guided Active Target Discovery (DiffATD), a novel
method that leverages diffusion dynamics for active target discovery. DiffATD
maintains a belief distribution over each unobserved state in the environment, using this distribution to dynamically balance exploration-exploitation. Exploration
reduces uncertainty by sampling regions with the highest expected entropy, while
exploitation targets areas with the highest likelihood of discovering the target,
indicated by the belief distribution and an incrementally trained reward model
designed to learn the characteristics of the target. DiffATD enables efficient target
discovery in a partially observable environment within a fixed sampling budget,
all without relying on any prior supervised training. Furthermore, DiffATD offers
interpretability, unlike existing black-box policies that require extensive supervised
training. Through extensive experiments and ablation studies across diverse domains, including medical imaging, species discovery and remote sensing, we show
that DiffATD performs significantly better than baselines and competitively with
supervised methods that operate under full environmental observability.

1

Introduction

A key challenge in many scientific discovery applications is the high cost associated with sampling and
acquiring feedback from the ground-truth reward function, which often requires extensive resources,
time, and cost. For instance, in MRI, doctors aim to minimize radiation exposure by strategically
selecting brain regions to identify potential tumors or other conditions. However, obtaining detailed
scans for accurate diagnosis is resource-intensive and time-consuming, involving advanced equipment,
skilled technicians, and substantial patient time. Furthermore, gathering reliable feedback to guide
treatment decisions often requires expert judgment, adding another layer of complexity and cost.
Similarly, in a search and rescue mission, personnel must strategically decide where to sample next
based on prior observations to locate a target of interest (e.g., a missing person), taking into account
limitations such as restricted field of view and high acquisition costs. In this context, obtaining
feedback from the ground truth reward function could involve sending a team for on-site verification or
having a human analyst review the collected imagery, both of which require significant resources and
expert judgment. This challenge extends to various scientific and engineering fields, such as material
and drug discovery, where the objective may vary but the core problem—optimizing sampling to
identify a target under constraints—remains the same. The challenge is further exacerbated by the
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

