Fast-in-Slow: A Dual-System VLA Model Unifying
Fast Manipulation within Slow Reasoning

Hao Chen∗ 1, 2 Jiaming Liu∗,†2 Chenyang Gu∗2,4 Zhuoyang Liu∗2 Renrui Zhang†1 Xiaoqi Li2
Xiao He3 Yandong Guo3 Chi-Wing Fu1 Shanghang Zhang2,4 Pheng-Ann Heng1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
AI2 Robotics 4 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI)

Abstract
Generalized policy and execution efficiency constitute the two critical challenges in
robotic manipulation. While recent foundation policies benefit from the commonsense reasoning capabilities of internet-scale pretrained vision-language models
(VLMs), they often suffer from low execution frequency. To mitigate this dilemma,
dual-system approaches have been proposed to leverage a VLM-based System 2
module for handling high-level decision-making, and a separate System 1 action
module for ensuring real-time control. However, existing designs maintain both systems as separate models, limiting System 1 from fully leveraging the rich pretrained
knowledge from the VLM-based System 2. In this work, we propose Fast-in-Slow
(FiS), a unified dual-system vision-language-action (VLA) model that embeds the
System 1 execution module within the VLM-based System 2 by partially sharing
parameters. This innovative paradigm not only enables high-frequency execution
in System 1, but also facilitates coordination between multimodal reasoning and
execution components within a single foundation model of System 2. Given their
fundamentally distinct roles within FiS-VLA, we design the two systems to incorporate heterogeneous modality inputs alongside asynchronous operating frequencies,
enabling both fast and precise manipulation. To enable coordination between the
two systems, a dual-aware co-training strategy is proposed that equips System 1
with action generation capabilities while preserving System 2’s contextual understanding to provide stable latent conditions for System 1. For evaluation, FiS-VLA
outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods by 8% in simulation and 11% in realworld tasks in terms of average success rate, while achieving a 117.7 Hz control
frequency with action chunk set to eight. Project web page: fast-in-slow.github.io.

1

Introduction

The undamental objective of robotic manipulation learning [3, 4, 5, 6] is to convert real-world sensory
data and human instructions into precise control signals. Simultaneously, enabling robots to execute
a broad spectrum of tasks while adapting to variations in objects and environments remains the
core challenge. Recently, some works [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] have sought to leverage the pretrained
knowledge of foundational vision–language-models (VLMs) [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18] to enable
generalized manipulation by fine-tuning these models on robotic datasets [19, 20], giving rise to the
vision-language-action (VLA) models. However, these methods, with their billion-scale parameters
and autoregressive action generation, lead to low operating frequencies, which constrain responsive
closed-loop control and hinder real-world application.
∗

Equal contribution, † Project lead, Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

