Fast Zeroth-Order Convex Optimization
with Quantum Gradient Methods
Junhyung Lyle Kim∗

Brandon Augustino∗

Jacob Watkins

Marco Pistoia

Dylan Herman∗

Enrico Fontana∗

Shouvanik Chakrabarti†

Global Technology Applied Research, JPMorganChase
New York, NY 10001 USA

Abstract
We study quantum algorithms based on quantum (sub)gradient estimation using
noisy function evaluation oracles, and demonstrate the first dimension-independent
query complexities (up to poly-logarithmic factors) for zeroth-order convex optimization in both smooth and nonsmooth settings. Interestingly, only using noisy
function evaluation oracles, we match the first-order query complexities of classical
gradient descent, thereby exhibiting exponential separation between quantum and
classical zeroth-order optimization. We then generalize these algorithms to work
in non-Euclidean settings by using quantum (sub)gradient estimation to instantiate mirror descent and its variants, including dual averaging and mirror prox.
By leveraging a connection between semidefinite programming and eigenvalue
optimization, we use our quantum mirror descent method to give a new quantum
algorithm for solving semidefinite programs, linear programs, and zero-sum games.
We identify a parameter regime in which our zero-sum games algorithm is faster
than any existing classical or quantum approach.

1

Introduction

Convex optimization has long been a central topic of study in computer science, mathematics,
operations research, statistics, and engineering due to its large number of scientific and industrial
applications. These problems are at the core of many machine learning pipelines, and generalize
well studied settings such as linear programming, second-order conic programming, and semidefinite
programming, to name a few. A convex optimization problem is of the form
Find x̃ ∈ X such that f (x̃) − min f (x) ≤ ε,
x∈X

(OPT)

where X ⊆ Rd is a closed convex set with nonempty interior, f : Rd → R is convex and G-Lipschitz
on X with respect to a given norm ∥ · ∥, and ε > 0 is an error parameter. We make the standard
assumption that (OPT) is solvable, i.e., there exists an optimal point x⋆ ∈ arg minx∈X f (x), and that
there exists R ≥ 1 such that supx∈X dist(x, x⋆ ) ≤ R for a suitable distance metric dist(·, ·).
In practical applications, problems of the form (OPT) are solved in very high dimension d, to very
high precision ε, or both. Developing algorithms with better scaling in d and 1/ε is a primary goal of
optimization theory. Due to the ubiquity and practical importance of convex optimization, there has
been a significant effort to develop quantum algorithms providing speedups for these problems.
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
shouvanik.chakrabarti@jpmchase.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

