Efficiently Scaling LLM Reasoning with Certaindex

Yichao Fu∗1 Junda Chen∗1 Siqi Zhu1◦ Zheyu Fu1 Zhongdongming Dai1
Yonghao Zhuang2 Yian Ma1 Aurick Qiao3 Tajana Rosing1 Ion Stoica4 Hao Zhang1
1
UCSD 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Snowflake 4 UC Berkeley

Abstract
Test-time reasoning algorithms such as chain-of-thought, self-consistency, and
MCTS enhance LLM problem-solving but can wastefully generate many tokens
without improving accuracy. At the same time, we observe that these algorithms
exhibit answer stabilization: their intermediate solutions often cease to change after
a certain point, and further investment of compute does not change their final answer.
To quantify this phenomenon, we introduce Certaindex, an algorithm-agnostic
metric measuring this evolving stability, signaling when further computation is
unlikely to alter the final result. Certaindex is lightweight, can accelerate reasoning
program inference via early exit, and further enables dynamic token allocation,
gang scheduling, and many opportunities when integrated with real-world LLM
serving systems. To quantify real-world benefits, we built Certaindex as a scheduler
into Dynasor, our reasoning-aware LLM serving system, and demonstrate up to
50% compute savings and 3.3× higher throughput in real workloads with no
accuracy drop. Our code is available at https://github.com/hao-ai-lab/
Dynasor.git.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have recently demonstrated remarkable ability in solving complex
problems. Central to these advances are test-time scaling algorithms [1; 2; 3], which allocate
additional inference resources to progressively enhance model accuracy. Whether the reasoning
algorithm is externally programmed (e.g. Self-Consistency [4], MCTS [5; 6], etc.) or internalized
in the model (Chain-of-Thought based models such as Deepseek-R1 [7]), or a combination of both
(as used in OpenAI-o3 [8], Grok3 [9], Gemini 2.5 Pro [10]), these methods fundamentally empower
LLMs to tackle challenging problems more effectively.
However, we observe that LLM reasoning is highly token-inefficient, i.e., often leads to token overuse
without further accuracy gains. This phenomenon is most observable in reasoning models: models
like Deepseek-R1 can generate excessive amount of tokens, resulting in substantial 3x more tokens
than it actually needs (see Figure 2). Similar token overuse behavior is also observed in recent
studies [11; 12]. This inefficiency arises because existing reasoning algorithms lack mechanisms
to detect diminishing returns in accuracy and terminate inference early, thereby wasting resources
without gains in solution quality.
To address this inefficiency, we leverage a key observation about LLM reasoning: LLMs often signal
when they’ve “settled” on an answer during reasoning. In particular, we study reasoning models with
Chain-of-Thought (CoT, §2.1): we force the model to periodically output a result in the middle of
its reasoning process, and examine how these intermediate answers evolve across successive steps.
We find these intermediate answers frequently stabilize; that is, they rarely change after a certain
number of reasoning steps, regardless of whether the answer is ultimately correct or not. This highly
indicates that the model itself has reached a point of “high certainty” that further computation is
unlikely to alter the final result, justifying safe termination. Conversely, significant variance in the
* Equal contribution.

◦

Work done while interning at UCSD

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

