Online Mixture of Experts: No-Regret Learning for
Optimal Collective Decision-Making

Larkin Liu∗
Technische Universität München
Riebaki AI
larkin.liu@tum.de

Jalal Etesami
Technische Universität München
j.etesami@tum.de

Abstract
We explore the use of expert-guided bandit learning, which we refer to as online
mixture-of-experts (OMoE). In this setting, given a context, a candidate committee of experts must determine how to aggregate their outputs to achieve optimal
results in terms of aggregate accuracy. We propose two algorithms to address this
problem. The first algorithm combines aggregate voting with UCB-driven successive elimination, efficiently pruning suboptimal exploration actions. The second
algorithm employs an online weighted-majority-voting mechanism, leveraging the
respective voting power of each expert proportional to their predictive power. We
derive theoretical guarantees for the regret properties in the bandit setting under
ideal circumstances, and empirical results are provided accordingly. As a modern study on applications, these methods are applied to the online fine-tuning of a
set of expert large language models (LLMs), where after each response, the generative LLM dynamically reweighs its set of experts and/or selects the optimal
committee of experts to generate the most accurate response. Our results introduce new methodologies and no-regret guarantees for combining multiple experts
to improve on the performance of the an aggregate model overall.

1

Introduction

The mixture-of-experts (MoE) model is a powerful concept in applied machine learning and social choice, leveraging the collective decision-making capabilities of a group of experts to yield
improved predictions or more computationally efficient models. The core idea is that within a collection of N experts, E, there exists at possible a subgroup, E ∗ ⊆ E, whose combined predictions
are well-optimized on some well-defined metric (e.g. collective accuracy, model efficiency etc.).
Classically, MoE models involved the design of a gating mechanism (a.k.a router) that aims to optimally transform the output of many experts into a single more optimal output. Traditionally, this
involved training an offline model from labelled data to optimize some loss function via supervised
learning [1, 2, 3] . Concerning neural architecture design for offline learning, the MoE framework
has been wide integrated to several state-of-the-art LLMs (e.g. DeepSeek-MoE, Mixtral) for token
prediction tasks [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] . More recently, pertinent to applications on AI alignment, the online
version of MoE has garnered significant interest. This is particularly useful when agents interact
with an environment in a repeated manner, receiving feedback in an online fashion, and needing to
optimize in real-time.
Online Mixture of Experts: Historically, online MoE was framed as a prediction with expert advice problem, which has been extensively studied in the learning literature [9, 10, 11, 12] . The
core principle involves aggregating predictions from multiple experts, where each expert is assigned
a weight proportional to its historical predictive performance. Previous online MoE learning algorithms, such as EXP4, are theoretically guaranteed to converge to the best single expert in hindsight
[13, 14, 9] . While this property ensures asymptotic optimality relative to the best individual expert, it introduces a concerning limitation. Specifically, such algorithms fail to account for scenarios
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

