MVSMamba: Multi-View Stereo with State Space
Model
Jianfei Jiang Qiankun Liu∗ Hongyuan Liu Haochen Yu
Liyong Wang Jiansheng Chen Huimin Ma∗
University of Science and Technology Beijing, China
{jiangjf,hongyuanliu,haochen.yu,wangly}@xs.ustb.edu.cn
{liuqk3,jschen,mhmpub}@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
Robust feature representations are essential for learning-based Multi-View Stereo
(MVS), which relies on accurate feature matching. Recent MVS methods leverage
Transformers to capture long-range dependencies based on local features extracted
by conventional feature pyramid networks. However, the quadratic complexity of
Transformer-based MVS methods poses challenges to balance performance and
efficiency. Motivated by the global modeling capability and linear complexity
of the Mamba architecture, we propose MVSMamba, the first Mamba-based
MVS network. MVSMamba enables efficient global feature aggregation with
minimal computational overhead. To fully exploit Mamba’s potential in MVS,
we propose a Dynamic Mamba module (DM-module) based on a novel referencecentered dynamic scanning strategy, which enables: (1) Efficient intra- and interview feature interaction from the reference to source views, (2) Omnidirectional
multi-view feature representations, and (3) Multi-scale global feature aggregation.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate MVSMamba outperforms state-of-theart MVS methods on the DTU dataset and the Tanks-and-Temples benchmark
with both superior performance and efficiency. The source code is available at
https://github.com/JianfeiJ/MVSMamba.

1

Introduction

Multi-View Stereo (MVS) is aims to reconstruct dense 3D geometry of objects or scenes from
calibrated multi-view images, which is widely used in fields like autonomous driving [1, 2]. It
estimates the depth of each pixel by identifying correspondences across source views that satisfy
multi-view geometric consistency, making the task highly dependent on the quality of feature
matching. Naturally, more robust feature representations lead to more reliable feature matching.
Traditional MVS methods [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] rely on handcrafted features, which tend to perform poorly
in regions with repetitive patterns, weak textures, and reflections. In contrast, learning-based MVS
methods [9, 10, 11] have made significant strides by leveraging the strong representational power of
deep neural networks. Early learning-based MVS methods utilize Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs)[12] and their variants[13, 14, 15, 16] for feature extraction, but their limited receptive fields
restricted to local features only. Recently, some methods have introduced Transformers [17] to
model long-range dependencies, enabling global feature learning both within and across views, thus
improving the robustness of feature matching in challenging regions.
Despite significant progress, Transformer-based MVS methods [18, 19, 20] continue to suffer from
quadratic computational complexity. To mitigate this issue, existing approaches have introduce linear
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

