A Faster Training Algorithm for Regression Trees
with Linear Leaves, and an Analysis of its Complexity

Kuat Gazizov
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Merced
kgazizov@ucmerced.edu

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Merced
mcarreira-perpinan@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
We consider the Tree Alternating Optimization (TAO) algorithm to train regression trees with linear predictors in the leaves. Unlike the traditional, greedy recursive partitioning algorithms such as CART, TAO guarantees a monotonic decrease
of the objective function and results in smaller trees of much better accuracy. We
modify the TAO algorithm so that it produces exactly the same result but is much
faster, particularly for high input dimensionality or deep trees. The idea is based
on the fact that, at each iteration of TAO, each leaf receives only a subset of the
training instances. Thus, the optimization of the leaf model can be done exactly
but faster by using the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula. This has the unexpected advantage that, once a tree exceeds a critical depth, then making it deeper
makes it faster to train, even though the tree is larger and has more parameters.
Indeed, this can make learning a nonlinear model (the tree) asymptotically faster
than a regular linear regression model. We analyze the corresponding computational complexity and verify the speedups experimentally in various datasets. The
argument can be applied to other types of trees, whenever the optimization of a
node can be computed in superlinear time of the number of instances.

1 Introduction
Decision trees have been a popular model in machine learning and statistics for many decades,
having high interpretability and fast inference as major advantages, as well as very high accuracy
when ensembled in forests. We consider trees making a hard decision at each node (rather than soft
decision trees). We consider regression (rather than classiﬁcation) trees, which deﬁne a mapping
from RD to RE (where E = 1 is scalar regression), and we focus on oblique trees with linear leaves.
Oblique trees use a (possibly sparse) hyperplane split at each decision node and are much more
powerful than axis-aligned trees (which use a single-feature split) while remaining interpretable.
(That said, all the results in this paper carry over to the axis-aligned case as well.) Linear leaves,
which use a linear mapping Ai x + bi as predictor, work much better for regression (i.e., continuous
outputs) than constant leaves, which predict a constant output vector.
The traditional algorithms to learn regression trees, such as CART [3] or C5.0 and M5 [19, 20], are
based on greedy recursive partitioning and have been used for decades. While they are fast, simple
and intuitive, they do not optimize a global objective function of all the parameters in the tree, so
they produce overly large trees and achieve low accuracy, particularly for oblique trees and/or for
linear leaves. We focus instead on the family of Tree Alternating Optimization (TAO) algorithms,
proposed more recently for classiﬁcation [5], regression [28] and other tasks. TAO provides a proper
optimization of a well-deﬁned objective function, so that each iteration decreases the error or leaves
it constant. Compared to CART or M5, this produces trees that are much smaller and much more
accurate. The key idea of TAO, explained in detail for regression in section 3, is to optimize the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

