Mixture of Noise for
Pre-Trained Model-Based Class-Incremental Learning

Kai Jiang1,2 , Zhengyan Shi2,3 , Dell Zhang2 , Hongyuan Zhang2,4∗ and Xuelong Li2∗
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI) of China Telecom
3
School of Computer Science & School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
University of Hong Kong
jk@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, macho2021@sjtu.edu.cn, dell.z@ieee.org,
hyzhang98@gmail.com, xuelong_li@ieee.org

1

Abstract
Class Incremental Learning (CIL) aims to continuously learn new categories while
retaining the knowledge of old ones. Pre-trained models (PTMs) show promising
capabilities in CIL. However, existing approaches that apply lightweight fine-tuning
to backbones still induce parameter drift, thereby compromising the generalization
capability of pre-trained models. Parameter drift can be conceptualized as a form
of noise that obscures critical patterns learned for previous tasks. However, recent
researches have shown that noise is not always harmful. For example, the large
number of visual patterns learned from pre-training can be easily abused by a
single task, and introducing appropriate noise can suppress some low-correlation
features, thus leaving a margin for future tasks. To this end, we propose learning
beneficial noise for CIL guided by information theory and propose Mixture of
Noise (M IN), aiming to mitigate the degradation of backbone generalization from
adapting new tasks. Specifically, task-specific noise is learned from high-dimension
features of new tasks. Then, a set of weights is adjusted dynamically for optimal
mixture of different task noise. Finally, M IN embeds the beneficial noise into
the intermediate features to mask the response of inefficient patterns. Extensive
experiments on six benchmark datasets demonstrate that M IN achieves state-ofthe-art performance in most incremental settings, with particularly outstanding
results in 50-steps incremental settings. This shows the significant potential for
beneficial noise in continual learning. Code is available at https://github.com/
ASCIIJK/MiN-NeurIPS2025.

1

Introduction

Unlike human beings can naturally learn new concepts without forgetting, existing AI systems lack
the ability for continual learning [1–4]. To address this challenge, Class-Incremental Learning (CIL)
is proposed to mitigate catastrophic forgetting [5] of old knowledge when acquiring new concepts.
Most traditional CIL works focus on learning-from-scratch [6–12], i.e., learning a model without pretraining. However, the pre-training technique has been widely used in real-world applications [13, 14].
Fine-tuning with pre-trained model (PTM) on downstream tasks has become a consensus within the
AI community. This has sparked significant research interest in the continual fine-tuning of PTMs for
downstream tasks.
Due to pre-training on large-scale datasets, PTMs appear strong generalization. Therefore, preserving
the generalization ability of PTMs across all incremental phases becomes a key factor to maintain
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

