Diffusion Model as a Noise-Aware Latent Reward
Model for Step-Level Preference Optimization

Tao Zhang1,3 Cheng Da2 Kun Ding1 Huan Yang2 Kun Jin2 Yan Li2
Tingting Gao2 Di Zhang2 Shiming Xiang1,3 Chunhong Pan1
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
3
Kuaishou Technology
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS

Abstract
Preference optimization for diffusion models aims to align them with human preferences for images. Previous methods typically use Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) as pixel-level reward models to approximate human preferences. However,
when used for step-level preference optimization, these models face challenges in
handling noisy images of different timesteps and require complex transformations
into pixel space. In this work, we show that pre-trained diffusion models are
naturally suited for step-level reward modeling in the noisy latent space, as they are
explicitly designed to process latent images at various noise levels. Accordingly, we
propose the Latent Reward Model (LRM), which repurposes components of the
diffusion model to predict preferences of latent images at arbitrary timesteps. Building on LRM, we introduce Latent Preference Optimization (LPO), a step-level
preference optimization method conducted directly in the noisy latent space. Experimental results indicate that LPO significantly improves the model’s alignment
with general, aesthetic, and text-image alignment preferences, while achieving a
2.5-28× training speedup over existing preference optimization methods. Our code
and models are available at https://github.com/Kwai-Kolors/LPO.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1] have achieved significant success in the domain of text-to-image generation.
Inspired by advancements in preference optimization [2, 3] for Large Language Models (LLMs),
several methods are proposed to align the diffusion model with human preferences. Diffusion-DPO [4]
extends Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [5] to diffusion models, leveraging human-annotated
data for training without requiring a reward model. However, the reliance on offline sampling
introduces a distribution discrepancy between the preference data and the model, resulting in reduced
optimization effectiveness. In contrast, DDPO [6] and D3PO [7] employ online sampling and reward
models for preference assessment. Furthermore, to address the issue of preference order inconsistency
at different timesteps, Step-by-step Preference Optimization (SPO) [8] introduces the Step-aware
Preference Model (SPM) to predict step-wise preferences. Consequently, SPO can align models with
aesthetic preference through step-level online sampling and preference assignment.
Reward models are critical for the aforementioned methods and are mainly implemented by finetuning Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like CLIP [9] on preference datasets. We designate these
models as Pixel-level Reward Models (PRMs) since they exclusively accept pixel-level image inputs.
When applied to step-level preference optimization, PRMs encounter several common challenges. (1)
Complex Transformation: At each timestep t, PRMs necessitate additional processes of diffusion
denoising and VAE [10] decoding to transform noisy latent images xt into clean ones x̂0,t and
B

Corresponding author: Kun Ding <kun.ding@ia.ac.cn>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

