SemCoT: Accelerating Chain-of-Thought Reasoning
through Semantically-Aligned Implicit Tokens

Yinhan He∗
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA
nee7ne@virginia.edu

Wendy Zheng∗
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA
ncd9cf@virginia.edu

Zaiyi Zheng
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA
sjc4fq@virginia.edu

Lin Su
LinkedIn Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA
lsu@linkedin.com

Qi Guo
LinkedIn Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA
qguo@linkedin.com

Liangjie Hong
LinkedIn Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA
liahong@linkedin.com

Yaochen Zhu∗
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA
uqp4qh@virginia.edu
Sriram Vasudevan
LinkedIn Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA
svasudevan@linkedin.com
Jundong Li
University of Virginia.
Charlottesville, VA
jl6qk@virginia.edu

Abstract
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) enhances the performance of Large Language Models
(LLMs) on reasoning tasks by encouraging step-by-step solutions. However, the
verbosity of CoT reasoning hinders its mass deployment in efficiency-critical
applications. Recently, implicit CoT approaches have emerged, which encode
reasoning steps within LLM’s hidden embeddings (termed “implicit reasoning”)
rather than explicit tokens. This approach accelerates CoT reasoning by reducing
the reasoning length and bypassing some LLM components. However, existing
implicit CoT methods face two significant challenges: (1) they fail to preserve
the semantic alignment between the implicit reasoning (when transformed to
natural language) and the ground-truth reasoning, resulting in a significant CoT
performance degradation, and (2) they focus on reducing the length of the implicit
reasoning; however, they neglect the considerable time cost for an LLM to generate
one individual implicit reasoning token. To tackle these challenges, we propose a
novel semantically-aligned implicit CoT framework termed SemCoT. In particular,
for the first challenge, we design a contrastively trained sentence transformer that
evaluates semantic alignment between implicit and explicit reasoning, which is
used to enforce semantic preservation during implicit reasoning optimization. To
address the second challenge, we introduce an efficient implicit reasoning generator
by finetuning a lightweight language model using knowledge distillation. This
generator is guided by our sentence transformer to distill ground-truth reasoning
into semantically aligned implicit reasoning, while also optimizing for accuracy.
SemCoT is the first approach that enhances CoT efficiency by jointly optimizing
token-level generation speed and preserving semantic alignment with ground-truth
reasoning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of SemCoT
compared to state-of-the-art methods in both efficiency and effectiveness. Our code
can be found at https://github.com/YinhanHe123/SemCoT.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

