Investigating Hallucinations of Time Series Foundation
Models through Signal Subspace Analysis

Yufeng Zou† Zijian Wang§ Diego Klabjan‡ Han Liu†‡♮
Department of Computer Science, ‡ Department of Industrial Engineering
and Management Sciences, ♮ Department of Statistics and Data Science, Northwestern University
§
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney
yufeng.zou@u.northwestern.edu
zwan0998@uni.sydney.edu.au
{d-klabjan, hanliu}@northwestern.edu
†

Abstract
Times series foundation models (TSFMs) have emerged as a promising paradigm
for time series analyses and forecasting, showing remarkable generalization performance across different domains. Despite the efforts made on hallucinations of
foundation models, hallucinations of TSFMs have been underexplored in existing
literature. In this paper, we formally define TSFM hallucinations in the zero-shot
forecasting setting by examining whether a generated forecast exhibits different
dynamics from those of the context. Our study reveals that TSFM hallucinations
are associated with the loss of context information in hidden states during forward
propagation. As such, we propose a methodology to identify signal subspaces of
TSFMs and magnify the information through intervention. Experiments demonstrate that our proposed intervention approach effectively mitigates hallucinations
and improves forecasting performance. The signal strength measure computed
from signal subspaces shows strong predictive power of hallucinations and forecasting performance of the model. Our work contributes to deeper understanding
of TSFM trustworthiness that could foster future research in this direction.

1

Introduction

Times series analysis is a major research field that facilitates decision making and scientific inference
across a broad range of domains, from energy and weather to economy, transport, and system
management. As a key task, time series forecasting has motivated the development of distinct
approaches including statistical [6, 37] and deep learning [31, 45] models. Despite competitive
performance for specific tasks, these models are typically trained on a single domain, without
sufficient capability to generalize to different domains. Inspired by the success of foundation models
in fields like natural language processing [1, 7], time series foundation models (TSFMs) have recently
emerged as a new paradigm towards universal forecasters [4, 8, 11, 17, 26, 34, 44]. Pretrained on
large-scale time series data, TSFMs have shown remarkable few-shot and even zero-shot forecasting
performance across numerous domains [3, 19], substantially reducing the need for downstream data.
The hidden representations of TSFMs are also useful for downstream tasks through the extraction of
context time series information [35].
Yet, the performance of TSFMs is often plagued by hallucinations, as with other foundation models.
Broadly referring to the generation of unsupported statements or nonsensical content, hallucinations
are attributed to incorrect knowledge or insufficient inference capability of a model [20]. Among
various hallucination detection and mitigation approaches proposed, mechanistic interpretability and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

