Compress Large Language Models via Collaboration
Between Learning and Matrix Approximation

Yuesen Liao1∗, Zhiwei Li1∗, Binrui Wu1∗, Zihao Cheng1
Su Zhao2 , Shuai Chen2 , Weizhong Zhang1,3†
1
Fudan University, 2 Meituan Inc.
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{ysliao24, zwli23, brwu23, zhcheng25}@m.fudan.edu.cn
{zhaosu04, chenshuai31}@meituan.com
weizhongzhang@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Sparse and low-rank matrix composite approximation has emerged as a promising
paradigm for compressing large language models (LLMs), offering a more flexible
pruning structure than conventional methods based solely on sparse matrices. The
significant variation in weight redundancy across layers, along with the differing
rank and sparsity structures of weight matrices, makes identifying the globally optimal pruning structure extremely challenging. Existing methods often depend on
uniform or manually designed heuristic rules to allocate weight sparsity across layers, subsequently compressing each matrix using matrix approximation techniques.
Given the above theoretical difficulty in global compression of LLMs and the limited computational and data resources available compared to the training phase, we
argue that a collaboration between learning and matrix approximation is essential
for effective compression. In this paper, we propose a novel LLM compression
framework based on generalized bilevel optimization that naturally formulates an
effective collaborative mechanism. Specifically, the outer loop frames the weight
allocation task as a probabilistic optimization problem, enabling the automatic
learning of both layer-wise sparsities and matrix-wise retained ranks, while the
inner loop solves the corresponding sparsity and rank-constrained model compression problem via matrix approximation. Our main technical contributions include
two key innovations for efficiently solving this bilevel optimization problem. First,
we introduce a truncated Gaussian prior-based probabilistic parameterization integrated with a policy gradient estimator, which avoids expensive backpropagation
and stabilizes the optimization process. Second, we design an adapted QR-based
matrix approximation algorithm that significantly accelerates inner loop computations. Extensive experiments on Phi-3 and the LLama-2/3 family demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. Notably, it maintains over 95% zero-shot accuracy
under 50% sparsity and achieves up to 2× inference speedup.

1

Introduction

Model compression [8, 22, 29, 31] is a widely adopted paradigm for improving the inference efficiency of large language models (LLMs). Its core principle is to reduce model size by removing
redundant parameters or approximating the model weights with low-rank matrices [37] while preserving the performance. Although promising results have been repeatedly reported in the literature,
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

