Statistical Guarantees for High-Dimensional
Stochastic Gradient Descent
Zhipeng Lou
Department of Mathematics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
zlou@ucsd.edu

Jiaqi Li
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
jqli@uchicago.edu
Johannes Schmidt-Hieber
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Twente
Enschede, Netherlands
a.j.schmidt-hieber@utwente.nl

Wei Biao Wu
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
wbwu@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its Ruppert–Polyak averaged variant
(ASGD) lie at the heart of modern large-scale learning, yet their theoretical properties in high-dimensional settings are rarely understood. In this paper, we provide rigorous statistical guarantees for constant learning-rate SGD and ASGD in
high-dimensional regimes. Our key innovation is to transfer powerful tools from
high-dimensional time series to online learning. Specifically, by viewing SGD
as a nonlinear autoregressive process and adapting existing coupling techniques,
we prove the geometric-moment contraction of high-dimensional SGD for constant learning rates, thereby establishing asymptotic stationarity of the iterates.
Building on this, we derive the q-th moment convergence of SGD and ASGD
for any q ≥ 2 in general ℓs -norms, and, in particular, the ℓ∞ -norm that is frequently adopted in high-dimensional sparse or structured models. Furthermore,
we provide sharp high-probability concentration analysis which entails the probabilistic bound of high-dimensional ASGD. Beyond closing a critical gap in SGD
theory, our proposed framework offers a novel toolkit for analyzing a broad class
of high-dimensional learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has been a cornerstone in large-scale machine learning since
the seminal work by Robbins and Monro [1951]. It is especially efficient in high-dimensional
and overparameterized settings where the number of unknown parameters can exceed the number
of training samples [Arpit et al., 2017, Zhang et al., 2017, He et al., 2016]. SGD can also be
combined with regularization techniques such as dropout to prevent overfitting in large networks
[Krizhevsky et al., 2012, Srivastava et al., 2014]. Despite the vast amount of theoretical work on
SGD, generalization bounds of SGD in high-dimensional regimes remain limited [Garrigos and
Gower, 2023]. Considering a strongly convex objective function, we provide statistical guarantees
for constant learning-rate SGD and its Ruppert–Polyak averaged variant (ASGD) [Ruppert, 1988,
Polyak and Juditsky, 1992] in high-dimensional settings.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

