Uncertainty Quantification with the Empirical Neural
Tangent Kernel

Joseph Wilson
School of Mathematics And Physics
University of Queensland
joseph.wilson1@uqconnect.edu.au

Chris van der Heide
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
University of Melbourne
chris.vdh@gmail.com

Liam Hodgkinson
School of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Melbourne
lhodgkinson@unimelb.edu.au

Fred Roosta
CIRES and School of Mathematics And Physics
University of Queensland
fred.roosta@uq.edu.au

Abstract
While neural networks have demonstrated impressive performance across various
tasks, accurately quantifying uncertainty in their predictions is essential to ensure
their trustworthiness and enable widespread adoption in critical systems. Several
Bayesian uncertainty quantification (UQ) methods exist that are either cheap or
reliable, but not both. We propose a post-hoc, sampling-based UQ method for
overparameterized networks at the end of training. Our approach constructs efficient and meaningful deep ensembles by employing a (stochastic) gradient-descent
sampling process on appropriately linearized networks. We demonstrate that our
method effectively approximates the posterior of a Gaussian Process using the
empirical Neural Tangent Kernel. Through a series of numerical experiments,
we show that our method not only outperforms competing approaches in computational efficiency–often reducing costs by multiple factors–but also maintains
state-of-the-art performance across a variety of UQ metrics for both regression and
classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NN) achieve impressive performance on a wide array of tasks, in areas such
as speech recognition (Nassif et al., 2019; Abdel-Hamid et al., 2014; Deng et al., 2013), image
classification (LeCun et al., 1998; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016), computer vision (Redmon
et al., 2016; Redmon & Farhadi, 2017), and language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Ray, 2023;
Devlin et al., 2019), often significantly exceeding human performance. While the promising predictive
and generative performance of modern NNs is evident, accurately quantifying uncertainty in their
predictions remains an important and active research frontier (Abdar et al., 2021). Models are often
over-confident in predictions on out-of-distribution (OoD) inputs (Guo et al., 2017), and sensitive to
distribution-shift (Ford et al., 2019). By quantifying a model’s uncertainty, we can determine when it
fails to provide well-calibrated predictions, indicating the need for additional training (possibly on
more diverse data) or even human intervention. This is vital for deploying NNs in critical applications
like diagnostic medicine and autonomous machine control (Nemani et al., 2023b).
An array of uncertainty quantification methods for NNs exist, each with benefits and drawbacks.
Frequentist statistical methods, such as conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005; Papadopoulos
et al., 2002; Lei & Wasserman, 2014), create prediction intervals through parameter estimation and
probability distributions on the data. While currently considered state-of-the-art, the main drawback
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

