OLinear: A Linear Model for Time Series Forecasting
in Orthogonally Transformed Domain

Wenzhen Yue1 , Yong Liu2 , Hao Wang3 , Haoxuan Li4,∗ , Xianghua Ying1,∗ ,
Ruohao Guo1 , Bowei Xing1 , Ji Shi1
1
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science
and Technology, Peking University, 2 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University,
3
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University,
4
Center for Data Science, Peking University
{yuewenzhen,hxli}@stu.pku.edu.cn, xhying@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents OLinear, a linear-based multivariate time series forecasting
model that operates in an orthogonally transformed domain. Recent forecasting
models typically adopt the temporal forecast (TF) paradigm, which directly encode
and decode time series in the time domain. However, the entangled step-wise dependencies in series data can hinder the performance of TF. To address this, some
forecasters conduct encoding and decoding in the transformed domain using fixed,
dataset-independent bases (e.g., sine and cosine signals in the Fourier transform).
In contrast, we utilize OrthoTrans, a data-adaptive transformation based on an
orthogonal matrix that diagonalizes the series’ temporal Pearson correlation matrix.
This approach enables more effective encoding and decoding in the decorrelated
feature domain and can serve as a plug-in module to enhance existing forecasters.
To enhance the representation learning for multivariate time series, we introduce
a customized linear layer, NormLin, which employs a normalized weight matrix
to capture multivariate dependencies. Empirically, the NormLin module shows a
surprising performance advantage over multi-head self-attention, while requiring
nearly half the FLOPs. Extensive experiments on 24 benchmarks and 140 forecasting tasks demonstrate that OLinear consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance with high efficiency. Notably, as a plug-in replacement for self-attention, the
NormLin module consistently enhances Transformer-based forecasters. The code
and datasets are available at https://github.com/jackyue1994/OLinear.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series forecasting is critical in fields such as weather [Wu et al., 2023a], transportation [Ma et al., 2021], energy [Zhou et al., 2021], and finance [Chen et al., 2023]. Time series
forecasters typically adopt the temporal forecast (TF) paradigm [Wang et al., 2025a, Liu et al., 2024a,
Nie et al., 2023, Wang et al., 2024a], which encodes time series into latent representations and
decodes them back, all within the time domain. However, this paradigm struggles to fully exploit
the forecasting potential in the presence of entangled intra-series dependencies [Yi et al., 2023, Yue
et al., 2025]. To mitigate this issue, recent studies apply Fourier [Yi et al., 2024a, 2023, Yue et al.,
2025] or wavelet [Masserano et al., 2024] transforms to obtain the decorrelated feature sequence and
perform encoding and decoding in the transformed domain. Nevertheless, these methods rely on
dataset-independent bases, which fail to exploit the dataset-specific temporal correlation information.
∗

Haoxuan Li and Xianghua Ying are the corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

