Partition-Then-Adapt: Combating Prediction Bias for
Reliable Multi-Modal Test-Time Adaptation

Guowei Wang1 Fan Lyu2 Changxing Ding1∗
1
South China University of Technology
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
eegw.wang@mail.scut.edu.cn, fan.lyu@cripac.ia.ac.cn, chxding@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing test-time adaptation (TTA) methods primarily focus on scenarios involving
domain shifts in a single modality. However, they often prove ineffective when
multiple modalities simultaneously undergo domain shifts, as they struggle to
identify and utilize reliable samples within testing batches amid severe prediction
bias. To address this problem, we propose Partition-Then-Adapt (PTA), a novel
approach combating prediction bias for TTA with multi-modal domain shifts. PTA
comprises two key components: Partition and Debiased Reweighting (PDR) and
multi-modal Attention-Guided Alignment (AGA). Specifically, PDR evaluates each
sample’s predicted label frequency relative to the batch average, partitioning the
batch into potential reliable and unreliable subsets. It then reweights each sample by
jointly assessing its bias and confidence levels through a quantile-based approach.
By applying weighted entropy loss, PTA simultaneously promotes learning from
reliable subsets and discourages reliance on unreliable ones. Moreover, AGA
regularizes PDR to focus on semantically meaningful multi-modal cues. Extensive
experiments validate the effectiveness of PTA, surpassing state-of-the-art method
by 6.1% on Kinetics50-MC and 5.8% on VGGSound-MC, respectively. Code of
this paper is available at https://github.com/MPI-Lab/PTA.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained models tend to encounter performance degradation when deployed due to source-target
domain shifts. To mitigate this, TTA updates model parameters during inference using online data,
making it essential for applications like visual understanding [31, 30] and embodied intelligence [6,
18]. Recent studies have expanded TTA to multi-modal scenarios (MM-TTA), such as multi-modal
action recognition and event classification [43, 50, 9]. However, they primarily focus on single-modal
domain shifts in multi-modal tasks, where only one modality undergoes a shift while others remain
unaffected. In the real world, multi-modal domain shifts are more commonly encountered. For
instance, variations in lighting and background noise can degrade the performance of cameras and
acoustic sensors used in autonomous driving systems [43, 40]. In this paper, we investigate the
challenging problem of simultaneous domain shifts across multiple modalities in MM-TTA scenarios.
Existing MM-TTA methods typically address single-modal domain shifts in multi-modal tasks, but
they fall short in handling multi-modal domain shifts. This is mainly due to difficulties in identifying
and effectively leveraging reliable samples. From Fig. 1 (a), we observe that as more modalities
become contaminated, the pre-trained model gradually loses reliability in multi-modal fusion, causing
fused representations of different classes to overlap. Consequently, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), this results
in biased predictions. In the context of TTA, updating the pre-trained model with biased predictions
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

