On the Value of Cross-Modal Misalignment in
Multimodal Representation Learning

Yichao Cai∗
Yuhang Liu∗†
Erdun Gao
Tianjiao Jiang
Zhen Zhang
Anton van den Hengel
Javen Qinfeng Shi
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
The University of Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia

Abstract
Multimodal representation learning, exemplified by multimodal contrastive learning (MMCL) using image-text pairs, aims to learn powerful representations by
aligning cues across modalities. This approach relies on the core assumption that
the exemplar image-text pairs constitute two representations of an identical concept. However, recent research has revealed that real-world datasets often exhibit
cross-modal misalignment. There are two distinct viewpoints on how to address
this issue: one suggests mitigating the misalignment, and the other leveraging it.
We seek here to reconcile these seemingly opposing perspectives, and to provide a
practical guide for practitioners. Using latent variable models we thus formalize
cross-modal misalignment by introducing two specific mechanisms: Selection bias,
where some semantic variables are absent in the text, and perturbation bias, where
semantic variables are altered—both leading to misalignment in data pairs. Our
theoretical analysis demonstrates that, under mild assumptions, the representations
learned by MMCL capture exactly the information related to the subset of the
semantic variables invariant to selection and perturbation biases. This provides a
unified perspective for understanding misalignment. Based on this, we further offer
actionable insights into how misalignment should inform the design of real-world
ML systems. We validate our theoretical findings via extensive empirical studies
on both synthetic data and real image-text datasets, shedding light on the nuanced
impact of cross-modal misalignment on multimodal representation learning. 2

1

Introduction

Modern multimodal learning has achieved remarkable success in jointly modeling information from
heterogeneous sources such as vision, language, and audio. Multimodal contrastive learning (MMCL)
on paired data has emerged as a dominant strategy for aligning modalities [55, 27, 72]. This approach
is exemplified by vision-and-language models like CLIP, which attempt to identify a common
representation space that maximizes the similarity of real image-text pairs while minimizing that of
incorrect pairs [55]. One of the assumptions underpinning this approach is that the training pairs are
aligned across modalities, meaning that they convey exactly the same semantic information [73, 45].
This assumption, though convenient, is often violated in real-world scenarios, where multimodal data
is inherently noisy or imprecisely paired [49, 50]. More critically, text taken from image captions
typically only partially describes the paired image content, and often contains descriptive elements
that are irrelevant or misleading, a situation referred to as cross-modal misalignment. For example, in
a large-scale video-text dataset, over 50% of the purportedly aligned clip-caption pairs were found
to be misaligned [49]. It is worth noting that the impact of cross-modal misalignment is mainly
∗
2

Equal contribution. † Correspondence to: yuhang.liu01@adelaide.edu.au.
The project page is available at https://yichaocai.com/misalignment.github.io

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

