Private Hyperparameter Tuning with Ex-Post
Guarantee
Badih Ghazi
Google Research
badihghazi@gmail.com

Pritish Kamath
Google Research
pritish@alum.mit.edu

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Pasin Manurangsi
Google Research
pasin@google.com

Alexander Knop
Google Research
alexanderknop@google.com
Chiyuan Zhang
Google Research
chiyuan@google.com

Abstract
The conventional approach in differential privacy (DP) literature formulates the
privacy-utility tradeoff with a “privacy-first” perspective: for a predetermined level
of privacy, a certain utility is achievable. However, practitioners often operate under
a “utility-first” paradigm, prioritizing a desired level of utility and then determining
the corresponding privacy cost.
Wu et al. [2019] initiated a formal study of this “utility-first” perspective by introducing ex-post DP. They demonstrated that by adding correlated Laplace noise and
progressively reducing it on demand, a sequence of increasingly accurate estimates
of a private parameter can be generated, with the privacy cost attributed only to the
least noisy iterate released. This led to a Laplace mechanism variant that achieves
a specified utility with minimal privacy loss. However, their work, and similar
findings by Whitehouse et al. [2022], are primarily limited to simple mechanisms
based on Laplace or Gaussian noise.
In this paper, we significantly generalize these results. In particular, we extend
the work of Wu et al. [2019] and Liu and Talwar [2019] to support any sequence
of private estimators, incurring at most a doubling of the original privacy budget.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that hyperparameter tuning for these estimators,
including the selection of an optimal privacy budget, can be performed without
additional privacy cost. Finally, we extend our results to ex-post Rényi DP, further
broadening the applicability of utility-first privacy mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Many applications of machine learning and statistics involve computation on sensitive data, necessitating privacy-preserving techniques. In recent years, differential privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2016] has
become one of the most rigorous formalization of privacy, with many practical applications [Abadi
et al., 2016, Yu et al., 2024, Mehta et al., 2023, Tang et al., 2025, US Census Bureau, 2023, Hod and
Canetti, 2025, Wilson et al., 2020]. Recall that an algorithm is DP if the output distributions on two
neighboring inputs are close, where the closeness is determined by the privacy budget1 ε:
Definition 1 (Pure Differentially Privacy, [Dwork et al., 2016]). For ε ≥ 0, a mechanism M with
input from D and output from O is ε-differentially private (or simply, ε-DP) iff Pr[M(D) = o] ≤
eε Pr[M(D′ ) = o], for all o ∈ O and neighboring datasets D, D′ ∈ D. 2
1
2

Our work also applies to approximate-DP with δ parameter; see Section 2 for the definition.
We also assume for simplicity that O is finite; it is simple to extend the results to the infinite case.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

