Cooperative Bargaining Games Without Utilities:
Mediated Solutions from Direction Oracles
Kushagra Gupta∗ †
The University of Texas at Austin
kushagrag@utexas.edu

Surya Murthy∗
The University of Texas at Austin
surya.murthy@utexas.edu

Mustafa O. Karabag
The University of Texas at Austin
karabag@utexas.edu

Ufuk Topcu
The University of Texas at Austin
utopcu@utexas.edu

David Fridovich-Keil
The University of Texas at Austin
dfk@utexas.edu

Abstract
Cooperative bargaining games are widely used to model resource allocation and
conflict resolution. Traditional solutions assume the mediator can access agents’
utility function values and gradients. However, there is an increasing number of
settings, such as human-AI interactions, where utility values may be inaccessible
or incomparable due to unknown, nonaffine transformations. To model such
settings, we consider that the mediator has access only to agents’ most preferred
directions—normalized utility gradients in the decision space. To this end, we
propose a cooperative bargaining algorithm where a mediator has access to only
the direction oracle of each agent. We prove that unlike popular approaches
such as the Nash and Kalai-Smorodinsky bargaining solutions, our approach is
invariant to monotonic nonaffine transformations, and that under strong convexity
and smoothness assumptions, this approach enjoys global asymptotic convergence
to Pareto stationary solutions. Moreover, we show that the bargaining solutions
found by our algorithm also satisfy the axioms of symmetry and (under slightly
stronger conditions) independence of irrelevant alternatives, which are popular
in the literature. Finally, we conduct experiments in two domains, multi-agent
formation assignment and mediated stock portfolio allocation, which validate these
theoretical results.
Project Website: https://kaugsrha.github.io/dibs-on-neurips.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of centralized, cooperative multi-agent bargaining where a mediator has
access to only each agent’s most preferred direction to move in the decision space, and does not know
the agents’ underlying utility functions. Over the past eighty years, a variety of celebrated bargaining
solution concepts have been introduced [26]; however, most require the mediator to have access to
the explicit utility values and gradients for each agent, e.g., the Nash [19] and Kalai-Smorodinsky
[9] bargaining solutions (NBS and KSBS, respectively). Unfortunately, these existing bargaining
solutions cannot cater to an increasing number of important settings.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

