Efficient Data Selection at Scale
via Influence Distillation
Mahdi Nikdan∗ †
ISTA & Google Research

Vincent Cohen-Addad†
Google Research

Dan Alistarh
ISTA & Red Hat AI

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research

Abstract
Effective data selection is critical for efficient training of modern Large Language Models (LLMs). This paper introduces Influence Distillation, a novel,
mathematically-justified framework for data selection that employs second-order
information to optimally weight training samples. By distilling each sample’s
influence on a target distribution, our method assigns model-specific weights that
are used to select training data for LLM fine-tuning, guiding it toward strong performance on the target domain. We derive these optimal weights for both Gradient
Descent and Adam optimizers. To ensure scalability and reduce computational cost,
we propose a landmark-based approximation: influence is precisely computed for
a small subset of “landmark” samples and then efficiently propagated to all other
samples to determine their weights. We validate Influence Distillation by applying
it to instruction tuning on the Tulu V2 dataset, targeting a range of tasks including
GSM8k, SQuAD, and MMLU, across several models from the Llama and Qwen
families. Experiments show that Influence Distillation matches or outperforms
state-of-the-art performance while achieving up to 3.5× faster selection.

1

Introduction

The rise of Large Language Models (LLMs) has driven significant advances in natural language
processing; yet, training and fine-tuning these models requires massive computational resources and
carefully-curated datasets. One key direction towards improved training efficiency has been via data
selection and data weighting methods [Xia et al., 2024, Yin and Rush, 2024, Antonello et al., 2020,
Marion et al., 2023, Ankner et al., 2024, Li et al., 2023a, Ivison et al., 2025, Axiotis et al., 2024,
Xie et al., 2023a, Engstrom et al., 2024a, Huang et al., 2024, Feng et al., 2024], which aim to curate
training subsets that maximize a model’s effectiveness, often with respect to a particular target data
distribution or downstream task. However, existing approaches typically rely on heuristics—such
as perplexity-based filtering—or require expensive proxy model training or expensive embedding
functions to generate data representations.
More precisely, existing methods face several limitations. First, many existing methods utilize fixed,
model-agnostic features or representations (e.g., static embeddings) that may not capture the full
relationship between training samples and the target distribution [Yin and Rush, 2024, Antonello
et al., 2020, Marion et al., 2023, Ankner et al., 2024]. Second, methods that update weights during
training lack theoretical justification and can be unstable [Xie et al., 2023a, Huang et al., 2024].
Lastly, approaches that rely on reference model training or costly embeddings are computationally
∗
†

Work done while an intern at Google Research.
Correspondence to mnikdan@ista.ac.at and cohenaddad@google.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

