TimeWak: Temporal Chained-Hashing Watermark for
Time Series Data
Zhi Wen Soi1,∗ Chaoyi Zhu2,∗ Fouad Abiad2 Aditya Shankar2
Jeroen M. Galjaard2 Huijuan Wang2 Lydia Y. Chen1,2,†
1

University of Neuchâtel

2

Delft University of Technology

{zhi.soi, yiyu.chen}@unine.ch
{c.zhu-2, f.abiad, a.shankar, j.m.galjaard, h.wang}@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Synthetic time series generated by diffusion models enable sharing privacysensitive datasets, such as patients’ functional MRI records. Key criteria for synthetic data include high data utility and traceability to verify the data source. Recent
watermarking methods embed in homogeneous latent spaces, but state-of-the-art
time series generators operate in data space, making latent-based watermarking incompatible. This creates the challenge of watermarking directly in data space while
handling feature heterogeneity and temporal dependencies. We propose TimeWak,
the first watermarking algorithm for multivariate time series diffusion models. To
handle temporal dependence and spatial heterogeneity, TimeWak embeds a temporal chained-hashing watermark directly within the temporal-feature data space.
The other unique feature is the ϵ-exact inversion, which addresses the non-uniform
reconstruction error distribution across features from inverting the diffusion process
to detect watermarks. We derive the error bound of inverting multivariate time
series while preserving robust watermark detectability. We extensively evaluate
TimeWak on its impact on synthetic data quality, watermark detectability, and
robustness under various post-editing attacks, against five datasets and baselines of
different temporal lengths. Our results show that TimeWak achieves improvements
of 61.96% in context-FID score, and 8.44% in correlational scores against the
strongest state-of-the-art baseline, while remaining consistently detectable. Our
code is available at https://github.com/soizhiwen/TimeWak.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series data drive key applications in healthcare [19], finance [13], and science [25].
However, access to real-world datasets is often restricted by privacy regulations, limited availability,
and high acquisition costs. To address these issues, synthetic time series generated by models
are increasingly adopted as practical alternatives [9, 25]. Among generative techniques, diffusion
models [10] have gained prominence for producing high-quality samples, often outperforming the
mainstream Generative Adversarial Networks and Variational Autoencoders [6, 12].
Beyond generation quality, traceability is equally critical, as it ensures verifiability and safeguards
against misuse [18, 41]. In this context, watermarking has become the de-facto approach for tracking
and auditing synthetic data [32, 18]. The challenge lies in striking a delicate balance: embedding
imperceptible signals that preserve the quality of generated content while remaining detectable, even
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

