Combining Cost-Constrained Runtime Monitors for
AI Safety

Tim Tian Hua∗
MARS
timhua0@gmail.com

Henri Lemoine†
MARS

James Baskerville
MARS

Aryan Bhatt
Redwood Research
aryan@rdwrs.com

Mia Hopman†
MARS

Tyler Tracy
MARS & Redwood Research
tylertracy@rdwrs.com

Abstract
Monitoring AIs at runtime can help us detect and stop harmful actions. In this
paper, we study how to efficiently combine multiple runtime monitors into a
single monitoring protocol. The protocol’s objective is to maximize the probability
of applying a safety intervention on misaligned outputs (i.e., maximize recall).
Since running monitors and applying safety interventions are costly, the protocol
also needs to adhere to an average-case budget constraint. Taking the monitors’
performance and cost as given, we develop an algorithm to find the best protocol.
The algorithm exhaustively searches over when and which monitors to call, and
allocates safety interventions based on the Neyman-Pearson lemma. By focusing
on likelihood ratios and strategically trading off spending on monitors against
spending on interventions, we more than double our recall rate compared to a naive
baseline in a code review setting. We also show that combining two monitors can
Pareto dominate using either monitor alone. Our framework provides a principled
methodology for combining existing monitors to detect undesirable behavior in
cost-sensitive settings.

1

Introduction

As AI systems with greater autonomy and capability permeate our world, their potential for harm
scales in lockstep. One straightforward safety intervention is to monitor AI outputs and block
harmful actions. Indeed, monitors form a cornerstone of proposed safeguards for advanced AI
systems (Korbak et al., 2025b; Grosse, 2024; Shah et al., 2025) and are central to present-day content
moderation (Inan et al., 2023). However, monitoring is imperfect and costly. Given a budget, how
can we spend it in the most cost-efficient manner to stop as many harmful actions as possible?
Developers often have access to multiple monitors and wish to combine them into a single monitoring
protocol. For example, OpenAI uses two monitors to mitigate the misuse of ChatGPT Agent for
creating biological and chemical weapon: one to detect if the topic is related to biology, and a second
one to detect if the response violates their policies (OpenAI, 2025, pg. 35). Cunningham et al.
(2025) from Anthropic propose “multi-stage classifiers” by first using a cheap model-internals-based
monitors then calling a larger monitor if the cheap monitor found the output to be suspicious. There
are also academic studies that combine probe monitors and black box monitors for various safetyrelevant tasks (McKenzie et al., 2025; Parrack et al., 2025). However, these existing monitoring
∗
†

Corresponding author: timhua0@gmail.com
Equal contribution, author order randomized.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

