Knowledge Graph Enhanced Generative Multi-modal
Models for Class-Incremental Learning

Xusheng Cao2 , Haori Lu2 , Linlan Huang2 , Fei Yang1,2 , Xialei Liu1,2∗, Ming-Ming Cheng1,2
1
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian, 2 VCIP, CS, Nankai University
{caoxusheng, luhaori, huanglinlan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn,
{feiyang, xialei, cmm}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Continual learning in computer vision faces the critical challenge of catastrophic
forgetting, where models struggle to retain prior knowledge while adapting to
new tasks. Although recent studies have attempted to leverage the generalization
capabilities of pre-trained models to mitigate overfitting on current tasks, models
still tend to forget details of previously learned categories as tasks progress, leading
to misclassification. To address these limitations, we introduce a novel Knowledge Graph Enhanced Generative Multi-modal model (KG-GMM) that builds an
evolving knowledge graph throughout the learning process. Our approach utilizes
relationships within the knowledge graph to augment the class labels and assigns
different relations to similar categories to enhance model differentiation. During
testing, we propose a Knowledge Graph Augmented Inference method that locates
specific categories by analyzing relationships within the generated text, thereby
reducing the loss of detailed information about old classes when learning new
knowledge and alleviating forgetting. Experiments demonstrate that our method
effectively leverages relational information to help the model correct mispredictions, achieving state-of-the-art results in both conventional CIL and few-shot CIL
settings, confirming the efficacy of knowledge graphs at preserving knowledge in
the continual learning scenarios.

1

Introduction

Continual learning without forgetting old knowledge[34] has been thriving in the ever-changing world.
Traditional approaches in this area typically employ three categories [33] of methods to prevent
forgetting: replay-based methods [25, 40, 15, 57] that retain a portion of past data, architecture-based
methods [32, 42, 58] that progressively expand the model, and regularization-based methods [7, 24, 1]
that prevent excessive changes in model parameters. Recently, methods based on large-scale pretrained models [21, 39] have attracted more attention due to their superior performance than the
traditional train-from-scratch methods. For example, prompt-based methods [44, 56, 55, 54] have
been proposed that use a small number of parameters to learn “general” and “specific” knowledge
without altering the pre-trained backbone. SLCA [62] proposes to use a small learning rate for the
backbone to preserve the generalizability and a larger learning rate for the classifier to accommodate
new classes. Yet, these methods do not leverage textual information of the class labels or the
relationships between the learned classes.
To leverage the rich information lies in text modality, Continual CLIP [49] proposes to use Frozen
CLIP to conduct predictions based on image-text similarities. RAPF [18] uses CLIP [39] text encoder
to detect and pull apart similar classes. PROOF [67] proposes to use task-specific projections on both
image and text encoder. MoE-Adapters [59] utilize the Mixture-of-Experts adapters on top of the
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

