Imitation Learning with Temporal Logic Constraints

Zining Fan
Rutgers University
zf140@scarletmail.rutgers.edu

He Zhu
Rutgers University
hz375@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Designing reinforcement learning agents to satisfy complex temporal objectives
expressed in Linear Temporal Logic (LTL), presents significant challenges, particularly in ensuring sample efficiency and task alignment over infinite horizons.
Recent works have shown that by leveraging the corresponding Limit Deterministic
Büchi Automaton (LDBA) representation, LTL formulas can be translated into
variable discounting schemes over LDBA-accepting states to maximize a lower
bound on the probability of formula satisfaction. However, the resulting reward
signals are inherently sparse, making exploration of LDBA-accepting states increasingly difficult as task horizons lengthen to infinity. In this work, we address these
challenges by leveraging finite-length demonstrations to overcome the exploration
bottleneck for LTL objectives over infinite horizons. We segment agent exploratory
trajectories at LDBA-accepting states and iteratively guide the agent within each
segment to learn to efficiently reach these accepting states. By incentivizing the
agent to visit LDBA-accepting states from arbitrary states, our approach increases
the probability of LTL formula satisfaction without the need for extensive or lengthy
demonstrations. We demonstrate the applicability of our method in a variety of
high-dimensional continuous control domains. It achieves faster convergence and
consistently outperforms baseline approaches.

1

Introduction

Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) has been extensively studied as an alternative framework for specifying
objectives for reinforcement learning (RL) agents [54, 27, 13, 62, 3, 16, 63]. LTL provides a powerful
and flexible language to define tasks with temporal dependencies, such as“cycle between two subgoals
while always avoiding unsafe regions" or “eventually reach a goal after completing a sequence of
subtasks" [2]. Designing RL agents to satisfy these objectives is particularly challenging when
considering infinite horizons, where the agent must maintain behavior that satisfies the objectives
indefinitely. These challenges are compounded by the need to ensure sample efficiency in highdimensional, continuous systems.
Several recent studies [28, 63, 13] have proposed proxy reward schemes to derive policies from the
Limit Deterministic Büchi Automaton (LDBA) representation of LTL specifications. A trajectory
satisfies an LTL formula if and only if it visits an LDBA-accepting state infinitely often. However,
these proxy rewards, defined over LDBA-accepting states, are inherently sparse, posing challenges
for effective exploration toward such states.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel framework, TiLoIL (Temporal Logic Imitation
Learning), which leverages Learning from Demonstrations to mitigate reward sparsity in policy
optimization for LTL objectives. The high-level idea is to combine the structure of LDBAs with
finite-length demonstrations to guide exploration. Specifically, TiLoIL segments exploratory agent
trajectories at each visit to an LDBA accepting state, treating each segment as a sub-trajectory leading
toward acceptance. Using these segments, TiLoIL encourages the agent to learn how to efficiently
reach LDBA accepting states by imitating expert behavior along these sub-trajectories. In essence,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

