A Generalist Intracortical Motor Decoder
Joel Ye1∗ Fabio Rizzoglio3 Adam Smoulder1 Hongwei Mao2 Xuan Ma3
Patrick Marino2 Raeed Chowdhury2 Dalton Moore5 Gary Blumenthal2
William Hockeimer2 Nicolas G. Kunigk2 J. Patrick Mayo2 Aaron P. Batista2
Steven Chase1 Adam Rouse4 Michael L. Boninger2 Charles Greenspon5
Andrew B. Schwartz2 Nicholas G. Hatsopoulos4 Lee E. Miller3
Kristofer E. Bouchard6 Jennifer L. Collinger2 Leila Wehbe1 Robert Gaunt2†
1

2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Pittsburgh
Northwestern University
4
5
University of Chicago
University of Kansas Medical Center
6
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

Abstract
Mapping the relationship between neural activity and motor behavior is a central
aim of sensorimotor neuroscience and neurotechnology. While most progress to
this end has relied on restricting complexity, the advent of foundation models
instead proposes integrating a breadth of data as an alternate avenue for broadly
advancing downstream modeling. We quantify this premise for motor decoding
from intracortical microelectrode data, pretraining an autoregressive Transformer
on 2000 hours of neural population spiking activity paired with diverse motor
covariates from over 30 monkeys and humans. The resulting model is broadly
useful, benefiting decoding on 8 downstream decoding tasks and generalizing to
a variety of neural distribution shifts. However, we also highlight that scaling
autoregressive Transformers seems unlikely to resolve limitations stemming from
sensor variability and output stereotypy in neural datasets.
Code: https:
//github.com/joel99/ndt3

1

Introduction

Intracortical neural data collection is growing rapidly. This growth comprises not only larger
individual datasets with more neurons and higher behavioral complexity [1, 2], but also an increase
in the collective number of datasets. This wealth of data presents an opportunity to develop insights
and applications that span datasets, provided we can reconcile their inherent diversity. Large deep
networks appear very suitable for this task, so much so that the generic creation of deep networks
operating on broad domain data has been termed foundation modeling [3]. Efforts to create foundation
models are now proliferating beyond their origins in natural language processing (NLP) and computer
vision (CV) into many domains of engineering and science [4]. Here, we evaluate the efficacy of
foundation modeling for motor decoding from intracortical spiking activity.
Motor decoding is a valuable domain for characterizing neural data foundation models. Academic and
industrial efforts to create iBCIs for neuroprosthetics provide a path for scaling data collection from
hundreds to thousands of subject-hours, and also fuel a need for pretrained models that generalize
quickly and perform robustly for new users and settings. Behavior prediction metrics for BCI
performance are also more intuitive for benchmarking progress than neural data prediction or the
abstract goal of providing scientific insight (e.g. with latent variable models or in silico models) [5, 6].
Finally, recent work has shown that deep networks are able to transfer learn across motor cortical
∗
†

Correspondence: joelye9@gmail.com
Correspondence: rag53@pitt.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

