Mellow: a small audio language model for reasoning

Soham Deshmukh Satvik Dixit Rita Singh Bhiksha Raj
Carnegie Mellon University
{sdeshmuk, satvikd, rsingh, bhikshar}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Multimodal Audio-Language Models (ALMs) can understand and reason over
both audio and text. Typically, reasoning performance correlates with model size,
with the best results achieved by models exceeding 8 billion parameters. However,
no prior work has explored enabling small audio-language models to perform
reasoning tasks, despite the potential applications for edge devices. To address this
gap, we introduce Mellow, a small Audio-Language Model specifically designed
for reasoning. Mellow achieves state-of-the-art performance among existing small
audio-language models and surpasses several larger models in reasoning capabilities. For instance, Mellow scores 52.11 on MMAU, comparable to SoTA Qwen2
Audio (which scores 52.5) while using 50 times fewer parameters and being trained
on 60 times less data (audio hrs). To train Mellow, we introduce ReasonAQA, a
dataset designed to enhance audio-grounded reasoning in models. It consists of
a mixture of existing datasets (30% of the data) and synthetically generated data
(70%). The synthetic dataset is derived from audio captioning datasets, where
Large Language Models (LLMs) generate detailed and multiple-choice questions
focusing on audio events, objects, acoustic scenes, signal properties, semantics,
and listener emotions. To evaluate Mellow’s reasoning ability, we benchmark it on
a diverse set of tasks, assessing on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution data,
including audio understanding, deductive reasoning, and comparative reasoning.
Finally, we conduct extensive ablation studies to explore the impact of projection
layer choices, synthetic data generation methods, and language model pretraining
on reasoning performance. Our training dataset, findings, and baseline pave the
way for developing small ALMs capable of reasoning.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of computational audition [7] and machine listening has transitioned from
task-specific approaches [13] to unified models [26, 14] capable of performing multiple tasks. These
unified systems, known as Audio Foundation Models [69], have demonstrated impressive performance
across a variety of tasks, often surpassing task-specific and dataset-specific models. Most Audio
Foundation Models leverage language as a mode of supervision during pretraining, utilizing relatively
simple objectives such as contrastive learning [25, 27, 73] or next-token prediction [14, 36, 33]. The
simplicity of these objectives makes them highly scalable, allowing for the scaling of both data and
model parameters with increased computational resources.
Over the years, advancements in architectural design, along with the scaling of both data and model
parameters, have significantly enhanced performance on existing benchmarks [36, 34, 66, 33, 10, 11].
Early contrastive audio-language models, such as CLAP [25], were trained on relatively small
datasets, such as 128k audio-text pairs. In contrast, recent next-token prediction models leverage
datasets containing millions of pairs, incorporating multiple encoders and projection layers, with
some models exceeding 10 million pairs [34]. Beyond benchmark improvements, these larger models
have begun to exhibit emergent abilities [16, 18]—skills not explicitly trained for and not easily
inferred from their individual components. Notable examples include the ability of Audio-Language
Models (ALMs) to serve as general-purpose audio quality estimators [16], enhanced reasoning over
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

