Contimask: Explaining Irregular Time Series Models
via Perturbations in Continuous Time
Max Moebus, Björn Braun, and Christian Holz
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
{max.moebus};{bjoern.braun};{christian.holz}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Explaining black-box models for time series data is critical for the wide-scale
adoption of deep learning techniques across domains such as healthcare. Recently,
explainability methods for deep time series models have seen significant progress
by adopting saliency methods that perturb masked segments of time series to
uncover their importance towards the prediction of black-box models. Thus far,
such methods have been largely restricted to regular time series. Irregular time
series, however, sampled at irregular time intervals and potentially with missing
values, are the dominant form of time series in various critical domains (e.g.,
hospital records). In this paper, we conduct the first evaluation of saliency methods
for the interpretation of irregular time series models. We first translate techniques
for regular time series into the continuous time realm of irregular time series and
show under which circumstances such techniques are still applicable. However,
existing perturbation techniques neglect the timing and structure of observed
data, e.g., informative missingness when data is not missing at random. Thus,
we propose Contimask, a simple framework to also apply non-differentiable
perturbations, such as simulating that parts of the data had not been observed using
NeuroEvolution. Doing so, we successfully detect how structural differences in the
data can bias irregular time series models on a real-world sepsis prediction task
where 90% of the data is missing. Source code is available on GitHub.

1

Introduction

Deep learning promises to change the analysis of time series data across various domains, including
healthcare, economics, ecology, or physics. To enable the broad-scale application of deep learning
models in these domains, model internals have to be verifiable. Suggestions made by models
must become explainable for humans using them, which has become the challenge of the field of
explainable AI (XAI). Especially in fields such as healthcare, where models could be used to assist
patient treatment, human-level explainability is vital to enable impactful broad-scale application [9].
Explainability methods for deep learning initially surged for image models [6, 38, 31], and have seen
some recent progress for time series [13, 14, 4, 5, 22]. Methods for explaining time series models
initially translated masking and perturbation techniques from the image domain to the realm of time
series [4, 5] and extended them to create more realistic perturbations that more naturally imitate time
series [14]. So far, these methods have only focused on regularly sampled time series, i.e., samples
arrive at equally spaced intervals and without missing values.
However, in many domains, time series data arrive at irregularly sampled intervals since data is
often only generated in response to a specific event. For example, in healthcare, the physician
and the state of the patient’s health determine when data is collected so that hospital resources
are not wasted [9]. Similarly, in mobile and wearable computing, signals might only be partially
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

