Robustness in Both Domains:
CLIP Needs a Robust Text Encoder
Elias Abad Rocamora
Yongtao Wu

, Christian Schlarmann
, Matthias Hein

, Naman Deep Singh

,

, Volkan Cevher

: LIONS - École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
: Tübingen AI center, University of Tübingen, Germany
{name.surname}@{epfl.ch, uni-tuebingen.de}

Abstract
Adversarial input attacks can cause a significant shift of CLIP embeddings.
This can affect the downstream robustness of models incorporating CLIP in the
pipeline, such as text-to-image generative models or large vision language models. While some efforts have been done towards making the CLIP image encoders robust, the robustness of text encoders remains unexplored. In this work,
we cover this gap in the literature. We propose LEAF: an efficient adversarial finetuning method for the text domain, with the ability to scale to large CLIP models.
Our models significantly improve the zero-shot adversarial accuracy in the text
domain, while maintaining the vision performance provided by robust image encoders. When combined with text-to-image diffusion models, we can improve the
generation quality under adversarial noise. In multimodal retrieval tasks, LEAF
improves the recall under adversarial noise over standard CLIP models. Finally,
we show that robust text encoders facilitate better reconstruction of input text from
its embedding via direct optimization. We open-source our code and models.

1

Introduction

Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) models embed images and captions into a shared
embedding space [Radford et al., 2021]. CLIP is a simple but rather powerful tool for visionlanguage understanding, being employed in a wide range of multimodal tasks such as retrieval [Fang
et al., 2021, Koukounas et al., 2024, Vendrow et al., 2024], Large Multimodal Models (LMMs)
[Alayrac et al., 2022, Liu et al., 2023] and text-to-image generative models [Ramesh et al., 2021,
Rombach et al., 2022, Ramesh et al., 2022, Podell et al., 2024].
However, the simplicity of CLIP and its plug-and-play usage becomes a double-edged sword, allowing adversarial attacks to be optimized over CLIP, and transferred to the downstream task of interest
[Zhuang et al., 2023, Ghazanfari et al., 2023, 2024, Croce et al., 2025]. Recently, making the image
encoder of CLIP robust has gained interest [Mao et al., 2023], making LMMs robust to adversarial
perturbations by replacing the image encoder with an adversarially finetuned one [Schlarmann et al.,
2024]. Nevertheless, adversarial finetuning has not been yet investigated for the text encoder.
In this work, we fill this gap by studying adversarial finetuning for CLIP text encoders, proposing
Levenshtein Efficient Adversarial Finetuning (LEAF). Motivated by recent advancements in the image domain, we optimize the same objective as Schlarmann et al. [2024], allowing us to replace
the text encoder in tasks like text-to-image generation, without needing to finetune the rest of the
pipeline. Moreover, to make adversarial finetuning faster in the text domain, we propose an attack
that can be parallelized within training batches, accelerating the approach of Abad Rocamora et al.
[2024] by an order of magnitude with very little loss of performance.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

