Causal Mixture Models:
Characterization and Discovery
Sarah Mameche
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
sarah.mameche@cispa.de

Janis Kalofolias
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
janis.kalofolias@cispa.de

Jilles Vreeken
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
jv@cispa.de

Abstract
Real-world datasets are often a combination of unobserved subpopulations that
follow distinct causal generating processes. In an observational study, for example,
participants may fall into unknown groups that either (a) respond effectively to
a drug, or (b) show no response due to drug resistance. Not accounting for such
heterogeneity then risks biased estimates of drug effectiveness. In this work, we
formulate this setting through a causal mixture model, in which the data-generating
process of each variable depends on latent group membership (a or b). Specifically,
we model each variable as a mixture of structural causal equation models, where
latent categorical (mixing) variables index assignment to subpopulations. Unlike
prior work, the approach allows for multiple independent mixing variables, each
affecting distinct sets of observed variables. To infer both the graph, mixing
variables, and assignments jointly, we integrate mixture modeling into score-based
causal discovery; show theoretically that the resulting scoring criterion is consistent;
and demonstrate empirically that the resulting causal discovery approach discovers
the causal model in synthetic and real-world evaluations.

1

Introduction

A central part of scientific investigation is understanding cause-effect relationships, which the field
of causal discovery [Pearl, 2009] aims to discover directly from observational data. Many existing
causal discovery approaches, however, rely on idealized assumptions, among others assuming that
no relevant unmeasured variables exist and that all samples come from a homogeneous distribution.
Real-world applications might violate both assumptions, for example, when observations come from
heterogeneous populations or environments.
Take, for example, a nationwide study of antimicrobial resistance in hospitalized patients, focusing on
a resistant pathogen such as Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA) [Hasanpour et al.,
2023]. As patients come from different regions, their individual medical histories differ, including
prior exposure to pathogens such as Enterococcus [Li et al., 2022] with known cross-resistance to
MRSA. The regional plasmid profiles of Enterococcus largely determine its susceptibility, say to
Vancomycin [Boumasmoud et al., 2022], in turn influencing MRSA cross-resistance [ArredondoAlonso et al., 2020]. Although well documented, this variable is not routinely measured, and is hence
a latent variable that defines the mechanism under which the presence of Enteroccocus affects MRSA
cross-resistance [Cong et al., 2019]. Consequently, observations across regions effectively arise from
a mixture of distinct causal mechanisms.
More generally, observational data can be a combination of multiple subgroups with distinct generating processes. To illustrate, consider a simplified, synthetic setting in Fig. 1, where the causal
mechanism for Y is a mixture of two functional relationships X → Y . Treating all samples as one
population can then cause artifacts during causal discovery, such as spurious relationships or reversed
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

