DAMamba: Vision State Space Model with Dynamic
Adaptive Scan

Tanzhe Li1,2,3∗, Caoshuo Li1,2,3∗, Jiayi Lyu4 , Hongjuan Pei4 , Baochang Zhang5 ,
Taisong Jin1,2,3†, Rongrong Ji1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Effcient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
Fujian Ocean Innovation Center, China
4
School of Engineering Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, China
{litanzhe, caoshuoli}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,jintaisong@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
State space models (SSMs) have recently garnered significant attention in computer
vision. However, due to the unique characteristics of image data, adapting SSMs
from natural language processing to computer vision has not outperformed the
state-of-the-art convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Vision Transformers
(ViTs). Existing vision SSMs primarily leverage manually designed scans to flatten image patches into sequences locally or globally. This approach disrupts the
original semantic spatial adjacency of the image and lacks flexibility, making it difficult to capture complex image structures. To address this limitation, we propose
Dynamic Adaptive Scan (DAS), a data-driven method that adaptively allocates
scanning orders and regions. This enables more flexible modeling capabilities
while maintaining linear computational complexity and global modeling capacity.
Based on DAS, we further propose the vision backbone DAMamba, which significantly outperforms popular vision Mamba models in vision tasks such as image
classification, object detection, instance segmentation, and semantic segmentation.
Notably, it surpasses some of the latest state-of-the-art CNNs and ViTs. Code is
available at https://github.com/ltzovo/DAMamba.

1

Introduction

In recent years, to tackle the limitations of traditional convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [30] in
modeling long-range dependencies, Transformer [51] have been introduced into computer vision,
achieving state-of-the-art performance in image classification task. However, the self-attention
mechanism within Transformer, due to its quadratic computational complexity, faces limitations when
applied to high-resolution vision downstream tasks such as object detection and image segmentation.
To address this issue, researchers have proposed various sparse attention mechanisms [54, 55, 58,
9, 69, 27, 67, 44]. These mechanisms reduce complexity by introducing sparsity into attention
computations, but this usually comes at the expense of the model’s global modeling capability,
limiting their performance in some vision tasks.
State space models (SSMs) [13], represented by Mamba [12], have recently garnered significant
attention from researchers. The core module, the S6 block, selectively retains or discards information
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

