STNet: Spectral Transformation Network for
Solving Operator Eigenvalue Problem

Hong Wang1,2,3∗, Yixuan Jiang1,4∗, Jie Wang1,2,3† , Xinyi Li1 , Jian Luo1,2,3 ,
Huanshuo Dong1,2,3
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
3
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
4
Tsinghua University
wanghong1700@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiangyix25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Operator eigenvalue problems play a critical role in various scientific fields and
engineering applications, yet numerical methods are hindered by the curse of
dimensionality. Recent deep learning methods provide an efficient approach to
address this challenge by iteratively updating neural networks. These methods’
performance relies heavily on the spectral distribution of the given operator: larger
gaps between the operator’s eigenvalues will improve precision, thus tailored
spectral transformations that leverage the spectral distribution can enhance their
performance. Based on this observation, we propose the Spectral Transformation
Network (STNet). During each iteration, STNet uses approximate eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions to perform spectral transformations on the original operator, turning
it into an equivalent but easier problem. Specifically, we employ deflation projection
to exclude the subspace corresponding to already solved eigenfunctions, thereby
reducing the search space and avoiding converging to existing eigenfunctions.
Additionally, our filter transform magnifies eigenvalues in the desired region and
suppresses those outside, further improving performance. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that STNet consistently outperforms existing learning-based methods,
achieving state-of-the-art performance in accuracy 1 .

1

Introduction

The operator eigenvalue problem is a prominent focus in many scientific fields [10, 4, 6, 35] and
engineering applications [8, 5, 13]. However, traditional numerical methods are constrained by the
curse of dimensionality, as the computational complexity increases quadratically or even cubically
with the mesh size [43].
A promising alternative is using neural networks to approximate eigenfunctions [36]. These approaches reduce the number of parameters by replacing the matrix representation with a parametric
nonlinear representation via neural networks. By designing appropriate loss functions, it updates
parameters to approximate the desired operator eigenfunctions. These methods only require sampling
specific regions without designing a discretization mesh, significantly reducing the algorithm design
cost and unnecessary approximation errors [19]. Moreover, neural networks generally exhibit stronger
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/j1y1x/STNet.

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

