SALS: Sparse Attention in Latent Space for KV cache
Compression

1

Junlin Mu1,2,3∗, Hantao Huang3†, Jihang Zhang3 , Minghui Yu3†, Tao Wang1,2†, Yidong Li1,2†
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Transportation, Ministry of Education, China
2
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
3
ByteDance Seed, China

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) capable of handling extended contexts are in
high demand, yet their inference remains challenging due to substantial Key-Value
(KV) cache size and high memory bandwidth requirements. Previous research
has demonstrated that KV cache exhibits low-rank characteristics within the hidden dimension, suggesting the potential for effective compression. However, due
to the widely adopted Rotary Position Embedding (RoPE) mechanism in modern
LLMs, naive low-rank compression suffers severe accuracy degradation or creates a new speed bottleneck, as the low-rank cache must ﬁrst be reconstructed
in order to apply RoPE. In this paper, we introduce two key insights: ﬁrst, the
application of RoPE to the key vectors increases their variance, which in turn results in a higher rank; second, after the key vectors are transformed into the latent
space, they largely maintain their representation across most layers. Based on
these insights, we propose the Sparse Attention in Latent Space (SALS) framework. SALS projects the KV cache into a compact latent space via low-rank
projection, and performs sparse token selection using RoPE-free query–key interactions in this space. By reconstructing only a small subset of important tokens, it avoids the overhead of full KV cache reconstruction. We comprehensively
evaluate SALS on various tasks using two large-scale models: LLaMA2-7b-chat
and Mistral-7b, and additionally verify its scalability on the RULER-128k benchmark with LLaMA3.1-8B-Instruct. Experimental results demonstrate that SALS
achieves SOTA performance by maintaining competitive accuracy. Under different settings, SALS achieves 6.4-fold KV cache compression and 5.7-fold speed-up
in the attention operator compared to FlashAttention2 on the 4K sequence. For the
end-to-end throughput performance, we achieves 1.4-fold and 4.5-fold improvement compared to GPT-fast on 4k and 32K sequences, respectively. The source
code will be publicly available in the future.

1

Introduction

The groundbreaking success of Large Language Models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT [15] and
Claude [1], is transforming information retrieval in many areas. The exponential growth in LLM
service requests is creating an unprecedented demand for inference optimization algorithms, especially for long-context applications. In particular, many research efforts [14, 20, 28, 33] show that
the Key-Value cache (KV cache) acts as a major performance bottleneck in LLM serving. As the
sequence length increases, the KV cache consumes a large portion of GPU device memory. This
* Work done at ByteDance
†

Corresponding authors.twang@bjtu.edu.cn,{huanghantao,yuminghui.exp}@bytedance.com,ydli@bjtu.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

