Majority of the Bests: Improving Best-of-N via
Bootstrapping

Amin Rakhsha1,2,3∗

Kanika Madan3

Amir-massoud Farahmand4,5,1
1

University of Toronto

4

Polytechnique Montréal

2

Tianyu Zhang3
Amir Khasahmadi3

Vector Institute
5

3

Autodesk

Mila - Quebec AI Institute

Abstract
Sampling multiple outputs from a Large Language Model (LLM) and selecting
the most frequent (Self-consistency) or highest-scoring (Best-of-N) candidate is a
popular approach to achieve higher accuracy in tasks with discrete final answers.
Best-of-N (BoN) selects the output with the highest reward, and with perfect
rewards, it often achieves near-perfect accuracy. With imperfect rewards from
reward models, however, BoN fails to reliably find the correct answer and its
performance degrades drastically. We consider the distribution of BoN’s outputs
and highlight that, although the correct answer does not usually have a probability
close to one under imperfect rewards, it is often the most likely outcome. This
suggests that the mode of this distribution can be more reliably correct than a sample
from it. Based on this idea, we propose Majority-of-the-Bests (MoB), a novel
selection mechanism that estimates the output distribution of BoN via bootstrapping
and selects its mode. Experimental results across five benchmarks, three different
base LLMs, and two reward models demonstrate consistent improvements over
BoN in 25 out of 30 setups. We also provide theoretical results for the consistency
of the bootstrapping. MoB serves as a simple, yet strong alternative to BoN and
self-consistency, and more broadly, motivates further research in more nuanced
selection mechanisms.2

1

Introduction

Scaling the inference-time computation of language models has led to a significant improvement
of their performance on a variety of tasks (Brown et al., 2024; Snell et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2024;
OpenAI, 2024; DeepSeek-AI, 2025). A growing number of methods have been introduced in this
paradigm, such as generating long chains-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022; Muennighoff et al., 2025),
asking the model to evaluate and improve its own outputs (Madaan et al., 2023), and tree search
(Yao et al., 2023; Hao et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024). Another family of such algorithms, termed
sample-and-marginalize by Wang et al. (2022), generate multiple outputs from the model and then
aggregate them into a final answer. Examples include Self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022), Best-of-N
(Lightman et al., 2023), and Weighted Best-of-N (Li et al., 2022). These methods have gained
popularity due to their simplicity and scalability.
∗
2

Work done during internship at Autodesk. Correspondence to: aminr@cs.toronto.edu.
Code and data available at https://github.com/arakhsha/mob

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

