Selective Learning for Deep Time Series Forecasting

Yisong Fu1,2 ,

Zezhi Shao1 , Chengqing Yu1,2 , Yujie Li1,2 , Zhulin An1,2 ,
Qi Wang3 , Yongjun Xu1,2∗, Fei Wang1,2∗
1
State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
{fuyisong24s, shaozezhi, yuchengqing22b, liyujie23s, anzhulin}@ict.ac.cn,
cheemswang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xyj,wangfei}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Benefiting from high capacity for capturing complex temporal patterns, deep learning (DL) has significantly advanced time series forecasting (TSF). However, deep
models tend to suffer from severe overfitting due to the inherent vulnerability of
time series to noise and anomalies. The prevailing DL paradigm uniformly optimizes all timesteps through the MSE loss and learns those uncertain and anomalous
timesteps without difference, ultimately resulting in overfitting. To address this,
we propose a novel selective learning strategy for deep TSF. Specifically, selective
learning screens a subset of the whole timesteps to calculate the MSE loss in optimization, guiding the model to focus on generalizable timesteps while disregarding
non-generalizable ones. Our framework introduces a dual-mask mechanism to
target timesteps: (1) an uncertainty mask leveraging residual entropy to filter
uncertain timesteps, and (2) an anomaly mask employing residual lower bound
estimation to exclude anomalous timesteps. Extensive experiments across eight
real-world datasets demonstrate that selective learning can significantly improve the
predictive performance for typical state-of-the-art deep models, including 37.4%
MSE reduction for Informer, 8.4% for TimesNet, and 6.5% for iTransformer.
Code: https://github.com/GestaltCogTeam/selective-learning
https://github.com/GestaltCogTeam/BasicTS

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting (TSF) plays a crucial role in many real-world applications, such as traffic
flow prediction [26, 45, 43], weather forecasting [38, 65, 80, 12], and energy consumption planning
[33, 57]. The rapid advancement of deep learning (DL) has spurred breakthroughs in TSF, with
numerous deep models pushing the boundaries of predictive performance and becoming pivotal in
the field [81, 64, 82, 76, 35, 29].
Despite the strong capacity for capturing complex temporal patterns, deep TSF models are prone to
suffer from severe overfitting issues under certain scenarios due to the characteristics of real-world
time series data [42, 58, 7]. Unlike other data modalities such as natural language and images, time
series is inherently susceptible to noise and anomalies introduced by random exogenous factors
[28, 56, 31]. For example, industrial sensors are easily affected by noise from mechanical vibrations
and electromagnetic disturbances, and stock prices exhibit non-stationary fluctuations given the policy
interventions. These interference factors are challenging to model and typically change over time,
exhibiting uncertain and anomalous patterns at a specific range of timesteps. However, the current
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

