Learning Gradient Boosted Decision Trees with
Algorithmic Recourse

Kentaro Kanamori
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Fujitsu Limited
k.kanamori@fujitsu.com

Ken Kobayashi
School of Engineering
Institute of Science Tokyo
kobayashi.k@iee.eng.isct.ac.jp

Takuya Takagi
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Fujitsu Limited
takagi.takuya@fujitsu.com

Abstract
This paper proposes a new algorithm for learning gradient boosted decision trees
while ensuring the existence of recourse actions. Algorithmic recourse aims to
provide a recourse action for altering the undesired prediction result given by
a model. While existing studies often focus on extracting valid and executable
actions from a given learned model, such reasonable actions do not always exist
for models optimized solely for predictive accuracy. To address this issue, recent
studies proposed a framework for learning a model while guaranteeing the existence
of reasonable actions with high probability. However, these methods can not be
applied to gradient boosted decision trees, which are renowned as one of the most
popular models for tabular datasets. We propose an efficient gradient boosting
algorithm that takes recourse guarantee into account, while maintaining the same
time complexity as the standard ones. We also propose a post-processing method
for refining a learned model under the constraint of a recourse guarantee and provide
a PAC-style analysis of the refined model. Experimental results demonstrated that
our method successfully provided reasonable actions to more instances than the
baselines without significantly degrading accuracy and computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are increasingly applied to critical decision-making tasks, such as loan
approvals. In such high-stakes applications where predictions can significantly impact individuals [52],
decision-makers need to explain how users can alter undesired predictions [42, 62]. Algorithmic
Recourse (AR) aims to provide such information [58]. For a predictive model f : X → Y, a desired
class y ∗ ∈ Y, and an instance x ∈ X such that f (x) ̸= y ∗ , AR provides a perturbation a that flips
the prediction result into the desired class, i.e., f (x + a) = y ∗ . The user can regard the perturbation
a as a recourse action for obtaining the desired outcome y ∗ [32]. For example, let us consider a
situation where a bank deploys a model f for predicting whether a loan applicant will repay the loan
or default, and a user x gets the loan application rejected. To help the user x get the loan approved,
AR suggests an action a that changes the prediction result of f from “default” to “repayment.”
To provide actions that are executable for users, most of the existing studies on AR focus on post-hoc
methods for extracting feasible actions with low costs from a learned model f [5, 11, 13, 19, 27,
29, 39, 45, 48, 57, 64]. In general, however, such executable actions do not always exist when f
is trained solely for predictive performance [8, 36, 55]. For example, in the above loan approval
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

