Unified 2D-3D Discrete Priors for Noise-Robust and
Calibration-Free Multiview 3D Human Pose
Estimation
Geng Chen∗ Pengfei Ren∗ Xufeng Jian Haifeng Sun† Menghao Zhang
Qi Qi Zirui Zhuang Jing Wang Jianxin Liao Jingyu Wang†
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{chengeng, rpf, jianxf, hfsun, zhangmenghao, qiqi8266, zhuangzirui,
wangjing, liaojx, wangjingyu}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view 3D human pose estimation (HPE) leverages complementary information across views to improve accuracy and robustness. Traditional methods rely on
camera calibration to establish geometric correspondences, which is sensitive to
calibration accuracy and lacks flexibility in dynamic settings. Calibration-free approaches address these limitations by learning adaptive view interactions, typically
leveraging expressive and flexible continuous representations. However, as the
multiview interaction relationship is learned entirely from data without constraint,
they are vulnerable to noisy input, which can propagate, amplify and accumulate
errors across all views, severely corrupting the final estimated pose. To mitigate
this, we propose a novel framework that integrates a noise-resilient discrete prior
into the continuous representation-based model. Specifically, we introduce the UniCodebook, a unified, compact, robust, and discrete representation complementary
to continuous features, allowing the model to benefit from robustness to noise while
preserving regression capability. Furthermore, we propose an attribute-preserving
and complementarity-enhancing Discrete-Continuous Spatial Attention (DCSA)
mechanism to facilitate interaction between discrete priors and continuous pose
features. Extensive experiments on three representative datasets demonstrate that
our approach outperforms both calibration-required and calibration-free methods,
achieving state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

3D human pose estimation aims to estimate the 3D locations of keypoints from images or videos.
It is important because 3D human skeletons are widely used in scenarios such as action recognition [21, 25], human mesh recovery [8, 12], and robotics manipulation [7, 34]. Although monocular
pose estimation offers greater convenience in usage, its performance is limited by depth ambiguity
and occlusion issues, which hinder its broader application. Multiview systems [36, 13, 22, 31] offer a
promising solution by leveraging complementary information from different views, enhancing accuracy and robustness in pose estimation. Existing multiview methods utilize the geometric constraints
provided by camera extrinsics to establish correspondences between views, facilitating the fusion
of complementary information to enhance 3D pose prediction. There are several drawbacks to using
camera calibration-based methods. First, due to the complexity and computational intensity of camera
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

