Disentangling Misreporting from Genuine Adaptation
in Strategic Settings: A Causal Approach

Dylan Zapzalka1 Trenton Chang1 Lindsay Warrenburg2 Sae-Hwan Park2
Daniel K. Shenfeld2 Ravi B. Parikh2,3 Jenna Wiens1 Maggie Makar1
1
University of Michigan 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 Emory University
{dylanz, mmakar}@umich.edu

Abstract
In settings where ML models are used to inform the allocation of resources, agents
affected by the allocation decisions might have an incentive to strategically change
their features to secure better outcomes. While prior work has studied strategic
responses broadly, disentangling misreporting from genuine adaptation remains a
fundamental challenge. In this paper, we propose a causally-motivated approach to
identify and quantify how much an agent misreports on average by distinguishing
deceptive changes in their features from genuine adaptation. Our key insight is that,
unlike genuine adaptation, misreported features do not causally affect downstream
variables (i.e., causal descendants). We exploit this asymmetry by comparing the
causal effect of misreported features on their causal descendants as derived from
manipulated datasets against those from unmanipulated datasets. We formally
prove identifiability of the misreporting rate and characterize the variance of our
estimator. We empirically validate our theoretical results using a semi-synthetic
and real Medicare dataset with misreported data, demonstrating that our approach
can be employed to identify misreporting in real-world scenarios.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are increasingly used by decision-makers to guide decisions about the
allocation of critical resources, such as in loan applications, or determining government payouts to
private insurers [2, 47, 14]. In these contexts, organizations—referred to as agents—may have an
incentive to strategically change their features to secure better outcomes [32]. They can do so through
genuine adaptation or misreporting. Genuine adaptation refers to agents genuinely changing their
behavior, causing the actual values of their features to change. This leads to real improvements and
authentic changes. Misreporting refers to agents not changing their behavior but instead reporting
incorrect feature values to manipulate the allocation process, creating an illusion of improvement
without any real change. Incentivizing genuine adaptation is often desirable to the decision-maker, as
it can lead to improvements in the target outcome [41, 17]. Misreporting, however, is never desirable
to the decision-maker as it leads to incorrect predictions and inefficient resource allocation.
As a running example, we consider the U.S. Medicare Advantage (MA) program, where the government uses a public risk adjustment model to allocate payments to privately-owned insurers based
on enrollee health [37, 31]. This risk adjustment model is designed to recommend higher payments
to insurers for higher-risk, sicker enrollees [3]. In response, private insurers may genuinely change
their enrollees’ health by providing targeted interventions to high-risk enrollees, reducing their costs
and increasing their profit margins. Alternatively, they may resort to misreporting, or “upcoding,” by
inflating diagnosis codes to make enrollees appear sicker, which in turn increases payments without
additional treatment expenses [23]. Upcoding has led to an estimated $50 billion in overpayments [29]
and over $100 million in auditing efforts in 2024 alone [13]. Estimating the extent of misreporting is
therefore critical for prioritizing oversight and promoting resource efficiency.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

