From Shortcut to Induction Head: How Data
Diversity Shapes Algorithm Selection in Transformers

Ryotaro Kawata∗,1,2 , Yujin Song∗,1,2 , Alberto Bietti3 , Naoki Nishikawa1,2 ,
Taiji Suzuki1,2 , Samuel Vaiter4,5 , Denny Wu3,6
1

5

The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN AIP, 3 Flatiron Institute, 4 CNRS,
Université Côte d’Azur, Laboratoire J.A. Dieudonné, 6 New York University

{kawata-ryotaro725,nishikawa-naoki259}@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp;
y.song.research@gmail.com; {abietti,dwu}@flatironinstitute.org;
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp; samuel.vaiter@cnrs.fr

Abstract
Transformers can implement both generalizable algorithms (e.g., induction heads)
and simple positional shortcuts (e.g., memorizing fixed output positions). In this
work, we study how the choice of pretraining data distribution steers a shallow
transformer toward one behavior or the other. Focusing on a minimal triggeroutput prediction task – copying the token immediately following a special trigger upon its second occurrence – we present a rigorous analysis of gradientbased training of a single-layer transformer. In both the infinite and finite sample
regimes, we prove a transition in the learned mechanism: if input sequences exhibit sufficient diversity, measured by a low “max-sum” ratio of trigger-to-trigger
distances, the trained model implements an induction head and generalizes to unseen contexts; by contrast, when this ratio is large, the model resorts to a positional shortcut and fails to generalize out-of-distribution (OOD). We also reveal
a trade-off between the pretraining context length and OOD generalization, and
derive the optimal pretraining distribution that minimizes computational cost per
sample. Finally, we validate our theoretical predictions with controlled synthetic
experiments, demonstrating that broadening context distributions robustly induces
induction heads and enables OOD generalization. Our results shed light on the algorithmic biases of pretrained transformers and offer conceptual guidelines for
data-driven control of their learned behaviors.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) leverage circuits of attention heads [VSP+ 17] to perform (implicit)
algorithmic reasoning. Certain attention heads implement discrete algorithms — notably induction
heads [ENO+ 21, OEN+ 22], which scan for previously seen token patterns in the context to predict
subsequent tokens. Such heads enable in-context learning behaviors [BMR+ 20], allowing a transformer to continue a sequence such as [A, B, . . . , A] → B purely by leveraging patterns in the context. By contrast, attention can also implement positional mechanisms that select tokens based solely
on their location in the sequence [VTM+ 19, AWKA24]. These mechanisms can yield contrasting
generalization performance [CBKZ24], and we expect the pretraining data distribution to play a
central role in determining which mechanisms a model learns to rely on: depending on structural
properties of the corpus, a transformer may either discover generalizable strategies (content-based
retrieval) or adopt position-based shortcuts.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

