Beyond Last-Click: An Optimal Mechanism for Ad
Attribution
Nan An
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China
Beijing, China
annan0425@ruc.edu.cn

Weian Li
School of Software
Shandong University
Jinan, China
weian.li@sdu.edu.cn

Qi Qi∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China
Beijing, China
qi.qi@ruc.edu.cn

Changyuan Yu
Baidu Inc.
Beijing, China
yuchangyuan@baidu.com

Liang Zhang
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China
Beijing, China
zhang.liang@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate attribution for multiple platforms is critical for evaluating performancebased advertising. However, existing attribution methods rely heavily on the
heuristic methods, e.g., Last-Click Mechanism (LCM) which always allocates the
attribution to the platform with the latest report, lacking theoretical guarantees for
attribution accuracy. In this work, we propose a novel theoretical model for the
advertising attribution problem, in which we aim to design the optimal dominant
strategy incentive compatible (DSIC) mechanisms and evaluate their performance.
We first show that LCM is not DSIC and performs poorly in terms of accuracy and
fairness. To address this limitation, we introduce the Peer-Validated Mechanism
(PVM), a DSIC mechanism in which a platform’s attribution depends solely on
the reports of other platforms. We then examine the accuracy of PVM across both
homogeneous and heterogeneous settings, and provide provable accuracy bounds
for each case. Notably, we show that PVM is the optimal DSIC mechanism in the
homogeneous setting. Finally, numerical experiments are conducted to show that
PVM consistently outperforms LCM in terms of attribution accuracy and fairness.

1

Introduction

Online advertising has become the dominant force in the global advertising landscape, with expenditures projected to exceed $790 billion in 2024—accounting for over 72% of total ad spend—and
continuing to grow at a consistent rate of more than 10% annually. This substantial and growing
capital investment calls for the development and application of robust methodologies to optimize
budget allocation across diverse digital platforms.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

