Large Stepsizes Accelerate Gradient Descent for
Regularized Logistic Regression

Jingfeng Wu∗
UC Berkeley
uuujf@berkeley.edu

Pierre Marion∗†
Inria, DI ENS, PSL University
pierre.marion@inria.fr

Peter L. Bartlett
UC Berkeley & Google DeepMind
peter@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study gradient descent (GD) with a constant stepsize for ℓ2 -regularized logistic
regression with linearly separable data. Classical theory suggests small stepsizes to
ensure monotonic reduction of the optimization objective, achieving exponential
e
convergence in O(κ)
steps with κ being the condition number. Surprisingly, we
√
show that this can be accelerated to e
O( κ) by simply using a large stepsize—for
which the objective evolves nonmonotonically. The acceleration brought by large
stepsizes extends to minimizing the population risk for separable distributions,
improving on the best-known upper bounds on the number of steps to reach a nearoptimum. Finally, we characterize the largest stepsize for the local convergence of
GD, which also determines the global convergence in special scenarios. Our results
extend the analysis of Wu et al. (2024) from convex settings with minimizers at
infinity to strongly convex cases with finite minimizers.

1

Introduction

Machine learning often involves minimizing regularized empirical risk (see, e.g., Shalev-Shwartz and
Ben-David, 2014). An iconic case is logistic regression with ℓ2 -regularization, given by
λ
e
L(w)
:= L(w) + ∥w∥2 ,
2

where L(w) :=

n

1X
ln 1 + exp(−yi x⊤
i w) .
n i=1

(1)

Here, λ > 0 is the regularization hyperparameter, w ∈ H is the trainable parameter, and (xi , yi ) ∈
H × {±1} for i = 1, . . . , n are the training data, where H is a Hilbert space. We consider a generic
optimization algorithm, gradient descent (GD), defined as
e t ),
wt+1 := wt − η∇L(w

t ≥ 0,

w0 ∈ H,

(GD)

where η > 0 is a constant stepsize and w0 is an initialization, e.g., w0 = 0.
This problem is smooth and strongly convex. Classical optimization theory suggests a small stepsize,
e t ) monotonically (Nesterov, 2018, Section 1.2.3), which
for which GD decreases the objective L(w
we refer to as the stable regime. In this regime, GD achieves an ε error in O(κ ln(1/ε)) steps, where
κ > 1 is the condition number of the Hessian of Le (the smoothness parameter divided by the strong
convexity
parameter). This step complexity is known to be suboptimal and can be improved to
√
O( κ ln(1/ε)) when GD is modified by Nesterov’s momentum (Nesterov, 2018, Section 2.2).
A recent line of work shows that GD converges even with large stepsizes that lead to oscillation (Wu
et al., 2024, other related works will be discussed later in Section 1.1). This is known as the edge of
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while P.M. was a postdoc at EPFL, visiting the Simons Institute at UC Berkeley.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

