Towards Comprehensive Scene Understanding:
Integrating First and Third-Person Views for LVLMs
Insu Lee1∗ ,

Wooje Park1∗ , Jaeyun Jang1 , Minyoung Noh1 ,
Kyuhong Shim2† , Byonghyo Shim1†
1
Seoul National University, 2 Sungkyunkwan University
{islee, wjpark, jyjang, mynoh, bshim}@islab.snu.ac.kr, khshim@skku.edu

Abstract
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) are increasingly deployed in interactive
applications such as virtual and augmented reality, where a first-person (egocentric)
view captured by head-mounted cameras serves as key input. While this view
offers fine-grained cues about user attention and hand-object interactions, its narrow field of view and lack of global context often lead to failures on spatially
or contextually demanding queries. To address this, we introduce a framework
that augments egocentric inputs with third-person (exocentric) views, providing
complementary information such as global scene layout and object visibility to
LVLMs. We present E3VQA, the first benchmark for multi-view question answering with 4K high-quality question-answer pairs grounded in synchronized
ego-exo image pairs. Additionally, we propose M3CoT, a training-free prompting
technique that constructs a unified scene representation by integrating scene graphs
from three complementary perspectives. M3CoT enables LVLMs to reason more
effectively across views, yielding consistent performance gains (4.84% for GPT4o and 5.94% for Gemini 2.0 Flash) over a recent CoT baseline. Our extensive
evaluation reveals key strengths and limitations of LVLMs in multi-view reasoning and highlights the value of leveraging both egocentric and exocentric inputs.
The dataset and source code are available at https://github.com/Leeinsu1/
Towards-Comprehensive-Scene-Understanding.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large vision-language models (LVLMs) have received significant attention for their
unprecedented performance in diverse tasks, including information retrieval, content generation,
and multi-modal interaction [47, 18, 17, 13, 25, 16]. Their applications are now extended to interactive and immersive systems like virtual and augmented reality and embodied robotics [5, 24, 28].
Key characteristic of these applications is that images associated with the first-person view (a.k.a.
egocentric view), captured by head-mounted cameras or smart glasses, are used as input. Although
the first-person view is crucial in revealing the user’s intention, LVLMs might not interpret it well
since most of the training datasets, often obtained from generic web images, are not acquired from a
first-person perspective.
Recently, several approaches overcoming the scarcity of this so called egocentric data have been
proposed. Notable ones include synthetic generation of egocentric data, incorporating large-scale
egocentric datasets during the pre-training stage, and leveraging parameter-efficient fine-tuning on
small-scale egocentric data [23, 33, 36]. While these approaches are effective to some extent, due
to inherent constraints of the egocentric view, such as a limited field of view and a lack of global
∗

Co-first authors. † Co-corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

