D2GS: Dense Depth Regularization for LiDAR-free
Urban Scene Reconstruction
Kejing Xia1∗ Jidong Jia2∗ Ke Jin3 Yucai Bai4 Li Sun4 Dacheng Tao5 Youjian Zhang4†
1

Wuhan University 2 Shanghai Jiaotong University 3 TongJi University 4 Bosch
5
Nanyang Technological University

xiakejing.lesia@whu.edu.cn, jjd1123@sjtu.edu.cn, 2330379@tongji.edu.cn
dacheng.tao@ntu.edu.sg, {Yucai.BAI, Kevin.SUN, Youjian.ZHANG}@cn.bosch.com

Abstract
Recently, Gaussian Splatting (GS) has shown great potential for urban scene reconstruction in the field of autonomous driving. However, current urban scene
reconstruction methods often depend on multimodal sensors as inputs, i.e. LiDAR
and images. Though the geometry prior provided by LiDAR point clouds can
largely mitigate ill-posedness in reconstruction, acquiring such accurate LiDAR
data is still challenging in practice: i) precise spatiotemporal calibration between
LiDAR and other sensors is required, as they may not capture data simultaneously;
ii) reprojection errors arise from spatial misalignment when LiDAR and cameras
are mounted at different locations. To avoid the difficulty of acquiring accurate
LiDAR depth, we propose D2 GS, a LiDAR-free urban scene reconstruction framework. In this work, we obtain geometry priors that are as effective as LiDAR
while being denser and more accurate. First, we initialize a dense point cloud
by back-projecting multi-view metric depth predictions. This point cloud is then
optimized by a Progressive Pruning strategy to improve the global consistency.
Second, we jointly refine Gaussian geometry and predicted dense metric depth
via a Depth Enhancer. Specifically, we leverage diffusion priors from a depth
foundation model to enhance the depth maps rendered by Gaussians. In turn, the
enhanced depths provide stronger geometric constraints during Gaussian training.
Finally, we improve the accuracy of ground geometry by constraining the shape
and normal attributes of Gaussians within road regions. Extensive experiments on
the Waymo dataset demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms stateof-the-art methods, producing more accurate geometry even when compared with
those using ground-truth LiDAR data.

1

Introduction

Modeling urban street scenes is fundamental to autonomous driving [2]. Accurate 3D reconstructions
of roads, buildings, and street furniture enable the creation of high-fidelity virtual environments,
which are crucial for the closed-loop simulation and testing of perception, planning, and control
systems [3]. The ability to reuse and edit these digital urban scenes, rather than repeatedly collecting
fresh data for every test scenario, significantly improves the efficiency of data collection.
Recently, methods leveraging Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [4] and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [5] have become popular in this field for their photorealistic results. However, NeRF-based
methods are computationally intensive while 3DGS is favored due to its explicit representation, high
∗
†

This work was completed during an internship at Bosch. Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

