GUI-Reflection: Empowering Multimodal GUI Models
with Self-Reflection Behavior
Penghao Wu♠ , Shengnan Ma♡ , Bo Wang♡ , Jiaheng Yu♡ , Lewei Lu♡ , Ziwei Liu♠ ∗
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University♠ , SenseTime Research♡
Project Page: https://penghao-wu.github.io/GUI_Reflection/
Task: Find the size of the file.

Might find the
file size in File
setting. Click it!

I am correct! Next,
click Font Size to
find the answer.

Might find the
file size in File
setting. Click it!

I am wrong! No
size info here.
Press back.

File setting is wrong,
so probably should be
Info. Click it!

1. Recognize the mistake.

I am correct! Size
is 369 Bytes!

2. Undo the incorrect action and get back on track.
3. Summarize the mistake and make another try.

Current GUI Models

I am correct!
Next, click 4 to
find the answer.

GUI Models with Self-Reflection Behaviors

Figure 1: Illustrative comparison of typical GUI models versus our proposed GUI model with
self-reflection behaviors. While current models fail to recognize and recover from errors (left), our
model (right) demonstrates the ability to: 1. Recognize its mistake; 2. Undo the incorrect action and
get back on track; 3. Summarize the mistake and make another try, ultimately succeeding.

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have shown great potential in
revolutionizing Graphical User Interface (GUI) automation. However, existing
GUI models mostly rely on learning from nearly error-free offline trajectories, thus
lacking reflection and error recovery capabilities. To bridge this gap, we propose
GUI-Reflection, a novel framework that explicitly integrates self-reflection and
error correction capabilities into end-to-end multimodal GUI models throughout
dedicated training stages: GUI-specific pre-training, offline supervised fine-tuning
(SFT), and online reflection tuning. GUI-reflection enables self-reflection behavior
emergence with fully automated data generation and learning processes without
requiring any human annotation. Specifically, 1) we first propose scalable data
pipelines to automatically construct reflection and error correction data from existing successful trajectories. While existing GUI models mainly focus on grounding
and UI understanding ability, we propose the GUI-Reflection Task Suite to learn
and evaluate reflection-oriented abilities explicitly. 2) Furthermore, we built a
diverse and efficient environment for online training and data collection of GUI
models on mobile devices. 3) We also present an iterative online reflection tuning
algorithm leveraging the proposed environment, enabling the model to continuously enhance its reflection and error correction abilities. Our framework equips
GUI agents with self-reflection and correction capabilities, paving the way for
more robust, adaptable, and intelligent GUI automation, with all data, models,
environments, and tools to be released publicly.
∗

Corresponding authors: ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

