70% Size, 100% Accuracy:
Lossless LLM Compression for Efficient GPU
Inference via Dynamic-Length Float (DFloat11)
Tianyi Zhang1 , Mohsen Hariri2 , Shaochen (Henry) Zhong1 , Vipin Chaudhary2 , Yang Sui1 , Xia
Hu1 , and Anshumali Shrivastava1,3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Rice University
Department of Computer and Data Sciences, Case Western Reserve University
3
Ken Kennedy Institute

{tz21, henry.zhong, yang.sui, xia.hu, anshumali}@rice.edu, {mohsen.hariri,
vipin}@case.edu
Code: https://github.com/LeanModels/DFloat11
Models: https://huggingface.co/DFloat11

Abstract
Large-scale AI models, such as Large Language Models (LLMs) and Diffusion
Models (DMs), have grown rapidly in size, creating significant challenges for
efficient deployment on resource-constrained hardware. In this paper, we introduce
Dynamic-Length Float (DFloat11), a lossless compression framework that reduces
LLM and DM size by 30% while preserving outputs that are bit-for-bit identical
to the original model. DFloat11 is motivated by the low entropy in the BFloat16
weight representation of LLMs, which reveals significant inefficiency in the existing storage format. By applying entropy coding, DFloat11 assigns dynamic-length
encodings to weights based on frequency, achieving near information-optimal
compression without any loss of precision. To facilitate efficient inference with
dynamic-length encodings, we develop a custom GPU kernel for fast online decompression. Our design incorporates the following: (i) compact, hierarchical lookup
tables (LUTs) that fit within GPU SRAM for efficient decoding, (ii) a two-phase
GPU kernel for coordinating thread read/write positions using lightweight auxiliary
variables, and (iii) transformer-block-level decompression to minimize latency.
Experiments on Llama 3.3, Qwen 3, Mistral 3, FLUX.1, and others validate our
hypothesis that DFloat11 achieves around 30% model size reduction while preserving bit-for-bit identical outputs. Compared to a potential alternative of offloading
parts of an uncompressed model to the CPU to meet memory constraints, DFloat11
achieves 2.3–46.2× higher throughput in token generation. With a fixed GPU
memory budget, DFloat11 enables 5.7–14.9× longer generation lengths than uncompressed models. Notably, our method enables lossless inference of Llama 3.1
405B, an 810GB model, on a single node equipped with 8×80GB GPUs.

1

Introduction

Foundation models, such as Large Language Models (LLMs) and Diffusion Models (DMs), have
demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide range of Natural Language Processing (NLP) [56]
and Computer Vision (CV) tasks [57]. However, their huge model sizes create substantial obstacles
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

