AOR: Anatomical Ontology-Guided Reasoning
for Medical Large Multimodal Model in
Chest X-Ray Interpretation

Qingqiu Li1 , Zihang Cui2 , Seongsu Bae3 , Jilan Xu1 , Runtian Yuan1 , Yuejie Zhang1,B ,
Rui Feng1,B , Quanli Shen4 , Xiaobo Zhang4,B , Shang Gao5 , Junjun He6 , Shujun Wang7,8
1
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
3
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
4
National Children’s Medical Center, Children’s Hospital of Fudan University
5
School of Information Technology, Deakin University
6
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
7
Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
8
Research Institute for Smart Ageing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{yjzhang,fengrui}@fudan.edu.cn, zhangxiaobo0307@163.com

Abstract
Chest X-rays (CXRs) are the most frequently performed imaging examinations
in clinical settings. Recent advancements in Medical Large Multimodal Models
(MLMMs) have enabled automated CXR interpretation, improving diagnostic accuracy and efficiency. However, despite their strong visual understanding, current
MLMMs still face two major challenges: (1) insufficient region-level understanding
and interaction, and (2) limited accuracy and interpretability due to single-step
prediction. In this paper, we address these challenges by empowering MLMMs
with anatomy-centric reasoning capabilities to enhance their interactivity and explainability. Specifically, we propose an Anatomical Ontology-Guided Reasoning
(AOR) framework that accommodates both textual and optional visual prompts,
centered on region-level information to enable multimodal multi-step reasoning.
We also develop AOR-Instruction, a large instruction dataset for MLMMs training,
under the guidance of expert physicians. Our experiments demonstrate AOR’s superior performance in both Visual Question Answering (VQA) and report generation
tasks. Code and data are available at: https://github.com/Liqq1/AOR.

1

Introduction

Chest X-rays (CXRs), with over 2 billion examinations annually [2], are essential for diagnosing and
monitoring thoracic diseases [34]. However, their interpretation is time-consuming and expertisedependent, leading to diagnostic delays, variability, and errors [5, 6], especially under increasing
clinical workloads and radiologist shortages. These challenges highlight the urgent need for accurate
and efficient automatic CXR interpretation systems to support modern medical practice.
Early task-specific models for CXR interpretation focused on disease classification [32], detection [28], or report generation [8], but often lacked generalization and interpretability. Recently, the
advancement of Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [23, 22] has emerged as a promising and scalable
solution for CXR interpretation. Notable examples include LLaVA-Med [18] and CheXagent [9].
B

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

