Lessons Learned: A Multi-Agent Framework for Code
LLMs to Learn and Improve

Yuanzhe Liu1∗ Ryan Deng2† Tim Kaler2 Xuhao Chen2,3
Charles E. Leiserson2 Yao Ma1 Jie Chen4
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Michigan State University 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
{liuy72,may13}@rpi.edu {ryandeng,tfk,cxh,cel}@mit.edu
chenjie@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Recent studies show that LLMs possess different skills and specialize in different
tasks. In fact, we observe that their varied performance occur in several levels
of granularity. For example, in the code optimization task, code LLMs excel at
different optimization categories and no one dominates others. This observation
prompts the question of how one leverages multiple LLM agents to solve a coding
problem without knowing their complementary strengths a priori. We argue that a
team of agents can learn from each other’s successes and failures so as to improve
their own performance. Thus, a lesson is the knowledge produced by an agent and
passed on to other agents in the collective solution process. We propose a lessonbased collaboration framework, design the lesson solicitation–banking–selection
mechanism, and demonstrate that a team of small LLMs with lessons learned can
outperform a much larger LLM and other multi-LLM collaboration methods.

1

Introduction

Code optimization refers to rewriting the code such that it performs the same task more efficiently [32].
The efficiency is predominantly measured by the runtime, but it could also refer to storage, energy, or
other resource consumptions. Code optimization is a less explored coding task in the context of AI
compared with the popularly studied code generation task [62], but it is a natural, and sometimes
key, step in the software development cycle. Code performance can be improved in many ways, such
as using a lower-complexity algorithm, caching and memorization, data alignment, vectorization,
and parallelization [50, 5]. Many of these approaches require low-level system knowledge that code
LLMs are not explicitly trained with.
We are interested in exploring the use of multiple LLM-powered agents for code optimization. We
use multiple LLMs because no one LLM performs the best on all problems, even if they are trained
with extensive code data. The common practice of benchmarking uses aggregated performance to
rank models [6], but the best-ranked model may not be the best performer for every problem. We
take the ParEval benchmark [39], which consists of programming problems in scientific computing,
for example. When three open-source, small models and two GPT models are evaluated on this
benchmark (see Appendix A for details), GPT-4o [43] is the overall winner. However, on the
“geometry” category of problems, Qwen7B [25] outperforms GPT-4o by 2.5× in terms of speedup;
and on the “histogram” category, Deepseek7B [20] and Qwen14B [25] outperform GPT-4o by 1.6×
(Figure 5). Additionally, among the three open-source models, Qwen7B excels at “search,” while
∗
†

Part of the work was done while YL visited MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research.
Part of the work was done while RD interned at MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research.
Code implementation is available at https://github.com/MITIBM-FastCoder/LessonL.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

