Revisiting Logit Distributions for Reliable
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Jiachen Liang1,2

Ruibing Hou1∗ Minyang Hu1,2

Hong Chang1,2

Shiguang Shan1,2

Xilin Chen1,2
State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China
{jiachen.liang, minyang.hu}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {houruibing, changhong, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is critical for ensuring the reliability of deep
learning models in open-world applications. While post-hoc methods are favored
for their efficiency and ease of deployment, existing approaches often underexploit
the rich information embedded in the model’s logits space. In this paper, we propose LogitGap, a novel post-hoc OOD detection method that explicitly exploits the
relationship between the maximum logit and the remaining logits to enhance the
separability between in-distribution (ID) and OOD samples. To further improve its
effectiveness, we refine LogitGap by focusing on a more compact and informative
subset of the logit space. Specifically, we introduce a training-free strategy that
automatically identifies the most informative logits for scoring. We provide both
theoretical analysis and empirical evidence to validate the effectiveness of our
approach. Extensive experiments on both vision-language and vision-only models demonstrate that LogitGap consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance
across diverse OOD detection scenarios and benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/GIT-LJc/LogitGap.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have demonstrated remarkable success across various computer vision tasks,
typically under the closed-set assumption. However, this assumption often fails to hold in real-world
applications such as autonomous driving, medical imaging, and access control systems. In open-world
scenarios, deployed models are inevitably exposed to out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, which can
result in unreliable predictions, thereby introducing significant risks to the safety and reliability of
the system. To mitigate these risks, OOD detection has been proposed to detect and reject such OOD
inputs before making decisions.
In recent years, the post-hoc OOD detection methods have attracted significant attention. These
methods directly operate on pre-trained models without modifying their parameters [30, 14, 59, 25,
29, 45, 17], offering high deployment flexibility and computational efficiency. A core problem for
the post-hoc methods is how to design a scoring function that effectively maximize the separability
between ID and OOD samples. Two representative scoring functions are Maximum Logit (MaxLogit)
[14] and Maximum Concept Matching (MCM2 [33]). MaxLogit simply uses the largest logit value
as the OOD score, which completely disregards information from the remaining logits. In contrast,
∗

Corresponding author
Although MCM [33] and Max Softmax Probablity (MSP [17]) target different objectives, their methods for
computing OOD scores are equivalent. Hence, we analyze only one in detail.
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

