Latent Zoning Network:
A Unified Principle for Generative Modeling,
Representation Learning, and Classification

Zinan Lin∗
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA

Enshu Liu
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Xuefei Ning
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Wenyu Wang
Redmond, WA, USA

Junyi Zhu
KU Leuven
Leuven, Belgium

Sergey Yekhanin
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA

Abstract
Generative modeling, representation learning, and classification are three core
problems in machine learning (ML), yet their state-of-the-art (SoTA) solutions
remain largely disjoint. In this paper, we ask: Can a unified principle address all
three? Such unification could simplify ML pipelines and foster greater synergy
across tasks. We introduce Latent Zoning Network (LZN) as a step toward
this goal. At its core, LZN creates a shared Gaussian latent space that encodes
information across all tasks. Each data type (e.g., images, text, labels) is equipped
with an encoder that maps samples to disjoint latent zones, and a decoder that maps
latents back to data. ML tasks are expressed as compositions of these encoders and
decoders: for example, label-conditional image generation uses a label encoder
and image decoder; image embedding uses an image encoder; classification uses
an image encoder and label decoder. We demonstrate the promise of LZN in
three increasingly complex scenarios: (1) LZN can enhance existing models
(image generation): When combined with the SoTA Rectified Flow model, LZN
improves FID on CIFAR10 from 2.76 to 2.59—without modifying the training
objective. (2) LZN can solve tasks independently (representation learning):
LZN can implement unsupervised representation learning without auxiliary loss
functions, outperforming the seminal MoCo and SimCLR methods by 9.3% and
0.2%, respectively, on downstream linear classification on ImageNet. (3) LZN can
solve multiple tasks simultaneously (joint generation and classification): With
image and label encoders/decoders, LZN performs both tasks jointly by design,
improving FID and achieving SoTA classification accuracy on CIFAR10. The
code and trained models are available at https://github.com/microsoft/
latent-zoning-networks. The project website is at https://zinanlin.me/
blogs/latent_zoning_networks.html.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling, representation learning, and classification are three of the most widely used
machine learning (ML) tasks. Generative models like DALLE [71, 70, 5] and GPT [68, 69, 7, 1] power
applications such as question answering and content creation. Representation learning, exemplified
by CLIP [67], supports tasks like information retrieval. Classification is central to tasks such as object
recognition [17] and sentiment analysis [19, 54].
Notably, the state-of-the-art (SoTA) techniques for these tasks differ. For example, SoTA generative
modeling relies on diffusion models [32, 76, 78] and auto-regressive transformers [68, 69, 7, 1]; SoTA
∗

Correspondence to: Zinan Lin (zinanlin@microsoft.com).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

