RGNMR: A Gauss-Newton method for robust matrix
completion with theoretical guarantees

Eilon Vaknin Laufer
Weizmann Institute of Science
eilon.vaknin@weizmann.ac.il

Boaz Nadler
Weizmann Institute of Science
boaz.nadler@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Recovering a low rank matrix from a subset of its entries, some of which may be
corrupted, is known as the robust matrix completion (RMC) problem. Existing
RMC methods have several limitations: they require a relatively large number of
observed entries; they may fail under overparametrization, when their assumed
rank is higher than the correct one; and many of them fail to recover even mildly
ill-conditioned matrices. In this paper we propose a novel RMC method, denoted
RGNMR, which overcomes these limitations. RGNMR is a simple factorization-based
iterative algorithm, which combines a Gauss–Newton linearization with removal
of entries suspected to be outliers. On the theoretical front, we prove that under
suitable assumptions, RGNMR is guaranteed exact recovery of the underlying low
rank matrix. Our theoretical results improve upon the best currently known for
factorization-based methods. On the empirical front, we show via several simulations the advantages of RGNMR over existing RMC methods, and in particular
its ability to handle a small number of observed entries, overparameterization of
the rank and ill-conditioned matrices. In addition, we propose a novel scheme for
estimating the number of corrupted entries. This scheme may be used by other
RMC methods that require as input the number of corrupted entries.

1

Introduction

Low-rank matrices play a fundamental role in multiple scientific disciplines. As reviewed in Davenport and Romberg (2016), in various applications, there is a need to recover a low rank matrix
from only a subset of its entries. Examples include recommendation systems (Bennett et al., 2007),
various problems in computer vision (Kennedy et al., 2016; Tulyakov et al., 2016; Miao and Kou,
2021), in sensor networks (Wu et al., 2025) and in single-cell data analysis (Lejun et al., 2025). A
key challenge in these and other applications is that some of the observed entries may be arbitrarily
corrupted outliers.
In this work, we consider the robust matrix completion (RMC) problem, of recovering a low rank
matrix from a subset of its entries, out of which a few are outliers. Formally, let X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 be a
matrix with a decomposition X = L∗ + S ∗ , where L∗ is a rank r matrix and S ∗ is a sparse corruption
matrix whose few non-zero entries are arbitrary. The RMC problem is to recover L∗ from the subset
{Xi,j | (i, j) ∈ Ω}, where Ω ⊂ [n1 ] × [n2 ] denotes the subset of observed entries in X.
Related work. Over the past decade, the RMC problem was studied from both mathematical,
computational and statistical perspectives. On the computational front, several RMC algorithms have
been proposed. In general, to solve the RMC problem the following optimization issues need to be
addressed: (i) either promote a low rank solution or strictly enforce it; and (ii) suppress the potentially
detrimental effect of the outliers, whose locations are a-priori unknown.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

