Thinking vs. Doing: Improving Agent Reasoning by
Scaling Test-Time Interaction

Junhong Shen1,2∗ Hao Bai3∗ Lunjun Zhang4 Yifei Zhou5 Amrith Setlur1
Shengbang Tong7 Diego Caples6 Nan Jiang3 Tong Zhang3
Ameet Talwalkar1 Aviral Kumar1
1

CMU

2

Scribe

3

UIUC

4

U of Tronoto

5

UC Berkeley

6

The AGI Company

7

NYU

Abstract
The current paradigm of test-time scaling relies on generating long reasoning traces
(“thinking” more) before producing a response. In agent problems that require
interaction, this can be done by generating thinking traces before acting in the
world. However, this process does not allow agents to acquire new information
from the environment or adapt their behavior over time. In this work, we propose
to scale test-time interaction, an untapped dimension of test-time scaling that
increases the agent’s interaction horizon to enable running rich behaviors such as
exploration, backtracking, and dynamic re-planning within a single rollout. To
demonstrate the promise of this scaling dimension, we study the domain of web
agents. We first show that even prompting-based interaction scaling without any
training can improve task success on web benchmarks non-trivially. Building
on this, we introduce TTI (Test-Time Interaction), a curriculum-based online
reinforcement learning (RL) approach that trains agents by adaptively adjusting
their rollout lengths. Using a Gemma 3 12B model, TTI produces state-of-the-art
open-source, open-data web agents on WebVoyager and WebArena benchmarks.
We further show that TTI enables agents to balance exploration and exploitation
adaptively. Our results establish interaction scaling as a powerful, complementary
axis to scaling per-step compute, offering new avenues for training adaptive agents.
Project page: https://test-time-interaction.github.io
Code: https://github.com/test-time-interaction/TTI

1

Introduction

Recent advances in foundation models have enabled a shift from static language models to interactive
agents that perform multi-step tasks in dynamic environments like browsers [1–6], terminals [7], and
the physical world [8–13]. These agents operate in closed-loop settings where each action changes the
current state of the world and affects future interaction with the environment. As a result, interactive
agents must plan under uncertainty and adapt to failures in real time to be successful. How can we
build agents that succeed in such interactive settings?
Current post-training approaches produce reactive agents that respond to immediate observations
but struggle with evolving or uncertain task dynamics. Methods like supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on
expert demonstrations [14–18] or reinforcement learning (RL) with task rewards [19–23] typically
train agents to predict a single best action at each step. Even with test-time scaling, where agents
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: junhongs@andrew.cmu.edu, haob2@illinois.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

