LVLM-Driven Attribute-Aware Modeling for
Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification
Zhiqi Pang1

Lingling Zhao1
Junjie Wang2
Chunyu Wang1∗
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Nanjing Medical University, China

1

zqpang98@gmail.com, zhaoll@hit.edu.cn, junjiehit@163.com, chunyu@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) aims to match visible and infrared images of the same individual. Supervised VI-ReID (SVI-ReID) methods
have achieved promising performance under the guidance of manually annotated
identity labels. However, the substantial annotation cost severely limits their scalability in real-world applications. As a result, unsupervised VI-ReID (UVI-ReID)
methods have attracted increasing attention. These methods typically rely on
pseudo-labels generated by clustering and matching algorithms to replace manual
annotations. Nevertheless, the quality of pseudo-labels is often difficult to guarantee, and low-quality pseudo-labels can significantly hinder model performance
improvements. To address these challenges, we explore the use of attribute arrays
extracted by a large vision-language model (LVLM) to enhance VI-ReID, and
propose a novel LVLM-driven attribute-aware modeling (LVLM-AAM) approach.
Specifically, we first design an attribute-aware reliable labeling strategy, which refines intra-modality clustering results based on image-level attributes and improves
inter-modality matching by grouping clusters according to cluster-level attributes.
Next, we develop an explicit-implicit attribute fusion module, which integrates
explicit and implicit attributes to obtain more fine-grained identity-related text features. Finally, we introduce an attribute-aware contrastive learning module, which
jointly leverages static and dynamic text features to promote modality-invariant
feature learning. Extensive experiments conducted on VI-ReID datasets validate
the effectiveness of the proposed LVLM-AAM and its individual components.
LVLM-AAM not only significantly outperforms existing unsupervised methods
but also surpasses several supervised methods.

1

Introduction

Person re-identification (ReID) [45, 2, 4, 57, 34, 25, 10, 35] focuses on identifying images of a
specific person from a large-scale gallery. To advance intelligent surveillance systems across various
time periods, visible-infrared ReID (VI-ReID) [31, 46, 42, 22, 9] was introduced, aiming to match
visible and infrared images of the same person. While supervised VI-ReID (SVI-ReID) methods
[43, 51, 7, 50] have shown promising performance on multiple datasets, they heavily rely on manually
annotated identity labels in the training set. However, manually annotating data for VI-ReID tasks is
an extremely labor-intensive process. As a result, increasing attention has been given to unsupervised
VI-ReID (UVI-ReID) [21, 38, 32, 36, 37, 29, 30, 33]. These UVI-ReID methods typically begin by
clustering image features extracted by an image encoder to generate intra-modality pseudo-labels.
They then perform inter-modality matching to generate inter-modality pseudo-labels. These intramodality and inter-modality pseudo-labels serve as supervisory signals to replace manual labels, thus
reducing the limitations imposed by the high cost of annotation.
∗

Corresponding author: Chunyu Wang

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

