Handling Missing Responses under Cluster
Dependence with Applications to Language Model
Evaluation
Zhenghao Zeng
Stanford University
zhzeng@stanford.edu

David Arbour
Adobe Research
arbour@adobe.com

Ishita Dasgupta
Adobe Research
idasgupt@adobe.com

Atanu R Sinha
Adobe Research
atr@adobe.com

Avi Feller
University of California, Berkeley
afeller@berkeley.edu
Edward H. Kennedy
Carnegie Mellon University
edward@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
Human annotations play a crucial role in evaluating the performance of GenAI
models. Two common challenges in practice, however, are missing annotations
(the response variable of interest) and cluster dependence among human-AI interactions (e.g., questions asked by the same user may be highly correlated). Reliable
inference must address both issues to achieve unbiased estimation and appropriately quantify uncertainty when estimating average scores from human annotations.
In this paper, we analyze the doubly robust estimator, a widely used method in
missing data analysis and causal inference, applied to this setting and establish
novel theoretical properties under cluster dependence. We further illustrate our
findings through simulations and a real-world conversation quality dataset. Our
theoretical and empirical results underscore the importance of incorporating cluster
dependence in missing response problems to perform valid statistical inference.

1

Introduction

Missing response/outcome variables are common in empirical research and present many challenges
to data analysis and interpretation. Such missingness can occur for various reasons, including
nonresponse in surveys (Hansen and Hurwitz, 1946; Chen and Haziza, 2019), dropout in longitudinal
studies (Hogan et al., 2004), or data entry errors (Bound et al., 2001; Schennach, 2016). If not
properly addressed, missingness can lead to biased estimates, reduced statistical power, and invalid
conclusions. Researchers have developed methods that leverage observed data to estimate missing
values under assumptions about the missingness mechanism, typically assuming i.i.d sampling.
Examples common in causal inference include outcome modeling, re-weighting, and combinations
of the two (Robins et al., 1994; Little and Rubin, 2019).
Clustered data, commonly encountered in fields such as education (Lüdtke et al., 2011), healthcare
(Austin and Merlo, 2017), and the social sciences (McNeish and Stapleton, 2016), refers to data
in which observations are naturally grouped into clusters or hierarchies. Typical examples include
students nested within schools or patients nested within hospitals, where clusters (e.g., schools or
hospitals) are sampled first, followed by individuals within those clusters. Another form of clustered
sampling arises in settings with repeated measurements on the same individuals. For instance, in
the evaluation of large language models (LLMs), users often provide multi-turn feedback, with
user-system interactions generated sequentially for each user. In this context, different users can
be treated as separate clusters. This clustering introduces within-cluster correlation, violating the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

