Adaptive Discretization for Consistency Models

Jiayu Bai1 , Zhanbo Feng2 , Zhijie Deng2 , Tianqi Hou3 , Robert C. Qiu1 , Zenan Ling1∗
1
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Huawei

Abstract
Consistency Models (CMs) have shown promise for efficient one-step generation.
However, most existing CMs rely on manually designed discretization schemes,
which can cause repeated adjustments for different noise schedules and datasets.
To address this, we propose a unified framework for the automatic and adaptive
discretization of CMs, formulating it as an optimization problem with respect to
the discretization step. Concretely, during the consistency training process, we
propose using local consistency as the optimization objective to ensure trainability
by avoiding excessive discretization, and taking global consistency as a constraint
to ensure stability by controlling the denoising error in the training target. We
establish the trade-off between local and global consistency with a Lagrange
multiplier. Building on this framework, we achieve adaptive discretization for
CMs using the Gauss-Newton method. We refer to our approach as ADCMs.
Experiments demonstrate that ADCMs significantly improve the training efficiency
of CMs, achieving superior generative performance with minimal training overhead
on both CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. Moreover, ADCMs exhibit strong adaptability
to more advanced DM variants. Code is available at https://github.com/
rainstonee/ADCM.

1

Introduction

Diffusion Models (DMs) [34, 9, 38, 18, 20] have achieved remarkable accomplishments in the field
of data generation, including images [4, 29, 30], videos [10, 2, 41], audio [15, 28, 19] and 3D
contents [40, 27, 22]. However, DMs require numerous iterations to achieve high-quality generation,
significantly slowing sampling speed and making it resource-intensive. Recently, many fast-sampling
methods for DMs have been proposed, including training-free methods [35, 14, 24, 48] and distillationbased approaches [25, 31, 46, 6, 26, 42, 45, 32]. However, these methods often sacrifice quality for
faster sampling or incur substantial training overhead, which limits their practical application.
Consistency Models (CMs) [37, 7] offer significant advantages in addressing these challenges. CMs
sample trajectories from the PF-ODE of DMs and aim to map each point on these trajectories to
their corresponding endpoint. Through this approach, CMs achieve single-step generation while
preserving the advantage of DMs, which improve generation quality by performing more iterations.
CMs achieve the mapping to the endpoint by minimizing the distance between adjacent trajectory
points. We refer to the selection of adjacent trajectory points as the discretization for CMs. Previous
works [37, 36, 7, 23, 21] have shown that discretization is crucial for CMs’ training. It determines
the trainability and stability of CMs: poor trainability can impair final performance, while instability
during training may slow convergence or even lead to divergence. A suboptimal discretization strategy
may lead to an imbalance between trainability and stability [7]. It may also cause CMs to overly focus
on training within a specific time interval, leading to a loss of consistency [17]. To mitigate these
challenges and ensure a balanced training process, most existing works adopt empirical discretization
strategies, which require manual adjustments based on different noise schedules and datasets [7].
∗

Corresponding Author: Zenan Ling (lingzenan@hust.edu.cn).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

