The World Is Bigger!
A Computationally-Embedded Perspective
on the Big World Hypothesis

Alex Lewandowski1,2,⋆ Aditya A. Ramesh3 Edan Meyer1,2
Dale Schuurmans1,2,4,5 Marlos C. Machado1,2,4
1
University of Alberta 2 Amii 3 The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, USI & SUPSI
4
Canada CIFAR AI Chair 5 Google DeepMind

Abstract
Continual learning is often motivated by the idea, known as the big world hypothesis, that “the world is bigger” than the agent. Recent problem formulations
capture this idea by explicitly constraining an agent relative to the environment.
These constraints lead to solutions in which the agent continually adapts to best use
its limited capacity, rather than converging to a fixed solution. However, explicit
constraints can be ad hoc, difficult to incorporate, and may limit the effectiveness of
scaling up the agent’s capacity. In this paper, we characterize a problem setting in
which an agent, regardless of its capacity, is constrained by being embedded in the
environment. In particular, we introduce a computationally-embedded perspective
that represents an embedded agent as an automaton simulated within a universal
(formal) computer. Such an automaton is always constrained; we prove that it is
equivalent to an agent that interacts with a partially observable Markov decision
process over a countably infinite state-space. We propose an objective for this
setting, which we call interactivity, that measures an agent’s ability to continually
adapt its behaviour by learning new predictions. We then develop a model-based
reinforcement learning algorithm for interactivity-seeking, and use it to construct
a synthetic problem to evaluate continual learning capability. Our results show
that deep nonlinear networks struggle to sustain interactivity, whereas deep linear
networks sustain higher interactivity as capacity increases.

1

Introduction

The goal of this paper is to characterize a general problem setting in which the best use of an agent’s
limited capacity is to continually adapt (Ring, 1994; Thrun, 1998; Abel et al., 2023). Our approach
is motivated by the idea, known as the big world hypothesis, that “the world is bigger” than the
agent (Javed and Sutton, 2024). That is, an agent in a big world may lack the capacity to learn
the fixed optimal solution, and should instead continually adapt to new experience by updating its
approximate solution (i.e., by tracking, Sutton et al., 2007). However, formalizing the relationship
between the agent and the environment presents a challenge, because they are typically treated as
separate entities in reinforcement learning (see Figures 1a and 1b). We address this by introducing a
computationally-embedded agent that is simulated by the environment’s dynamics, thus constraining
the agent within the environment. With this perspective, we construct a problem setting in which
any such agent is (i) constrained by its capacity, and (ii) suboptimal if it stops learning.
Explicit constraints on the agent have been previously considered in continual learning as a means
of capturing the big world hypothesis. For example, in continual learning experiments, the agent’s
⋆

Correspondence to: Alex Lewandowski <lewandowski@ualberta.ca>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

