Structured Sparse Transition Matrices
to Enable State Tracking in State-Space Models

Aleksandar Terzić1,2∗

Nicolas Menet1,2∗

aleksandar.terzic1@ibm.com

nicolas.menet@ibm.com

Michael Hersche1

Thomas Hofmann2

Abbas Rahimi1

michael.hersche@ibm.com

thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch

abr@zurich.ibm.com

1

IBM Research – Zurich, 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich

Abstract
Modern state-space models (SSMs) often utilize structured transition matrices
which enable efficient computation but pose restrictions on the model’s expressivity,
as measured in terms of the ability to emulate finite-state automata (FSA). While
unstructured transition matrices are optimal in terms of expressivity, they come
at a prohibitively high compute and memory cost, even for moderate state sizes.
We propose a structured sparse parametrization of transition matrices in SSMs
that enables FSA state tracking with provably optimal state size and depth, while
keeping the computational cost of the recurrence comparable to that of diagonal
SSMs. Our method, PD-SSM, parametrizes the transition matrix as the product
of a column one-hot matrix (P ) and a complex-valued diagonal matrix (D). As
a result, the computational cost of parallel scans scales linearly with the state
size. Theoretically, the model is BIBO-stable and can emulate any N -state FSA
with one layer of dimension N and a linear readout of size N × N , significantly
improving on all current structured SSM guarantees. Experimentally, the model
significantly outperforms a wide collection of modern SSM variants on various FSA
state tracking tasks. On multivariate time-series classification, it outperforms neural
controlled differential equations, a paradigm explicitly built for time-series analysis.
Finally, we integrate PD-SSM into a hybrid Transformer-SSM architecture and
demonstrate that the model can effectively track the states of a complex FSA in
which transitions are encoded into sets of variable-length English sentences. The
code is available at https://github.com/IBM/expressive-sparse-state-space-model.

1

Introduction

The Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) marked a paradigm shift in machine learning, providing a
unified yet versatile architecture with strong scalability. However, experimental and theoretical results
indicate that Transformers struggle in algorithmic state tracking tasks such as finite-state automaton
(FSA) emulation (Hahn 2020; Bhattamishra et al. 2020; Merrill and Sabharwal 2023; Delétang et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2023; Strobl et al. 2024). Moreover, the inherent quadratic cost of the attention
mechanism hinders the training on very long sequences, and its linearly growing key/value cache can
lead to memory issues during inference.
In contrast, state-space models (SSMs) (Gu et al. 2022b; Gupta et al. 2022; Fu et al. 2023; Smith
et al. 2023; Orvieto et al. 2023; Gu and Dao 2023) offer a scalable alternative to Transformers
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

