Hierarchical Implicit Neural Emulators

Ruoxi Jiang1,5 Xiao Zhang1 Karan Jakhar3,6 Peter Y. Lu4,7
Pedram Hassanzadeh3 Michael Maire1 Rebecca Willett1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Chicago
2
Department of Statistics, The University of Chicago
3
Department of Geophysical Sciences, The University of Chicago
4
Department of Physics, The University of Chicago
5
Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Incubation Institute, Fudan University
6
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Rice University
7
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tufts University

Abstract
Neural PDE solvers offer a powerful tool for modeling complex dynamical systems,
but often struggle with error accumulation over long time horizons and maintaining
stability and physical consistency. We introduce a multiscale implicit neural emulator that enhances long-term prediction accuracy by conditioning on a hierarchy of
lower-dimensional future state representations. Inspired by the stability properties
of numerical implicit time-stepping methods, we developed an approach that leverages predictions several steps ahead in time at increasing compression rates for
next-timestep refinements. By actively adjusting the temporal downsampling ratios,
our design enables the model to capture dynamics across multiple granularities and
enforce long-range temporal coherence. Experiments on turbulent fluid dynamics
show that our method achieves high short-term accuracy and produces long-term
stable forecasts, significantly outperforming non-hierarchical autoregressive baselines while adding minimal computational overhead. The codebase is available at
this link1 .

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML)-based surrogate modeling of dynamical systems has spurred great interest in
recent years due to transformative applications in climate modeling [1–5], molecular dynamics [6–8],
cosmology [9–11], and beyond. These surrogate models or emulators are often orders of magnitude
faster than classical numerical solvers and can be trained to directly emulate real-world data. Although
existing developments in neural surrogate models have made notable strides in short-term prediction,
often benchmarked using one-step mean square error (MSE), their ability to deliver stable long-term
predictions remains a critical challenge [12–14]. For scientific practitioners, achieving a long-term
stable forecast is valuable and expands the potential for research use, especially where classical
numerical solvers are too costly to run. For example, climate scientists can use accurate long-term
emulators to predict the probability of extreme events [15]. However, the error accumulation in
unrolling the predictions for complex, nonlinear, and multiscale dynamical systems often causes
existing surrogate models to degrade catastrophically during long-term forecasting, resulting in
unphysical collapsed or exploding solutions [14, 16].
Recent efforts to address long-term stability explore two primary avenues. From the temporal
evolution perspective, frameworks centered on multi-step ahead prediction aim to shift focus from
single-step accuracy to extended horizons by training models on multi-step targets [17–20]. Yet,
*
1

Correspondence to: roxie_jiang@fudan.edu.cn, zhang7@uchicago.edu, and willett@uchicago.edu.
https://github.com/roxie62/Hierarchical-Implicit-Neural-Emulators

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

