Adaptively Coordinating with Novel Partners via
Learned Latent Strategies

Benjamin Li1 Shuyang Shi1 Lucia Romero2 Huao Li2 Yaqi Xie1 Woojun Kim1
Stefanos Nikolaidis3 Michael Lewis2 Katia Sycara1 Simon Stepputtis4
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Pittsburgh
3
University of Southern California 4 Virginia Tech
{benjil, shuyangs, yaqix, woojunk, sycara}@andrew.cmu.edu
{luciaromero, hul52, cmlewis}@pitt.edu
nikolaid@usc.edu, stepputtis@vt.edu

Abstract
Adaptation is the cornerstone of effective collaboration among heterogeneous
team members. In human-agent teams, artificial agents need to adapt to their
human partners in real time, as individuals often have unique preferences and
policies that may change dynamically throughout interactions. This becomes
particularly challenging in tasks with time pressure and complex strategic spaces,
where identifying partner behaviors and selecting suitable responses is difficult. In
this work, we introduce a strategy-conditioned cooperator framework that learns to
represent, categorize, and adapt to a broad range of potential partner strategies in
real-time. Our approach encodes strategies with a variational autoencoder to learn
a latent strategy space from agent trajectory data, identifies distinct strategy types
through clustering, and trains a cooperator agent conditioned on these clusters by
generating partners of each strategy type. For online adaptation to novel partners,
we leverage a fixed-share regret minimization algorithm that dynamically infers and
adjusts the partner’s strategy estimation during interaction. We evaluate our method
in a modified version of the Overcooked domain, a complex collaborative cooking
environment that requires effective coordination among two players with a diverse
potential strategy space. Through these experiments and an online user study, we
demonstrate that our proposed agent achieves state of the art performance compared
to existing baselines when paired with novel human, and agent teammates.

1

Introduction

As an increasing number of AI agents and robots enter our daily lives, it is becoming increasingly
important to explore methods of effective collaboration between agent and human. When an agent
attempts to collaborate with an unknown partner (whether human or artificial), the challenge can
typically be divided into two steps: (1) accurately predicting the partner’s behavior, and (2) choosing
actions that advance the team toward its common goal. Our approach focuses on understanding
and responding to behavioral patterns that distinguish different types of collaborators. Equipping
an agent with the ability to identify partner type can enable it to exploit knowledge about that type
when choosing its own actions, enabling adaptation for coherent and fluid collaboration. This type
of adaptation is essential, as misaligned actions between teammates inevitably decrease overall
performance. The problem of adapting to a previously unknown human is an instance of the more
general problem of ad hoc teamwork, cooperating with any previously unknown teammate [38].
The difficulties of the problem arise if the agent begins without prior knowledge of its teammate’s
behavioral patterns, yet must select its own actions to match the teammate’s intended strategy
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

