Joint Velocity-Growth Flow Matching for Single-Cell
Dynamics Modeling

Dongyi Wang1,∗, Yuanwei Jiang1,∗ , Zhenyi Zhang2,∗ , Xiang Gu1,† , Peijie Zhou3,† , Jian Sun1,†
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
LMAM and School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
3
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University, Beijing, China.
{dongyiwang,jyw1578857771}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn; {xianggu,jiansun}@xjtu.edu.cn;
zhenyizhang@stu.pku.edu.cn; pjzhou@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning the underlying dynamics of single cells from snapshot data has gained
increasing attention in scientific and machine learning research. The destructive
measurement technique and cell proliferation/death result in unpaired and unbalanced data between snapshots, making the learning of the underlying dynamics
challenging. In this paper, we propose joint Velocity-Growth Flow Matching
(VGFM), a novel paradigm that jointly learns state transition and mass growth
of single-cell populations via flow matching. VGFM builds an ideal single-cell
dynamics containing velocity of state and growth of mass, driven by a presented
two-period dynamic understanding of the static semi-relaxed optimal transport,
a mathematical tool that seeks the coupling between unpaired and unbalanced
data. To enable practical usage, we approximate the ideal dynamics using neural
networks, forming our joint velocity and growth matching framework. A distribution fitting loss is also employed in VGFM to further improve the fitting
performance for snapshot data. Extensive experimental results on both synthetic
and real datasets demonstrate that VGFM can capture the underlying biological
dynamics accounting for mass and state variations over time, outperforming existing approaches for single-cell dynamics modeling. Our code is available at
https://github.com/DongyiWang-66/VGFM.

1

Introduction

Inferring the latent dynamics of complex systems from sparse and noisy data is a fundamental
challenge in science and engineering. In many domains, e.g., stock markets [1], climate systems [2],
and biological processes [3–11], continuous trajectories are rarely fully observed by sensors. Instead,
cross-sectional snapshot data collected at discrete time points are commonly provided. This challenge
is especially important in single-cell RNA sequencing [12–16], where destructive sampling yields
unpaired population-level snapshots across time without having the tracked individual cell fates.
Furthermore, due to the mass changes during cellular development or response processes, observed
data often exhibits mass unbalancedness across time, violating mass conservation. Consequently,
reconstructing the time-evolving, unnormalized density function from limited samples has become an
important research problem and attracted increasing attention [14, 15, 17].
Deep learning-based models for dynamics inference have demonstrated great potential [3, 7, 18–
29]. These models typically employ ordinary or stochastic differential equations (ODEs or SDEs)
parameterized by neural networks to approximate the velocity field governing density evolution.
∗

These authors contributed equally. † Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

