HOI-Dyn: Learning Interaction Dynamics for
Human-Object Motion Diffusion

Lin Wu
James Watt School of Engineering
University of Glasgow
l.wu.1@research.gla.ac.uk

Zhixiang Chen
School of Computer Science
University of Sheffield
zhixiang.chen@sheffield.ac.uk

Jianglin Lan†
James Watt School of Engineering
University of Glasgow
jianglin.lan@glasgow.ac.uk

Abstract
Generating realistic 3D human-object interactions (HOIs) remains a challenging
task due to the difficulty of modeling detailed interaction dynamics. Existing
methods treat human and object motions independently, resulting in physically
implausible and causally inconsistent behaviors. In this work, we present HOIDyn, a novel framework that formulates HOI generation as a driver-responder
system, where human actions drive object responses. At the core of our method is
a lightweight transformer-based interaction dynamics model that explicitly predicts
how objects should react to human motion. To further enforce consistency, we
introduce a residual-based dynamics loss that mitigates the impact of dynamics
prediction errors and prevents misleading optimization signals. The dynamics
model is used only during training, preserving inference efficiency. Through
extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments, we demonstrate that our approach not only enhances the quality of HOI generation but also establishes a
feasible metric for evaluating the quality of generated interactions. Project website:https://wulin97.github.io/hoi-dyn

1

Introduction

Synthesizing complex and realistic 3D human-object interactions (HOIs) is essential for progress in
VR/AR, computer animation, and robotics [1–4], yet remains a significant challenge. Compared to
human motion generation—whether for single or multiple people [5, 6]—HOI is significantly more
difficult. Human motion generation typically involves relatively free movement, making it easier to
generate plausible sequences [7, 8]. However, HOI requires capturing intricate interaction dynamics,
such as stable contact, forces, and action-response relationships. Simply applying human motion
generation frameworks to HOI often produces independent motion of the human and object, leading
to physically unrealistic and causally inconsistent behaviors.
Previous works on HOI generation mainly focused on interactions between humans and static objects
or scenes [9–12], such as sitting on a sofa. Recent advances have shifted toward controllable synthesis
of dynamic HOI, where both the human and object move synchronously [13, 14]. For example, given
an initial state and a textual instruction, the system can generate a motion sequence where a human
†

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

