SAM2Flow: Interactive Optical Flow Estimation with
Dual Memory for in vivo Microcirculation Analysis

Luojie Huang1

Ryan Zhang1 Marisa M. Morakis1 Michaela Taylor-Williams1
Gregory N. McKay1 Nicholas J. Durr1,†
1
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
ndurr@jhu.edu

Abstract
Analysis of noninvasive microvascular blood flow can improve the diagnosis,
prognosis, and management of many medical conditions, including cardiovascular,
peripheral vascular, and sickle cell disease. This paper introduces SAM2Flow, an
interactive optical flow estimation model to analyze long Oblique Back-illumination
Microscopy (OBM) videos of in vivo microvascular flow. Inspired by the Segment
Anything Model (SAM2), SAM2Flow enables users to specify regions of interest
through user prompts for focused flow estimation. SAM2Flow also incorporates a
dual memory attention mechanism, comprising both motion and context memory,
to achieve efficient and stable flow estimations over extended video sequences.
According to our experiments, SAM2Flow achieves SOTA accuracy in foreground
optical flow estimation on both microvascular flow and public datasets, with a fast
inference speed of over 20 fps on 512 × 512 inputs. Based on the temporally robust
flow estimation, SAM2Flow demonstrated superior performance in downstream
physiological applications compared to existing models. The code is available at:
https://github.com/DurrLab/SAM2Flow.

1

Introduction

Microvascular blood flow parameters, such as flow velocity, provide critical insight to understand
and manage diseases that affect blood rheology and vascular mechanics. Noninvasive microvascular
imaging allows visualization of vessel and blood cell dynamics at the single-cell level in vivo,
providing a window into the early progression of diseases and the real-time rheological status of
the patient. Some applications include measuring microvascular elasticity to diagnose coronary
microvascular dysfunction [1–3], monitoring tumor angiogenesis to assess cancer progression and
treatment response [4], and evaluating blood cell function in sickle cell disease [5, 6].
Established techniques for measuring vascular flow include Laser Doppler Flowmetry (LDF) [7] and
Laser Speckle Contrast Imaging (LSCI) [8]. But these techniques acquire low-resolution data and are
most sensitive to arterioles and venules, which are much larger and deeper beneath the skin compared
to capillaries. Orthogonal Polarization Spectral (OPS) imaging [9] and Side-stream Dark Field (SDF)
imaging [10] have also been explored for capillary-resolution microvascular measurement of the
human oral cavity and finger nailfold. Recently, Oblique Back-illumination Microscopy (OBM) [11]
has demonstrated the potential for non-invasive microvascular measurements with high-speed imaging
and subcellular resolution. Green-light OBM can simultaneously record phase and absorption contrast
from individual blood cells flowing through superficial capillaries [12].
For all microvascular imaging techniques, quantitative, accurate, and efficient video analysis is
critical to enable clinical impact. Current analysis approaches often use semiquantitative metrics
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

