In-Context Learning of Stochastic Differential
Equations with Foundation Inference Models
Patrick Seifner1, 2 , Kostadin Cvejoski1, 3 , David Berghaus1, 3
César Ojeda4 & Ramsés J. Sánchez1, 2, 3
1
Lamarr Institute , University of Bonn2 , Fraunhofer IAIS3 & University of Potsdam4
seifner@cs.uni-bonn.de, sanchez@cs.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Stochastic differential equations (SDEs) describe dynamical systems where deterministic flows, governed by a drift function, are superimposed with random
fluctuations, dictated by a diffusion function. The accurate estimation (or discovery) of these functions from data is a central problem in machine learning,
with wide application across the natural and social sciences. Yet current solutions
either rely heavily on prior knowledge of the dynamics or involve intricate training
procedures. We introduce FIM-SDE (Foundation Inference Model for SDEs), a
pretrained recognition model that delivers accurate in-context (or zero-shot) estimation of the drift and diffusion functions of low-dimensional SDEs, from noisy time
series data, and allows rapid finetuning to target datasets. Leveraging concepts from
amortized inference and neural operators, we (pre)train FIM-SDE in a supervised
fashion to map a large set of noisy, discretely observed SDE paths onto the space
of drift and diffusion functions. We demonstrate that FIM-SDE achieves robust
in-context function estimation across a wide range of synthetic and real-world
processes — from canonical SDE systems (e.g. double-well dynamics or weakly
perturbed Lorenz attractors) to stock price recordings and oil-price and wind-speed
fluctuations — while matching the performance of symbolic, Gaussian process and
Neural SDE baselines trained on the target datasets. When finetuned to the target
processes, we show that FIM-SDE consistently outperforms all these baselines.
Our pretrained model, repository and tutorials are available online1 .

1

Introduction

Stochastic differential equations (SDEs) govern dynamical systems featuring deterministic flows
superimposed with random fluctuations. The deterministic components of these systems are dictated
by a drift function, and can be used to model the slow, tractable or accessible degrees of freedom of
dynamic phenomena. The random components are instead controlled by a diffusion function, and can
be used to represent fast or intractable degrees of freedom. Such a description in terms of tractable
versus intractable, slow versus fast, is abstract enough to be approximately valid across disciplines
and observation scales, for phenomena in and out of equilibrium. However, the central obstacle
limiting its applicability to many real-world scenarios lies in the accurate estimation of the drift and
diffusion functions that best characterize a collection of empirical observations. In other words, the
problem of SDE discovery from data, whose solution is a key step toward the automation of scientific
discovery. Yet current machine learning approaches either rely heavily on prior knowledge of the
underlying dynamics or involve intricate training schemes.
Likely inspired by the proliferation and advancement of foundation models in natural language
processing and time series forecasting, there has been a recent shift toward (pre)training neural
1

https://fim4science.github.io/OpenFIM/intro.html

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

