TopoPoint: Enhance Topology Reasoning
via Endpoint Detection in Autonomous Driving

Yanping Fu1,2,3 , Xinyuan Liu1,2 , Tianyu Li3,4 , Yike Ma1 , Yucheng Zhang1 , Feng Dai1∗
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Science;
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences; 3 Shanghai AI Lab; 4 Shanghai Innovation Institute
fuyanping23s@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Topology reasoning, which unifies perception and structured reasoning, plays a
vital role in understanding intersections for autonomous driving. However, its
performance heavily relies on the accuracy of lane detection, particularly at connected lane endpoints. Existing methods often suffer from lane endpoints deviation,
leading to incorrect topology construction. To address this issue, we propose
TopoPoint, a novel framework that explicitly detects lane endpoints and jointly
reasons over endpoints and lanes for robust topology reasoning. During training,
we independently initialize point and lane query, and proposed Point-Lane Merge
Self-Attention to enhance global context sharing through incorporating geometric distances between points and lanes as an attention mask . We further design
Point-Lane Graph Convolutional Network to enable mutual feature aggregation
between point and lane query. During inference, we introduce Point-Lane Geometry Matching algorithm that computes distances between detected points and
lanes to refine lane endpoints, effectively mitigating endpoint deviation. Extensive
experiments on the OpenLane-V2 benchmark demonstrate that TopoPoint achieves
state-of-the-art performance in topology reasoning (48.8 on OLS). Additionally, we
propose DETp to evaluate endpoint detection, under which our method significantly
outperforms existing approaches (52.6 v.s. 45.2 on DETp ). The code is released at
https://github.com/Franpin/TopoPoint.

1

Introduction

In autonomous driving scenarios, perceiving lane markings and traffic elements on the road surface is
critical for understanding complex intersection environments. To enable accurate interpretation of the
scene and determine feasible driving directions, it is essential to infer both lane-lane topology and lanetraffic element topology. With the growing trend of end-to-end autonomous driving systems[1, 2, 3],
perception and reasoning have become increasingly integrated into a unified task, referred to as
topology reasoning[4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. This task also plays a vital role in high-definition (HD) map
learning[9, 10, 11, 12] and supports downstream modules such as planning and control.
As a continuation of the lane detection task, topology reasoning task need to uniformly process lanes,
traffic elements, and their corresponding topological relationships, so the query-based architecture
has become the mainstream solution. In this pipeline, the multiple lanes are encoded and predicted
through multiple independent queries, as shown in Figure 1(a). However, since the lane endpoints
are actually attached to lane query and are affected by the supervised learning of multiple lanes, it
is difficult to ensure that the multiple endpoints of the final prediction can strictly coincide, which
is called the endpoint deviation problem. This problem already explored preliminarily as early as
in the era of lane detection, e.g., the method STSU[13] aligns the endpoints by moving the entire
lane, while the method LaneGAP[14] adopts a path-wise modeling approach, predicting complete
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

