Bridging Human and LLM Judgments:
Understanding and Narrowing the Gap

Felipe Maia Polo1∗, Xinhe Wang1∗, Mikhail Yurochkin2
Gongjun Xu1 , Moulinath Banerjee1 , Yuekai Sun1
1
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan
2
Institute of Foundation Models, MBZUAI

Abstract
Large language models are increasingly used as judges (LLM-as-a-judge) to evaluate model outputs at scale, but their assessments often diverge systematically
from human judgments. We present Bridge1 , a unified statistical framework that
explicitly bridges human and LLM evaluations under both absolute scoring and
pairwise comparison paradigms. Bridge posits a latent human preference score
for each prompt-response pair and models LLM deviations as linear transformations of covariates that capture sources of discrepancies. This offers a simple
and principled framework for refining LLM ratings and characterizing systematic
discrepancies between humans and LLMs. We provide an efficient fitting algorithm
with asymptotic guarantees for statistical inference. Using six LLM judges and
two benchmarks (BigGen Bench and Chatbot Arena), Bridge achieves higher
agreement with human ratings (accuracy, calibration, and KL divergence) and
exposes systematic human-LLM gaps.

1

Introduction

Accurate and reliable evaluation is fundamental to the advancement and deployment of artificial
intelligence (AI) systems, such as Large Language Models (LLMs). Traditional expert-based or automatic methods (e.g., ROUGE [27] or BLEU [33]) for open-ended generated text often struggle with
either scalability or poor quality. Recently, LLMs have shown significant promise in addressing these
challenges through the emergent “LLM-as-a-Judge” (LLMJ) paradigm [12, 22, 23]. Leveraging their
extensive knowledge, flexible reasoning, instruction following, and natural language understanding,
LLMs can effectively evaluate complex tasks by scoring, ranking, or selecting among diverse outputs.
However, ensuring the trustworthiness, robustness, and human-alignment of LLM-based evaluation
systems remains a critical challenge that necessitates careful attention.
A crucial step towards better judges involves deepening our understanding of LLMJ systems and
recognizing their inherent strengths and limitations. Such knowledge allows practitioners to better
quantify associated risks and steer the development of more robust evaluation methods. Recent
research has extensively explored factors contributing to inaccuracies in LLM judgments and proposed
ways to mitigate them. For example, various biases have been well-documented, including preferences
for lengthier responses, overly generous scoring tendencies, or biases influenced simply by the
presentation order during pairwise comparisons [8, 41, 48, 39]. In this work, we introduce Bridge, a
statistical framework that explicitly connects LLM ratings to human judgments, providing deeper
insight into the sources of human-LLM discrepancies and enabling more reliable alignment between
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work. Corresponding authors: felipemaiapolo@gmail.com;
xinhe.wang07@gmail.com
1
Please check our GitHub repository: https://github.com/felipemaiapolo/bridge

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

