Local Curvature Descent: Squeezing More Curvature
out of Standard and Polyak GD

Peter Richtárik1,2
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Simone Maria Giancola1,3
simone.giancola@kaust.edu.sa

Dymitr Lubczyk1,4
dymitr.lubczyk@student.uva.nl
1

Robin Yadav1,5
robiny12@student.ubc.ca

KAUST, Saudi Arabia; 2 AI Initiative, Saudi Arabia; 3 Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay,
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, France;
4
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands; 5 University of British Columbia, Canada

Abstract
We contribute to the growing body of knowledge on more powerful and adaptive
stepsizes for convex optimization, empowered by local curvature information.
We do not go the route of fully-fledged second-order methods which require the
expensive computation of the Hessian. Instead, our key observation is that, for
some problems (e.g., when minimizing the sum of squares of absolutely convex
functions), certain local curvature information is readily available, and can be used
to obtain surprisingly powerful matrix-valued stepsizes, and meaningful theory. In
particular, we develop three new methods—LCD1, LCD2 and LCD3—where the
abbreviation stands for local curvature descent. While LCD1 generalizes gradient
descent with fixed stepsize, LCD2 generalizes gradient descent with Polyak stepsize.
Our methods enhance these classical gradient descent baselines with local curvature
information, and our theory recovers the known rates in the special case when
no curvature information is used. Our last method, LCD3, is a variable-metric
version of LCD2; this feature leads to a closed-form expression for the iterates.
Our empirical results are encouraging, and show that the local curvature descent
improves upon gradient descent.

1

Introduction

In this work we revisit the standard optimization problem
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a continuous convex function with a nonempty set of minimizers X⋆ . Further,
we denote the optimal function value by f⋆ := f (x⋆ ), where x⋆ ∈ X⋆ .
1.1

First-order methods

First-order methods of the Gradient Descent (GD) and Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) variety
have been widely adopted to solve problems of type (1) [Polyak, 1963, Robbins and Monro, 1951].
Due to their simplicity and relatively low computational cost, these methods have seen great success
across many machine learning applications, and beyond. Nonetheless, GD, performing iterations of
the form
xk+1 = xk − γk ∇f (xk ),
(2)
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

