Test-Time Scaling of Diffusion Models via Noise
Trajectory Search

Vignav Ramesh
Harvard University
vignavramesh@college.harvard.edu

Morteza Mardani
NVIDIA
mmardani@nvidia.com

Abstract
The iterative and stochastic nature of diffusion models enables test-time scaling,
whereby spending additional compute during denoising generates higher-fidelity
samples. Increasing the number of denoising steps is the primary scaling axis,
but this yields quickly diminishing returns. Instead, optimizing the noise trajectory—the sequence of injected noise vectors—is promising, as the specific
noise realizations critically affect sample quality; but this is challenging due to a
high-dimensional search space, complex noise-outcome interactions, and costly
trajectory evaluations. We address this by first casting diffusion as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) with a terminal reward, showing tree-search methods
such as Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) to be meaningful but impractical. To
balance performance and efficiency, we then resort to a relaxation of MDP, where
we view denoising as a sequence of independent contextual bandits. This allows
us to introduce an ϵ-greedy search algorithm that globally explores at extreme
timesteps and locally exploits during the intermediate steps where de-mixing occurs. Experiments on EDM and Stable Diffusion reveal state-of-the-art scores for
class-conditioned/text-to-image generation, exceeding baselines by up to 164%
and matching/exceeding MCTS performance. To our knowledge, this is the first
practical method for test-time noise trajectory optimization of arbitrary (nondifferentiable) rewards.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have emerged as the de-facto standard for generative modeling of visual and, more
recently, language data [Ho et al., 2020, Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015, Nie et al., 2025]. A notable
property of these models is their test-time scaling: the iterative and stochastic nature of the generation
process allows for enhanced sample quality by allocating additional computational resources during
inference. A primary strategy for leveraging this has been to increase the number of denoising steps.
However, empirical observations indicate that performance gains from more denoising steps typically
plateau after a few dozen iterations [Karras et al., 2022, Song et al., 2022, 2021].
The diminishing returns from merely increasing denoising steps motivate exploring alternative testtime optimizations. Optimizing the noise trajectory itself is a promising direction. Diffusion models
iteratively transform an initial noise distribution towards a target data distribution via a stochastic
process (often a stochastic differential equation (SDE)), where sequentially introduced fresh noise
instances define a random path. The characteristics of these injected noises, forming the noise
trajectory, are crucial to sample quality.
Recent studies show that injected noises are not equally effective; specific noise realizations can
produce higher fidelity samples, with certain noises better suited for different objectives [Qi et al.,
2024, Ahn et al., 2024]. However, optimizing this noise trajectory is challenging: the search
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

