Beyond Verifiable Rewards: Scaling Reinforcement
Learning in Language Models to Unverifiable Data

Yunhao Tang

Sid Wang
Meta Platforms, Inc.

Lovish Madaan
Meta Platforms, Inc.

Rémi Munos
Meta Platforms, Inc.

Abstract
We propose to scale RL to unverifiable data with a novel algorithm JEPO (Jensen’s
Evidence lower bound for Policy Optimization). While most prior effort on scaling
RL for LLMs focuses on verifiable data where ground truth answers are typically short-form and can be matched easily, we investigate the case where such
assumptions are less valid (e.g., when answers are long-form such as mathematical
proofs). To scale RL training to unverifiable data with contemporary training
constraints, we propose JEPO. JEPO applies Jensen’s evidence lower bound, a
pragmatic simplification of the evidence lower bound which views chain-of-thought
as a latent variable in the generative process. We show that on verifiable datasets
(math), JEPO is as effective as RL with verifiable reward; on semi-verifiable and
unverifiable datasets (numina and numina-proof), JEPO improves on soft-match
based evaluations compared to RL with verifiable reward which can only leverage
a subset of the data source as well as test set likelihood evaluations.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning from verifiable reward (RLVR) has proved effective at endowing language
models with capabilities beyond canonical pre-training and supervised fine-tuning [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
At its core, reinforcement learning (RL) allows for the training of chain-of-thought at scale, which
can elicit significant performance improvements especially for reasoning intensive tasks [7, 8]. In the
case of mathematical reasoning, it encourages step-by-step solutions that lead up to a final answer
[9, 10], whose correctness can be verified to produce a reward signal for RL training.
However, a main limitation of current RLVR is the data source: verifiable rewards are mostly derived
from datasets where ground truth answers are short-form and can be checked in relatively easy ways
[4, 5, 6]. For example, most answers to popular benchmarks MATH [11] and AIME [12] are integers
and can be verified using simple string match. Yet, for many data sources, the ground truth answers
are less verifiable or even unverifiable by current standards. For example, for long-form data with the
answer being the whole proof, its inherent correctness is hard to assess without human raters [13].
The boundary between verifiable and unverfiable data, though often blurry in practice, can be made
actionable: we define data as unverifiable, if its ground truth answer cannot be verified with a
reasonably simple automatic procedure. It is of interest to scale RL to such data sources, for a
few notable practical reasons: (1) some data have inherently long answers which cannot be cast
into short-form answers in a straightforward way; (2) data sources with long-form answers exist in
abundance, and it is sub-optimal not to leverage such data for training. In this work, we seek to tackle
the problem of scaling RL to these unverifiable data sources.
We propose JEPO (short for Jensen’s Evidence lower bound for Policy Optimization), a novel RL
algorithm that can equally post-train models on verifiable or unverifiable data. The design of the
algorithm is inspired by a latent variable view of chain-of-thought [14, 15]. Different from prior work,
we make use of Jensen’s evidence lower bound, a novel pragmatic simplification of the full evidence
lower bound [16, 17], named after Jensen’s inequality [18]. Optimizing a simplified objective
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

