Counterfactual Implicit Feedback Modeling

1

Chuan Zhou1,2 Lina Yao3,4 Haoxuan Li5,2,∗ Mingming Gong1,2,∗
The University of Melbourne 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
The University of New South Wales 4 CSIRO’s Data61 5 Peking University
chuan.zhou@student.unimelb.edu.au, lina.yao@data61.csiro.au,
hxli@stu.pku.edu.cn, mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
In recommendation systems, implicit feedback data can be automatically recorded
and is more common than explicit feedback data. However, implicit feedback
poses two challenges for relevance prediction, namely (a) positive-unlabeled (PU):
negative feedback does not necessarily imply low relevance and (b) missing not
at random (MNAR): items that are popular or frequently recommended tend to
receive more clicks than other items, even if the user does not have a significant
interest in them. Existing methods either overlook the MNAR issue or fail to
account for the inherent mechanism of the PU issue. As a result, they may lead to
inaccurate relevance predictions or inflated biases and variances. In this paper, we
formulate the implicit feedback problem as a counterfactual estimation problem
with missing treatment variables. Prediction of the relevance in implicit feedback is
equivalent to answering the counterfactual question that “whether a user would click
a specific item if exposed to it?". To solve the counterfactual question, we propose
the Counterfactual Implicit Feedback (Counter-IF) prediction approach that divides
the user-item pairs into four disjoint groups, namely definitely positive (DP), highly
exposed (HE), highly unexposed (HU), and unknown (UN) groups. Specifically,
Counter-IF first performs missing treatment imputation with different confidence
levels from raw implicit feedback, then estimates the counterfactual outcomes
via causal representation learning that combines pointwise loss and pairwise loss
based on the user-item pairs stratification. Theoretically the generalization bound
of the learned model is derived. Extensive experiments are conducted on publicly
available datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. The code is
available at https://github.com/zhouchuanCN/NeurIPS25-Counter-IF.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems are technical tools that analyze historical user behavioral data to predict their
preferences and actively provide personalized recommendations [1, 2, 3], which have been widely
applied to various fields, such as e-commerce, streaming video, and social media [4, 5, 6, 7]. There
are two types of feedback mechanisms in user behavioral data, including explicit feedback [8, 9, 10],
which refers to the explicit signals that users directly express their preferences, such as product
ratings. Implicit feedback [11], on the other hand, comes from the indirect interactions between users
and the system, including unstructured behavioral trajectories such as the length of time spent on the
page, clicks, and so on. Implicit feedback has a great advantage over explicit feedback in terms of
data acquisition [12, 5], as most user behaviors are implicit [13], which can be collected continuously
on a large scale and can reflect the potential user demand more promptly.
In implicit feedback recommendation, the goal is to infer the user’s true relevance or preference for an
item from their behavior data, i.e., to determine whether the user is likely to be interested in an item.
∗

Haoxuan Li and Mingming Gong are the corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

