Elastic Robust Unlearning of Specific Knowledge in
Large Language Models

Yize Sui1 , Jing Ren1 , Wenjing Yang1 , Ruochun Jin1 , Liyang Xu1 , Xiyao Liu2 , Ji Wang1∗
1
College of Computer Science and Technology,
National University of Defense Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Central South University
{suiyize18, renjing, wenjing.yang, jinrc, xuliyang08, wj}@nudt.edu.cn
lxyzoewx@csu.edu.cn

Abstract
LLM unlearning aims to remove sensitive or harmful information within the model,
thus reducing the potential risk of generating unexpected information. However,
existing Preference Optimization (PO)-based unlearning methods suffer two limitations. First, their rigid reward setting limits the effect of unlearning. Second,
the lack of robustness causes unlearned information to reappear. To remedy these
two weaknesses, we present a novel LLM unlearning optimization framework,
namely Elastic Robust Unlearning (ERU), to efficiently and robustly remove specific knowledge from LLMs. We design the elastic reward setting instead of the
rigid reward setting to enhance the unlearning performance. Meanwhile, we incorporate the refusal feature ablation into the unlearning process to trigger specific
failure patterns for efficiently enhancing the robustness of the PO-based unlearning
methods in multiple scenarios. Experimental results show that ERU can improve
the unlearning effectiveness significantly while maintaining high utility performance. Especially, on the WMDP-Bio benchmark, ERU shows a 9% improvement
over the second-best method, and maintains 83% performance even under 1,000
sample fine-tuned retraining attacks, significantly better than the baseline method.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs) [1–3], their potential applications
across various fields have increasingly become evident. This potential primarily stems from their
extensive pre-trained knowledge base and exceptional generalization capabilities. However, due to
the possibility that training data may contain copyrighted content, personal privacy information, and
harmful speech among other undesirable elements [4–6], LLMs inevitably absorb some negative
behavioral patterns during learning. These negative behaviors not only pose a threat to information
security but may also have adverse social impacts, thereby hindering the widespread application of
LLMs in real-world scenarios. Therefore, ensuring that LLMs are aligned with human values and
intentions is crucial for maintaining their credibility and safety.
Since retraining models to remove specific undesirable content is costly and time-consuming, researchers have explored methods including safe fine-tuning [7] and adversarial training (AT) [8, 9].
However, recent studies on interpretability [10], representation engineering [11, 12], and continual
learning [13–15] indicate that surface safety fine-tuning is difficult to ensure that LLMs are harmless
in all scenarios, because this approach is not sufficient to fundamentally change the knowledge and
capabilities of LLMs. Given that undesirable responses often stem from the same harmful knowledge
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

