Fair Matroid Selection
Kiarash Banihashem
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
kiarash@umd.edu

MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
hajiaghayi@gmail.com

Danny Mittal
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
dannymittal@gmail.com

Abstract
We investigate the problem of sequentially selecting elements of an unknown matroid in an online manner to form an independent set, with the goal of maximizing
the minimum probability of acceptance across all elements, a property we define
as f -fairness. Under adversarial arrival orders, we design an α(ln k + 1)-fair
algorithm, where α is the arboricity of the matroid and k is the rank, a result that is
nearly optimal. For laminar matroids, we develop a (2α − 1)-fair algorithm, which
is optimal up to constant factors, achieved through a novel online coloring scheme.
In the random arrival order setting, we achieve a (4 + o(1))α-fair algorithm for
graphic matroids, matching the optimal result up to constant factors, relying on a
novel technique for learning a degeneracy ordering using a sampled subset of edges.
We further generalize our result to p-matchoids, obtaining a β(p ln k + 1)-fair
algorithm for the adversarial arrival model, where β is the optimal offline fairness.
Notably, all our results can be extended to a setting with no prior knowledge of the
matroid with only a logarithmic increase in the fairness factor.

1

Introduction

One of the most central problems in online decision making is the secretary problem introduced
in the seminal result of Dynkin [Dyn63]. In this problem, a sequence of values arrives online in
a random order, and the goal is to select the maximum value. It is well known that the optimal
strategy selects the maximum value with probability 1/e. A natural generalization allows selecting
multiple elements, subject to combinatorial constraints, and competing with the offline optimum in
expectation. One of the central open questions in this area is the matroid secretary conjecture of
Babaioff et al. [BIK07, BIKK18], which posits that a constant-competitive algorithm exists when
the feasibility constraint is given by a matroid 1 . Despite extensive research, this conjecture remains
unresolved. However, an important limitation of the standard matroid secretary problem is that it
solely maximizes the sum of accepted elements, potentially leading to highly unequal outcomes—an
issue of particular concern from a fairness perspective.
Motivated by this, we introduce and study the fair matroid selection problem. In this problem,
elements from an unknown matroid arrive online, and an algorithm must select elements irrevocably
while respecting the matroid’s independence constraints. Said algorithm may learn the matroid’s
structure online via independence queries on sets containing only elements which have already
1
A matroid is a tuple M = (E, I), where E is a finite ground set and I ⊆ 2E satisfies: (1) If I ∈ I and
I ′ ⊆ I, then I ′ ∈ I; (2) If I, J ∈ I with |I| < |J|, then there exists e ∈ J \ I such that I ∪ {e} ∈ I.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

