T REE S YNTH: Synthesizing Diverse Data from Scratch
via Tree-Guided Subspace Partitioning
Sheng Wang∗ , Pengan Chen∗ , Jingqi Zhou∗ , Qintong Li, Jingwei Dong
The University of Hong Kong
{u3009618, cpa2001, u3011211, qtli, joviedong89}@connect.hku.hk

Jiahui Gao
The University of Hong Kong

Boyang Xue, Jiyue Jiang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

ggaojiahui@gmail.com

byxue@se.cuhk.edu.hk, jiangjy@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Lingpeng Kong, Chuan Wu
The University of Hong Kong
{lpk, cwu}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Model customization necessitates high-quality and diverse datasets, but acquiring
such data remains time-consuming and labor-intensive. Despite the great potential
of large language models (LLMs) for data synthesis, current approaches are constrained by limited seed data, model biases, and low-variation prompts, resulting in
limited diversity and biased distributions with the increase of data scales. To tackle
this challenge, we introduce T REE S YNTH, a tree-guided subspace-based data synthesis approach inspired by decision trees. It constructs a spatial partitioning tree
to recursively divide a task-specific full data space (i.e., root node) into numerous atomic subspaces (i.e., leaf nodes) with mutually exclusive and exhaustive
attributes to ensure both distinctiveness and comprehensiveness before synthesizing
samples within each atomic subspace. This globally dividing-and-synthesizing
method finally collects subspace samples into a comprehensive dataset, effectively
circumventing repetition and space collapse to ensure the diversity of large-scale
data synthesis. Furthermore, the spatial partitioning tree enables sample allocation
into atomic subspaces, allowing the rebalancing of existing datasets for more balanced and comprehensive distributions. Empirically, extensive experiments across
diverse benchmarks consistently demonstrate the superior data diversity, model
performance, and robust scalability of T REE S YNTH compared to both humancrafted datasets and peer data synthesis methods, with an average performance gain
reaching 10%. Besides, the consistent improvements of T REE S YNTH-balanced
datasets highlight its efficacious application to redistribute existing datasets for
more comprehensive coverage and the induced performance enhancement. The
code is available at https://github.com/cpa2001/TreeSynth.

1

Introduction

With the superior performance, large language models (LLMs), such as OpenAI o1 [1], LLaMA3 [2], and DeepSeek R1 [3], have been deployed for various downstream applications, including
code copilot [4], mathematical reasoning [5], psychology [6], etc. The success of these models
∗

Equal Contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

