Scaling Unlocks Broader Generation and Deeper
Functional Understanding of Proteins
Aadyot Bhatnagar∗ ,†

Sarthak Jain∗

Joel Beazer∗

Alexander M. Hoffnagle∗

Kyle S. Ching∗

Michael Martyn∗

Jeffrey A. Ruffolo∗ ,†

Samuel C. Curran∗
Stephen Nayfach∗

Ali Madani∗ ,†

Abstract
Generative protein language models (PLMs) are powerful tools for designing proteins purpose-built to solve problems in medicine, agriculture, and industrial processes. Recent work has trained ever larger language models, but there has been
little systematic study of the optimal training distributions and the inﬂuence of
model scale on the sequences generated by PLMs. We introduce the ProGen3
family of sparse generative PLMs, and we develop compute-optimal scaling laws
to scale up to a 46B-parameter model pre-trained on 1.5T amino acid tokens. ProGen3’s pre-training data is sampled from an optimized data distribution over the
Proﬂuent Protein Atlas v1, a carefully curated dataset of 3.4B full-length proteins.
We evaluate for the ﬁrst time in the wet lab the inﬂuence of model scale on the
sequences generated by PLMs, and we ﬁnd that larger models generate viable proteins for a much wider diversity of protein families. Finally, we ﬁnd both computationally and experimentally that larger models are more responsive to alignment
with laboratory data, resulting in improved protein ﬁtness prediction and sequence
generation capabilities. These results indicate that larger PLMs like ProGen3-46B
trained on larger, well-curated datasets are powerful foundation models that push
the frontier of protein design.1

1

Introduction

Proteins are ubiquitous molecules that play a central role in most biological processes. They catalyze
reactions, contribute to immune function, regulate cellular pathways, and facilitate the transport of
other molecules. They enable solutions for multiple industries including therapeutics, diagnostics,
agriculture, energy, and manufacturing. Until recently, we have been limited to ﬁnding relevant
proteins in nature through serendipitous discovery. Techniques to engineer proteins for our desired
purposes largely rely on laborious laboratory techniques that randomly mutate these initial hits in
hopes of discovering a variant with enhanced function [3, 34]. Relying on these inherently random
processes presents a major challenge to the bespoke design of proteins for speciﬁc use cases.
The dramatic reduction of DNA sequencing costs has enabled exponential growth in our ability to
sample naturally occurring protein sequences that are the product of selective pressures over billions
of years. Generative protein language models (PLMs) have emerged as powerful tools to learn the
complex distribution of proteins found in nature, and their ability to design highly functional novel
proteins has been experimentally veriﬁed for a wide range of applications [40, 45, 63, 68, 79, 80, 96].
∗

Proﬂuent Bio, Inc.
To whom correspondence should be addressed: {abhatnagar,jeff,ali}@profluent.bio
1
Code and model weights are available at https://github.com/Profluent-AI/progen3.

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

