DNAEdit: Direct Noise Alignment for
Text-Guided Rectified Flow Editing
⋆

†

⋆

Chenxi Xie1,2, , Minghan Li3, , Shuai Li1 , Yuhui Wu1,2 , Qiaosi Yi1,2 , Lei Zhang1,2,
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 OPPO Research Institute,
3
Harvard University
chenxi.xie@connect.polyu.hk mili4@meei.harvard.edu cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
⋆
†
Equal contribution
Corresponding author

Project Page: https://xiechenxi99.github.io/DNAEdit/

Abstract
Leveraging the powerful generation capability of large-scale pretrained text-toimage models, training-free methods have demonstrated impressive image editing
results. Conventional diffusion-based methods, as well as recent rectified flow
(RF)-based methods, typically reverse synthesis trajectories by gradually adding
noise to clean images, during which the noisy latent at the current timestep is
used to approximate that at the next timesteps, introducing accumulated drift and
degrading reconstruction accuracy. Considering the fact that in RF the noisy latent
is estimated through direct interpolation between Gaussian noises and clean images
at each timestep, we propose Direct Noise Alignment (DNA), which directly refines
the desired Gaussian noise in the noise domain, significantly reducing the error
accumulation in previous methods. Specifically, DNA estimates the velocity field
of the interpolated noised latent at each timestep and adjusts the Gaussian noise
by computing the difference between the predicted and expected velocity field.
We validate the effectiveness of DNA and reveal its relationship with existing RFbased inversion methods. Additionally, we introduce a Mobile Velocity Guidance
(MVG) to control the target prompt-guided generation process, balancing image
background preservation and target object editability. DNA and MVG collectively
constitute our proposed method, namely DNAEdit. Finally, we introduce DNABench, a long-prompt benchmark, to evaluate the performance of advanced image
editing models. Experimental results demonstrate that our DNAEdit achieves
superior performance to state-of-the-art text-guided editing methods. Our code,
model, and benchmark will be made publicly available.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in text-to-image (T2I) generation have been driven by Rectified Flow (RF)-based
models [12, 11], which significantly reduce sampling timesteps, enabling faster generation. Leveraging large-scale T2I models such as SD3 [3] and FLUX [8], training-free text-guided image editing
methods [17, 22, 7, 30] can achieve high-quality editing results with fewer sampling steps. Existing
RF-based editing methods [17, 7, 2, 22, 25, 27, 30] typically follow earlier Diffusion Model (DM)based editing approaches [15, 6, 14], first reversing the generative trajectory by gradually adding
noise to the clean image, obtaining an inverted noise and then re-denosing it under new conditions to
generate the edited image, as shown by the black path in Fig. 1 (a). The inverted noise is critical for
the preservation of fidelity, as it retains the structural information of the reference image, ensuring
consistency between the edited and the reference images. However, this inversion process introduces
This work is supported by the PolyU-OPPO Joint Innovative Research Center.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

