Identifying multi-compartment Hodgkin-Huxley
models with high-density extracellular voltage
recordings

Ian Christopher Tanoh1,2 Michael Deistler3,4 Jakob H. Macke3,4,5
Scott W. Linderman1,2
1
Department of Statistics, Stanford University
2
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University
3
Machine Learning in Science, University of Tübingen
4
Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen
5
Department of Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
{ictanoh, scott.linderman}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Multi-compartment Hodgkin-Huxley models are biophysical models of how electrical signals propagate throughout a neuron, and they form the basis of our knowledge
of neural computation at the cellular level. However, these models have many
free parameters that must be estimated for each cell, and existing fitting methods
rely on intracellular voltage measurements that are highly challenging to obtain
in vivo. Recent advances in neural recording technology with high-density probes
and arrays enable dense sampling of extracellular voltage from many sites surrounding a neuron, allowing indirect measurement of many compartments of a cell
simultaneously. Here, we propose a method for inferring the underlying membrane
voltage, biophysical parameters, and the neuron’s position relative to the probe,
using extracellular measurements alone. We use an Extended Kalman Filter to
infer membrane voltage and channel states using efficient, differentiable simulators.
Then, we learn the model parameters by maximizing the marginal likelihood using
gradient-based methods. We demonstrate the performance of this approach using
simulated data and real neuron morphologies.

1

Introduction

Biological neurons are equipped with a wide range of biophysical mechanisms that contribute to
information processing [1–3] and to the brain’s robustness to environmental perturbations [4, 5].
Multi-compartment Hodgkin-Huxley models provide a principled framework for studying biophysical
mechanisms of neurons [6, 7]. Multi-compartment models treat neurons as connected electrical
compartments, allowing simulation of how voltage signals propagate throughout a cell as ion channels
open and close. A central limitation for building multi-compartment models—and for understanding
biophysical mechanisms in neurons—is the lack of experimental techniques to precisely measure
the biophysical parameters of these models. As such, these parameters must be inferred from
recordings of the activity of neurons [8–11]. Typically, these recordings are made from within a
neuron using intracellular measurements such as patch-clamp electrophysiology, which enables
precise recordings of voltage dynamics in the soma [12, 13] and, for large neurons, in dendrites [14].
However, intracellular methods are technically challenging, and only provide voltage signals from a
very small number of locations within a neuron (typically, only from the soma) [15].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

