DitHub: A Modular Framework for
Incremental Open-Vocabulary Object Detection

Chiara Cappellino

Gianluca Mancusi

Matteo Mosconi

Angelo Porrello

Simone Calderara

Rita Cucchiara

AImageLab - University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
name.surname@unimore.it

Abstract
Open-Vocabulary object detectors can generalize to an unrestricted set of categories
through simple textual prompting. However, adapting these models to rare classes
or reinforcing their abilities on multiple specialized domains remains essential.
While recent methods rely on monolithic adaptation strategies with a single set of
weights, we embrace modular deep learning. We introduce DitHub, a framework
designed to build and maintain a library of efficient adaptation modules. Inspired
by Version Control Systems, DitHub manages expert modules as branches that can
be fetched and merged as needed. This modular approach allows us to conduct
an in-depth exploration of the compositional properties of adaptation modules,
marking the first such study in Object Detection. Our method achieves state-of-theart performance on the ODinW-13 benchmark and ODinW-O, a newly introduced
benchmark designed to assess class reappearance.

1

Introduction

Object detection is a cornerstone of computer vision, with recent advancements [48, 2, 57, 32, 24]
enabling architectures that integrate Vision and Language large-scale pre-training [25]. This has given
rise to Open-Vocabulary Object Detection, where models can classify and localize objects beyond a
predefined set of categories. The ability to process arbitrary textual queries and detect corresponding
objects has profound implications for real-world applications, including medical imaging [18], safety
and security [41], and industrial quality control [38]. For instance, the ability to detect rare or atypical
objects from a safety camera is crucial for issuing early warnings about uncommon dangers. However,
this requires Open-Vocabulary detectors to adapt effectively, enabling them to recognize categories
beyond their pre-training knowledge distribution.
Recent approaches, such as those detailed in [4], have extended Vision-Language detectors to
incrementally accommodate new categories while preserving robust capabilities [40]. However,
these methods employ monolithic adaptation, where all newly acquired knowledge is condensed
into a single set of weights. This approach presents challenges in real-world scenarios that demand
updates to specific concepts which may reappear under varied input modalities. For instance, in
safety and security applications, the class “person” may need to be detected not only in standard
RGB imagery but also in thermal imagery, necessitating continuous model adaptation to ensure
consistent performance across different data types. Additionally, for rare or complex categories,
incremental adaptation is crucial to refine the base model for fine-grained concepts. In such scenarios,
a monolithic deep architecture faces challenges similar to managing a complex program written on
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

