Impact of Dataset Properties on Membership
Inference Vulnerability of Deep Transfer Learning

Marlon Tobaben1∗ Hibiki Ito2∗† Joonas Jälkö1∗ Yuan He1 Antti Honkela1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland
2
School of Informatics, Kyoto University, Japan
{marlon.tobaben,joonas.jalko,yuan.he,antti.honkela}@helsinki.fi
ito.hibiki.77n@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Membership inference attacks (MIAs) are used to test practical privacy of machine
learning models. MIAs complement formal guarantees from differential privacy
(DP) under a more realistic adversary model. We analyze MIA vulnerability of
fine-tuned neural networks both empirically and theoretically, the latter using a
simplified model of fine-tuning. We show that the vulnerability of non-DP models
when measured as the attacker advantage at a fixed false positive rate reduces
according to a simple power law as the number of examples per class increases. A
similar power-law applies even for the most vulnerable points, but the dataset size
needed for adequate protection of the most vulnerable points is very large.

Introduction

Membership inference attacks (MIAs; Shokri
et al., 2017; Carlini et al., 2022) and differential privacy (DP; Dwork et al., 2006) provide
complementary means of deriving lower and upper bounds for the privacy loss of a machine
learning algorithm. Yet, the two operate under
slightly different threat models. DP implicitly
assumes a very powerful adversary with access
to all training data except the target point and
provides guarantees against every target point.

(TPR - FPR)
at FPR=0.001

1

1
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.0001

MIAs assume an often more realistic adversary
model with access to just the data distribution
and the unknown training data becoming latent
variables that introduce stochasticity into the
attack. However, the practical evaluation is statistical and cannot provide universal guarantees.

16

64

256

1024 4096 16384 65536

Examples per class
Patch Camelyon (C=2)
CIFAR10 (C=10)
EuroSAT (C=10)

Pets (C=37)
Resics45 (C=45)
CIFAR100 (C=100)

Figure 1: We observe a power-law relation between MIA vulnerability and examples per class
(denoted as S or shots) when attacking a fine-tuned
ViT-B Head using LiRA. Each colored line denotes
a different fine-tuning dataset where C specifies
In this paper, we seek to explore MIA vulner- the number of classes. The solid line is median and
ability to extrapolate this gap. Inspired by an the error bars the min/max bounds for the Clopperempirical finding that average MIA vulnerability Pearson CIs over six seeds.
of neural network fine-tuning strongly reduces
as the number of samples in the target class increases (see Figure 1), we develop theory of optimal
MIA against a simple model of neural network fine-tuning and reproduce the decrease in vulnerability.
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Work performed in part while at the University of Helsinki.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

