FSEO: Few-Shot Evolutionary Optimization via Meta
Learning for Expensive Multi-Objective Optimization

Xunzhao Yu
Department of Economics, University of Warwick
Xunzhao.Yu@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Meta-learning has been demonstrated to be useful to improve the sampling efficiency of Bayesian optimization (BO) and surrogate-assisted evolutionary algorithms (SAEAs) when solving expensive optimization problems (EOPs). Existing
studies mainly focus on either combinations of existing meta-learning modeling
methods with optimization algorithms, or the development of meta-learning acquisition functions for specific meta BO. However, the meta-learning models used in
the literature are not designed for optimization purposes, and the generalization
ability of meta-learning acquisition functions is limited. In this work, we develop a
novel architecture of meta-learning model for optimization purposes and propose a
generalized few-shot evolutionary optimization (FSEO) framework to solve EOPs.
We focus on the scenario of expensive multi-objective EOPs (EMOPs) in the context of few-shot optimization as there are few studies on it and its high requirement
on surrogate modeling performance. The surrogates in FSEO framework combines
neural network with Gaussian Processes (GPs), their network parameters and some
parameters of GPs represent task-independent experience and are meta-learned
across related optimization tasks, the remaining GPs parameters are task-specific
parameters that represent unique features of the target task. We demonstrate that
FSEO is able to improve the sampling efficiency of existing SAEAs on EMOPs.

1

Introduction

Expensive optimization problems (EOPs) aim to find as good as possible solutions within a budget of
limited solution evaluations. Conventional Bayesian optimization (BO) and surrogate-assisted evolutionary algorithms (SAEAs) have been widely used to solve EOPs, but they train surrogate models
from scratch. To further improve sampling efficiency and optimization performance, many efforts
have been made to pre-train surrogates with the prior experience gained from related optimization
tasks, resulting in experience-based optimization algorithms [2, 24, 38, 37].
Scope. This work considers solving EOPs in the context of few-shot problems [7, 44], where
plenty of expensive related tasks are available and each of them can provide a small dataset for
experience learning. Therefore, many experience-based optimization approaches, such as multitasking optimization [47, 3, 52] and transfer optimization [37, 21, 20], are not considered as they
cannot learn experience from small related tasks (a detailed clarification of differences between
these concepts is available in Appendix A.1). In comparison, meta-learning [17] has been proven
to be powerful in solving few-shot problems, leading to a new subcategory of experience-based
optimization, namely few-shot optimization (FSO) [50].
Motivation. Existing studies on FSO are mainly few-shot Bayesian optimization (FSBO) where
meta-learning approaches are combined with BO to solve EOPs with only one objective. These
studies either employ meta-learning models from the literature directly or focus on the meta-learning
of acquisition functions (AFs) that are customized for BO. In this paper, we develop a novel meta39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

