FOCUS: Internal MLLM Representations for
Efficient Fine-Grained Visual Question Answering

Liangyu Zhong∗1,3 , Fabio Rosenthal∗2,4 , Joachim Sicking 3 , Fabian Hüger 3 ,
Thorsten Bagdonat 4 , Hanno Gottschalk 1 , Leo Schwinn 2
1

Technical University of Berlin, 2 Technical University of Munich,
3
CARIAD SE, 4 Volkswagen AG
Project page: https://focus-mllm-vqa.github.io

Abstract
While Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) offer strong perception and
reasoning capabilities for image-text input, Visual Question Answering (VQA)
focusing on small image details still remains a challenge. Although visual cropping
techniques seem promising, recent approaches have several limitations: the need
for task-specific fine-tuning, low efficiency due to uninformed exhaustive search,
or incompatibility with efficient attention implementations. We address these
shortcomings by proposing a training-free visual cropping method, dubbed FOCUS,
that leverages MLLM-internal representations to guide the search for the most
relevant image region. This is accomplished in four steps: first, we identify the
target object(s) in the VQA prompt; second, we compute an object relevance map
using the key-value (KV) cache; third, we propose and rank relevant image regions
based on the map; and finally, we perform the fine-grained VQA task using the topranked region. As a result of this informed search strategy, FOCUS achieves strong
performance across four fine-grained VQA datasets and three types of MLLMs. It
outperforms three popular visual cropping methods in both accuracy and efficiency,
and matches the best-performing baseline, ZoomEye, while requiring 3 – 6.5×
less compute.

1

Introduction

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) exhibit compelling cross-modal perception and
reasoning capabilities, particularly on image-text data [8, 9, 22]. However, standard MLLM architectures are not well suited to perceive and reason about small visual details in high-resolution images
[37, 42] as they typically downscale their inputs, leading to a loss of information. Examples of these
so-called global-view MLLMs include Instruct-BLIP [9] and LLaVA-1.5 [24], which only support
low-resolution inputs of 224 × 224 px and 336 × 336 px, respectively. As a consequence, globalview MLLMs perform poorly on Visual Question Answering (VQA) tasks involving small-scale
visual details [38].
Recent MLLM architectures such as LLaVA-OneVision [22] and Gemma-3 [19] address this limitation by processing both a downsampled global view and local crops extracted from the original image.
This dual-view strategy enables them to handle high-resolution inputs with reduced information loss
compared to global-view MLLMs. However, despite having access to fine-grained visual details from
all local crops, these so-called global-local-view MLLMs struggle to identify the few visual tokens
that are relevant for fine-grained VQA amid the large number of local crop tokens. While these
* Equal contribution
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

