Riemannian Consistency Model

Chaoran Cheng∗1 , Yusong Wang∗2 , Yuxin Chen1 , Xiangxin Zhou3 , Nanning Zheng2 , Ge Liu1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Consistency models are a class of generative models that enable few-step generation for diffusion and flow matching models. While consistency models have
achieved promising results on Euclidean domains like images, their applications
to Riemannian manifolds remain challenging due to the curved geometry. In
this work, we propose the Riemannian Consistency Model (RCM), which, for
the first time, enables few-step consistency modeling while respecting the intrinsic manifold constraint imposed by the Riemannian geometry. Leveraging the
covariant derivative and exponential-map-based parameterization, we derive the
closed-form solutions for both discrete- and continuous-time training objectives
for RCM. We then demonstrate theoretical equivalence between the two variants of
RCM: Riemannian consistency distillation (RCD) that relies on a teacher model to
approximate the marginal vector field, and Riemannian consistency training (RCT)
that utilizes the conditional vector field for training. We further propose a simplified training objective that eliminates the need for the complicated differential
calculation. Finally, we provide a unique kinematics perspective for interpreting the
RCM objective, offering new theoretical angles. Through extensive experiments,
we manifest the superior generative quality of RCM in few-step generation on
various non-Euclidean manifolds, including flat-tori, spheres, and the 3D rotation
group SO(3), spanning a variety of crucial real-world applications such as RNA
and protein generation.

1

Introduction

Diffusion [47, 48, 19] and flow matching [27, 7] models have achieved remarkable success on
generative modeling in various domains including image generation [42, 11], protein design [55, 3],
and text generation [2, 14, 9]. As an intrinsically iterative process that gradually transforms the
data from random noises into meaningful samples, the inference procedure of diffusion and flow
matching usually requires hundreds to up to a thousand steps for decent generation. To mitigate such
high computational cost, a new family of generative models known as the Consistency Model (CM)
[50] was proposed. By “shortcutting” the probability flow and enforcing consistent model outputs,
consistency models are able to generate high-quality samples using one or a few steps. In the image
generation task, consistency models have surpassed the existing distillation approaches [44] and
rectified flows [29, 28] in one-step generation.
Besides Euclidean domains like images, generative models on various Riemannian manifolds have
a potentially profound impact in scientific domains, including protein generation [55, 3], peptide
design [26, 25], robotics [5], and geoscience [41]. For example, the generative modeling of a protein
requires descriptors of its position, orientation, and torsion angles for each amino acid. While the
position is Euclidean, the orientation lies in the 3D rotation group SO(3) and the torsion angle lies in
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author to chaoran7@illinois.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

