Harnessing the Universal Geometry of Embeddings

Rishi Jha

Collin Zhang Vitaly Shmatikov John X. Morris
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University

Abstract
We introduce the first method for translating text embeddings from one vector
space to another without any paired data, encoders, or predefined sets of matches.
Our unsupervised approach translates any embedding to and from a universal latent
representation (i.e., a universal semantic structure conjectured by the Platonic
Representation Hypothesis). Our translations achieve high cosine similarity across
model pairs with different architectures, parameter counts, and training datasets.
The ability to translate unknown embeddings into a different space while preserving
their geometry has serious implications for security. An adversary with access
to a database of only embedding vectors can extract sensitive information about
underlying documents, sufficient for classification and attribute inference.

Figure 1: Left: input embeddings from different model families (T5-based GTR [47] and BERT-based
GTE [32]) are fundamentally incomparable. Right: given unpaired embedding samples from different
models on different texts, our model learns a latent representation where they are closely aligned.

1

Introduction

Text embeddings are the backbone of modern NLP, powering tasks like retrieval, RAG, classification,
and clustering. There are many embedding models trained on different datasets, data shufflings, and
initializations. An embedding of a text encodes its semantics: a good model maps texts with similar
semantics to vectors close to each other in the embedding space. Since semantics is a property of
text, different embeddings of the same text should encode the same semantics. In practice, however,
different models encode texts into completely different and incompatible vector spaces.
The Platonic Representation Hypothesis Huh et al. [18] conjectures that all vision models of sufficient
size converge to the same latent representation. We propose a stronger, constructive version of this
hypothesis for text models: the universal latent structure of text representations can be learned and,
furthermore, harnessed to translate representations from one space to another without any paired data
or encoders.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

