Balancing Positive and Negative Classification Error
Rates in Positive-Unlabeled Learning

Ximing Li1,2,3 , Yuanchao Dai1,2 , Bing Wang1,2 , Changchun Li1,2∗, Jianfeng Qu4,5 ,
Renchu Guan1,2
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering, Jilin University, China
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
5
Suzhou Key Lab of Multi-modal Data Fusion and Intelligent Healthcare, Suzhou City University, China
{liximing86, yuanchaodai, changchunli93}@gmail.com

Abstract
Positive and Unlabeled (PU) learning is a special case of binary classification with
weak supervision, where only positive labeled and unlabeled data are available.
Previous studies suggest several specific risk estimators of PU learning such as
non-negative PU (nnPU), which are unbiased and consistent with the expected
risk of supervised binary classification. In nnPU, the negative-class empirical
risk is estimated by positive labeled and unlabeled data with a non-negativity
constraint. However, its negative-class empirical risk estimator approaches 0,
so the negative class is over-played, resulting in imbalanced error rates between
positive and negative classes. To solve this problem, we suppose that the expected
risks of the positive-class and negative-class should be close. Accordingly, we
constrain that the negative-class empirical risk estimator is lower bounded by the
positive-class empirical risk, instead of 0; and also incorporate an explicit equality
constraint between them. We suggest a risk estimator of PU learning that balances
positive and negative classification error rates, named DC - PU, and suggest an
efficient training method for DC - PU based on the augmented Lagrange multiplier
framework. We theoretically analyze the estimation error of DC - PU and empirically
validate that DC - PU achieves higher accuracy and converges more stable than other
risk estimators of PU learning. Additionally, DC - PU also performs competitive
accuracy performance with practical PU learning methods.

1

Introduction

Positive and Negative (PN) learning refers to conventional supervised binary classification trained
with positive and negative labeled data [1]. Positive and Unlabeled (PU) learning is a specific case of
PN learning with weak supervision [2, 3], where, as its name suggests, it trains a binary classifier with
only positive labeled and unlabeled data but negative labeled data are unknown [1]. The paradigm
arises in various real-world scenarios, such as outlier detection and information retrieval [4, 5]. During
the past decade, there have been many practical PU learning methods mainly estimating pseudo-labels
for unlabeled data [6, 7, 8, 9]; and another research branch of PU learning is to formulate specific
risk estimators [10, 11, 12, 13], while some of them can be unbiased and consistent with the expected
risk of PN learning.
To distinctly discuss the risk estimators, we first give the problem assumption of PU learning, and in
this work, we concentrate on the two-sample problem setting [14]. To be specific, positive data are
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

