Exploring Diffusion Transformer Designs via Grafting

Keshigeyan Chandrasegaran ∗‡1,2 Michael Poli ∗1,2 Daniel Y. Fu 3,4 Dongjun Kim 1
Lea M. Hadzic 1 Manling Li 1,5 Agrim Gupta 6 Stefano Massaroli 2,7
Azalia Mirhoseini 1 Juan Carlos Niebles 1,8† Stefano Ermon 1† Li Fei-Fei 1†
1
Stanford University 2 Liquid AI 3 Together AI 4 UC San Diego
5
Northwestern University 6 Google DeepMind 7 RIKEN 8 Salesforce Research
grafting.stanford.edu

Abstract
Designing model architectures requires decisions such as selecting operators (e.g.,
attention, convolution) and configurations (e.g., depth, width). However, evaluating
the impact of these decisions on model quality requires costly pretraining, limiting
architectural investigation. Inspired by how new software is built on existing code,
we ask: can new architecture designs be studied using pretrained models? To
this end, we present grafting, a simple approach for editing pretrained diffusion
transformers (DiTs) to materialize new architectures under small compute budgets.
Informed by our analysis of activation behavior and attention locality, we construct
a testbed based on the DiT-XL/2 design to study the impact of grafting on model
quality. Using this testbed, we develop a family of hybrid designs via grafting:
replacing softmax attention with gated convolution, local attention, and linear
attention, and replacing MLPs with variable expansion ratio and convolutional
variants. Notably, many hybrid designs achieve good quality (FID: 2.38–2.64 vs.
2.27 for DiT-XL/2) using < 2% pretraining compute. We then graft a text-to-image
model (PixArt-Σ), achieving a 1.43× speedup with less than a 2% drop in GenEval
score. Finally, we present a case study that restructures DiT-XL/2 by converting
every pair of sequential transformer blocks into parallel blocks via grafting. This
reduces model depth by 2× and yields better quality (FID: 2.77) than other models
of comparable depth. Together, we show that new diffusion model designs can be
explored by grafting pretrained DiTs, with edits ranging from operator replacement
to architecture restructuring. Code and grafted models: grafting.stanford.edu.

1

Introduction

Model architecture design plays a central role in machine learning, alongside data, algorithms,
compute, and benchmarks. It defines a learnable function and entails key decisions, including
the choice of operators (e.g., attention, convolution) and configurations (e.g., model depth, width).
Despite this, insight into architectures—what works and what doesn’t—is difficult to obtain due to
the prohibitive costs of training models from scratch, especially in today’s foundation model era. As a
result, studying new architectures remains a challenge, particularly for generative models. Much like
how new software is built on existing code rather than written from scratch, can pretrained models
serve as scaffolds for studying new architectures? In this work, we investigate architectural editing of
pretrained models to study new architecture designs. We focus on diffusion transformers (DiTs), a
class of generative transformers widely used for image and video generation [1, 2, 3].
∗
‡

Equal contribution. † Equal senior authorship.
Part of this work was done at Liquid AI.
Correspondence to {keshik,poli}@stanford.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

