ToF-IP: Time-of-Flight Enhanced Sparse Inertial
Poser for Real-time Human Motion Capture

Yuan Yao1

Shifan Jiang1

Yangqing Hou1

Shihui Guo1∗

Chengxu Zuo1

Xinrui Chen1

Yipeng Qin2

1

2

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, UK

Abstract
Sparse inertial measurement units (IMUs) provide a portable, low-cost solution
for human motion tracking but struggle with error accumulation from drift and
sensor noise when estimating joint position through time-based linear acceleration
integration (i.e., indirect measurement). To address this, we propose ToF-IP, a novel
3D full-body pose estimation system that integrates Time-of-Flight (ToF) sensors
with sparse IMUs. The distinct advantage of our approach is that ToF sensors
provide direct distance measurements, effectively mitigating error accumulation
without relying on indirect time-based integration. From a hardware perspective,
we maintain the portability of existing solutions by attaching ToF sensors to selected
IMUs with a negligible volume increase of just 3%. On the software side, we
introduce two novel techniques to enhance multi-sensor integration: (i) a NodeCentric Data Integration strategy that leverages a Transformer encoder to explicitly
model both intra-node and inter-node data integration by treating each sensing node
as a token; and (ii) a Dynamic Spatial Positional Encoding scheme that encodes the
continuously changing spatial positions of wearable nodes as motion-conditioned
functions, enabling the model to better capture human body dynamics in the
embedding space. Additionally, we contribute a 208-minute human motion dataset
from 10 participants, including synchronized IMU-ToF measurements and groundtruth from optical tracking. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches such as PNP, achieving superior accuracy
in tracking complex and slow motions like Tai Chi, which remains challenging for
inertial-only methods.

1

Introduction

Sparse inertial measurement units (IMUs) have emerged as a promising solution for human motion
tracking due to their portability, low cost, and camera-free nature [8, 11, 20, 42]. However, despite
their potential, sparse IMUs face inherent numerical challenges due to their indirect method of
position estimation. Specifically, sparse IMUs estimate velocity and position by time-based linear
acceleration integration, a process highly prone to error accumulation from drift and sensor noise.
These errors are further amplified by the task’s reliance on human body forward kinematics, where
positional inaccuracies in intermediate joints propagate along the kinematic chain, leading to greater
errors at terminal joints. Consequently, accurately tracking subtle positional changes of key joints
during low-velocity motions (where the motion-signal-to-noise ratio is low) and enhancing the
long-term stability of sparse IMU systems remain persistent and critical challenges in this field [37].
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

