On the Convergence of Single-Timescale Actor-Critic

Navdeep Kumar∗
Technion

Priyank Agrawal,
Columbia University

Kfir Levy
Technion

Giorgia Ramponi
University of Zurich

Shie Mannor
Technion

Abstract
We analyze the global convergence of the single-timescale actor-critic (AC) algorithm for the infinite-horizon discounted Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with
finite state spaces. To this end, we introduce an elegant analytical framework for
handling complex, coupled recursions inherent in the algorithm. Leveraging this
framework, we establish that the algorithm converges to an ϵ-close globally optimal policy with a sample complexity of O(ϵ−3 ). This significantly improves upon
the existing complexity of O(ϵ−2 ) to achieve ϵ-close stationary policy, which is
equivalent to the complexity of O(ϵ−4 ) to achieve ϵ-close globally optimal policy
using gradient domination lemma. Furthermore, we demonstrate that to achieve
2
this improvement, the step sizes for both the actor and critic must decay as O(k − 3 )
− 12
with iteration k, diverging from the conventional O(k ) rates commonly used in
(non)convex optimization.

1

Introduction

Actor-critic algorithm, initially introduced in Konda and Tsitsiklis (1999), consist of two key components: the actor, which refines the policy towards an optimal solution based on feedback from
the critic, and the critic, which evaluates the value of the current policy (specifically the Q-value).
It has been adapted in various forms Schulman et al. (2017) and have emerged as one of the most
successful methods in reinforcement learning (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017; OpenAI et al.,
2019; Schrittwieser et al., 2020).
Despite their remarkable empirical success, the theoretical convergence of actor-critic algorithms
is not well understood. One line of research explores a two-time-scale version in which the actor
and the critic are effectively decoupled, greatly simplifying the analyses. This can be achieved via a
double-loop version, where the critic evaluates the policy in the inner loop, and the actor updates
the policy in the outer loop (Yang et al., 2019; Agarwal et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022; Kumar et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2019), or via a single-loop structure, but the critic updates much faster than the
actor (Borkar, 2022). In the later setup, the ratio of the learning rates of the actor and critic tends to
zero with the number of iterations. Essentially, the critic perceives the actor as nearly stationary, while
the actor views the critic as almost converged. Konda and Tsitsiklis (1999); Bhatnagar et al. (2009);
Chen et al. (2023); Hong et al. (2022); Wu et al. (2022); Xu et al. (2020b). It is important to note that
both frameworks are artificial constructs to ease the analysis, but they are often sample-inefficient
and therefore seldom used in practical implementations (Olshevsky and Gharesifard, 2023).
In this work, we focus on a single time-scale actor-critic framework where both the actor and the critic
are updated with each sample using similar step sizes Sutton and Barto (2018). While this framework
∗

corrosponding author email navdeep.kumar@zohomail.in

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

