Compositional Neural Network Verification via
Assume-Guarantee Reasoning

Hai Duong
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
hduong22@gmu.edu

David Shriver
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
dshriver@andrew.cmu.edu

ThanhVu Nguyen
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
tvn@gmu.edu

Matthew B. Dwyer
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
matthewbdwyer@virginia.edu

Abstract
Verifying the behavior of neural networks is necessary if developers are to confidently deploy them as parts of mission-critical systems. Toward this end, researchers have been actively developing a range of increasingly sophisticated and
scalable neural network verifiers. However, scaling verification to large networks
is challenging, at least in part due to the significant memory requirements of verification algorithms. In this paper, we propose an assume-guarantee compositional
framework, CoVeNN, that is parameterized by an underlying verifier to generate a
sequence of verification sub-problems to address this challenge. We present an iterative refinement-based strategy for computing assumptions that allow sub-problems
to retain sufficient accuracy. An evaluation using 7 neural networks and a total of
140 property specifications demonstrates that CoVeNN can verify nearly 7 times
more problems than state-of-the-art verifiers. CoVeNN is part of the NeuralSAT
verification project: https://github.com/dynaroars/neuralsat.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) techniques are advancing rapidly and have reached a level of performance
across a range of challenging tasks, e.g., in the medical [1, 2] and autonomous driving [3, 4, 5]
domains, that has led developers of critical systems to include ML models as components. To assure
that such systems are fit for deployment, researchers have developed a variety of formal verification
techniques to prove correctness properties of ML models, e.g., [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
Advances in neural network verification (NNV) have been dramatic since the landmark paper by
Katz et al. [6] which verified properties of models comprised of 6 linear layers. VNN-COMP [13, 14,
15, 16] has chronicled those advances by documenting the growth of benchmarks and verifiers. The
largest benchmark in the competition, as measured by the number of layers, has grown from 6 to 21;
where all but 2–3 of those layers are convolutional. Although these networks present are challenging
for verifiers, they do not reflect the complexity of modern ML models.
While the number of layers in a network is not the only factor that contributes to the difficulty of
a verification problem, it is directly related to its exponential complexity [6]. For SoTA verifiers,
like αβ-CROWN [8], NeuralSAT [17], and PyRAT [18], the worst-case involves each layer generating
multiple states which each serve as the starting point for verification of the suffix of the network from
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

