HyGen: Efficient LLM Serving via Elastic
Online-Offline Request Co-location

1

Ting Sun∗1 , Penghan Wang∗ 2 , Fan Lai1
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
suntcrick@gmail.com, wang6199@purdue.edu, fanlai@illinois.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have facilitated a wide range of applications with
distinct service-level objectives (SLOs), from latency-sensitive online tasks like
interactive chatbots to throughput-oriented offline workloads like data synthesis.
The existing deployment model, which dedicates machines to each workload,
simplifies SLO management but often leads to poor resource utilization.
This paper introduces HyGen, an interference-aware LLM serving system that
enables efficient co-location of online and offline workloads while preserving SLOs.
HyGen incorporates two key innovations: (1) performance control mechanisms,
including a latency predictor to estimate batch execution time and an SLO-aware
profiler to quantify latency interference, and (2) SLO-aware offline scheduling
policies that maximize serving throughput and prevent starvation. Our evaluation on
production workloads shows that HyGen achieves up to 3.9-5.8× throughput gains
over online and hybrid serving baselines, while ensuring latency SLOs. The code
of HyGen is publicly available at https://github.com/UIUC-MLSys/HyGen.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as transformative tools across diverse domains,
handling both latency-critical online requests (e.g., chatbot interactions [32, 39]) and throughputoriented offline tasks (e.g., document summarization [18]). Online serving demands low and stable
response times, measured by Time to First Token (TTFT) and Time Between Tokens (TBT), while
offline tasks prioritize high throughput and resource utilization, often processing large batches with
relaxed latency constraints. The disparity in these requirements has led most production deployments
to segregate online and offline serving onto separate clusters to avoid interference [41, 51, 54, 69].
However, real-world LLM workloads demonstrate significant temporal variations in request load.
Our analysis of production traces shows that in addition to the popular diurnal request arrival patterns,
online request rates can vary by up to 3× within minutes (Section 3). To meet latency requirements
under such bursty loads, service providers have to provision GPU resources for peak demand, as
minute-level resource scaling is often impractical due to infrastructure complexity and engineering
overhead [15, 64, 66]—leading to substantial underutilization during off-peak hours.
This resource overprovisioning suggests an opportunity to improve resource efficiency via hybrid
serving—co-locating online and offline workloads on the same inference engine instance. By
opportunistically padding online requests with offline requests during periods of low online load, the
system could maintain high GPU utilization while preserving latency guarantees for online requests.
However, realizing this opportunity requires addressing several fundamental challenges.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

