G2M: A Generalized Gaussian Mirror Method to
boost feature selection power

1

Hongyu Shen1 , Zhizhen Zhao1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{hongyu2, zhizhenz}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in false discovery rate (FDR)-controlled feature selection methods
have improved reliability by effectively limiting false positives, making them wellsuited for complex applications. A popular FDR-controlled framework called data
splitting uses the “mirror statistics" to select features. However, we find that the
unit variance assumption on mirror statistics could potentially limit the feature
selection power. To address this, we generalize the mirror statistics in the Gaussian
mirror framework and introduce a new approach called “generalized Gaussian
mirror" (G2 M), which adaptively learns the variance and forms new test statistics.
We demonstrate both theoretically and empirically that the proposed test statistics
achieve higher power than those of Gaussian mirror and data splitting. Comparisons
with other FDR-controlled frameworks on synthetic, semi-synthetic, and real
datasets highlight the superior performance of the G2 M method in achieving higher
power while maintaining FDR control. These findings suggest the potential for the
G2 M method for practical applications in real-world problems. Code is available
at: https://github.com/skyve2012/G2M.

1

Introduction

The complexity and high dimensionality of data in the era of big data make it challenging to develop
a universal feature selection algorithm that performs well in diverse datasets [18]. An algorithm
that works effectively for one type of data may fail for another. This variability complicates the
verification of feature selection results, thereby hindering the practical use of selected features. Such
challenges are especially prevalent in fields like healthcare, where there is no guarantee that identified
genes or metabolites [8] correlate well with response variables (e.g., diseases), making downstream
applications such as drug discovery even more difficult.
To address these challenges, recent research has focused on false discovery rate (FDR)-controlled
feature selection methods [4, 8]. These methods limit the number of false positives during feature
selection, providing a guarantee of the maximum number of incorrect selections. This property is
particularly advantageous in ultra-high-dimensional settings, such as genetic or RNA-sequencing
data.
Over the past decade, various methods have been proposed. Model-X knockoffs [4, 8] is a novel
framework designed to select relevant features while controlling the FDR. It generates “knockoff"
variables as references to the original design matrix and forms knockoff statistics. The symmetryabout-zero property of these statistics for null features enables FDR control under specified nominal
levels. Although theoretical guarantees exist for Gaussian design matrices [8, 37], challenges remain
for non-Gaussian settings due to the lack of theoretical assurances. Methods like Deep Knockoff [30],
KnockoffGAN [14], and DeepDRK [34] have been proposed to enhance selection power while
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

