Scaling Law with Learning Rate Annealing

Howe Tissue
h-sun20@tsinghua.org.cn

Venus Wang
wangxxing12@gmail.com

Lu Wang
wangluloveslezhi@gmail.com

Abstract
We find that the cross-entropy loss curves of neural language models empirically
adhere to a scaling law with learning rate (LR) annealing over training steps:
L(s) = L0 + A · S1−α − C · S2 , where L(s) is the validation loss at step s, S1 is the
area under the LR curve, S2 is the LR annealing area, and L0 , A, C, α are constant
parameters. This formulation accounts for two main effects: (1) power-law scaling
over data size, and (2) the additional loss reduction during LR annealing. Unlike
previous studies that only fit losses at final steps, our formulation captures the
entire training curve, allowing for parameter fitting using losses from any training
step. Applying the scaling law with LR annealing and fitting only one or two
training curves, we can accurately predict the loss at any given step under any
learning rate scheduler (LRS). This approach significantly reduces computational
cost in formulating scaling laws while providing more accuracy and expressiveness.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our findings hold across a range of hyperparameters and model architectures and can extend to scaling effect of model
sizes. Moreover, our formulation provides accurate insights into empirical results
observed in numerous previous studies, particularly those focusing on LR schedule
and annealing. This work is promising to enhance the understanding of LLM
training dynamics while democratizing scaling laws, and it is helpful to guide
researchers in refining training strategies for further LLMs.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have garnered significant academic and industrial
attention (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023). The scaling law suggests that the validation loss of
language models follows a power-law pattern as the size of the model and the data increase (Hestness
et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020; Henighan et al., 2020). This law provides a powerful framework for
forecasting LLM performances before large-scale training by fitting losses at smaller scales (OpenAI,
2023; DeepSeek-AI, 2024; Dubey et al., 2024). Numerous studies have explored the formulation to
model the scaling effect of LLMs in various different settings (Bahri et al., 2021; Hernandez et al.,
2021; Caballero et al., 2022; Michaud et al., 2023; Muennighoff et al., 2023).
However, typical scaling law formulations focus only on the final loss at the end of training (Hoffmann
et al., 2022). Specifically, previous approaches generally rely on a set of training runs and fit the
scaling law curve solely on the final loss from each run, while ignoring middle losses during training
which do not follow traditional scaling laws. This approach underutilizes the training compute and
fails to capture the training dynamics within each run. Further, the application of scaling laws in
LLM developments is limited since the loss curve through the whole training process is not modeled.
An expressive formulation that models full loss curves enables prediction of future training dynamics
and also offers insights on the learning process of LLMs.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

