Panoptic Captioning: An Equivalence Bridge for
Image and Text

Kun-Yu Lin
Hongjun Wang
Weining Ren
Visual AI Lab, The University of Hong Kong
kunyulin@hku.hk

{hjwang,weining}@connect.hku.hk

Kai Han˚
kaihanx@hku.hk

Abstract
This work introduces panoptic captioning, a novel task striving to seek the minimum text equivalent of images, which has broad potential applications. We take
the first step towards panoptic captioning by formulating it as a task of generating a comprehensive textual description for an image, which encapsulates all
entities, their respective locations and attributes, relationships among entities, as
well as global image state. Through an extensive evaluation, our work reveals
that state-of-the-art Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have limited performance in solving panoptic captioning. To address this, we propose
an effective data engine named PancapEngine to produce high-quality data and
a novel method named PancapChain to improve panoptic captioning. Specifically, our PancapEngine first detects diverse categories of entities in images by
an elaborate detection suite, and then generates required panoptic captions using
entity-aware prompts. Additionally, our PancapChain explicitly decouples the
challenging panoptic captioning task into multiple stages and generates panoptic
captions step by step. More importantly, we contribute a comprehensive metric
named PancapScore and a human-curated test set for reliable model evaluation.
Experiments show that our PancapChain-13B model can beat state-of-the-art opensource MLLMs like InternVL-2.5-78B and even surpass proprietary models like
GPT-4o and Gemini-2.0-Pro, demonstrating the effectiveness of our data engine
and method. Project page: https://visual-ai.github.io/pancap/

1

Introduction

Representing images by textual descriptions is a fundamental topic in computer vision and natural
language processing fields [1, 2], which benifits various applications, e.g., cross-modal retrieval [3, 4],
multi-modal learning [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10], safe content generation [11, 12]. While prior works have
explored various image caption formats, identifying the most effective format remains an open
challenge. The most concise captions, which describe only primary entity categories, often sacrifice
critical details like entity attributes. Conversely, highly detailed representations, such as paragraphs
detailing all pixel-level semantics and their interrelations, are computationally burdensome due to
their length. Inspired by these considerations, this work conceives of finding the minimum text
equivalent of an image, an ambitious yet challenging goal, which aims to develop a concise textual
description that comprehensively captures its essential semantic elements. Conceptually, achieving
minimal text equivalence for images can be seen as aligning images and text in the data space, while
existing image-text alignment models like CLIP [13] perform this in the embedding space. Such
text representations would maximize the utility of image information for learning and downstream
applications.
This work introduces the task of panoptic captioning, which strives to seek the minimum text
equivalent of images. Our work serves as the initial effort towards this challenging task. To make the
˚

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

