Temporal Representation Alignment:
Successor Features Enable Emergent Compositionality
in Robot Instruction Following

Vivek Myers∗

Bill Chunyuan Zheng∗

Anca Dragan

University of California, Berkeley

1

Kuan Fang1

Sergey Levine

Cornell University

Abstract
Effective task representations should facilitate compositionality, such that after
learning a variety of basic tasks, an agent can perform compound tasks consisting
of multiple steps simply by composing the representations of the constituent steps
together. While this is conceptually simple and appealing, it is not clear how to
automatically learn representations that enable this sort of compositionality. We
show that learning to associate the representations of current and future states with
a temporal alignment loss can improve compositional generalization, even in the
absence of any explicit subtask planning or reinforcement learning. We evaluate
our approach across diverse robotic manipulation tasks as well as in simulation,
showing substantial improvements for tasks specified with either language or goal
images.

1

Introduction

Compositionality is a core aspect of intelligent behavior, describing the ability to sequence previously
learned capabilities and solve new tasks [1]. In domains involving long-horizon decision-making
like robotics, various learning approaches have been proposed to enable this property, including
hierarchical learning [2], explicit subtask planning [3, 4, 5], and dynamic-programming-based
“stitching” [6, 7]. In practice, these techniques are often unstable or data-inefficient in real-world
robotics settings, making them difficult to scale [8].
By contrast, humans and animals are adept at quickly composing behaviors to reach new goals [1].
Possible explanations for these capabilities have been proposed, including the ability to perform
transitive inference [9], learn successor representations and causal models [10, 11], and plan with
world models [12]. In common among these theories is the idea of learning structured representations
of the world, which inference about which actions will lead to certain goals.
How might these concepts translate to algorithms for robot learning? In this work, we study how
adding an auxiliary successor representation learning objective affects compositional behavior in a
real-world tabletop manipulation setting. We show that learning this representation structure improves
the ability of the robot to perform long-horizon, compositionally-new tasks, specified either through
goal images or natural language instructions. Perhaps surprisingly, we found that this temporal
alignment does not need to be used for training the policy or test-time inference, as long as it is used
as an auxiliary loss over the same representations used for the tasks (Fig. 1).
We compare our method, Temporal Representation Alignment (TRA), against past imitation and
reinforcement learning baselines across a set of challenging multi-step manipulation tasks in the
BridgeData setup [13] as well as the OGBench simulation benchmark [14]. Unlike prior work in
setup, we focus on the compositional capabilities of the robot policies: as a whole, the tasks are
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
Website: https://tra-paper.github.io/
* Equal contribution.

