Online Experimental Design With Estimation-Regret
Trade-off Under Network Interference
Zhiheng Zhang∗ †
School of Statistics and Data Science, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics,
Shanghai 200433, P.R. China
Institute of Data Science and Statistics, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics,
Shanghai 200433, P.R. China
Zichen Wang∗
Department of ECE and CSL
UIUC

Abstract
Network interference has attracted significant attention in the field of causal inference, encapsulating various sociological behaviors in which the treatment assigned
to one individual within a network may affect the outcomes of others, such as their
neighbors. A key challenge in this setting is that standard causal inference methods
often assume independent treatment effects among individuals, which may not hold
in networked environments. To estimate interference-aware causal effects, a traditional approach is to inherit the independent settings, where practitioners randomly
assign experimental participants to different groups and compare their outcomes.
Although effective in offline settings, this strategy becomes problematic in sequential experiments, where suboptimal decisions persist, leading to substantial regret.
To address this issue, we introduce a unified interference-aware framework for
online experimental design. Compared to existing studies, we extend the definition
of arm space using the statistical concept of exposure mapping, which allows for
a more flexible and context-aware representation of treatment effects in network
settings. Crucially, we establish a Pareto-optimal trade-off between estimation
accuracy and regret under the network concerning both time period and arm space,
which remains superior to baseline models even without network interference. Furthermore, we propose an algorithmic implementation and discuss its generalization
in different learning settings and network topology.

1

Introduction

Network interference has attracted significant attention in the fields of causal inference [Leung,
2022a,b, 2023, Ma and Tresp, 2021] and online statistical learning theory [Agarwal et al., 2024,
Jia et al., 2024], due to its capability to capture more complex real-world interactions. Unlike the
Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA) assumption [Imbens, 2024], which posits that the
treatment assignment and outcomes are isolated to individuals, network interference acknowledges
the influences that treatments received by one individual may have on the outcomes of others within a
network. This model has found extensive application in economics [Arpino and Mattei, 2016, Munro
et al., 2021] and social sciences [Bandiera et al., 2009, Bond et al., 2012, Paluck et al., 2016, Imbens,
2024], where understanding such interconnected dynamics is crucial.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author. Email: zhangzhiheng@mail.shufe.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

