On the Existence and Complexity of Core-Stable Data
Exchanges

Jiaxin Song
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
jiaxins8@illinois.edu
Parnian Shahkar
University of California, Irvine
shahkarp@uci.edu

Pooja Ravi Kulkarni
Northwestern University
pooja.kulkarni@northwestern.edu
Bhaskar Ray Chaudhury
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
braycha@illinois.edu

Abstract
The rapid growth of data-driven technologies and the emergence of various datasharing paradigms have underscored the need for efficient and stable data exchange
protocols. In any such exchange, agents must carefully balance the benefit of
acquiring valuable data against the cost of sharing their own. Ensuring stability
in these exchanges is essential to prevent agents—or groups of agents—from
departing and conducting local (and potentially more favorable) exchanges among
themselves. To address this, we study a model where n agents participate in a
data exchange. Each agent has an associated payoff for the data acquired from
other agents and a cost incurred during sharing its own data. The net utility of
an agent is payoff minus the cost. We adapt the classical notion of core-stability
from cooperative game theory to data exchange. A data exchange is core-stable
if no subset of agents has any incentive to deviate to a different exchange. We
show that a core-stable data exchange is guaranteed to exist when agents have
concave payoff functions and convex cost functions– a setting typical in domains
like PAC learning and random discovery models. We show that relaxing either
of the foregoing conditions may result in the nonexistence of core-stable data
exchanges. Then, we prove that finding a core-stable exchange is PPAD-hard,
even when the potential blocking coalitions are restricted to constant size. This
provides the first known PPAD-hardness result for core-like guarantees in data
economics [BGI+ 24a, ACGM25]. Finally, we show that data exchange can be
modeled as a balanced n-person game. This immediately gives a pivoting algorithm
via Scarf’s theorem [Sca67]. We show that the pivoting algorithm works well in
practice through our empirical results.

1

Introduction

From accelerating vaccine development in healthcare to improving fraud detection in financial
services and advancing self-driving technology in the automotive industry, high-quality data has
become the bedrock of algorithmic decision-making and AI-driven solutions in the 21st century.
However, this valuable data is often fragmented i.e., distributed across multiple organizations. This
decentralization makes data sharing and collaboration critical for effective decision-making. For
instance, in healthcare, capturing nuanced relationships between disease patterns, socio-economic
factors, genetic information, and rare conditions requires training machine learning models on large,
diverse datasets that extend beyond curated datasets within individual organizations [RHL+ 20].
Similarly, in autonomous vehicle technology, self-driving cars must be exposed to a wide range
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

