Information-Driven Design of Imaging Systems

Henry Pinkard

Leyla Kabuli

Eric Markley

Tiffany Chien

Jiantao Jiao

Laura Waller

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Imaging systems have traditionally been designed to mimic the human eye and
produce visually interpretable measurements. Modern imaging systems, however,
process raw measurements computationally before or instead of human viewing.
As a result, the information content of raw measurements matters more than their
visual interpretability. Despite the importance of measurement information content,
current approaches for evaluating imaging system performance do not quantify it:
they instead either use alternative metrics that assess specific aspects of measurement quality or assess measurements indirectly with performance on secondary
tasks. We developed the theoretical foundations and a practical method to directly
quantify mutual information between noisy measurements and unknown objects.
By fitting probabilistic models to measurements and their noise characteristics,
our method estimates information by upper bounding its true value. By applying
gradient-based optimization to these estimates, we also developed a technique for
designing imaging systems called Information-Driven Encoder Analysis Learning (IDEAL). Our information estimates accurately captured system performance
differences across four imaging domains (color photography, radio astronomy,
lensless imaging, and microscopy). Systems designed with IDEAL matched the
performance of those designed with end-to-end optimization, the prevailing approach that jointly optimizes hardware and image processing algorithms. These
results establish mutual information as a universal performance metric for imaging systems that enables both computationally efficient design optimization and
evaluation in real-world conditions.
A video summary of this work can be found at:
https://waller-lab.github.io/EncodingInformationWebsite/

1

Introduction

The increasing utilization of computational processing in imaging systems removes the constraint that
they must produce human-interpretable measurements. Traditional imaging system designs produce
measurements that contain the specific visual patterns recognizable to human observers [1]. However,
these patterns are unnecessary for modern algorithms like deep neural networks, which can utilize
information in measurements regardless of how it appears: they can either transform measurements
into forms that make sense to humans, as computational imaging systems do [2], or they can analyze
measurements directly and bypass humans altogether.
This shift fundamentally changes what limits performance: not how well systems encode information
into human-perceptible patterns, but how much information they encode, regardless of its visual
appearance.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

