Object-centric Binding in Contrastive
Language-Image Pretraining

Rim Assouel1,2,3 Florian Bordes1 Pietro Astolfi1
Michal Drozdzal1 Adriana Romero-Soriano1,2,4,5
1
FAIR at Meta 2 Mila – Québec AI Institute
3
Université de Montréal 4 McGill University 5 Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Recent advances in vision language models (VLM) have been driven by contrastive
models such as CLIP, which learn to associate visual information with their
corresponding text descriptions. However, these models have limitations in
understanding complex compositional scenes involving multiple objects and their
spatial relationships. To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach that
diverges from commonly used strategies, which rely on the design of finegrained
hard-negative augmentations. Instead, our work focuses on integrating inductive
biases into CLIP-like models to improve their compositional understanding. To
that end, we introduce a binding module that connects a scene graph, derived
from a text description, with a slot-structured image representation, facilitating
a structured similarity assessment between the two modalities. We also leverage
relationships as text-conditioned visual constraints, thereby capturing the intricate
interactions between objects and their contextual relationships more effectively.
Our resulting model not only enhances the performance of CLIP-based models
in multi-object compositional understanding but also paves the way towards more
accurate and sample-efficient image-text matching of complex scenes.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in multi-modal representation learning have primarily been enabled by the introduction of CLIP [Radford et al., 2021]. CLIP learns aligned image-text representations from Internetscale data. Despite its success, CLIP exhibits limitations in understanding complex scenes composed
of multiple objects [Kamath et al., 2023, Yuksekgonul et al., 2023a, Doveh et al., 2023b, Paiss et al.,
2023]. For instance, while capable of recognizing individual objects, CLIP struggles with interpreting
spatial relationships among objects in the scene(e.g., “the cat is to the left of the mat” vs. “the cat
is to the right of the mat”) and adequately associating objects with their corresponding attributes (e.g.,
“a red square and a blue circle” vs. “a blue square and a red circle”). The process of acquiring this
compositional understanding of the world is known as the binding problem in the literature, and may
be decomposed into segregation, representation, and composition problems [Greff et al., 2020b].
Efforts to improve the compositional understanding of CLIP-like models have largely relied on
leveraging hard negative examples1 , either in the text space [Kalantidis et al., 2020, Yuksekgonul
et al., 2023b, Zhang et al., 2024b, Doveh et al., 2023b, Paiss et al., 2023] – to improve sensitivity to the
order of words and subtle textual differences – or the image space [Awal et al., 2024, Le et al., 2023,
Zhang et al., 2024a] – to improve sensitivity to subtle visual differences. Although these methods have
somewhat improved CLIP-like models’ performance on scene compositionality benchmarks [Parcalabescu et al., 2022, Zhao et al., 2022, Yuksekgonul et al., 2023b, Hsieh et al., 2023b], they do not
1

Hard-negatives are additional samples that either contain subtle visual changes in the image and/or subtle
linguistic/semantic difference in the caption and are sampled as negatives in the same batch.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

