MAPLE: Multi-scale Attribute-enhanced Prompt
Learning for Few-shot Whole Slide Image
Classification
Junjie Zhou1,2 , Wei Shao1,2∗, Yagao Yue1,2 , Wei Mu3 , Peng Wan1,2 , Qi Zhu1,2 , Daoqiang Zhang1,2
1

The College of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
The Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence Technology, Ministry of Education
3
The School of Engneering Medicine, Beihang University
junjiezhou@nuaa.edu.cn, shaowei20022005@nuaa.edu.cn, dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Prompt learning has emerged as a promising paradigm for adapting pre-trained
vision-language models (VLMs) to few-shot whole slide image (WSI) classification
by aligning visual features with textual representations, thereby reducing annotation
cost and enhancing model generalization. Nevertheless, existing methods typically
rely on slide-level prompts and fail to capture the subtype-specific phenotypic
variations of histological entities (e.g., nuclei, glands) that are critical for cancer
diagnosis. To address this gap, we propose Multi-scale Attribute-enhanced Prompt
Learning (MAPLE), a hierarchical framework for few-shot WSI classification that
jointly integrates multi-scale visual semantics and performs prediction at both the
entity and slide levels. Specifically, we first leverage large language models (LLMs)
to generate entity-level prompts that can help identify multi-scale histological entities and their phenotypic attributes, as well as slide-level prompts to capture global
visual descriptions. Then, an entity-guided cross-attention module is proposed
to generate entity-level features, followed by aligning with their corresponding
subtype-specific attributes for fine-grained entity-level prediction. To enrich entity
representations, we further develop a cross-scale entity graph learning module that
can update these representations by capturing their semantic correlations within
and across scales. The refined representations are then aggregated into a slide-level
representation and aligned with the corresponding prompts for slide-level prediction. Finally, we combine both entity-level and slide-level outputs to produce the
final prediction results. Results on three cancer cohorts confirm the effectiveness
of our approach in addressing few-shot pathology diagnosis tasks. Codes will be
available at https://github.com/JJ-ZHOU-Code/MAPLE.

1

Introduction

Whole slide images (WSIs) have become the clinical gold standard for cancer diagnosis, offering
gigapixel-resolution views of tissue architecture and cellular morphology [5, 6]. However, their huge
size (e.g., 150,000 × 150,000 pixels) and hierarchical structure render dense annotation of individual
patches impractical. To overcome this challenge, multiple instance learning (MIL) has emerged as an
effective way for weakly supervised WSI analysis [18, 32, 23, 39, 9], where each WSI is divided into
thousands of patches, encoded via a pre-trained feature extractor, and aggregated into a slide-level
representation for classification [17]. Beyond weak supervision, WSI classification faces another
critical challenge: the scarcity of the labeled images [26, 31]. This limitation stems from factors such
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

