DIsoN: Decentralized Isolation Networks for
Out-of-Distribution Detection in Medical Imaging

Felix Wagner1
Pramit Saha*1
Harry Anthony*1
1
J. Alison Noble
Konstantinos Kamnitsas1
1

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
felix.wagner@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Safe deployment of machine learning (ML) models in safety-critical domains
such as medical imaging requires detecting inputs with characteristics not seen
during training, known as out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, to prevent unreliable
predictions. Effective OOD detection after deployment could benefit from access to
the training data, enabling direct comparison between test samples and the training
data distribution to identify differences. State-of-the-art OOD detection methods,
however, either discard the training data after deployment or assume that test
samples and training data are centrally stored together, an assumption that rarely
holds in real-world settings. This is because shipping the training data with the
deployed model is usually impossible due to the size of training databases, as well
as proprietary or privacy constraints. We introduce the Isolation Network, an OOD
detection framework that quantifies the difficulty of separating a target test sample
from the training data by solving a binary classification task. We then propose
Decentralized Isolation Networks (DIsoN), which enables the comparison of
training and test data when data-sharing is impossible, by exchanging only model
parameters between the remote computational nodes of training and deployment.
We further extend DIsoN with class-conditioning, comparing a target sample solely
with training data of its predicted class. We evaluate DIsoN on four medical
imaging datasets (dermatology, chest X-ray, breast ultrasound, histopathology)
across 12 OOD detection tasks. DIsoN performs favorably against existing methods
while respecting data-privacy. This decentralized OOD detection framework opens
the way for a new type of service that ML developers could provide along with
their models: providing remote, secure utilization of their training data for OOD
detection services. Code available at: https://github.com/FelixWag/DIsoN

1

Introduction

Consider the standard setting where an organization, such as a software company, develops and trains
a Machine Learning (ML) model to perform a task of interest, for example disease classification
in medical images, using a training database. The organization then provides the model to a user
(e.g., a client) and deploys it, for example in a hospital, to make predictions on new test samples.
Because of heterogeneity in real-world data or user-error, a deployed model may receive inputs
unlike anything seen in the training data. Such inputs are called out-of-distribution (OOD) samples,
in contrast to the in-distribution (ID) samples that follow the distribution of the training data. For
example, OOD patterns in medical imaging can be artifacts from suboptimal acquisition or unknown
diseases. Performance of ML models often degrades unexpectedly on OOD data [43]. Thus, to ensure
safe deployment in safety-critical applications such as healthcare, deployment frameworks should
* Equal second-author contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

