Spurious-Aware Prototype Refinement for
Reliable Out-of-Distribution Detection
Reihaneh Zohrabi∗1

Hosein Hasani∗2 Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah2 Anna Rohrbach1
Marcus Rohrbach1 Mohammad Hossein Rohban2
1
TU Darmstadt 2 Sharif University of Technology
{reihaneh.zohrabi, anna.rohrbach, marcus.rohrbach}@tu-darmstadt.de
{hosein.hasani, soleymani, rohban}@sharif.edu

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial for ensuring the reliability and safety
of machine learning models in real-world applications, where they frequently face
data distributions unseen during training. Despite progress, existing methods are
often vulnerable to spurious correlations that mislead models and compromise
robustness. To address this, we propose SPROD, a novel prototype-based OOD detection approach that explicitly addresses the challenge posed by unknown spurious
correlations. Our post-hoc method refines class prototypes to mitigate bias from
spurious features without additional data or hyperparameter tuning, and is broadly
applicable across diverse backbones and OOD detection settings. We conduct a
comprehensive spurious correlation OOD detection benchmarking, comparing our
method against existing approaches and demonstrating its superior performance
across challenging OOD datasets, such as CelebA, Waterbirds, UrbanCars, Spurious Imagenet, and the newly introduced Animals MetaCoCo. On average, SPROD
improves AUROC by 4.8% and FPR@95 by 9.4% over the second best.

1

Introduction

Machine learning systems in real-world applications often encounter out-of-distribution (OOD)
inputs, which are samples from distributions different from the training data. These inputs require
cautious handling to prevent overconfident mispredictions during inference [1]. This makes OOD
detection crucial, as it aims to identify whether an input belongs to the known distribution or not. Yet,
deep neural networks, widely used in vision tasks [2–5], tend to make high-confidence predictions
even on OOD inputs, demonstrating their inability to recognize data outside the training distribution
as OOD [6, 7]. The reliability of OOD detection is especially critical in applications like healthcare
and autonomous driving, where overconfident predictions on unfamiliar data could have serious
consequences [8, 9].
Recent research on OOD detection aims to ensure the reliable deployment of DNNs [7, 10–13].
Despite many effective methods, their robustness can be undermined by spurious correlations in
the training data [14]. Studies indicate that models often rely on features that are statistically
informative but not causally representative of the object itself [15–17]. These misleading cues can act
as shortcuts, allowing models to achieve high accuracy without learning the core, causally relevant
features [18]. While spurious correlations have been well-explored in classification tasks [17, 19, 20],
their impact on OOD detection remains underexplored. Recently, [14] underscores the impact of
spurious correlations on OOD detection and introduces a formalization that categorizes OOD samples
into two types: spurious OODs (SP-OODs), which contain spurious attributes but lack core features,
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

