Fundamental Limitations in Pointwise Defences of
LLM Finetuning APIs

Xander Davies1,2∗ Eric Winsor1

Alexandra Souly1

Christian Schroeder de Witt2†
1

UK AI Security Institute

Tomek Korbak1

Robert Kirk1

Yarin Gal1,2†
2

University of Oxford

Abstract
LLM developers deploy technical mitigations to prevent fine-tuning misuse attacks,
attacks in which adversaries evade safeguards by fine-tuning the model using
a public API. Previous work has established several successful attacks against
specific fine-tuning API defences; however, prior attacks training and/or inference
samples can be easily flagged as suspicious. In this work, we show that defences
of fine-tuning APIs that seek to detect individual harmful training or inference
samples (‘pointwise’ detection) are fundamentally limited in their ability to prevent
fine-tuning attacks. We demonstrate a class of ‘pointwise-undetectable’ attacks
that repurpose semantic or syntactic variations in benign model outputs to covertly
transmit dangerous knowledge. Our attacks are composed solely of unsuspicious
benign samples that can be collected from the model before fine-tuning, meaning
training and inference samples are all individually benign and low-perplexity. We
test our attacks against the OpenAI fine-tuning API, finding they succeed in eliciting
answers to harmful multiple-choice questions, and that they evade an enhanced
monitoring system we design that successfully detects other fine-tuning attacks.
Our results showing fundamental limitations of defending against pointwise attacks
suggest focusing research efforts on mitigations towards multi-point defences.

1

Introduction

Providers of leading AI models have implemented technical safeguards to prevent models from being
misused in violation of usage policies, such as to facilitate illegal activity [OpenAI, 2024c, Google,
2024, Anthropic, 2024]. A substantial body of prior work has focused on prompt-based attacks
(‘jailbreaks’), which circumvent safeguards through adversarially constructed prompts.
Many providers also provide public fine-tuning APIs, where users supply data used to fine-tune a
model that is then served to the user [OpenAI, 2025, Google, 2024, Zhang et al., 2024]. Fine-tuning
APIs represent an additional attack surface where users may attempt to circumvent safeguards, such
as by fine-tuning to remove refusal behaviour [Qi et al., 2023, Zhan et al., 2024].
In response to the threat of fine-tuning attacks, providers have implemented safeguards on fine-tuning
APIs. For example, providers may screen training datasets and serve fine-tuned models behind
content filters [Bullwinkle et al., 2024, Farley et al., 2024].
In this work, we establish a core limitation in the use of pointwise content filters at train or test time:
anomaly detectors that discriminate malicious from benign content based on individual training or
∗
†

Correspondence to xander.davies@dsit.gov.uk.
Equal advising.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

