Physics-informed Reduced Order Modeling of
Time-dependent PDEs via Differentiable Solvers

Nima Hosseini Dashtbayaz∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, Canada
nhosse5@uwo.ca

Hesam Salehipour†
Autodesk Research
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
hesam.salehipour@autodesk.com

Adrian Butscher
Autodesk Research
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
adrian.butscher@autodesk.com

Nigel Morris
Autodesk Research
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
nigel.morris@autodesk.com

Abstract
Reduced-order modeling (ROM) of time-dependent and parameterized differential equations aims to accelerate the simulation of complex high-dimensional
systems by learning a compact latent manifold representation that captures the
characteristics of the solution fields and their time-dependent dynamics. Although
high-fidelity numerical solvers generate the training datasets, they have thus far
been excluded from the training process, causing the learned latent dynamics to
drift away from the discretized governing physics. This mismatch often limits
generalization and forecasting capabilities. In this work, we propose Physicsinformed ROM (Φ-ROM) by incorporating differentiable PDE solvers into the
training procedure. Specifically, the latent space dynamics and its dependence on
PDE parameters are shaped directly by the governing physics encoded in the solver,
ensuring a strong correspondence between the full and reduced systems. Our model
outperforms state-of-the-art data-driven ROMs and other physics-informed strategies by accurately generalizing to new dynamics arising from unseen parameters,
enabling long-term forecasting beyond the training horizon, maintaining continuity
in both time and space, and reducing the data cost. Furthermore, Φ-ROM learns to
recover and forecast the solution fields even when trained or evaluated with sparse
and irregular observations of the fields, providing a flexible framework for field
reconstruction and data assimilation. We demonstrate the framework’s robustness
across various PDE solvers and highlight its broad applicability by providing an
open-source JAX implementation that is readily extensible to other PDE systems
and differentiable solvers, available at https://phi-rom.github.io.

1

Introduction

Many-query problems in engineering, such as design optimization, optimal control, and inverse
problems, rely on exploring the solution manifold of a governing PDE in a large parameter space.
Reduced order modeling (ROM) provides an appealing alternative to computationally expensive
high-fidelity numerical simulations [1, 2]. Consider an autonomous time-dependent PDE of the form
u̇ = N (u; β), u(t, x) : T × Ω → Rm ,
(1)
∗

†

This study was conducted during the author’s internship at Autodesk.
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

