PreFM: Online Audio-Visual Event Parsing
via Predictive Future Modeling

Xiao Yu1,2 Yan Fang1,2 Yao Zhao1,2 Yunchao Wei1,2,B
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Visual Intelligence + X International Joint Laboratory
B
Corresponding Author
xiaoyu@bjtu.edu.cn

wychao1987@gmail.com

Abstract
Audio-visual event parsing plays a crucial role in understanding multimodal video
content, but existing methods typically rely on offline processing of entire videos
with huge model sizes, limiting their real-time applicability. We introduce Online
Audio-Visual Event Parsing (On-AVEP), a novel paradigm for parsing audio, visual, and audio-visual events by sequentially analyzing incoming video streams.
The On-AVEP task necessitates models with two key capabilities: (1) Accurate
online inference, to effectively distinguish events with unclear and limited context in online settings, and (2) Real-time efficiency, to balance high performance
with computational constraints. To cultivate these, we propose the Predictive
Future Modeling (PreFM) framework featured by (a) predictive multimodal future
modeling to infer and integrate beneficial future audio-visual cues, thereby enhancing contextual understanding and (b) modality-agnostic robust representation
along with focal temporal prioritization to improve precision and generalization.
Extensive experiments on the UnAV-100 and LLP datasets show PreFM significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin with significantly
fewer parameters, offering an insightful approach for real-time multimodal video
understanding. Code is available at https://github.com/XiaoYu-1123/PreFM.

1

Introduction

Multimodal learning [5, 72, 38, 79] is a significant topic in the machine learning research area.
Among various modalities, audio [62] and vision [60, 47] are the primary ways humans perceive the
world, making audio-visual learning (AVL) [19, 42, 35, 15] essential. Among various progress [43,
45, 31, 34] related to AVL, audio-visual event parsing (AVEP), i.e., understanding events in videos,
becomes increasingly important with the explosive growth of video content on streaming platforms.
AVEP involves processing both modality-aligned (audio-visual) and modality-misaligned (audio-only
or visual-only) events in video content. Prevailing methods [13, 14, 78] operate offline, analyzing
entire video sequences to utilize global context for accurate video events understanding. Though
offering precise predictions, the necessity of whole-video processing, often coupled with large
models and consequently high computational costs, makes these approaches unsuitable for real-time
applications that require immediate detection and swift responses in dynamic environments such as
autonomous driving [65, 70], wearable devices [26, 2], and human-robot interaction [50, 32].
To tackle these limitations, we introduce Online Audio-Visual Event Parsing (On-AVEP), a new
paradigm that parses audio, visual, and audio-visual events in streaming videos with an online
processing manner. The core characteristic of On-AVEP is to perceive the environmental state and
generate timely feedback using only historical and current multimodal information, while balancing
model performance and efficiency particularly in resource-aware and dynamic environments.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

