Meta-Learning an In-Context Transformer Model of
Human Higher Visual Cortex

Muquan Yu1,2

Hossein Adeli3

Margaret M. Henderson6

Leila Wehbe6
1

Mu Nan1

Jacob S. Prince4
Michael J. Tarr6

John A. Pyles5
Andrew F. Luo†1

2
3
University of Hong Kong
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Columbia University
5
6
Harvard University
University of Washington
Carnegie Mellon University

4

mqyu@link.cuhk.edu.hk

†

Corresponding author: aluo@hku.hk

Abstract
Understanding functional representations within higher visual cortex is a fundamental question in computational neuroscience. While artificial neural networks pretrained on large-scale datasets exhibit striking representational alignment with human neural responses, learning image-computable models of visual cortex relies on individual-level, large-scale fMRI datasets. The necessity
for expensive, time-intensive, and often impractical data acquisition limits the
generalizability of encoders to new subjects and stimuli. BraInCoRL uses incontext learning to predict voxelwise neural responses from few-shot examples
without any additional finetuning for novel subjects and stimuli. We leverage a
transformer architecture that can flexibly condition on a variable number of incontext image stimuli, learning an inductive bias over multiple subjects. During
training, we explicitly optimize the model for in-context learning. By jointly conditioning on image features and voxel activations, our model learns to directly
generate better performing voxelwise models of higher visual cortex. We demonstrate that BraInCoRL consistently outperforms existing voxelwise encoder designs
in a low-data regime when evaluated on entirely novel images, while also exhibiting strong test-time scaling behavior. The model also generalizes to an entirely
new visual fMRI dataset, which uses different subjects and fMRI data acquisition
parameters. Further, BraInCoRL facilitates better interpretability of neural signals
in higher visual cortex by attending to semantically relevant stimuli. Finally, we
show that our framework enables interpretable mappings from natural language
queries to voxel selectivity. Our code and model weights are publicly available at
https://github.com/leomqyu/BraInCoRL.

1

Introduction

Human visual cortex transforms raw sensory input into behaviorally-relevant representations of
the world. While early visual areas are characterized by retinotopic organization and selective
tuning to simple features such as edges and orientation gradients [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], higher-order visual
areas demonstrate selectivity to more abstract semantics and categories. While this functional
organization is largely consistent across individuals at a coarse scale, the spatial distribution and finegrained semantic selectivity within visual cortex varies due to structural differences, developmental
experience, and life-long learning [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Such functional inter-subject differences pose a
fundamental challenge in constructing generalizable models of higher visual cortex that can adapt to
subject-specific neural organization without exhaustive data collection for every individual.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

