A Implies B: Circuit Analysis in LLMs for
Propositional Logical Reasoning

Guan Zhe Hong∗ 1

Nishanth Dikkala2 Enming Luo2 Cyrus Rashtchian2
Xin Wang2 Rina Panigrahy2
1
Purdue University 2 Google Research
hong288@purdue.edu,
{nishanthd, enming, cyroid, wanxin, rinap}@google.com

Abstract
Due to the size and complexity of modern large language models (LLMs), it has
proven challenging to uncover the underlying mechanisms that models use to solve
reasoning problems. For instance, is their reasoning for a specific problem localized
to certain parts of the network? Do they break down the reasoning problem into
modular components that are then executed as sequential steps as we go deeper
in the model? To better understand the reasoning capability of LLMs, we study
a minimal propositional logic problem that requires combining multiple facts to
arrive at a solution. By studying this problem on Mistral and Gemma models, up
to 27B parameters, we illuminate the core components the models use to solve
such logic problems. From a mechanistic interpretability point of view, we use
causal mediation analysis to uncover the pathways and components of the LLMs’
reasoning processes. Then, we offer fine-grained insights into the functions of
attention heads in different layers. We not only find a sparse circuit that computes
the answer, but we decompose it into sub-circuits that have four distinct and
modular uses. Finally, we reveal that three distinct models – Mistral-7B, Gemma2-9B and Gemma-2-27B – contain analogous but not identical mechanisms.

1

Introduction

LLMs can solve many tasks in a few-shot manner (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019b).
One emergent ability of these models is solving problems that require planning and reasoning. In
particular, LLMs seem to have internal components that judiciously process and transform the
provided information. Unfortunately, it is not clear whether these models implement step-by-step
algorithms or whether they perform opaque computations to arrive at their answers.
The area of circuit analysis has emerged as a way to understand how transformers use their internal
components. While the definition of a circuit varies across different works, in this paper, our definition
follows Wang et al. (2023a). A circuit within a transformer is a collection of model components
(attention heads, neurons, etc.) with the edges in the circuit indicating the information flow between
the components in the forward pass. Circuit analysis can inform how to improve models, how
to debug errors, and how to explain patterns in their behavior. Despite the importance of these
goals, there has been a limited number of large-scale studies of interpreting LLM reasoning. Within
mechanistic interpretability (Geva et al., 2021; Vig et al., 2020; Hou et al., 2023), existing studies
either only provide partial evidence for the underlying circuits (Meng et al., 2022) or are limited to
small models like a 3-layer transformer or GPT-2 sized models (Merullo et al., 2024a; Rauker et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023a). Our goal is to go beyond this, uncovering the distinct roles of different
∗

Part of this work was done as a student researcher at Google Research.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

