Spik-NeRF:
Spiking Neural Networks for Neural Radiance Fields

Gang Wan1,∗, Qinlong Lan1,∗ , Zihan Li2,3 , Huimin Wang2,3 ,
Yitian Wu1 , Zhen Wang1 , Wanhua Li1 , Yufei Guo3,†
1
Space Engineering University, 2 Peking University
3
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC
casper_51@163.com, whulanql@whu.edu.cn, yfguo@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), as a biologically inspired neural network architecture, have garnered significant attention due to their exceptional energy efficiency
and increasing potential for various applications. In this work, we extend the use
of SNNs to neural rendering tasks and introduce Spik-NeRF (Spiking Neural Radiance Fields with Ternary Spike). We observe that the binary spike activation map of
traditional SNNs lacks sufficient information capacity, leading to information loss
and a subsequent decline in the performance of spiking neural rendering models.
To address this limitation, we propose the use of ternary spike neurons, which
enhance the information-carrying capacity in the spiking neural rendering model.
With ternary spike neurons, Spik-NeRF achieves performance that is on par with,
or nearly identical to, traditional ANN-based rendering models. Additionally, we
present a re-parameterization technique for inference that allows Spik-NeRF with
ternary spike neurons to retain the event-driven, multiplication-free advantages
typical of binary spike neurons. Furthermore, to further boost the performance
of Spik-NeRF, we employ a distillation method, using an ANN-based NeRF to
guide the training of our Spik-NeRF model, which is more compatible with the
our ternary neurons compared to the standard binary neurons and other neuron
forms. We evaluate Spik-NeRF on both realistic and synthetic scenes, and the
experimental results demonstrate that Spik-NeRF achieves rendering performance
comparable to ANN-based NeRF models.

1

Introduction

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) [36, 3, 9, 10, 35, 18, 17], known for their energy efficiency
compared to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), have garnered significant attention due to their eventdriven computation mechanism and the energy-saving advantages of multiplication-free operations.
SNNs have shown great potential in a wide range of applications. For instance, in [34], SNNs
were applied to object detection and demonstrated substantial energy efficiency improvements,
outperforming their ANN counterparts by orders of magnitude. In [16], SNNs were used to improve
the image de-occlusion task. In [33], SNNs were employed for sequential learning, showing better
performance and reduced energy consumption compared to ANNs with similar scale. Similarly,
in [26], SNNs were utilized for Human Activity Recognition (HAR), achieving up to a 94% reduction
in energy consumption while maintaining comparable accuracy to ANN-based models. Additionally,
SNNs have been applied to pose tracking [45], 3D recognition [37], and even autonomous driving [39],
∗
†

Equal Contributions.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

