STaR-Bets: Sequential Target-Recalculating Bets for
Tighter Confidence Intervals

Václav Voráček
Second Foundation˚
vasek.voracek@gmail.com

Francesco Orabona
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
francesco@orabona.com

Abstract
The construction of confidence intervals for the mean of a bounded random variable
is a classical problem in statistics with numerous applications in machine learning and virtually all scientific fields. In particular, obtaining the tightest possible
confidence intervals is vital every time the sampling of the random variables is
expensive. The current state-of-the-art method to construct confidence intervals
is by using betting algorithms. This is a very successful approach for deriving
optimal confidence sequences, even matching the rate of law of iterated logarithms.
However, in the fixed horizon setting, these approaches are either sub-optimal
or based on heuristic solutions with strong empirical performance but without a
finite-time
guarantee. Hence, no betting-based algorithm guaranteeing the optimal
b
σ 2 log δ1
Op
q width of the confidence intervals are known. This work bridges this
n
gap. We propose a betting-based algorithm to compute confidence intervals that
empirically outperforms the competitors. Our betting strategy uses the optimal
strategy in every step (in a certain sense), whereas the standard betting methods
choose a constant strategy in advance. Leveraging this fact results in strict improvements even for classical concentration inequalities, such as the ones of Hoeffding
or Bernstein. Moreover, we also prove that the width of our confidence intervals
is optimal up to an 1 ` op1q factor diminishing with n. The code is available
on github.

1

Introduction

Quantifying uncertainty is a cornerstone of statistical inference, and Confidence Intervals (CIs) remain
one of the most widely used tools for this purpose. Typically constructed within the frequentist
paradigm, a p1 ´ δq-CI provides a range of plausible values for an unknown parameter, derived from
observed data, with the guarantee that the procedure yields intervals covering the true parameter
value in 1 ´ δ proportion of hypothetical repetitions. In particular, in this paper we are interested in
providing CI for the mean of a bounded random variable. So, more formally, after observing n i.i.d.
samples X1 , . . . , Xn of a random variable in r0, 1s with mean µ, we want to find ln and un such that
Ptµ ď un u ě 1 ´ δ{2 and Ptµ ě ln u ě 1 ´ δ{2 .

(1)

We aim for narrow confidence intervals, i.e., small un ´ln . Classical methods provide well-established
procedures with optimal asymptotic properties, but their performance deteriorates when n is small.
This paper explores an alternative approach to constructing confidence intervals, based on the
framework of game-theoretic probability and sequential betting. In this framework, the algorithm
makes sequential bets on the values of Xi ´ m. If m is close to the true mean µ, then the random
˚

work done while with University of Tübingen.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

