Real-Time Scene-Adaptive Tone Mapping for
High-Dynamic Range Object Detection

Gongzhe Li1 Linwei Qiu2 Peibei Cao3 Fengying Xie2 Xiangyang Ji4 Qilin Sun1,5∗
1
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Tianmushan Laboratory, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
Point Spread Technology, China
gongzheli1@link.cuhk.edu.cn,∗ sunqilin@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
High-dynamic-range (HDR) images, with their rich tone and detail reproduction,
hold significant potential to enhance computer vision systems, particularly in autonomous driving. However, most neural networks for embedded systems are
trained on low-dynamic-range (LDR) inputs and suffer substantial performance
degradation when handling high-bit-depth HDR images due to the challenges
posed by extreme dynamic ranges. In this paper, we propose a novel tone mapping
method that not only bridges the gap between HDR RAW inputs and the LDR
sRGB requirements of detection networks but also achieves end-to-end optimization with downstream tasks. Instead of relying on the traditional image signal
processing (ISP) pipeline, we introduce neural photometric calibration to regularize
dynamic ranges and a scaling-invariant local tone mapping model to preserve image
details. In addition, our architecture also supports performance transfer finetuning,
enabling efficient adaptation from the LDR sRGB images to the HDR RAW images
with minimal cost. The proposed method outperforms traditional tone mapping
algorithms and advanced AI-ISP methods in challenging automotive HDR scenes.
Moreover, our pipeline achieves real-time processing of 4K high-bit-depth HDR
inputs on NVIDIA Jetson platforms.

1

Introduction

Real-world scenes can exhibit an immense dynamic range, reaching approximately 280 dB [1].
HDR cameras, by capturing a broader range of luminance, not only enrich visual content but also
substantially enhance visual perception and decision-making—ultimately improving navigation safety
[2]. State-of-the-art HDR sensors, such as the SONY IMX490 [3], deliver HDR RAW streams with
an impressive dynamic range of up to 140 dB and preserve unparalleled levels of unprocessed detail.
As a result, computer vision systems must handle challenging high-bit-depth HDR (e.g., 24-bit)
scenes and rapidly changing lighting conditions in real-time, such as transitions when entering or
exiting a tunnel.
Existing computer vision methods, particularly DNN-based object detection networks [4, 5, 6,
7, 8], are designed for low-dynamic-range (LDR) inputs processed through the traditional image
signal processor (ISP). When applied directly to high-bit-depth HDR imagery, these systems suffer
significant performance degradation 3.1 due to extreme luminance contrasts, leading to the collapse
of feature extraction in neural networks. A common solution to this problem is to utilize professional
HDR ISP, such as those described in [9, 10, 11], to convert HDR RAW images into LDR sRGB
equivalents through a series of image processing steps. A critical component of these ISP is tone
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
∗

Corresponding author.

