Robust Explanations of Graph Neural Networks via
Graph Curvatures

1

Yazheng Liu1 , Xi Zhang2 , Sihong Xie∗ 1 , Hui Xiong1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
2
The Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
yliu533@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, zhangx@bupt.edu.cn
{sihongxie,xionghui}@hkust-gz.edu.cn,

Abstract
Explaining graph neural networks (GNNs) is a key approach to improve the trustworthiness of GNN in high-stakes applications, such as finance and healthcare.
However, existing methods are vulnerable to perturbations, raising concerns about
explanation reliability. Prior methods enhance explanation robustness using model
retraining or explanation ensemble, with certain weaknesses. Retraining leads to
models that are different from the original target model and misleading explanations, while ensemble can produce contradictory results due to different inputs or
models. To improve explanation robustness without the above weaknesses, we
take an unexplored route and exploit the two edge geometry properties curvature
and resistance to enhance explanation robustness. We are the first to prove that
these geometric notions can be used to bound explanation robustness. We design
a general optimization algorithm to incorporate these geometric properties into a
wide spectrum of base GNN explanation methods to enhance the robustness of
base explanations. We empirically show that our method outperforms six base
explanation methods in robustness across nine datasets spanning node classification,
link prediction, and graph classification tasks, improving fidelity in 80% of the
cases and achieving up to a 10% relative improvement in robust performance. The
code is available at https://github.com/yazhengliu/Robust_explanation_curvature.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have proven their strengths in many real world applications, such as
social network modeling [1] and fraud detection [2]. To establish human trust in GNN prediction, it
is essential to make GNN predictions transparent to humans in risk-critical applications [3, 4]. For
example, biological researchers may seek to understand the reasoning behind GNN predictions for
protein function to verify whether the model is trustworthy. Many explanation methods have been
designed to explain the behavior of GNNs.
However, recent studies have shown that these explanation methods are vulnerable to perturbations
[5, 6, 7]. The fragility of explanations [8] can mislead users into making wrong decisions, raising
security concerns in high-stakes domains such as finance, healthcare, and criminal justice [9, 10].
For example, we consider a graph in which nodes represent customers and edges denote financial
relationships such as borrowing or transaction flows. We use GNNs to predict personal loan approvals.
If a loan is denied, customers may feel the need to understand the possible reasons and corrections
to improve the chance of future approval. When small changes in the graph structure (adding or
removing a transaction edge) lead to substantially different explanations, trust in the model may be
undermined as customers begin to question the decisions of companies.
∗

Sihong Xie is the the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

