Bandit and Delayed Feedback
in Online Structured Prediction
Yuki Shibukawa
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
shibu-yu762@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Shinsaku Sakaue∗
CyberAgent
Tokyo, Japan
shinsaku.sakaue@gmail.com

Taira Tsuchiya
The University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP
Tokyo, Japan
tsuchiya@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Kenji Yamanishi
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
yamanishi@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Online structured prediction is a task of sequentially predicting outputs with complex structures based on inputs and past observations, encompassing online classification. Recent studies showed that in the full-information setting, we can achieve
finite bounds on the surrogate regret, i.e., the extra target loss relative to the best
possible surrogate loss. In practice, however, full-information feedback is often unrealistic as it requires immediate access to the whole structure of complex outputs.
Motivated by this, we propose algorithms that work with less demanding feedback,
bandit and delayed feedback. For bandit feedback, by using a standard
√ inverseweighted gradient estimator, we achieve a surrogate regret bound of O( KT ) for
the time horizon T and the size of the output set K. However, K can be extremely
large when outputs are highly complex, resulting in an undesirable bound. To
address this issue, we propose another algorithm that achieves a surrogate regret
bound of O(T 2/3 ), which is independent of K. This is achieved with a carefully
designed pseudo-inverse matrix estimator. Furthermore, we numerically compare
the performance of these algorithms, as well as existing ones. Regarding delayed
feedback, we provide algorithms and regret analyses that cover various scenarios, including full-information and bandit feedback, as well as fixed and variable
delays.

1

Introduction

In many machine learning problems, given an input vector from a set X of input vectors, we aim to
predict a vector in a finite output space Y. Multiclass classification is one of the simplest examples,
while in other cases, output spaces may have more complex structures. Structured prediction refers to
such a class of problems with structured output spaces, including multiclass classification, multilabel
classification, ranking, and ordinal regression, and it has applications in various fields, ranging from
natural language processing to bioinformatics [2, 43]. In structured prediction, training models that
directly predict outputs in complex discrete output spaces is typically challenging. Therefore, we
often adopt the surrogate loss framework [3]—define an intermediate space of score vectors and
train models that estimate score vectors from inputs based on surrogate loss functions. Examples of
∗

This work was primarily conducted during the period when SS was affiliated with the University of Tokyo
and RIKEN AIP.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

