RGB-Only Supervised Camera Parameter
Optimization in Dynamic Scenes

Fang Li
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
fangli3@illinois.edu

Hao Zhang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
haoz19@illinois.edu

Narendra Ahuja
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
n-ahuja@illinois.edu

Figure 1: (a) Overview of our RGB-only supervised camera parameter optimization. (b) Front
view of the 3D Gaussian field reconstructed by our camera estimates at time t. (c) 2D renderings
(RGB and depth) at time t with quantitative metrics. Our optimization is not only significantly more
efficient and accurate, but also avoids overfitting the reconstruction to specific viewpoints. Record3D
is a mobile app that factory-calibrates the intrinsic and uses LiDAR sensors to collect metric depth
for camera pose estimates, thus does not have valid runtime.

Abstract
Although COLMAP has long remained the predominant method for camera parameter optimization in static scenes, it is constrained by its lengthy runtime and
reliance on ground truth (GT) motion masks for application to dynamic scenes.
Many efforts attempted to improve it by incorporating more priors as supervision
such as GT focal length, motion masks, 3D point clouds, camera poses, and metric
depth, which, however, are typically unavailable in casually captured RGB videos.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for more accurate and efficient camera
parameter optimization in dynamic scenes solely supervised by a single RGB video,
dubbed ROS-Cam. Our method consists of three key components: (1) Patch-wise
Tracking Filters, to establish robust and maximally sparse hinge-like relations
across the RGB video. (2) Outlier-aware Joint Optimization, for efficient camera
parameter optimization by adaptive down-weighting of moving outliers, without
reliance on motion priors. (3) A Two-stage Optimization Strategy, to enhance stability and optimization speed by a trade-off between the Softplus limits and convex
minima in losses. We visually and numerically evaluate our camera estimates. To
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

