Shift Before You Learn: Enabling Low-Rank
Representations in Reinforcement Learning

Bastien Dubail
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
bastdub@kth.se

Stefan Stojanovic
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
stesto@kth.se

Alexandre Proutiere
KTH, Digital Futures, Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
Low-rank structure is a common implicit assumption in many modern reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. For instance, reward-free and goal-conditioned
RL methods often presume that the successor measure admits a low-rank representation. In this work, we challenge this assumption by first remarking that the
successor measure itself is not approximately low-rank. Instead, we demonstrate
that a low-rank structure naturally emerges in the shifted successor measure, which
captures the system dynamics after bypassing a few initial transitions. We provide
finite-sample performance guarantees for the entry-wise estimation of a low-rank
approximation of the shifted successor measure from sampled entries. Our analysis
reveals that both the approximation and estimation errors are primarily governed
by a newly introduced quantitity: the spectral recoverability of the corresponding
matrix. To bound this parameter, we derive a new class of functional inequalities
for Markov chains that we call Type II Poincaré inequalities and from which we
can quantify the amount of shift needed for effective low-rank approximation and
estimation. This analysis shows in particular that the required shift depends on
decay of the high-order singular values of the shifted successor measure and is
hence typically small in practice. Additionally, we establish a connection between
the necessary shift and the local mixing properties of the underlying dynamical
system, which provides a natural way of selecting the shift. Finally, we validate our
theoretical findings with experiments, and demonstrate that shifting the successor
measure indeed leads to improved performance in goal-conditioned RL.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), the complexity of environment dynamics requires structural assumptions to achieve statistical efficiency. A widely adopted approach assumes that key quantities
admit low-dimensional feature representations, effectively imposing low-rank structure on matrices
underlying various RL components such as the Q-function (57; 55; 60), transition kernel (2; 33; 59),
graph Laplacian (46; 47; 64), and successor representation (15; 58; 5). Some works even aim to learn
universal low-dimensional representations transferable across tasks, as in Forward-Backward models
(62; 63) and goal-conditioned RL (3; 21). Despite their empirical success and emerging theoretical
analyses, fundamental questions remain:
Why should low-rank structure arise in MDPs, and under what conditions does it yield accurate,
learnable representations?
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

