Near-Optimal Regret-Queue Length Tradeoff
in Online Learning for Two-Sided Markets

Zixian Yang
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
zixian@umich.edu
Sushil Mahavir Varma
Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
sushilv@umich.edu
Lei Ying
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
leiying@umich.edu

Abstract
We study a two-sided market, wherein, price-sensitive heterogeneous customers
and servers arrive and join their respective queues. A compatible customer-server
pair can then be matched by the platform, at which point, they leave the system.
Our objective is to design pricing and matching algorithms that maximize the
platform’s profit, while maintaining reasonable queue lengths. As the demand
and supply curves governing the price-dependent arrival rates may not be known
in practice, we design a novel online-learning-based pricing policy and establish
its near-optimality. In particular, we prove a tradeoff among three performance
metrics: ÕpT 1´γ q regret, ÕpT γ{2 q average queue length, and ÕpT γ q maximum
queue length for γ P p0, 1{6s, significantly improving over existing results [1].
Moreover, barring the permissible range of γ, we show that this trade-off between
regret and average queue length is optimal up to logarithmic factors under a class of
policies, matching the optimal one as in [2] which assumes the demand and supply
curves to be known. Our proposed policy has two noteworthy features: a dynamic
component that optimizes the tradeoff between low regret and small queue lengths;
and a probabilistic component that resolves the tension between obtaining useful
samples for fast learning and maintaining small queue lengths.

1

Introduction

We study a two-sided market, wherein, heterogeneous customers and servers arrive into the system
and join their respective queues. Any compatible customer-server pair can then be matched, at which
point they leave the system instantaneously. More formally, the system is described by a bipartite
graph, where the vertices are customer and server queues while the edges represent compatibility
between them.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

