Optimality and NP-Hardness of Transformers in
Learning Markovian Dynamical Functions

Yanna Ding1∗, Songtao Lu2 , Yingdong Lu3 , Tomasz Nowicki3 , Jianxi Gao1
1
Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
IBM Research
{dingy6,gaoj8}@rpi.edu, stlu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk,
{yingdong,tnowicki}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Transformer architectures can solve unseen tasks based on input-output pairs
in a given prompt due to in-context learning (ICL). Existing theoretical studies
on ICL have mainly focused on linear regression tasks, often with i.i.d. inputs.
To understand how transformers express ICL when modeling dynamics-driven
functions, we investigate Markovian function learning through a structured ICL
setup, where we characterize the loss landscape to reveal underlying optimization
behaviors. Specifically, we (1) provide the closed-form expression of the global
minimizer (in an enlarged parameter space) for a single-layer linear self-attention
(LSA) model; (2) prove that recovering transformer parameters that realize the
optimal solution is NP-hard in general, revealing a fundamental limitation of onelayer LSA in representing structured dynamical functions; and (3) supply a novel
interpretation of a multilayer LSA as performing preconditioned gradient descent
to optimize multiple objectives beyond the square loss. These theoretical results
are numerically validated using simplified transformers.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based language models have demonstrated remarkable in-context learning (ICL) capabilities, predicting outputs for unseen inputs using only examples provided in the prompt, without
parameter updates [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. This phenomenon has motivated a growing body of theoretical work aiming to understand the mechanisms underlying ICL. Much of this work focuses on
regression tasks with i.i.d. Gaussian inputs [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 11, 18, 19, 20, 21],
showing that transformers can emulate classical algorithms like gradient descent. Others have
begun to explore the limitations of transformer expressivity, especially under structured inputs [22, 23, 24, 25, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29], revealing that even moderate-depth transformers struggle
with certain algorithmic tasks.
A complementary learning scenario involves predicting dynamical functions from temporally structured data, such as those governed by Markovian processes. Recent studies have made progress in
understanding how transformers perform next-token prediction in structured single-sequence settings,
including Markov chains [24, 22, 23], autoregressive models [30], and causal sequences [28, 29]. In
contrast, we focus on a different task formulation: learning latent transition dynamics from multiple
in-context sequences, where the model must integrate structural information across examples to
generalize to a new sequence.
∗

Yanna Ding, Songtao Lu, Yingdong Lu, and Tomasz Nowicki contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

