Multi-Objective Hyperparameter Selection via
Hypothesis Testing on Reliability Graphs

Amirmohammad Farzaneh Osvaldo Simeone
Centre for Intelligent Information Processing Systems
Department of Engineering
King’s College London
London, United Kingdom
{amirmohammad.farzaneh,osvaldo.simeone}@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
The selection of hyperparameters, such as prompt templates in large language
models (LLMs), must often strike a balance between reliability and cost. In
many cases, structural relationships between the expected reliability levels of the
hyperparameters can be inferred from prior information and held-out data – e.g.,
longer prompt templates may be more detailed and thus more reliable. However,
existing hyperparameter selection methods either do not provide formal reliability
guarantees or are unable to incorporate structured knowledge in the hyperparameter
space. This paper introduces reliability graph-based Pareto testing (RG-PT), a
novel multi-objective hyperparameter selection framework that maintains formal
reliability guarantees in terms of false discovery rate (FDR), while accounting for
known relationships among hyperparameters via a directed acyclic graph. Edges in
the graph reflect expected reliability and cost trade-offs among hyperparameters,
which are inferred via the Bradley-Terry (BT) ranking model from prior information
and held-out data. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that RG-PT significantly
outperforms existing methods such as learn-then-test (LTT) and Pareto testing (PT)
through a more efficient exploration of the hyperparameter space.

1

Introduction

1.1

Context and Motivation

Consider the problem of selecting prompt templates for a large language model (LLM)-based
sentiment analysis task [1]. In this setting, the LLM receives a natural language prompt template
along with a movie review as input, and the goal is to determine whether the sentiment expressed
in the review is positive or negative. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the prompt templates λ are chosen
from a set of pre-determined choices Λ, and the objective is to identify prompt templates λ that elicit
consistently accurate responses across inputs [1].
Longer prompts often yield more reliable outputs [2]. However, they are also more costly to the
end user when pay-per-token billing schemes are applied. This is commonly the case for enterprise
software incorporating AI-driven analytics or hosted LLM endpoints via the LLM application
programming interface (API) [3]. As exemplified in Fig. 1a, this suggests that the reliability of
different prompt templates follows a directed acyclic graph (DAG) structure with nodes closer to the
roots corresponding to more costly prompt templates with a higher expected reliability.
An ideal prompt engineering scheme would apply hyperparameter selection methods capable of
selecting prompt templates that are as short as possible while enduring formal reliability guarantees.
Existing hyperparameter selection methods, however, either do not meet formal reliability require39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

