Assignments for Congestion-Averse Agents:
Seeking Competitive and Envy-Free Solutions

Jiehua Chen
Institute of Logic and Computation
TU Wien
Austria
jchen@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Jiong Guo
School of Computer Science and Technology
Shandong University
Qingdao, China
jguo@sdu.edu.cn

Yinghui Wen
Digital and Intelligent Center
Shandong Institute of Information Technology Industry Development
Jinan, China
yinghui.wen@foxmail.com

Abstract
We investigate congested assignment problems where agents have preferences over
both resources and their associated congestion levels. These agents are averse
towards congestion, i.e., consistently preferring lower congestion for identical
resources. Such scenarios are ubiquitous across domains including traffic management and school choice, where fair resource allocation is essential. We focus on the
concept of competitiveness, recently introduced by Bogomolnaia and Moulin [6],
and contribute a polynomial-time algorithm that determines competitiveness, resolving their open question. Additionally, we explore two optimization variants
of congested assignments by examining the problem of finding envy-free or maximally competitive assignments that guarantee a certain amount of social welfare
for every agent, termed top-guarantees [6]. While we prove that both problems
are NP-hard, we develop parameterized algorithms with respect to the number of
agents or resources.

1

Introduction

In the realm of resource allocation and task assignment, the challenge often extends beyond mere
allocation–it entails navigating the intricate balance between individual preferences and the congestions that other agents incur. Congested assignments epitomize this challenge and address the
situation when agents are congestion-averse, i.e., the preferences are negatively correlated with the
number of agents simultaneously assigned to the same resource, the so-called congestion level.
Congested assignments are pertinent in numerous real-world scenarios: From urban traffic management, where drivers select routes while considering traffic congestion, to educational contexts like
school choice [35, 12] or student exercise slot allocations, where students’ choices are influenced by
class sizes. Similarly, in cloud computing, allocating computational tasks to servers must account
for server load. In each of these scenarios, assigning an agent–whether a driver, a student, or a task
executor–to a resource (jointly referred to as a post) may introduce additional costs, with detrimental
effects on other agents. For example, the productivity in a shared office space diminishes as more
people use it. Similarly, in traffic management, drivers might opt for less crowded routes since the
mental load increases significantly with even a small increase in traffic. In other words, the agents’
individual preference over a post is inversely proportional to its congestion level.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

