Integration Matters for Learning PDEs with
Backward SDEs
Sungje Park
University of Southern California
sungjepa@usc.edu

Stephen Tu
University of Southern California
stephen.tu@usc.edu

Abstract
Backward stochastic differential equation (BSDE)-based deep learning methods
provide an alternative to Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) for solving
high-dimensional partial differential equations (PDEs), offering potential algorithmic advantages in settings such as stochastic optimal control, where the PDEs of
interest are tied to an underlying dynamical system. However, standard BSDEbased solvers have empirically been shown to underperform relative to PINNs in
the literature. In this paper, we identify the root cause of this performance gap as
a discretization bias introduced by the standard Euler-Maruyama (EM) integration scheme applied to one-step self-consistency BSDE losses, which shifts the
optimization landscape off target. We find that this bias cannot be satisfactorily
addressed through finer step-sizes or multi-step self-consistency losses. To properly
handle this issue, we propose a Stratonovich-based BSDE formulation, which we
implement with stochastic Heun integration. We show that our proposed approach
completely eliminates the bias issues faced by EM integration. Furthermore, our
empirical results show that our Heun-based BSDE method consistently outperforms
EM-based variants and achieves competitive results with PINNs across multiple
high-dimensional benchmarks. Our findings highlight the critical role of integration
schemes in BSDE-based PDE solvers, an algorithmic detail that has received little
attention thus far in the literature.

1

Introduction

Numerical solutions to partial differential equations (PDEs) are foundational to modeling problems
across a diverse set of fields in science and engineering. However, due to the curse of dimensionality
of traditional numerical methods, application of classic solvers to high dimensional PDEs is computationally intractable. In recent years, motivated by the success of deep learning methods, both
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) [1, 2] and backward stochastic differential equation
(BSDE) methods [3–5] have emerged as promising alternatives to classic techniques.
Despite the widespread popularity of PINNs methods, in this paper we focus on the use of BSDEbased methods for solving high-dimensional PDEs. The key difference between PINNs and BSDE
methods is that while PINNs minimize the PDE residual directly on randomly sampled collocation
points, BSDE methods reformulate PDEs as forward-backward SDEs (FBSDEs) and simulate
the resulting stochastic processes to minimize the discrepancy between predicted and terminal
conditions at the end of the forward SDE trajectory [3], or across an intermediate time-horizon
via self-consistency losses [4, 5]. BSDE methods are especially well-suited for high-dimensional
problems where there is underlying dynamics—such as in stochastic optimal control or quantitative
finance—as the crux of these methods involving sampling over stochastic trajectories rather than
over bounded spatial domains. Furthermore, BSDE methods offers a significant advantage in
problems where the governing equations of the PDE are unknown and can only be accessed through
simulation [6], as in model-free optimal control (cf. Appendix C for more details). In contrast, PINNs
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

