Zero-Shot Context Generalization in Reinforcement
Learning from Few Training Contexts

∗
James Chapman
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
chapman20j@math.ucla.edu

∗
Kedar Karhadkar
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
kedar@math.ucla.edu

Guido Montúfar
Departments of Mathematics and of Statistics & Data Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
montufar@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved remarkable success across multiple domains, including competitive games, natural language processing, and
robotics. Despite these advancements, policies trained via DRL often struggle to
generalize to evaluation environments with different parameters. This challenge is
typically addressed by training with multiple contexts and/or by leveraging additional structure in the problem. However, obtaining sufficient training data across
diverse contexts can be impractical in real-world applications. In this work, we consider contextual Markov decision processes (CMDPs) with transition and reward
functions that exhibit regularity in context parameters. We introduce the contextenhanced Bellman equation (CEBE) to improve generalization when training on a
single context. We prove both analytically and empirically that the CEBE yields a
first-order approximation to the Q-function trained across multiple contexts. We
then derive context sample enhancement (CSE) as an efficient data augmentation
method for approximating the CEBE in deterministic control environments. We numerically validate the performance of CSE in simulation environments, showcasing
its potential to improve generalization in DRL.1

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has been deployed successfully in many problems requiring decision
making and multi-step optimization. Despite these successes, reinforcement learning still struggles
to perform well at test time in real-world scenarios. This is a well documented phenomenon with
multiple causes (e.g., sim-to-real distribution shift, limited contextual data) (Zhao et al., 2020; Ghosh
et al., 2021; Kirk et al., 2023). This places out-of-distribution generalization as a fundamental
challenge of reinforcement learning.
One approach to address generalization in reinforcement learning is to use continual learning in
which some training occurs at deployment in the testing environment (Khetarpal et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2023). However, this is not always feasible or desirable, as, for instance, safety considerations
*
1

Equal Contribution.
Code: https://github.com/chapman20j/ZeroShotGeneralization-CMDPs.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

