Subgraph Federated Learning via Spectral Methods

Javad Aliakbari1

Johan Östman2
1

Ashkan Panahi1

Chalmers University of Technology

2

Alexandre Graell i Amat1
AI Sweden

Abstract
We consider the problem of federated learning (FL) with graph-structured data
distributed across multiple clients. In particular, we address the prevalent scenario
of interconnected subgraphs, where interconnections between clients significantly
influence the learning process. Existing approaches suffer from critical limitations,
either requiring the exchange of sensitive node embeddings, thereby posing privacy
risks, or relying on computationally-intensive steps, which hinders scalability. To
tackle these challenges, we propose F ED L AP, a novel framework that leverages
global structure information via Laplacian smoothing in the spectral domain to
effectively capture inter-node dependencies while ensuring privacy and scalability.
We provide a formal analysis of the privacy of F ED L AP, demonstrating that it
preserves privacy. Notably, F ED L AP is the first subgraph FL scheme with strong
privacy guarantees. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that
F ED L AP achieves competitive or superior utility compared to existing techniques.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data naturally arise in a wide variety of real-world scenarios, with nodes representing
distinct entities and edges reflecting relationships among them. Illustrative examples include antimoney laundering, social networks, and supply chains.
For graph-structured data, graph neural networks (GNNs) [1–3] have demonstrated remarkable
effectiveness in tasks such as drug discovery, social network analysis, and traffic prediction, by
capturing both node and structural information. However, in many real-world scenarios, as in the
examples above, graph data is distributed across multiple parties, hindering direct data sharing due
to regulatory, privacy, or proprietary considerations. This has led to the emergence of federated
learning (FL) [4] as a promising paradigm to harness globally distributed graph data while preserving
local data privacy. A particularly common setting for graph-structured data is Subgraph Federated
Learning (SFL) [5], where each client holds a disjoint subgraph of a globally connected graph.
Several SFL methods have been proposed [5–11], but most except [11] involve sharing node features
or learned embeddings, raising critical privacy concerns. Furthermore, attaining robust predictive
accuracy under limited information exchange remains challenging. This reflects the well-known
accuracy–privacy–communication trilemma [12], where improving one aspect often comes at the
expense of the others. More recently, [13] proposed F ED S TRUCT, an SFL method that avoids sharing
sensitive features by leveraging global graph structure. Although F ED S TRUCT offers stronger privacy
than earlier methods (as clients share significantly less information), it still involves sharing partial
adjacency matrix information and node structure features, which can potentially leak information. In
addition, it lacks a formal privacy analysis and demands considerable communication overhead.
Our Contribution. We tackle the challenge of SFL for node classification, where a large graph is
partitioned into disjoint subgraphs held by different clients. We adopt the common setting considered
in [13, 10], where clients know how their subgraphs connect to others, but neither the central server
nor any client can access the internal features or edges of other subgraphs. This scenario naturally
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

