Meta-learning how to Share Credit among
Macro-Actions
Ionel-Alexandru Hosu
Politehnica University of Bucharest
Bucharest, Romania
ionel.hosu@cs.pub.ro

Traian Rebedea
NVIDIA &
Politehnica University of Bucharest
Bucharest, Romania
trebedea@nvidia.com

Razvan Pascanu
Mila – Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute
Montreal, Canada
r.pascanu@gmail.com

Abstract
One proposed mechanism to improve exploration in reinforcement learning is
through the use of macro-actions. Paradoxically though, in many scenarios the
naive addition of macro-actions does not lead to better exploration, but rather the
opposite. It has been argued that this was caused by adding non-useful macros and
multiple works have focused on mechanisms to discover effectively environmentspecific useful macros. In this work, we take a slightly different perspective. We
argue that the difficulty stems from the trade-offs between reducing the average
number of decisions per episode versus increasing the size of the action space.
Namely, one typically treats each potential macro-action as independent and atomic,
hence strictly increasing the search space and making typical exploration strategies
inefficient. To address this problem we propose a novel regularization term that
exploits the relationship between actions and macro-actions to improve the credit
assignment mechanism by reducing the effective dimension of the action space
and, therefore, improving exploration. The term relies on a similarity matrix that
is meta-learned jointly with learning the desired policy. We empirically validate
our strategy looking at macro-actions in Atari games, and the StreetFighter II
environment. Our results show significant improvements over the R AINBOWDQN baseline in all environments. Additionally, we show that the macro-action
similarity is transferable to related environments. We believe this work is a small
but important step towards understanding how the similarity-imposed geometry
on the action space can be exploited to improve credit assignment and exploration,
therefore making learning more effective.

1

Introduction

While Reinforcement Learning (RL) lead to a plethora of successes [e.g. 1–5], being an integral
component of modern LLMs as well [e.g. 6], efficient exploration remains a significant challenge.
This is particularly so in environments with large or complex action spaces or sparse rewards that
require to do credit assignments over long episodes. One potential approach to simplify exploration
is the use of macro-actions [e.g. 7–10], fixed sequences of actions that are frequently used by the
policy. By expanding the action space with macro-actions, and using them efficiently, an agent can
reduce considerably the number of decisions that it needs to take during an episode, hence making
the exploration easier.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

