Stable Port-Hamiltonian Neural Networks
Fabian J. Roth, Dominik K. Klein, Maximilian Kannapinn, Jan Peters, Oliver Weeger
Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
{roth,klein,kannapinn,weeger}@cps.tu-darmstadt.de,
peters@ias.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
In recent years, nonlinear dynamic system identification using artificial neural
networks has garnered attention due to its broad potential applications across
science and engineering. However, purely data-driven approaches often struggle
with extrapolation and may yield physically implausible forecasts. Furthermore,
the learned dynamics can exhibit instabilities, making it difficult to apply such
models safely and robustly. This article introduces stable port-Hamiltonian neural
networks, a machine learning architecture that incorporates physical biases of
energy conservation and dissipation while ensuring global Lyapunov stability of the
learned dynamics. Through illustrative and real-world examples, we demonstrate
that these strong inductive biases facilitate robust learning of stable dynamics from
sparse data, while avoiding instability and surpassing purely data-driven approaches
in accuracy and physically meaningful generalization. Furthermore, the model’s
applicability and potential for data-driven surrogate modeling are showcased on
multiphysics simulation data.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen a strongly growing interest in using machine learning (ML) to identify the
dynamics of physical systems directly from observations [5, 28, 31, 32, 40, 42, 53]. This approach has
diverse applications, ranging from modeling phenomena with partially or entirely unknown underlying
physics to creating surrogate and reduced-order models for rapid simulations and digital twins [23, 53,
54]. In the latter application, data-driven methods can address the drawbacks of traditional numerical
methods, which often require tremendous computational resources and expertise [1, 53]. However, in
turn, classical ML algorithms typically require large amounts of training data and lack robustness, as
they often suffer from poor extrapolation and are prone to making physically implausible forecasts
[1, 33, 53, 54]. To overcome these limitations, a general consensus is to avoid discarding centuries’
worth of established knowledge in physics, which is an implicit consequence of relying solely on
data-driven methods. Instead, there is a growing emphasis on incorporating physical priors and
inductive biases into ML approaches [33, 54]. This physics-guided ML promises improved accuracy,
robustness, and interpretability while reducing data requirements [33, 53].
Several physics-guided architectures have been proposed for learning dynamical systems. These
approaches often parameterize an ordinary differential equation (ODE) to identify continuous-time
dynamics. To ensure adherence to the laws of thermodynamics, many architectures build upon
frameworks such as Hamiltonian mechanics [9, 16, 20], Lagrangian mechanics [10, 34], Poisson
systems [19], GENERIC [18, 56], port-Hamiltonian systems (PHS) [11, 13, 37, 38, 57], or the
generalized Onsager principle [55]. The latter three allow for the modeling of dissipative dynamics,
while the former are generally limited to energy-conserving systems. Additionally, PHS explicitly
incorporate external excitations, making them particularly suited for modeling controlled systems.
The mentioned physical modeling frameworks have implications for the stability of the learned
dynamics. For example, in Hamiltonian neural networks, stable equilibria correspond to extrema in
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

