Token Perturbation Guidance for Diffusion Models
Javad Rajabi1,2 Soroush Mehraban1,2,3 Seyedmorteza Sadat4 Babak Taati1,2,3
1

University of Toronto
3

2

Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence

KITE Research Institute

4

ETH Zürich

{rajabi, taati}@cs.toronto.edu
soroush.mehraban@mail.utoronto.ca
seyedmorteza.sadat@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Classifier-free guidance (CFG) has become an essential component of modern
diffusion models to enhance both generation quality and alignment with input
conditions. However, CFG requires specific training procedures and is limited
to conditional generation. To address these limitations, we propose Token Perturbation Guidance (TPG), a novel method that applies perturbation matrices
directly to intermediate token representations within the diffusion network. TPG
employs a norm-preserving shuffling operation to provide effective and stable
guidance signals that improve generation quality without architectural changes. As
a result, TPG is training-free and agnostic to input conditions, making it readily
applicable to both conditional and unconditional generation. We further analyze the guidance term provided by TPG and show that its effect on sampling
more closely resembles CFG compared to existing training-free guidance techniques. Extensive experiments on SDXL and Stable Diffusion 2.1 show that TPG
achieves nearly a 2× improvement in FID for unconditional generation over the
SDXL baseline, while closely matching CFG in prompt alignment. These results establish TPG as a general, condition-agnostic guidance method that brings
CFG-like benefits to a broader class of diffusion models. The code is available at
https://github.com/TaatiTeam/Token-Perturbation-Guidance

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1, 2, 3] have emerged as the main methodology behind many successful generative
models for images [4, 5], videos [6, 7, 8, 9, 10], audio [11, 12], and 3D objects [13, 14, 15]. Despite
their theoretical capacity to produce high-fidelity data, unguided diffusion models often suffer from
poor sample quality, manifesting as visual artifacts, lack of semantic consistency, and insufficient
sharp details [16]. To mitigate these issues, classifier-free guidance (CFG) [17] has become the de
facto approach to steer the generation process toward higher quality and more semantically aligned
outputs. However, CFG is inherently limited to conditional generation and requires a specific training
strategy that randomly replaces the input condition with a null condition.
In response to these constraints, several alternative guidance techniques have emerged, aiming to
extend CFG-like benefits to broader settings [18, 16, 19, 20, 21]. These approaches often manipulate
components of the denoiser network, such as attention layers, to construct effective guidance signals.
However, they either require additional specialized training or offer limited improvements in prompt
alignment and generation quality (particularly w.r.t. unconditional generation). Accordingly, there
remains a need for a training-free guidance mechanism that works across both conditional and
unconditional settings while improving generation quality and semantic alignment similar to CFG.
In this paper, we revisit existing attention-based guidance techniques and aim to bridge the gap
between the effectiveness of CFG and that of training-free, condition-agnostic methods. We observe
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

