AC-DiT: Adaptive Coordination Diffusion
Transformer for Mobile Manipulation

Sixiang Chen1,4∗, Jiaming Liu1∗† , Siyuan Qian1,4∗ , Han Jiang2 , Xiaoqi Li1 , Renrui Zhang3 ,
Zhuoyang Liu1 , Chenyang Gu1,4 , Chengkai Hou1 , Pengwei Wang4 ,
Zhongyuan Wang4 , Shanghang Zhang1,4 B
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University;
2

Nanjing University; 3 CUHK; 4 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI)
Project web page: ac-dit.github.io

Abstract
Recently, mobile manipulation has attracted increasing attention for enabling
language-conditioned robotic control in household tasks. However, existing methods still face challenges in coordinating mobile base and manipulator, primarily
due to two limitations. On the one hand, they fail to explicitly model the influence
of the mobile base on manipulator control, which easily leads to error accumulation
under high degrees of freedom. On the other hand, they treat the entire mobile
manipulation process with the same visual observation modality (e.g., either all
2D or all 3D), overlooking the distinct multimodal perception requirements at
different stages during mobile manipulation. To address this, we propose the
Adaptive Coordination Diffusion Transformer (AC-DiT), which enhances mobile
base and manipulator coordination for end-to-end mobile manipulation. First, since
the motion of the mobile base directly influences the manipulator’s actions, we
introduce a mobility-to-body conditioning mechanism that guides the model to
first extract base motion representations, which are then used as context prior for
predicting whole-body actions. This enables whole-body control that accounts for
the potential impact of the mobile base’s motion. Second, to meet the perception
requirements at different stages of mobile manipulation, we design a perceptionaware multimodal conditioning strategy that dynamically adjusts the fusion weights
between various 2D visual images and 3D point clouds, yielding visual features
tailored to the current perceptual needs. This allows the model to, for example,
adaptively rely more on 2D inputs when semantic information is crucial for action
prediction, while placing greater emphasis on 3D geometric information when
precise spatial understanding is required. We empirically validate AC-DiT through
extensive experiments on both simulated and real-world mobile manipulation tasks,
demonstrating superior performance compared to existing methods.

1

Introduction

Mobile manipulation, which integrates mobile platforms with manipulative capabilities to perform
complex household tasks under natural language conditions, has gained substantial attention. Some
two-stage approaches [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] leverage task planners (e.g., VLMs or LLMs) to decompose
long-horizon tasks into sub-tasks, which are then executed sequentially by atomic skill modules. In
contrast, end-to-end methods [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] typically employ imitation learning or reinforcement
learning to jointly optimize the control of both the mobile base and the manipulator. However, these
∗

Equal contribution, † Project lead, B Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

