— The Flood Complex —
Large-Scale Persistent Homology on Millions of Points
Florian Graf1, † # , Paolo Pellizzoni2,† # , Martin Uray1,3 , Stefan Huber3 , Roland Kwitt1
1 University of Salzburg, Austria
2 Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany
3 Josef Ressel Centre for Intelligent and Secure Industrial Automation,
University of Applied Sciences, Salzburg, Austria

Abstract
We consider the problem of computing Persistent Homology (PH) for large-scale
Euclidean point cloud data, aimed at downstream machine learning tasks, where the
exponential growth of the most widely-used Vietoris-Rips complex imposes serious
computational limitations. Although more scalable alternatives such as the Alpha
complex or sparse Rips approximations exist, they often still result in a prohibitively
large number of simplices. This poses challenges in the complex construction and in
the subsequent PH computation, prohibiting their use on large-scale point clouds. To
mitigate these issues, we introduce the Flood complex, inspired by the advantages of
the Alpha and Witness complex constructions. Informally, at a given filtration value
𝑟 ≥ 0, the Flood complex contains all simplices from a Delaunay triangulation of a
small subset of a point cloud 𝑋 that are fully covered by the union of balls of radius 𝑟
emanating from 𝑋, a process we call flooding. Our construction allows for efficient
PH computation, possesses several desirable theoretical properties, and is amenable
to GPU parallelization. Scaling experiments on 3D point cloud data show that we
can compute PH of up to dimension 2 on several millions of points. Importantly,
when evaluating object classification performance on real-world and synthetic data,
we provide evidence that this scaling capability is needed, especially if objects are
geometrically or topologically complex, yielding performance superior to other
PH-based methods and neural networks for point cloud data. Source code and
datasets are available on §: https://github.com/plus-rkwitt/flooder.

1

Introduction

Throughout the past years, topological data analysis (TDA) tools and, in particular, persistent homology
(PH) [1, 21, 42, 54], have found widespread application in machine learning [39]. Applications range
from graph classification [10, 28, 29], and time series forecasting [14, 51] to studying representations
[2, 38, 48] and generalization of neural networks [7, 18], and developing novel regularizers or loss
functions [13, 30]. The central pillar of most of these works is the power of PH to reveal and concisely
summarize topological and geometrical information from a finite sample of points. In particular,
within this pipeline, one first constructs a simplicial complex together with a filtration that encodes
the underlying topological structure across scales. Once built, one then computes a stable summary
called a persistence barcode or persistence diagram.
Importantly, however, the unfavorable computational complexity of the algorithmic pipeline for PH
computation has, so far, largely limited the scope of topological approaches to studying connectivity
† equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

