Rethinking Optimal Verification Granularity
for Compute-Efficient Test-Time Scaling

Hao (Mark) Chen1 Guanxi Lu1 Yasuyuki Okoshi2
Zhiwen Mo1 Masato Motomura2 Hongxiang Fan1
1
Imperial College London, UK
2
Institute of Science Tokyo, Japan
{hao.chen20, guanxi.lu22, zhiwen.mo25, hongxiang.fan}@imperial.ac.uk
{okoshi.yasuyuki, motomura}@artic.iir.titech.ac.jp

Abstract
Test-time scaling (TTS) has proven effective in enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs). Verification plays a key role in TTS,
simultaneously influencing (1) reasoning performance and (2) compute efficiency,
due to the quality and computational cost of verification. In this work, we challenge the conventional paradigms of verification, and make the first attempt toward
systematically investigating the impact of verification granularity—that is, how
frequently the verifier is invoked during generation, beyond verifying only the final
output or individual generation steps. To this end, we introduce Variable Granularity Search (VG-Search), a unified algorithm that generalizes beam search and
Best-of-N sampling via a tunable granularity parameter g. Extensive experiments
with VG-Search under varying compute budgets, generator-verifier configurations,
and task attributes reveal that dynamically selecting g can improve the compute
efficiency and scaling behavior. Building on these findings, we propose adaptive
VG-Search strategies that achieve accuracy gains of up to 3.1% over Beam Search
and 3.6% over Best-of-N, while reducing FLOPs by over 52%. Our code is avaiblae
at github.com/hmarkc/VG-Search.

1

Introduction

The past few years have witnessed the rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs), driven
by scaling of model size and training data [6, 17, 28]. However, further training-time scaling is
increasingly constrained by prohibitive computational costs and the limited availability of high-quality
human-generated data [34]. Test-time scaling (TTS) [33, 5, 32] offers a promising alternative by
enhancing performance through additional compute at inference time. TTS techniques generally
fall into two categories: internal scaling [33, 25], which focuses on optimizing a single generation
trajectory, and sampling-based scaling [5, 32, 35], which improves performance by exploring multiple
candidate generations. These two approaches are orthogonal and can be combined to achieve higher
performance [22]. Sampling-based methods are typically training-free and easy to integrate with
internal scaling approaches in a plug-and-play manner.
Verification, commonly implemented as a learned reward model or scoring function, plays a key
role in both TTS paradigms. State-of-the-art (SOTA) sampling-based methods, such as Diverse
Verifier Tree Search (DVTS) [4] and verifier-guided Beam Search [32], leverage a separate verifier
LLM to guide the generation of a generator LLM, improving sampling efficiency and accuracy. In
these methods, a generation step is typically defined as a chunk of text delimited by special tokens
(e.g., newline characters), which serves as the atomic unit of verification. However, this verification
granularity choice is heuristic [32, 22] and remains static [36], with no guarantee of optimality. As
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

