The Non-Linear Representation Dilemma: Is Causal
Abstraction Enough for Mechanistic Interpretability?

Denis Sutter,

Julian Minder,
Thomas Hofmann,
Tiago Pimentel
ETH Zürich
EPFL
densutter@ethz.ch, julian.minder@epfl.ch, {thomas.hofmann, tiago.pimentel}@inf.ethz.ch
densutter/non-linear-representation-dilemma

Abstract
The concept of causal abstraction got recently popularised to demystify the
opaque decision-making processes of machine learning models; in short, a neural
network can be abstracted as a higher-level algorithm if there exists a function
which allows us to map between them. Notably, most interpretability papers
implement these maps as linear functions, motivated by the linear representation
hypothesis: the idea that features are encoded linearly in a model’s representations.
However, this linearity constraint is not required by the definition of causal
abstraction. In this work, we critically examine the concept of causal abstraction by
considering arbitrarily powerful alignment maps. In particular, we prove that under
reasonable assumptions, any neural network can be mapped to any algorithm,
rendering this unrestricted notion of causal abstraction trivial and uninformative.
We complement these theoretical findings with empirical evidence, demonstrating
that it is possible to perfectly map models to algorithms even when these models
are incapable of solving the actual task; e.g., on an experiment using randomly initialised language models, our alignment maps reach 100% interchange-intervention
accuracy on the indirect object identification task. This raises the non-linear representation dilemma: if we lift the linearity constraint imposed to alignment maps
in causal abstraction analyses, we are left with no principled way to balance the
inherent trade-off between these maps’ complexity and accuracy. Together, these
results suggest an answer to our title’s question: causal abstraction is not enough for
mechanistic interpretability, as it becomes vacuous without assumptions about how
models encode information. Studying the connection between this informationencoding assumption and causal abstraction should lead to exciting future work.

1

Introduction

The increasing popularity of machine learning (ML) models has led to a surge in their deployment
across various industries. However, the lack of interpretability in these models raises significant
concerns, particularly in high-stakes applications where understanding the decision-making process
is crucial (Goodman and Flaxman, 2017; Tonekaboni et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020; Gao and Guan,
2023). Unsurprisingly, this opacity has motivated a multitude of research on mechanistic (or causal)
interpretability, which tries to analyse and understand the hidden algorithms that underlie these models
(Olah et al., 2020; Elhage et al., 2021; Mueller et al., 2024; Ferrando et al., 2024; Sharkey et al., 2025).
A promising approach to address this challenge is causal abstraction (Beckers and Halpern, 2019;
Geiger et al., 2024a), which tries to map the behaviour of a model to a higher-level (and conceptually
simpler) algorithm which solves the task. At the core of this concept is the idea that if an intervention
is found to change a model’s behaviour in a way that aligns with a specific algorithm, then that
algorithm can be considered implemented by the model. Recent research, however, has raised considerable issues with this approach (e.g., Makelov et al., 2024; Mueller, 2024; Sun et al., 2025). Among
those, Méloux et al. (2025) notes that a model’s causal abstraction is not necessarily unique, showing
that many algorithms can be aligned to the same neural network. Additionally, most work on causal
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

