Whitened Score Diffusion:
A Structured Prior for Imaging Inverse Problems
Jeffrey Alido1 Tongyu Li1 Yu Sun2 Lei Tian1
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA
{jalido, tongyuli, leitian}@bu.edu, ysun214@jh.edu

Abstract
Conventional score-based diffusion models (DMs) may struggle with anisotropic
Gaussian diffusion processes due to the required inversion of covariance matrices
in the denoising score matching training objective [58]. We propose Whitened
Score (WS) diffusion models, a novel framework based on stochastic differential
equations that learns the Whitened Score function instead of the standard score.
This approach circumvents covariance inversion, extending score-based DMs by
enabling stable training of DMs on arbitrary Gaussian forward noising processes.
WS DMs establish equivalence with flow matching for arbitrary Gaussian noise,
allow for tailored spectral inductive biases, and provide strong Bayesian priors
for imaging inverse problems with structured noise. We experiment with a variety of computational imaging tasks using the CIFAR, CelebA (64 × 64), and
CelebA-HQ (256 × 256) datasets and demonstrate that WS diffusion priors trained
on anisotropic Gaussian noising processes consistently outperform conventional
diffusion priors based on isotropic Gaussian noise. Our code is open-sourced at
github.com/jeffreyalido/wsdiffusion.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) are a powerful class of generative models that implicitly learn a complex
data distribution by modeling the (Stein) score function [48, 49, 18, 13, 26, 25]. The score function
is then plugged into a reverse denoising process described by an ordinary differential equation (ODE)
or a stochastic differential equation (SDE) to generate novel samples from noise. Typically, the
forward noising process is defined by adding different levels of isotropic Gaussian noise to a clean
data sample, which enables a simple and tractable denoising score matching (DSM) objective [58].
However, the DSM objective exhibits instability when the forward diffusion noise covariance is
ill-conditioned or singular, as its computation requires inverting the covariance matrix.
Flow matching (FM) [33, 35, 1, 65] is an alternative generative modeling paradigm that reshapes an
arbitrary known noise distribution into a complex data distribution according to an implicit probability
path constructed by the flow. For the isotropic Gaussian case, [34, 52] established that FM and DMs
are equivalent up to a rescaling of the noise parameters that define the SDE and probability paths.
However, for anisotropic Gaussian noise, there exists a gap between score-based DMs and FM, where
score-based DMs cannot be as easily trained for arbitrary Gaussian forward noising processes due to
the necessary inversion of the covariance matrix in the conditional score [58].
A denoising DM capable of denoising structured, correlated noise is desirable in many scientific
inverse problems, especially in imaging, as it may serve as a rich Bayesian prior [49, 16, 63, 28].
Imaging through fog, turbulence and scattering [3, 64, 31], wide-field microscopy [39], diffraction
tomography [32, 30], optical coherence tomography (OCT) [21], interferometry [56] and many other
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

