CoT-lized Diffusion: Let’s Reinforce T2I Generation
Step-by-step

Zheyuan Liu1,3* Munan Ning1* Qihui Zhang1,3 Shuo Yang1 Zhongrui Wang1
Yiwei Yang4 Xianzhe Xu2,3 Yibing Song2,3 Weihua Chen2,3† Fan Wang3 Li Yuan1†
1

3

FLUX

Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University 2 Hupan Lab
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

RPG

EliGen

CoT-Diff (Ours)

FLUX

RPG

EliGen

FLUX

RPG

EliGen

CoT-Diff (Ours)

CoT-Diff (Ours)

Prompt: Six ceramic mugs in different

Prompt: On a smooth table, an apple

Prompt: A cabin nestled in a snowy

rests at the back-left of a cylindrical
glass, with the glass obscuring the right
half of the apple.

forest. At the front-left, a child builds a
snowman; at the back-right near a pine
tree, a deer stands. The northern lights
blaze vividly across the sky above.

Multiple Objects

Precise Layouts

Spatial Relation

colors are arranged in a circle on a
beautiful wooden desk, bathed in the
warm glow of afternoon sunlight.

Figure 1: Comparison of generated images across three challenging spatial scenarios: multiple-object
configuration (left), precise layout (middle), and complex spatial relations (right). CoT-Diff (ours)
achieves significantly better spatial alignment than FLUX [5], RPG [47], and EliGen [48], faithfully
following 3D-aware instructions in the prompt (highlighted in red).

Abstract
Current text-to-image (T2I) generation models struggle to align spatial composition
with the input text, especially in complex scenes. Even layout-based approaches
yield suboptimal spatial control, as their generation process is decoupled from
layout planning, making it difficult to refine the layout during synthesis. We
present CoT-Diff, a framework that brings step-by-step CoT-style reasoning into
T2I generation by tightly integrating Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM)driven 3D layout planning with the diffusion process. CoT-Diff enables layoutaware reasoning inline within a single diffusion round: at each denoising step,
the MLLM evaluates intermediate predictions, dynamically updates the 3D scene
layout, and continuously guides the generation process. The updated layout is
* Equal contribution † Corresponding author
{liuzy2233, munanning}@gmail.com
kugang.cwh@alibaba-inc.com yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

