Optimizing Distributional Geometry Alignment with
Optimal Transport for Generative Dataset Distillation

Xiao Cui1,2

Yulei Qin3 Wengang Zhou1 Hongsheng Li2 Houqiang Li1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
CUHK MMLab
3
Independent Researcher
cuixiao2001@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yuleichin@126.com
{zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Dataset distillation seeks to synthesize a compact distilled dataset, enabling models
trained on it to achieve performance comparable to models trained on the full
dataset. Recent methods for large-scale datasets focus on matching global distributional statistics (e.g., mean and variance), but overlook critical instance-level
characteristics and intraclass variations, leading to suboptimal generalization. We
address this limitation by reformulating dataset distillation as an Optimal Transport (OT) distance minimization problem, enabling fine-grained alignment at both
global and instance levels throughout the pipeline. OT offers a geometrically
faithful framework for distribution matching. It effectively preserves local modes,
intra-class patterns, and fine-grained variations that characterize the geometry of
complex, high-dimensional distributions. Our method comprises three components
tailored for preserving distributional geometry: (1) OT-guided diffusion sampling,
which aligns latent distributions of real and distilled images; (2) label-imagealigned soft relabeling, which adapts label distributions based on the complexity
of distilled image distributions; and (3) OT-based logit matching, which aligns
the output of student models with soft-label distributions. Extensive experiments
across diverse architectures and large-scale datasets demonstrate that our method
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in an efficient manner, achieving at least 4% accuracy improvement under IPC=10 settings for each architecture
on ImageNet-1K.

1

Introduction

The expansion of data has fueled advances in deep learning, but also introduced prohibitive costs
in storage, computation, and energy [1, 2, 3]. To address these challenges, dataset distillation
aims to synthesize a small set of training samples to expedite model training while maintaining
comparable performance [4]. Such distillation not only improves accessibility and cost-efficiency,
but also facilitates practical applications such as knowledge transfer [5], federated learning [6, 7], and
continual learning [8, 9]. Moreover, it provides a valuable lens to investigate the theoretical principles
underlying training efficiency and representation capacity in deep learning [10, 11].
Traditional dataset distillation methods can be broadly categorized into optimization-based [12, 13,
14, 15] and distribution-matching-based approaches [16, 17, 18, 19]. Despite their effectiveness,
these methods remain largely restricted to small-scale, low-resolution datasets such as MNIST [20],
CIFAR [21], or downsampled ImageNet subsets [22]. This limitation stems from the prohibitive
Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

