REINFORCE Converges to Optimal Policies with Any
Learning Rate

Samuel Robertson 1 ∗

Thang D. Chu 1 ∗
Csaba Szepesvári 1 2
1
University of Alberta 2 Google DeepMind

Bo Dai 2 3
Dale Schuurmans 1 2
Jincheng Mei 2
3
Georgia Institute of Technology

{smrobert,thang}@ualberta.ca
{bodai,schuurmans,szepi,jcmei}@google.com

Abstract
We prove that the classic REINFORCE stochastic policy gradient (SPG) method
converges to globally optimal policies in finite-horizon Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) with any constant learning rate. To avoid the need for small or decaying
learning rates, we introduce two key innovations in the stochastic bandit setting,
which we then extend to MDPs. First, we identify a new exploration property: the
online SPG method samples every action infinitely often, improving on previous
results that only guaranteed at least two actions would be sampled infinitely often.
This means SPG inherently achieves asymptotic exploration without modification.
Second, we eliminate the assumption of unique mean reward values, a condition
that previous convergence analyses in the bandit setting relied on, but that does
not translate to MDPs. Our results deepen the theoretical understanding of SPG in
both bandit problems and MDPs, with a focus on how it handles the explorationexploitation trade-off when standard analysis techniques for optimization and
stochastic approximation methods cannot be applied, as is the case with large
constant learning rates.

1

Introduction

Policy gradient (PG) methods constitute one of the most popular classes of algorithms for reinforcement learning (RL). In the PG paradigm, a learner acts according to a parameterized policy; the
expected return is directly optimized by computing its gradient with respect to the policy parameters
and performing stochastic gradient ascent. PG methods have played a key role in the advancements
of deep RL (Lillicrap et al., 2019; Schulman et al., 2017a,b): combined with deep neural networks,
PG algorithms have shown strong empirical performance across many domains, including robotics
Akkaya et al. (2019), games Vinyals et al. (2019), and large language model training (Rafailov et al.,
2024; Ouyang et al., 2022).
Despite PG methods’ conceptual simplicity and rich set of practical applications, known theoretical
guarantees on their performance come with restrictive assumptions. In particular, convergence proofs
either require oracle access to the exact gradient (Liu et al., 2024; Agarwal et al., 2020), which is akin
to demanding that the reward function and dynamics of the environment are known to the learner,
or they impose harsh constraints on the learning rate used for stochastic gradient ascent (Mei et al.,
2024b; Klein et al., 2024). Both of these assumptions are violated in typical applications. In the
stochastic setting, where the rewards and transition probabilities are unknown and must be estimated
from interaction with the environment, convergence of the classic REINFORCE algorithm (Williams,
*

Equal contributions

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

