Multimodal Tabular Reasoning with
Privileged Structured Information

Jun-Peng Jiang1,2,3∗ Yu Xia3
Hai-Long Sun1,2,3∗
Shiyin Lu3
Qing-Guo Chen3
3
3
1,2
Weihua Luo
Kaifu Zhang
De-Chuan Zhan
Han-Jia Ye1,2†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
2
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
3
AI Business, Alibaba Group.
{jiangjp, sunhl, zhandc, yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
{daxiao.xy, running.lsy, qingguo.cqg, weihua.luowh, kaifu.zkf}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Tabular reasoning requires complex, multi-step information extraction and logical
inference, such as aggregation, comparison, or calculation over tabular data. While
recent advances have leveraged large language models (LLMs) for reasoning over
structured text tables, such high-quality textual representations are often unavailable
in real-world settings, where tables typically appear as images. In this paper, we
tackle the task of tabular reasoning directly from table images. Our core strategy is
to leverage privileged structured information—specifically, the ground-truth structured table data available during training but inaccessible at test time—to enhance
multimodal large language models (MLLMs). The key challenges lie in: accurately aligning visual representations with the structured information, particularly
mapping the visual evidence to logical steps; and effectively transferring the reasoning skills learned during training to the MLLM for visual inference. To address
these, we introduce T URBO (TabUlar Reasoning with Bridged infOrmation), a new
framework for multimodal tabular reasoning using privileged information. T URBO
benefits from a structure-aware reasoning trace generator based on DeepSeek-R1,
which contributes to high-quality modality-bridged information. On this basis,
T URBO repeatedly generates and selects advantageous reasoning traces, further
enhancing the model’s tabular reasoning ability. Experimental results demonstrate
that, with limited (9k) data, T URBO achieves state-of-the-art performance (+7.2%
vs. previous SOTA) across multiple datasets.

1

Introduction

Tabular understanding focuses on the extraction of information from various forms of tables, such as
structured tables and table images [16, 31, 64, 73]. Going a step further, tabular reasoning [91, 77, 89]
involves multi-step extraction, integration, and logical inference over tables to derive the final answer,
demonstrating its potential in fields such as finance [95], healthcare [63], and scientific research [24].
With the advancement of large language models (LLMs) [4, 49, 8, 18, 75], particularly their increasing
reasoning capabilities [48, 55, 21, 74], performing tabular reasoning tasks becomes feasible. Current
efforts primarily focus on structured tables, where the input is typically the table’s text or structured
representations such as Markdown [85, 77, 89]. In contrast, in real-world scenarios, we can only have
access to table images or screenshots rather than clean, structured tables [50, 90, 40]. Given the gap
∗
†

Work done during an internship at AI Business, Alibaba Group
Corresponding author, email: yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

