Model Inversion with Layer-Specific Modeling and
Alignment for Data-Free Continual Learning

1

Ruilin Tong1 , Haodong Lu1 , Yuhang Liu2 , Dong Gong1∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales
2
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
{ruilin.tong, haodong.lu, dong.gong}@unsw.edu.au
yuhang.liu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) aims to incrementally train a model to a sequence of
tasks while maintaining performance on previously seen ones. Despite mitigating
forgetting, data storage and replay are often infeasible due to privacy or security constraints and are impractical for arbitrary pre-trained models. Data-free or
examplar-free CL aims to continually update models with new tasks without storing
previous data. In addition to regularizing updates, we employ model inversion
to synthesize data from the trained model, anchoring learned knowledge through
replay without retaining old data. However, model inversion in predictive models
faces two key challenges. First, generating inputs (e.g., images) solely from highly
compressed output labels (e.g., classes) often causes drift between synthetic and
real data. Replaying on such synthetic data can contaminate and erode knowledge
learned from real data, further degrading inversion quality over time. Second,
performing inversion is usually computationally expensive, as each iteration requires backpropagation through the entire model and many steps are needed for
convergence. These problems are more severe with large pre-trained models such
as Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) models. To improve model inversion efficiency, we propose Per-layer Model Inversion (PMI) approach inspired
by the faster convergence of single-layer optimization. The inputs optimized from
PMI provide strong initialization for full-model inversion, significantly reducing
the number of iterations required for convergence. To address feature distribution
shift, we model class-wise feature distribution using a Gaussian distribution and
preserve distributional information with a contrastive model. Sampling features for
inversion ensures alignment between synthetic and real feature distributions. Combining PMI and feature modeling, we demonstrate the feasibility of incrementally
training models on new classes by generating data from pseudo image features
mapped through semantic-aware feature projection. Our method shows strong
effectiveness and compatibility across multiple CL settings. Code is available at
https://github.com/RuilinTong/PMI-CFS-DFCL.

1

Introduction

In real-world scenarios, intelligent agents are required to learn from evolving data presented as a
sequence of tasks. However, models often forget previously acquired knowledge when trained on
new tasks — a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting [28]. Continual learning (CL) aims
to address this challenge by enabling models to incrementally learn new tasks while preserving
knowledge from earlier tasks [36]. A common strategy to mitigate this is to store a subset of data
∗

D. Gong is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

