LOMIA: Label-Only Membership Inference Attacks
against Pre-trained Large Vision-Language Models

Yihao Liu, Xinqi Lyu, Dong Wang, Yanjie Li, Bin Xiao∗
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{yihao5.liu,xinqi.lyu,dong-comp.wang,yanjie.li}@connect.polyu.hk,
b.xiao@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Large vision-language models (VLLMs) have driven significant progress in multimodal systems, enabling a wide range of applications across domains such as
healthcare, education, and content generation. Despite the success, the large-scale
datasets used to train these models often contain sensitive or personally identifiable
information, raising serious privacy concerns. To audit and better understand such
risks, membership inference attacks (MIAs) have become a key tool. However,
existing MIAs against VLLMs predominantly assume access to full-model logits,
which are typically unavailable in many practical deployments. To facilitate MIAs
in a more realistic and restrictive setting, we propose a novel framework: label-only
membership inference attacks (LOMIA) targeting pre-trained VLLMs where only
the model’s top-1 prediction is available. Within this framework, we propose three
effective attack methods, all of which exploit the intuition that training samples
are more likely to be memorized by the VLLMs, resulting in outputs that exhibit
higher semantic alignment and lower perplexity. Our experiments show that our
framework surpasses existing label-only attack adaptations for different VLLMs
and competes with state-of-the-art logits-based attacks across all metrics on three
widely used open-source VLLMs and GPT-4o.

1

Introduction

Large vision-language models (VLLMs) [31, 56, 55, 36] have proven to be formidable tools capable
of understanding and generating multimodal content, leading to substantial advancements in areas
such as image captioning [25, 8] and visual question answering [42, 13, 28]. These models are
typically trained on vast datasets that integrate images and textual descriptions, often sourced from
the Internet. While this extensive training enables impressive performance, it also raises substantial
privacy issues, especially in relation to the inadvertent inclusion of sensitive or proprietary information
in the training data [32]. For example, identity-related details, such as names linked to faces can be
revealed, even when both alignment and fine-tuning are performed using anonymized datasets [3]. In
the medical domain, VLLMs trained on datasets comprising medical images and associated diagnoses
may unintentionally disclose private information of patients [22, 33]. Moreover, numerous studies
have demonstrated that large language models (LLMs) are capable of memorizing substantial portions
of training data prior to overfitting and exhibit a lower tendency to forget during training [48, 4, 50].
Given that VLLMs are built upon LLMs, it is reasonable to expect that they inherit this memorization
behavior as well.
One of the most common methods used to tackle these risks is membership inference attack (MIA),
which tries to distinguish whether a particular sample has been utilized in training model [45].
However, prevailing methods largely presume access to the full set of model logits, enabling the
* Bin Xiao is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

