Sparse Polyak: an adaptive step size rule for
high-dimensional M-estimation

Tianqi Qiao
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
tianqi.qiao@tamu.edu

Marie Maros
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
mmaros@tamu.edu

Abstract
We propose and study Sparse Polyak, a variant of Polyak’s adaptive step size, designed to solve high-dimensional statistical estimation problems where the problem
dimension is allowed to grow much faster than the sample size. In such settings, the
standard Polyak step size performs poorly, requiring an increasing number of iterations to achieve optimal statistical precision-even when, the problem remains well
conditioned and/or the achievable precision itself does not degrade with problem
size. We trace this limitation to a mismatch in how smoothness is measured: in high
dimensions, it is no longer effective to estimate the Lipschitz smoothness constant.
Instead, it is more appropriate to estimate the smoothness restricted to specific directions relevant to the problem (restricted Lipschitz smoothness constant). Sparse
Polyak overcomes this issue by modifying the step size to estimate the restricted
Lipschitz smoothness constant. We support our approach with both theoretical
analysis and numerical experiments, demonstrating its improved performance.

1

Introduction

Consider the high-dimensional statistical estimation problem
n

min

Rd ∋θ:∥θ∥0 ≤s

f (θ) =

1X
ℓ(zi , θ),
n i=1

(1)

with data points zi ∈ Rd , i = 1 . . . n. We focus on the regime in which the dimensionality grows
much faster than the sample size, i.e. nd → ∞. To obtain consistent estimates in this setting, it is
necessary to assume that the true solution exhibits some low-dimensional structure-such as sparsity.
In (1) sparsity is enforced through the ℓ0 constraint, which guarantees that θ will have at most s
non-zero elements. This constraint renders the problem in (1) non-convex and, in general, NP-hard,
regardless of the objective function f Natarajan (1995). Nevertheless, under certain assumptions
on the data, various algorithms have been developed to efficiently find approximate solutions to (1).
Notably, under suitable assumptions that hold for a variety of statistical models, the Iterative Hard
Thresholding (IHT) algorithm has been shown to efficiently find sufficiently accurate solutions to (1).
The IHT algorithm results from applying projected gradient descent to (1) and reads
θt+1 = HTs (θt − γ∇f (θt )) ,
where HTs denotes the hard thresholding operator. HTs retains the s largest-magnitude components
of its input and sets the remaining to zero. Here, γ > 0 denotes the step-size which ought to be
chosen as γ = 2/(3L̄) Jain et al. (2014), where L̄ denotes the restricted Lipschitz smoothness (RSS)
constant, and can be interpreted as the Lipschitz smoothness constant of f when restricted to sparse
directions.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

