L2RSI: Cross-view LiDAR-based Place Recognition
for Large-scale Urban Scenes via Remote Sensing
Imagery

Ziwei Shi1,2 Xiaoran Zhang1,2 Wenjing Xu1,2 Yan Xia3
Yu Zang1,2∗ Siqi Shen1,2 Cheng Wang1,2
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, China
shizw1995@stu.xmu.edu.cn zangyu7@xmu.edu.cn

Figure 1: (Left) We propose L2RSI for cross-view LiDAR-based place recognition without 3D
pre-built map. Given a point cloud submap representing the surroundings of the robot and the
absolute orientation provided by a LiDAR and a magnetometer, L2RSI provides the most probable
location in a large-scale city using high-resolution remote sensing imagery. (Right) Place recognition
performance in different retrieval ranges. Notably, L2RSI achieved a recall (< 30m) of over 80% at
Top-1 retrieval within a range of 100km2 .

Abstract
We tackle the challenge of LiDAR-based place recognition, which traditionally
depends on costly and time-consuming prior 3D maps. To overcome this, we
first construct LiRSI-XA dataset, which encompasses approximately 110, 000
remote sensing submaps and 13, 000 LiDAR point cloud submaps captured in
urban scenes, and propose a novel method, L2RSI, for cross-view LiDAR place
recognition using high-resolution Remote Sensing Imagery. This approach enables large-scale localization capabilities at a reduced cost by leveraging readily
available overhead images as map proxies. L2RSI addresses the dual challenges
of cross-view and cross-modal place recognition by learning feature alignment
between point cloud submaps and remote sensing submaps in the semantic domain.
Additionally, we introduce a novel probability propagation method based on particle estimation to refine position predictions, effectively leveraging temporal and
spatial information. This approach enables large-scale retrieval and cross-scene
generalization without fine-tuning. Extensive experiments on LiRSI-XA demonstrate that, within a 100km2 retrieval range, L2RSI accurately localizes 83.27% of
point cloud submaps within a 30m radius for top-1 retrieved location. Our project
page is publicly available at https://shizw695.github.io/L2RSI/.
*Corresponding Author
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

