SHAP Meets Tensor Networks:
Provably Tractable Explanations with Parallelism

Reda Marzouk∗
LIRMM, UMR 5506, University of Montpellier, CNRS
mohamed-reda.marzouk@umontpellier.fr
Shahaf Bassan*
The Hebrew University of Jeursalem
shahaf.bassan@mail.huji.ac.il

Guy Katz
The Hebrew University of Jeursalem
g.katz@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Although Shapley additive explanations (SHAP) can be computed in polynomial
time for simple models like decision trees, they unfortunately become NP-hard
to compute for more expressive black-box models like neural networks — where
generating explanations is often most critical. In this work, we analyze the problem
of computing SHAP explanations for Tensor Networks (TNs), a broader and more
expressive class of models than those for which current exact SHAP algorithms
are known to hold, and which is widely used for neural network abstraction and
compression. First, we introduce a general framework for computing provably
exact SHAP explanations for general TNs with arbitrary structures. Interestingly,
we show that, when TNs are restricted to a Tensor Train (TT) structure, SHAP
computation can be performed in poly-logarithmic time using parallel computation. Thanks to the expressiveness power of TTs, this complexity result can be
generalized to many other popular ML models such as decision trees, tree ensembles, linear models, and linear RNNs, therefore tightening previously reported
complexity results for these families of models. Finally, by leveraging reductions
of binarized neural networks to Tensor Network representations, we demonstrate
that SHAP computation can become efficiently tractable when the network’s width
is fixed, while it remains computationally hard even with constant depth. This
highlights an important insight: for this class of models, width — rather than depth
— emerges as the primary computational bottleneck in SHAP computation.

1

Introduction

Shapley additive explanations (SHAP) [75] represent a widely adopted method for obtaining posthoc explanations for decisions made by ML models. However, one of its main limitations lies in
its computational intractability [22, 106, 82]. While some frameworks mitigate this intractability using sampling heuristics or approximations, such as KernelSHAP [75, 42], FastSHAP [63],
DeepSHAP [37], Monte Carlo-based methods [31, 116, 85, 50, 51, 32], or leverage score sampling [88], others focus on exact SHAP computations, by leveraging structural properties of certain
model families to derive polynomial-time algorithms, such as the popular TreeSHAP [76] algorithm,
and its variants [114, 84, 112, 86].
However, exact SHAP frameworks are confined to relatively simple models, such as tree-based
models. For more expressive models like neural networks, where explanations are often most critical,
∗

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

