Enhancing Sample Selection Against Label Noise
by Cutting Mislabeled Easy Examples

Suqin Yuan1 Lei Feng2∗ Bo Han3 Tongliang Liu1∗
1
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney
2
Southeast University 3 Hong Kong Baptist University

Abstract
Sample selection is a prevalent approach in learning with noisy labels, aiming to
identify confident samples for training. Although existing sample selection methods have achieved decent results by reducing the noise rate of the selected subset,
they often overlook that not all mislabeled examples harm the model’s performance
equally. In this paper, we demonstrate that mislabeled examples correctly predicted
by the model early in the training process are particularly harmful to model performance. We refer to these examples as Mislabeled Easy Examples (MEEs). To
address this, we propose Early Cutting, which introduces a recalibration step that
employs the model’s later training state to re-select the confident subset identified
early in training, thereby avoiding misleading confidence from early learning and
effectively filtering out MEEs. Experiments on the CIFAR, WebVision, and full
ImageNet-1k datasets demonstrate that our method effectively improves sample
selection and model performance by reducing MEEs. Our implementation can be
found at https://github.com/tmllab/2025_NeurIPS_MEE.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success, while heavily relying on the
availability of high-quality, accurately annotated data. In practice, collecting large-scale datasets
with precise labels is challenging due to the high costs involved and the inherent subjectivity of
manual annotation processes. Consequently, datasets often contain noisy labels, which can degrade
the generalization performance of DNNs—a problem known as learning with noisy labels (LNL)
(Natarajan et al., 2013). One prevalent approach to address LNL is sample selection, which aims to
identify confident samples for training while discarding potentially mislabeled ones.
Sample selection methods can be categorized into two types: loss-based and dynamics-based. Lossbased methods rely on the assumption that clean samples tend to have smaller loss values than
mislabeled samples (Han et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020; Xia et al., 2021; Li et al., 2024). In contrast,
dynamics-based methods exploit the memorization effect of DNNs, which suggests that DNNs
learn simple patterns first and then gradually fit the assigned label for each particular minority
instance, including mislabeled samples (Liu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2024). By
analyzing the learning dynamics of DNNs, these methods aim to identify clean samples that are
learned early and consistently throughout the training process (Yu et al., 2019; Xia et al., 2020a; Bai
and Liu, 2021; Wei et al., 2022), considering them as confident samples for training. In recent years,
dynamics-based methods have gained attention due to their ability to select Clean Hard Examples
(CHEs)—challenging clean samples that are difficult to identify but crucial for achieving near-optimal
generalization performance (Feldman and Zhang, 2020; Bai and Liu, 2021; Yuan et al., 2023).
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

