Secure and Confidential Certificates of Online Fairness
Olive Franzese
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
Toronto, ON olive.franzese@vectorinstitute.ai
Carter Luck
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Amherst, MA

Ali Shahin Shamsabadi
Brave Software
London, UK

Hamed Haddadi
Imperial College London & Brave Software
London, UK

Abstract
The “black-box service model” enables ML service providers to serve clients while
keeping their intellectual property and client data confidential. Confidentiality is
critical for delivering ML services legally and responsibly, but makes it difficult for
outside parties to verify important model properties such as fairness. Existing methods that assess model fairness confidentially lack either (i) reliability because they
certify fairness with respect to a static set of data, and therefore fail to guarantee
fairness in the presence of distribution shift or service provider malfeasance; and/or
(ii) scalability due to the computational overhead of confidentiality-preserving cryptographic primitives. We address these problems by introducing online fairness
certificates, which verify that a model is fair with respect to data received by the
service provider online during deployment. We then present OATH, a deployably
efficient and scalable zero-knowledge proof protocol for confidential online group
fairness certification. OATH exploits statistical properties of group fairness via a
“cut-and-choose” style protocol, enabling scalability improvements over baselines.

1

Introduction

Service providers commonly adopt a “black-box service model” to provide ML-driven services to
clients in sensitive domains like finance and healthcare. The confidentiality offered by the black box
is critical for protecting data privacy and Intellectual Property (IP), but hinders the ability of outside
parties to verify properties of the model such as fairness [16, 24]. Since ML models are susceptible
to bias based on race, sex, color, disability, or location [43, 25, 45, 41, 29, 21, 6, 20, 2], verification
of fairness is also critical in sensitive applications. In this work we reconcile these two important
objectives–fairness and confidentiality–by asking:
How can we ensure that deployed models are fair while preserving confidentiality?
Existing solutions (detailed in Appendix A) for confidential fairness assessment include black-box
auditing [35, 34, 37] and cryptographic verification [40, 49, 28, 38, 44], but nearly all certify fairness
only with respect to offline data such as a static training or audit dataset. Such offline fairness
certificates suffer from unintentional or intentional fairness assessments failures when the model
is deployed (Figure 1, first row).
Unintentional issues of offline fairness certificates. In practice, offline fairness certificates fail to
generalize to unseen data encountered during deployment (e.g., online client data) as distribution
shift is common in real-world applications [13, 4] and challenging to account for during training [11].
Distributional shifts can actively reinforce biases [9]. As a result, fairness guarantees established
offline may not hold once the model is deployed. For example, a previous study of real-world
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

