B IO CLIP 2: Emergent Properties
from Scaling Hierarchical Contrastive Learning

Jianyang Gu1† , Samuel Stevens1 , Elizabeth G Campolongo1 , Matthew J Thompson1 ,
Net Zhang1 , Jiaman Wu1 , Andrei Kopanev1 , Zheda Mai1 , Alexander E. White2 ,
James Balhoff3 , Wasila Dahdul4 , Daniel Rubenstein5 , Hilmar Lapp6 ,
Tanya Berger-Wolf1 , Wei-Lun Chao1 , Yu Su1†
1
The Ohio State University, 2 Smithsonian Institution, 3 UNC Chapel Hill,
4
University of California, Irvine, 5 Princeton University, 6 Duke University

Beak size

Juvenile

Juvenile

Male

Female

Female

Male

Species
span
Adult

Adult

Figure 1: While B IO CLIP 2 is trained to distinguish species, it demonstrates emergent properties beyond the
initial training objective. Left: At the inter-species level, the embedding distribution of different species aligns
with ecological relationships; the embeddings of Darwin’s finches arrange themselves by beak size from left to
right. Right: Instead of collapsing, the intra-species variations are preserved in subspaces orthogonal to the
inter-species variation (the black lines point from the mean embedding of one variant to that of the other variant).
Orthogonality increases with scale (see Figure 3c).

Abstract
Foundation models trained at scale exhibit remarkable emergent behaviors, learning
new capabilities beyond their initial training objectives. We find such emergent
behaviors in biological vision models via large-scale contrastive vision-language
training. To achieve this, we first curate T REE O F L IFE -200M, comprising 214
million images of living organisms, the largest and most diverse biological organism image dataset to date. We then train B IO CLIP 2 on T REE O F L IFE -200M
to distinguish different species. Despite the narrow training objective, B IO CLIP
2 yields extraordinary accuracy when applied to various biological visual tasks
such as habitat classification and trait prediction. We identify emergent properties
in the learned embedding space of B IO CLIP 2. At the inter-species level, the
embedding distribution of different species aligns closely with functional and ecological meanings (e.g., beak sizes and habitats). At the intra-species level, instead
of being diminished, the intra-species variations (e.g., life stages and sexes) are
preserved and better separated in subspaces orthogonal to inter-species distinctions.
We provide formal proof and analyses to explain why hierarchical supervision
and contrastive objectives encourage these emergent properties. Crucially, our
results reveal that these properties become increasingly significant with larger-scale
training data, leading to a biologically meaningful embedding space.
Models, data, and code available at imageomics.github.io/bioclip-2. † {gu.1220, su.809}@osu.edu
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

