Density Ratio-Free Doubly Robust
Proxy Causal Learning

Bariscan Bozkurt1

Houssam Zenati1

Dimitri Meunier1

Liyuan Xu2

Arthur Gretton1,3
1

Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London,
2
Secondmind, 3 DeepMind.
{bariscan.bozkurt.23, h.zenati, dimitri.meunier.21}@ucl.ac.uk
liyuan9988@gmail.com arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the problem of causal function estimation in the Proxy Causal Learning (PCL) framework, where confounders are not observed but proxies for the
confounders are available. Two main approaches have been proposed: outcome
bridge-based and treatment bridge-based methods. In this work, we propose
two kernel-based doubly robust estimators that combine the strengths of both approaches, and naturally handle continuous and high-dimensional variables. Our
identification strategy builds on a recent density ratio-free method for treatment
bridge-based PCL; furthermore, in contrast to previous approaches, it does not
require indicator functions or kernel smoothing over the treatment variable. These
properties make it especially well-suited for continuous or high-dimensional treatments. By using kernel mean embeddings, we propose the first density-ratio free
doubly robust estimators for proxy causal learning, which have closed form solutions and strong uniform consistency guarantees. Our estimators outperform
existing methods on PCL benchmarks, including a prior doubly robust method that
requires both kernel smoothing and density ratio estimation.

1

Introduction and related works

Estimating the effects of interventions-also referred to as treatments-on outcomes is a central goal of
causal learning. This task is particularly challenging in observational settings, where randomized
experiments are not feasible. A major difficulty stems from confounding variables that influence both
the treatment and the outcome. In practice, the commonly made unconfoundedness (or ignorability)
assumption [1]—that there are no unobserved confounders—often fails to hold, as it is unrealistic to
expect that all relevant confounders can be accounted for. As a result, one may instead assume that
the observed covariates serve as proxies for latent unmeasured confounders.
One classical line of work for addressing unobserved confounding is instrumental variable (IV)
regression, which assumes access to instruments that affect the treatment but are independent of
the unobserved confounders [2, 3, 4]. A more recent and promising direction is the Proxy Causal
Learning (PCL), which leverages two auxiliary variables: (i) a treatment proxy, denoted by Z, which
is causally related to the treatment, and (ii) an outcome proxy, denoted by W , which is causally
related to the outcome. The associated causal graph is illustrated in Figure (1). In this setup, a
bidirectional arrow indicates that either causal direction between the two variables is plausible,
or that they may share an unobserved common cause. Within this framework, Miao et al. [5]
showed that the causal effect can be identified via an outcome bridge function, without the need
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

