E NERV ERSE: Envisioning Embodied Future Space for
Robotics Manipulation

Siyuan Huang1,3 , Liliang Chen2 † , Pengfei Zhou2 , Shengcong Chen2 , Yue Liao5 ,
Zhengkai Jiang3 , Yue Hu2 , Peng Gao3 , Hongsheng Li4 , Maoqing Yao2 ‡ , Guanghui Ren2 ‡
1
SJTU 2 AgiBot 3 Shanghai AI Lab 4 CUHK MMLab 5 LV-NUS Lab
Project Page: https://sites.google.com/view/enerverse
Email: yaomaoqing@agibot.com, renguanghui@agibot.com ∗

Abstract
We introduce E NERV ERSE, a generative robotics foundation model that constructs
and interprets embodied spaces. E NERV ERSE employs a chunk-wise autoregressive
video diffusion framework to predict future embodied spaces from instructions,
enhanced by a sparse context memory for long-term reasoning. To model the 3D
robotics world, we adopt a multi-view video representation, providing rich perspectives to address challenges like motion ambiguity and 3D grounding. Additionally,
E NERV ERSE-D, a data engine pipeline combining generative modeling with 4D
Gaussian Splatting, forms a self-reinforcing data loop to reduce the sim-to-real gap.
Leveraging these innovations, E NERV ERSE translates 4D world representations
into physical actions via a policy head (E NERV ERSE-A), achieving state-of-the-art
performance in both simulation and real-world tasks. For efficiency, E NERV ERSEA reuses features from the first denoising step and predicts action chunks, achieving
about 280 ms per 8-step action chunk on a single RTX 4090. Further video demos,
dataset samples could be found in our project page.

1

Introduction

Creative AI in vision has achieved significant progress, especially in video generation, where models
produce high-quality videos from human instructions [23, 59]. This success highlights the model’s
spatiotemporal imagination, enabling accurate forecasting of future frames. Similarly, robotic
manipulation, a fundamental task in embodied AI, needs accurate predictions of future actions based
on language instructions to interact with the physical world. Based on this sharing principle of future
space prediction, one natural strategy is to align robotics action prediction with a video generation
task to leverage video generation models’ imagination capabilities for policy planning. Motivated by
this, recent studies [49, 38, 6, 15] have conducted preliminary explorations by fine-tuning general
video generation models on robotic manipulation videos to align feature representations with the
robotics domain, and predict physical actions. However, such methods [38] often simply adapt
general-purpose video generation models to embodied tasks, neglecting the substantial gap between
their representation space and the three-dimensional, temporally interconnected robotics environment,
thereby hindering accurate action policy prediction. We do not claim a direct monotonic link between
pixel-level video quality and control success. Rather, we align the latent space to encode 3D,
action-conditioned dynamics so that actions can reliably follow generated trajectories.
To bridge the gap, we propose E NERV ERSE, a generative robotics foundation model designed to
construct and interpret the robotics 4D (3D with time) world. In E NERV ERSE, we employ an
autoregressive video diffusion framework that iteratively predicts the embodied future space based on
a given instruction. Within this generative paradigm, we define a minimal unit of the future space
∗

† indicates project leader. ‡ indicates corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

