Learning conformational ensembles of proteins based
on backbone geometry

Nicolas Wolf ∗ 1,2,3

Leif Seute ∗ 2,1,3 Vsevolod Viliuga 4,1
Jan Stühmer 2,5 Frauke Gräter 1,2,3

Simon Wagner 3

1

Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz, Germany
Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies, Heidelberg, Germany
3
IWR, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
4
SciLifeLab and DBB at Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
5
IAR, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
2

Abstract
Deep generative models have recently been proposed for sampling protein conformations from the Boltzmann distribution, as an alternative to often prohibitively
expensive Molecular Dynamics simulations. However, current state-of-the-art approaches rely on fine-tuning pre-trained folding models and evolutionary sequence
information, limiting their applicability and efficiency, and introducing potential
biases. In this work, we propose a flow matching model for sampling protein
conformations based solely on backbone geometry – BBFlow. We introduce a
geometric encoding of the backbone equilibrium structure as input and propose to
condition not only the flow but also the prior distribution on the respective equilibrium structure, eliminating the need for evolutionary information. The resulting
model is orders of magnitudes faster than current state-of-the-art approaches at
comparable accuracy, is transferable to multi-chain proteins, and can be trained
from scratch in a few GPU days. In our experiments, we demonstrate that the
proposed model achieves competitive performance with reduced inference time,
across not only an established benchmark of naturally occurring proteins but also
de novo proteins, for which evolutionary information is scarce or absent. BBFlow
is available at https://github.com/graeter-group/bbflow.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of protein structure prediction has been revolutionized by geometric deep
learning [19, 4, 27]. Jumper et al. [19] introduced AlphaFold 2, which predicts a protein’s structure
using patterns found in naturally occurring protein sequences, so-called evolutionary information,
upon inference. On the other hand, advancements in generative modeling such as diffusion [39] and
flow-matching [29, 3, 41] have propelled the field of protein design, where several approaches for the
generation of novel protein structures have been proposed [46, 52, 7]. Plausible protein structures
conditioned on symmetry or a motif can be designed without requiring an input sequence [15, 14, 53].
Both, protein structure prediction and design methods, generate a single equilibrium structure of a
protein. In contrast, protein function depends on structural dynamics [34, 11, 5], that is, the protein’s
conformational ensemble as given by the Boltzmann distribution, assuming thermal equilibrium. To
sample from the Boltzmann distribution, Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations are an established
method in the field [2]. However, covering the state space extensively with MD requires long
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

