PoLAR: Polar-Decomposed
Low-Rank Adapter Representation

Liang Zhang Bingcong Li∗ Niao He∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
{kai.lion, liang.zhang, bingcong.li, niao.he}@inf.ethz.ch
Kai Lion

Abstract
We show that low-rank adaptation of large-scale models suffers from a low stable
rank that is well below the linear algebraic rank of the subspace, degrading finetuning performance. To mitigate the underutilization of the allocated subspace,
we propose PoLAR, a parameterization inspired by the polar decomposition that
factorizes the low-rank update into two direction matrices constrained to Stiefel
manifolds and an unconstrained scale matrix. Our theory shows that PoLAR yields
an exponentially faster convergence rate on a canonical low-rank adaptation problem. Pairing the parameterization with Riemannian optimization leads to consistent
gains on three different benchmarks testing general language understanding, commonsense reasoning, and mathematical problem solving with base model sizes
ranging from 350M to 27B.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) transformed the field of machine learning through their proficiency
in understanding and generating text, as well as handling complex multimodal tasks. Typically, those
models require a number of parameters that is on the scale of billions, rendering fine-tuning of largescale models infeasible in hardware-constrained setups. Consequently, parameter-efficient fine-tuning
methods have been developed to enable adaptation of LLMs with limited resources (Houlsby et al.,
2019; Li and Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2022). One notable work is that of Hu et al.
(2022), which performs fine-tuning by learning an additive low-rank update parameterized as the
product of two low-rank matrices. Such Low-Rank Adapters (LoRA) have been the subject of study
in a large body of work. Various improvements, ranging from initialization strategies (Meng et al.,
2024; Li et al., 2025a) and custom learning rate settings for stable feature learning (Hayou et al.,
2024b) to alternative parameterizations (Liu et al., 2024a) have been proposed ever since.
Recent work attempts to overcome the low-rank constraint imposed by LoRA while preserving its
parameter-efficiency (Xia et al., 2024; Lialin et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2025; Jiang
et al., 2024). The underlying premise is that the low-rank nature of the adapter limits its expressiveness.
However, this premise is at odds with recent theoretical results that LoRA can approximate any target
transformer model reasonably well under mild assumptions on the rank that depend on the relationship
between the pre-trained and the target model (Zeng and Lee, 2024). Additionally, Kalajdzievski
(2023) shows that raising the nominal rank does little to improve performance. Taken together, these
findings suggest that the low-rank space offers sufficient expressiveness, but the classical low-rank
adapter formulation struggles to fully utilize this potential.
∗

Equal supervision.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

