Spatial-Aware Decision-Making with Ring Attractors
in Reinforcement Learning Systems

Marcos N. Saura
The University of Manchester
Manchester, United Kingdom
marcos.negresaura@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk
Richard Allmendinger
The University of Manchester
Manchester, United Kingdom
Richard.Allmendinger@manchester.ac.uk
Wei Pan
The University of Manchester
Manchester, United Kingdom
wei.pan@manchester.ac.uk

Theodore Papamarkou
PolyShape
Athens, Greece
theodore@polyshape.com

Abstract
Ring attractors, mathematical models inspired by neural circuit dynamics, provide
a biologically plausible mechanism to improve learning speed and accuracy in
Reinforcement Learning (RL). Serving as specialized brain-inspired structures that
encode spatial information and uncertainty, ring attractors explicitly encode the
action space, facilitate the organization of neural activity, and enable the distribution of spatial representations across the neural network in the context of Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL). These structures also provide temporal filtering
that stabilizes action selection during exploration, for example, by preserving the
continuity between rotation angles in robotic control or adjacency between tactical
moves in game-like environments. The application of ring attractors in the action
selection process involves mapping actions to specific locations on the ring and
decoding the selected action based on neural activity. We investigate the application
of ring attractors by both building an exogenous model and integrating them as
part of DRL agents. Our approach significantly improves state-of-the-art performance on the Atari 100k benchmark, achieving a 53% increase in performance
over selected baselines.

1

Introduction

This paper addresses the challenge of efficient action selection in Reinforcement Learning (RL),
particularly in environments with spatial structures, ranging from robotic manipulation where joint
movements are coupled, to game-playing agents where tactical decisions might depend on positional
awareness. We integrate ring attractors, a neural circuit model from neuroscience originally proposed
by [50] and later experimentally validated by [18], into the RL framework. This approach provides
a mechanism for uncertainty-aware decision-making in RL, thereby yielding more efficient and
reliable learning in complex environments. Ring attractors offer a unique framework to represent
spatial information in a continuous and stable manner [33]. In a ring attractor network, neurons
interconnect circularly, forming a loop with tuned connections [7]. This configuration allows for
robust and localized activation patterns, maintaining accurate spatial representations even in the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

