Under the Shadow: Exploiting Opacity Variation for
Fine-grained Shadow Detection

Xiaotian Qiao1,2 , Ke Xu1 , Xianglong Yang2 , Ruijie Dong1 , Xiaofang Xia1∗ , Jiangtao Cui1∗
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
2
Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, China

Abstract
Shadow characteristics are of great importance for scene understanding. Existing
works mainly consider shadow regions as binary masks, often leading to imprecise
detection results and suboptimal performance for scene understanding. We demonstrate that such an assumption oversimplifies light-object interactions in the scene,
as the scene details under either hard or soft shadows remain visible to a certain
degree. Based on this insight, we aim to reformulate the shadow detection paradigm
from the opacity perspective, and introduce a new fine-grained shadow detection
method. In particular, given an input image, we first propose a shadow opacity
augmentation module to generate realistic images with varied shadow opacities.
We then introduce a shadow feature separation module to learn the shadow position
and opacity representations separately, followed by an opacity mask prediction
module that fuses these representations and predicts fine-grained shadow detection
results. In addition, we construct a new dataset with opacity-annotated shadow
masks across varied scenarios. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
outperforms the baselines qualitatively and quantitatively, enhancing a wide range
of applications, including shadow removal, shadow editing, and 3D reconstruction.

1

Introduction

Shadow is a natural phenomenon when objects obstruct light sources either fully or partially, resulting
in intensity and color variations across certain regions. These shadow characteristics play vital roles
for scene understanding. The presence of shadows can degrade image quality and impede numerous
vision and graphics tasks, including image editing [48], object detection [33], and visual tracking.
Furthermore, shadow analysis allows us to interpret semantics and geometry of a scene [31], e.g.,
object shapes, light source positions, and object relationships. However, accurately detecting shadow
characteristics (e.g., boundary, opacity, etc.) in the scene can be very challenging. Shadows exhibit
diverse characteristics due to scene factors like lighting conditions, surface properties, and occluder
configurations, resulting in various shadow types, from sharp to diffuse.
While advanced shadow detection methods have been proposed, they often regard shadows as binary
masks or assume uniform opacity within shadow regions [2, 17, 49, 42]. We argue that such a binary
or simplified lighting paradigm oversimplifies light-object interactions, as the scene details under
either hard or soft shadows retain varying degrees of visibility. As shown in Figure 1, existing
methods [54, 55] fail to capture the nuanced opacity variations and suffer from position and shape
estimation artifacts, undermining downstream applications like shadow removal and editing that
rely on precise shadow characteristics. A fine-grained formulation of the shadow regions remains
underexplored, which is vital for scene understanding.
∗

Joint corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

