SDPGO: Efficient Self-Distillation Training Meets
Proximal Gradient Optimization

Tongtong Su1 , Liao Yun2∗ , Fengbo Zheng1∗
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Tianjin Normal University
2
College of Artificial Intelligence, Tianjin University of Science and Technology
1

Abstract
Self-knowledge distillation (SKD) enables single-model training by distilling
knowledge from the model’s own output, eliminating the need for a separate teacher
network required in conventional distillation methods. However, current SKD methods focus mainly on replicating common features in the student model, neglecting
the extraction of key features that significantly enhance student learning. Inspired
by this, we devise a self-knowledge distillation framework entitled Self-Distillation
training via Proximal Gradient Optimization or SDPGO, which utilizes gradient information to identify and assign greater weight to features that significantly impact
classification performance, enabling the network to learn the most relevant features
during training. Specifically, the proposed framework refines the gradient information into a dynamically changing weighting factor to evaluate the distillation
knowledge via the dynamic weight adjustment scheme. Meanwhile, we devise the
sequential iterative learning module to dynamically optimize knowledge transfer
by leveraging historical predictions and real-time gradients, stabilizing training
through mini-batch-based KL divergence refinement while adaptively prioritizing
task-critical features for efficient self-distillation. Comprehensive experiments on
image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation demonstrate that
our method consistently surpasses recent state-of-the-art knowledge distillation
techniques. Code is available at: https://github.com/nanxiaotong/SDGPO.

1

Introduction

In the past few years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in computer vision
tasks, including image classification [15, 45], object detection [22, 41], semantic segmentation
[11, 38] and others. Due to the over-parameterization and high computational complexity of DNNs,
deployment costs are increasingly significant. Knowledge distillation (KD) [14] addresses this by
transferring knowledge from a large teacher model to a lightweight student via soft target alignment,
uniquely enabling efficient compression and fast inference without structural modifications.
Despite its benefits, pre-training a high-capacity teacher network requires considerable computational
sources and run-in memory. Furthermore, the capacity gap issue [49, 65, 26]has persistently hindered
the development of knowledge distillation. In conventional offline KD, a one-way knowledge transfer
is applied through a two-stage training process to steer the learning of the student network [21, 43, 12].
In contrast, online KD operates without dependence on a pre-trained teacher, instead enabling an
ensemble of students to learn collaboratively in an end-to-end fashion [59, 28, 46, 52]. Consequently,
existing KD methods, whether online or offline, tend to be computationally expensive and timeconsuming, thereby hindering their deployment on resource-constrained end devices such as mobile
phones and digital cameras.
∗

Corresponding author: Liao Yun (yliao@tust.edu.cn), Fengbo Zheng (fzh229@tjnu.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

