Activation-Informed Merging of
Large Language Models

Amin Heyrani Nobari∗ 1 , Kaveh Alim∗1 , Ali ArjomandBigdeli2
Akash Srivastava3 , Faez Ahmed1 , Navid Azizan1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Stony Brook University
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab & Red Hat AI Innovation

Abstract
Model merging, a method that combines the parameters and embeddings of multiple fine-tuned large language models (LLMs), offers a promising approach to
enhance model performance across various tasks while maintaining computational
efficiency. This paper introduces Activation-Informed Merging (AIM), a technique
that integrates the information from the activation space of LLMs into the merging
process to improve performance and robustness. AIM is designed as a flexible,
complementary solution that is applicable to any existing merging method. It aims
to preserve critical weights from the base model, drawing on principles from continual learning (CL) and model compression. Utilizing a task-agnostic calibration
set, AIM selectively prioritizes essential weights during merging. We empirically
demonstrate that AIM significantly enhances the performance of merged models
across multiple benchmarks. Our findings suggest that considering the activationspace information can provide substantial advancements in the model merging
strategies for LLMs with up to 40% increase in benchmark performance. Our code
is publicly available at https://github.com/ahnobari/ActivationInformedMerging.

1

Introduction

Foundation models are rapidly becoming the dominant force for building Artificial Intelligence (AI)
systems. In many cases, researchers build their machine learning models by starting from pre-trained
foundation models and fine-tuning (FT) these pre-trained models for some desired target task [27]. In
such a paradigm, numerous fine-tuned models are developed for various tasks. However, an important
opportunity is missed, as these fine-tuned task-specialized models typically operate in isolation
without leveraging the rich features that each possesses [35]. This fact highlights the importance of a
growing area of research focused on combining multiple task-specialized models fine-tuned from the
same base foundation model.
In particular, as large language models (LLMs) continue to evolve, it becomes increasingly important
to develop methods that can effectively fuse the specialized knowledge of various fine-tuned models
derived from the same foundation model. Model merging has shown broad applications, including
enhancing accuracy and robustness [40], improving generalization [28], multi-modal models [37],
and model alignment to human feedback [29, 30]. Given these benefits, a substantial amount of
attention has been devoted to developing more effective merging algorithms for LLMs.
In the vast majority of cases, merging LLMs is done using algorithms that explore the weight space
of models and do not leverage the information in the activation space. Activation space information
has been widely used to develop model pruning and compression methods, both in the context of
∗

Equal Contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

