Flow Matching Neural Processes

Hussen Abu Hamad
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa

Dan Rosenbaum
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa

Abstract
Neural processes (NPs) are a class of models that learn stochastic processes directly
from data and can be used for inference, sampling and conditional sampling.
We introduce a new NP model based on flow matching, a generative modeling
paradigm that has demonstrated strong performance on various data modalities.
Following the NP training framework, the model provides amortized predictions
of conditional distributions over any arbitrary points in the data. Compared to
previous NP models, our model is simple to implement and can be used to sample
from conditional distributions using an ODE solver, without requiring auxiliary
conditioning methods. In addition, the model provides a controllable tradeoff
between accuracy and running time via the number of steps in the ODE solver. We
show that our model outperforms previous state-of-the-art neural process methods
on various benchmarks including synthetic 1D Gaussian processes data, 2D images,
and real-world weather data.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in generative machine learning are primarily driven by models capable of leveraging
context information to enhance their predictions. To be effective across varying levels of contextual
information, these models must handle multiple degrees of conditional uncertainty and therefore
accurately capture conditional distributions at multiple levels of abstraction.
The neural process (NP) framework introduced by Garnelo et al. [13, 14] provides a principled
approach to context-based predictions by formulating the problem as learning stochastic processes
from data, essentially training generative models of functions. Similarly to Gaussian processes, NP
models can be used as priors over functions capable of generating samples of arbitrary points along
the functions. These target points can be predicted unconditionally or conditioned on a context of
observed points along the function. This formulation has made neural processes a popular approach
for modeling data in various domains.
In recent years, many different models have been proposed within the neural process framework,
differing in their architecture and stochastic mechanisms. Early models focused on stochastic latent
variables and were trained by variational inference [14]. More recent approaches such as Nguyen
& Grover [32] leverage transformer-based architectures [40] in an autoregressive setup, achieving
improved performance in many scenarios.
Despite these advancements, several challenges remain unresolved. With the exception of autoregressive approaches, models tend to underfit the training functions, failing to capture intricate structures.
On the other hand, autoregressive models, while more expressive, require sequential sampling of the
target points one at a time and are therefore expensive to sample from. Additionally, these models
lack a global or hierarchical representation of the function and the uncertainty which can limit their
applicability and harm their performance in some cases. For example, the first dimensions in the
autoregressive order are constrained to simple distributions.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

