Learning to cluster neuronal function

Nina S. Nellen,1,†, * Polina Turishcheva,1,†,* Michaela Vystrčilová,1
Shashwat Sridhar,2,3 Tim Gollisch,2–5 Andreas S. Tolias,6–9 Alexander S. Ecker1,10,*
1

Institute of Computer Science and Campus Institute Data Science, University Göttingen, Germany
2
University Medical Center Göttingen, Department of Ophthalmology, Göttingen, Germany
3
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany
4
Cluster of Excellence “Multiscale Bioimaging: from Molecular Machines to Networks of Excitable Cells”
(MBExC), University of Göttingen, Germany
5
Else Kröner Fresenius Center for Optogenetic Therapies, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany
6
Department of Ophthalmology, Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA, US
7
Stanford Bio-X, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, US
8
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, CA, US
9
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, CA, US
10
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen, Germany
†

Shared contribution

⋆

nina.nellen@uni-goettingen.de
∗
{turishcheva,ecker}@cs.uni-goettingen.de

Abstract
Deep neural networks trained to predict neural activity from visual input and behaviour have shown great potential to serve as digital twins of the visual cortex.
Per-neuron embeddings derived from these models could potentially be used to map
the functional landscape or identify cell types. However, state-of-the-art predictive
models of mouse V1 do not generate functional embeddings that exhibit clear
clustering patterns which would correspond to cell types. This raises the question
whether the lack of clustered structure is due to limitations of current models or a
true feature of the functional organization of mouse V1. In this work, we introduce
DECEMber – Deep Embedding Clustering via Expectation Maximization-based
refinement – an explicit inductive bias into predictive models that enhances clustering by adding an auxiliary t-distribution-inspired loss function that enforces
structured organization among per-neuron embeddings. We jointly optimize both
neuronal feature embeddings and clustering parameters, updating cluster centers
and scale matrices using the EM-algorithm. We demonstrate that these modifications improve cluster consistency while preserving high predictive performance and
surpassing standard clustering methods in terms of stability. Moreover, DECEMber generalizes well across species (mice, primates) and visual areas (retina, V1,
V4). The code is available at https://github.com/Nisone2000/DECEMber,
https://github.com/ecker-lab/cnn-training.

1

Introduction

Understanding whether neurons form discrete cell types or lie on a continuum is a fundamental
question in neuroscience [1]. Previous research has extensively investigated the morphological
and electrophysiological properties of neurons in the visual cortex. While discrete anatomical and
transcriptomic classifications have been proposed [2–4], recent work on the mouse brain suggests a
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

