FreqPolicy: Efficient Flow-based Visuomotor Policy
via Frequency Consistency

Yifei Su1,2∗ , Ning Liu1∗† , Dong Chen1 , Zhen Zhao1 , Kun Wu1
Meng Li1 , Zhiyuan Xu1 , Zhengping Che1†‡ , Jian Tang1‡
1
Beijing Innovation Center of Humanoid Robotics
2
NLPR, MAIS, Institute of Automation of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Generative modeling-based visuomotor policies have been widely adopted in
robotic manipulation, attributed to their ability to model multimodal action distributions. However, the high inference cost of multi-step sampling limits its
applicability in real-time robotic systems. Existing approaches accelerate sampling in generative modeling-based visuomotor policies by adapting techniques
originally developed to speed up image generation. However, a major distinction
exists: image generation typically produces independent samples without temporal
dependencies, while robotic manipulation requires generating action trajectories
with continuity and temporal coherence. To this end, we propose FreqPolicy, a
novel approach that first imposes frequency consistency constraints on flow-based
visuomotor policies. Our work enables the action model to capture temporal structure effectively while supporting efficient, high-quality one-step action generation.
Concretely, we introduce a frequency consistency constraint objective that enforces
alignment of frequency-domain action features across different timesteps along
the flow, thereby promoting convergence of one-step action generation toward the
target distribution. In addition, we design an adaptive consistency loss to capture
structural temporal variations inherent in robotic manipulation tasks. We assess
FreqPolicy on 53 tasks across 3 simulation benchmarks, proving its superiority
over existing one-step action generators. We further integrate FreqPolicy into the
vision-language-action (VLA) model and achieve acceleration without performance
degradation on 40 tasks of Libero. Besides, we show efficiency and effectiveness
in real-world robotic scenarios with an inference frequency of 93.5 Hz.

1

Introduction

Recently, the generative modeling-based visuomotor policy framework extends the powerful capabilities of generative models in text-to-image synthesis [58, 17, 56, 60, 9, 21] to imitation learning
for robotic manipulation [27, 11, 39, 19, 6], achieving significant breakthroughs. A prominent class
of such policies is diffusion-based approaches [11, 76, 46, 75, 83, 23], which are widely adopted
for the ability to model complex multimodal distributions in high-dimensional action spaces [11].
More recently, flow matching [40, 38, 13, 36] has emerged as a generalization of diffusion models, offering simpler optimization objectives and more stable training [68]. It has been applied to
robotics [59, 19, 12, 77, 6, 25], proving the efficacy of flow-based policies. Despite these advancements, these generative modeling-based visuomotor policies rely on an iterative sampling process to
transform Gaussian noise into actions, resulting in high-latency inference. This presents a significant
∗

Co-first authors: Yifei Su and Ning Liu.
Project leaders: Ning Liu and and Zhengping Che.
‡
Corresponding authors: Jian Tang and Zhengping Che.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

