LoRO: Real-Time on-Device Secure Inference for
LLMs via TEE-Based Low Rank Obfuscation
Gaojian Xiong, Yu Sun∗, Jianhua Liu, Jian Cui, Jianwei Liu
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, China
{xionggaojian, sunyv, jason_hua, cuijianw, liujianwei}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
While Large Language Models (LLMs) have gained remarkable success, they are
consistently at risk of being stolen when deployed on untrusted edge devices. As a
solution, TEE-based secure inference has been proposed to protect valuable model
property. However, we identify a statistical vulnerability in existing protection
methods, and furtherly compromise their security guarantees by proposed Model
Stealing Attack with Prior. To eliminate this vulnerability, LoRO is presented in
this paper, which leverages dense mask to completely obfuscate parameters. LoRO
includes two innovations: (1) Low Rank Mask, which uses low-rank factors to generate dense masks efficiently. The computing complexity in TEE is hence reduced
by an exponential amount to achieve inference speed up, while providing robust
model confidentiality. (2) Factors Multiplexing, which reuses several cornerstone
factors to generate masks for all layers. Compared to one-mask-per-layer, the
secure memory requirement is reduced from GB-level to tens of MB, hence avoiding the hundred-fold latency introduced by secure memory paging. Experimental
results indicate that LoRO achieve a 0.94× Model Stealing (MS) accuracy, while
SOTA methods presents 3.37× at least. The averaged inference latency of LoRO is
only 1.49×, compared to the 112× of TEE-shielded inference. Moreover, LoRO
results no accuracy loss, and requires no re-training and structure modification.
LoRO can solve the concerns regarding model thefts on edge devices in an efficient
and secure manner, facilitating the wide edge application of LLMs.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models have demonstrated considerable ability in various domains [1]. However, the
predominant cloud-based deployment exposes critical limitations: users have to tolerate additional
network latency and upload their private data. In domains requiring real-time responsiveness and
private data protection, e.g. autonomous driving [2] and personal smart agent [3], there is growing
demand to deploy LLMs on user’s edge devices with accelerators [4, 5]. Alarmingly, on-device
models are usually white-box vulnerable to be stolen [6, 7]. Since LLMs are extremely expensive to
train, it is expected that users can benefit from edge inference in an efficient but black-box manner,
i.e. enjoy high-quality and fast inference with no knowledge about private parameters.
Trusted Execution Environment (TEE)-based secure inference [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] have been
proposed to safeguard valuable on-device models against theft. Advanced TEE-based methods
obfuscate and offload model parameters to Rich Execution Environment (REE) for acceleration
using GPUs. The de-obfuscation keys are shielded in TEE to restore the inference results accurately.
Compared to cryptograph-based secure inference that relies on Homomorphic Encryption [15]
or Multi-Party Computation [16], TEE-based methods offer more practical solutions due to their
real-time performance [9, 11, 14] and elimination of network bandwidth occupation.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

