Algorithms and SQ Lower Bounds for Robustly
Learning Real-valued Multi-index Models

Ilias Diakonikolas
UW Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Giannis Iakovidis
UW Madison
iakovidis@wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
UC San Diego
dakane@ucsd.edu

Lisheng Ren
UW Madison
lren29@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the complexity of learning real-valued Multi-Index Models (MIMs) under the Gaussian distribution. A K-MIM is a function f : Rd → R that depends
only on the projection of its input onto a K-dimensional subspace. We give a
general algorithm for PAC learning a broad class of MIMs with respect to the
square loss, even in the presence of adversarial label noise. Moreover, we establish a nearly matching Statistical Query (SQ) lower bound, providing evidence
that the complexity of our algorithm is qualitatively optimal as a function of the
dimension. Specifically, we consider the class of bounded variation MIMs with
the property that degree at most m distinguishing moments exist with respect to
projections onto any subspace. In the presence of adversarial label noise, the complexity of our learning algorithm is dO(m) 2poly(K/ϵ) . For the realizable and independent noise settings, our algorithm incurs complexity dO(m) 2poly(K) (1/ϵ)O(K) .
To complement our upper bound, we show that if for some subspace degree-m distinguishing moments do not exist, then any SQ learner for the corresponding class
of MIMs requires complexity dΩ(m) . As an application, we give the first efficient
learner for the class of positive-homogeneous L-Lipschitz K-MIMs. The resulting algorithm has complexity poly(d)2poly(KL/ϵ) . This gives a new PAC learning
algorithm for Lipschitz homogeneous ReLU networks with complexity independent of the network size, removing the exponential dependence incurred in prior
work.

1

Introduction

A common assumption in supervised learning is that real-world data possess hidden lowdimensional structure, in the sense that the relationship between the features is of a lowerdimensional nature. A natural formalization of this principle leads to the notion of a Multi-index
model [FJS81, Hub85, Li91, HL93, XTLZ02, Xia08], defined below.
Definition 1.1 (Multi-Index Model (MIM)). A function f : Rd → R is a K-MIM if there exists
a K-dimensional subspace W ⊆ Rd such that f (x) = f (xW ) for all x ∈ Rd , where xW is the
projection of x onto W . The special case of K = 1 corresponds to Single-Index Models (SIMs).
A few comments are in order. First, the dimension K of the hidden subspace is typically assumed
to be significantly smaller than the ambient dimension d. Second, certain regularity assumptions
Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

