Adaptive Data Analysis for Growing Data

Neil G. Marchant
School of Computing & Information Systems
University of Melbourne, Australia
nmarchant@unimelb.edu.au

Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein
School of Computing & Information Systems
University of Melbourne, Australia
brubinstein@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Reuse of data in adaptive workflows poses challenges regarding overfitting and the
statistical validity of results. Previous work has demonstrated that interacting with
data via differentially private algorithms can mitigate overfitting, achieving worstcase generalization guarantees with asymptotically optimal data requirements.
However, such past work assumes data is static and cannot accommodate situations
where data grows over time. In this paper we address this gap, presenting the first
generalization bounds for adaptive analysis on dynamic data. We allow the analyst
to adaptively schedule their queries conditioned on the current size of the data,
in addition to previous queries and responses. We also incorporate time-varying
empirical accuracy bounds and mechanisms, allowing for tighter guarantees as
data accumulates. In a batched query setting, the asymptotic data requirements of
our bound grows with the square-root of the number of adaptive queries, matching
prior works’ improvement over data splitting for the static setting. We instantiate
our bound for statistical queries with the clipped Gaussian mechanism, where it
empirically outperforms baselines composed from static bounds.

1

Introduction

The ubiquity of adaptive workflows in modern data science has raised concerns about the risk of
overfitting and the validity of findings [1, 2]. In such adaptive workflows, data is reused over
multiple steps, where the procedure or analysis at any given step may depend on results of previous
steps. Common examples include hyperparameter tuning or model selection on a hold-out set [3–5],
blending of exploratory and confirmatory data analysis [6, 7], and the reuse of benchmark/public
datasets within a research community [8]. While adaptivity can enable more exploratory analysis, it
is not covered by conventional guarantees of generalization and statistical validity, which assume the
analysis is selected independently of the data [9].
A simple approach for enabling adaptive data analysis with generalization guarantees is to collect a
fresh dataset whenever a step in the analysis depends on existing data. This can also be achieved by
randomly splitting a dataset and using a separate split for each step. However, the data requirements
of this approach may be prohibitive, scaling linearly in the number of adaptive steps. A line of work
based on algorithmic stability [9–18] offers a significant improvement over data splitting, with data
requirements that grow asymptotically with the square-root of the number of adaptive steps. The
core result of this line of work is a transfer theorem, which guarantees that the outputs of an adaptive
analysis are close to the expected outputs on the data distribution if (i) the analysis is stable under
small changes to the dataset and (ii) the outputs are close to the empirical average on the dataset.
Differential privacy [19] is commonly adopted as a notion of stability in this work, achieving the
square-root dependence mentioned above, which is asymptotically optimal in the worst case [20, 21].
Most prior work on adaptive data analysis via algorithmic stability assumes a common setting, where
the data is sampled i.i.d. from an unknown distribution and used by a mechanism to estimate an
analyst’s adaptive queries [9, 10, 15]. Generalization bounds are then obtained for a worst-case data
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

