Interpreting Arithmetic Reasoning in Large Language
Models using Game-Theoretic Interactions

Leilei Wen1

Liwei Zheng1 Hongda Li1 Lijun Sun1 Zhihua Wei1 Wen Shen1∗
1
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{2331934, 2432010, 2410907, sunlijun, zhihua_wei, wenshen}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have made significant advancements
in arithmetic reasoning. However, the internal mechanism of how LLMs solve arithmetic problems remains unclear. In this paper, we propose explaining arithmetic
reasoning in LLMs using game-theoretic interactions. Specifically, we disentangle
the output score of the LLM into numerous interactions between the input words.
We quantify different types of interactions encoded by LLMs during forward propagation to explore the internal mechanism of LLMs for solving arithmetic problems.
We find that (1) the internal mechanism of LLMs for solving simple one-operator
arithmetic problems is their capability to encode operand-operator interactions and
high-order interactions from input samples. Additionally, we find that LLMs with
weak one-operator arithmetic capabilities focus more on background interactions.
(2) The internal mechanism of LLMs for solving relatively complex two-operator
arithmetic problems is their capability to encode operator interactions and operand
interactions from input samples. (3) We explain the task-specific nature of the
LoRA method from the perspective of interactions.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the arithmetic reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) have improved
significantly, but the internal mechanism is still unclear. Some studies identified neurons that have
great effects on arithmetic reasoning [Yu and Ananiadou, 2024, Rai and Yao, 2024]. Other studies
evaluated the impact of modifying words in input arithmetic questions on neuron activations and
network outputs [Stolfo et al., 2023, Zhang et al., 2024]. However, previous studies have not
mathematically guaranteed that the explanations faithfully reflect the arithmetic reasoning logic of
LLMs. Recently, a series of studies have used game-theoretic interactions between input variables to
explain the representation power of traditional DNNs [Ren et al., 2024, Deng et al., 2024], e.g., the
interaction between “green” and “hand” forms the concept of “beginner.” The interaction has been
proven to be faithful explanations by a series of theoretical guarantees [Ren et al., 2023a].
Inspired by these studies, we use interactions to explain the arithmetic reasoning capability of LLMs.
As Figure 1 shows, given an input arithmetic question x, e.g., “What is 2 plus 7? Answer is,” the
interaction S (e.g., S = {2, plus, 7}) represents an AND relationship between the words in S , which
is equivalently2 encoded by the LLM. Each interaction S contributes a numerical effect IS to push
the output score towards generating the answer “9.” Thus, we can construct a logic model ϕ (x) based
on interactions. The faithfulness of using the logical model to explain an LLM is reflect as follows.
• As Figure 1(a) shows, given the same input sentence
Px, the output score of the LLM is equal to the
output of the logical model, that is, v(x) = ϕ (x) = S⊆N IS , where N is the set containing all the
∗

Corresponding author.
Note that each interaction is equivalently encoded by the entire DNN, rather than by a specific neuron.

2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

