Linear Attention for Efficient Bidirectional
Sequence Modeling

Arshia Afzal∗, Elias Abad Rocamora , Leyla Naz Candogan ,
Pol Puigdemont, Francesco Tonin, Yongtao Wu, Mahsa Shoaran,
Volkan Cevher

Abstract
Linear Transformers and State Space Models have emerged as efficient alternatives
to softmax Transformers for causal sequence modeling, enabling parallel training
via matrix multiplication and efficient RNN-style inference. However, despite their
success in causal tasks, no unified framework exists for applying Linear Transformers to bidirectional sequence modeling. We introduce L ION, the first framework to
systematically extend Linear Transformers to the bidirectional setting. L ION generalizes three core representations commonly used in the causal case—full Linear
Attention , bidirectional RNN, and chunkwise parallel form—to the bidirectional
setting. These forms are theoretically equivalent and enable models to exploit the
strengths of each during training and inference. We prove that a broad class of
Linear Transformers can be extended using L ION and validate our framework via
three core examples based on the choice of decay type: L ION - LIT, the bidirectional
extension of [25]; L ION - D, based on [44]; and L ION - S, a variant using selective
decay [34, 13]. Across standard bidirectional tasks, L ION enables models to match
or exceed the performance of softmax Transformers, while offering significantly
faster training and more efficient inference than existing State Space Models.
LION Code

1

,

LION Blog

Introduction

Softmax Transformers [48] are widely used in sequence modeling tasks such as causal language
modeling [4, 11] due to their high performance and parallelized training. However, their quadratic
computational cost is often limiting [45], increasing interest in Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)-like
models for inference. Causal Linear Transformers addresses this by replacing softmax attention with
linear attention, which is equivalent to an RNN with a two-dimensional hidden state [25]. Causal
Linear Transformers enjoy fast training via matrix multiplication and efficient RNN-style inference.
To improve the performance of Linear Transformers, several variants of linear attention and state
space models (SSMs) have been proposed by incorporating fixed [44, 34, 15] or input-dependent
[13, 6, 51] decay factors into the RNN recurrence. These recent Linear Transformers match the
performance of softmax Transformers in causal tasks, while retaining efficient and fast inference.
Several real-world tasks are inherently bidirectional and benefit from bidirectional sequence modeling.
Examples include DNA and protein modeling [17], computer vision [39], and biological and chemical
sequence modeling [42]. In these domains, bidirectional models often outperform causal ones, for
∗

Corresponding author: arshia.afzal@epfl.ch. Arshia Afzal, Elias Abad Rocamora, Leyla Naz Candogan,
Pol Puigdemont, Francesco Tonin, Yongtao Wu, and Volkan Cevher are with LIONS@EPFL. Mahsa Shoaran is
with Integrated Neurotechnologies Laboratory (INL)@EPFL.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

