zip2zip: Inference-Time Adaptive Tokenization via
Online Compression

Saibo Geng1∗ Nathan Ranchin1∗ Yunzhen Yao1 Maxime Peyrard4
Chris Wendler1,2 Michael Gastpar1 Robert West1
1 EPFL
2 Northeastern University
4 Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG
{saibo.geng, nathan.ranchin, yunzhen.yao, michael.gastpar, robert.west}@epfl.ch
maxime.peyrard@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr ch.wendler@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Tokenization efficiency plays a critical role in the performance and cost of large
language models (LLMs), yet most models rely on static tokenizers optimized on
general-purpose corpora. These tokenizers’ fixed vocabularies often fail to adapt
to domain- or language-specific inputs, leading to longer token sequences and
higher computational costs. We introduce zip2zip, a novel method for achieving
context-adaptive tokenization in LLMs at inference time. Leveraging an online
data compression algorithm (Lempel–Ziv–Welch), zip2zip dynamically expands
its active vocabulary at inference time by continuously replacing fragmented token
sequences with more compact hypertokens, which it can immediately output during
generation. zip2zip consists of three key components: (1) a tokenizer based on
Lempel–Ziv–Welch compression that incrementally merges co-occurring tokens
into reusable hypertokens on the fly; (2) a dynamic embedding (and unembedding)
layer that computes embeddings for newly formed hypertokens at runtime; and (3)
a variant of autoregressive language modeling that pretrains the model to handle
hypertokenized, compressed text sequences as inputs and outputs. We show that an
existing LLM can be uptrained for zip2zip in 10 GPU-hours via parameter-efficient
finetuning. The resulting LLM performs test-time adaptation, learning to use
hypertokens in unseen contexts and reducing input and output tokens by 15–40%.
Code and models are released at https://github.com/epfl-dlab/zip2zip.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive versatility across a broad spectrum of tasks
and domains [Brown et al., 2020, Bubeck et al., 2023], including biomedical tests [Nori et al., 2023],
mathematical reasoning [Frieder et al., 2023], programming [Jiang et al., 2024], and multiple human
languages. A critical underlying component of this flexibility is the tokenizer, which defines the
model’s vocabulary and governs how raw text is converted into token sequences fed to the model.
The efficiency of the tokenization scheme—i.e., how compactly a text is represented as tokens—has
significant impact on model performance. In particular, a more compact tokenization yields three key
benefits: (1) larger effective context windows; (2) lower computational (and thus monetary) cost; and
(3) shorter response times.
Despite its importance, the tokenizers used in most LLMs operate with fixed, static vocabularies
obtained by running algorithms such as Byte Pair Encoding [Sennrich et al., 2016] over large-scale,
general-purpose web corpora. While this globally optimized vocabulary performs reasonably well on
∗ Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

