JAMUN: Bridging Smoothed Molecular Dynamics and
Score-Based Learning for Conformational Ensemble
Generation
Ameya Daigavane∗
MIT
ameyad@mit.edu

Bodhi P. Vani∗
Prescient Design, Genentech
vanib@gene.com

Saeed Saremi
Prescient Design, Genentech
saremis@gene.com

Joshua A. Rackers†
Prescient Design, Genentech

Darcy Davidson
Prescient Design, Genentech
davidsd5@gene.com
Joseph Kleinhenz†
Prescient Design, Genentech
kleinhej@gene.com

Abstract
Conformational ensembles of protein structures are immensely important both for
understanding protein function and drug discovery in novel modalities such as
cryptic pockets. Current techniques for sampling ensembles such as molecular dynamics (MD) are computationally inefficient, while many recent machine learning
methods do not transfer to systems outside their training data. We propose JAMUN
which performs MD in a smoothed, noised space of all-atom 3D conformations of
molecules by utilizing the framework of walk-jump sampling. JAMUN enables
ensemble generation for small peptides at rates of an order of magnitude faster
than traditional molecular dynamics. The physical priors in JAMUN enables transferability to systems outside of its training data, even to peptides that are longer
than those originally trained on. Our model, code and weights are available at
https://github.com/prescient-design/jamun.

1

Introduction

Proteins are inherently dynamic entities constantly in motion, and these movements can be vitally
important. They are not well characterized as single structures as has traditionally been the case,
but rather as ensembles of structures drawn from the Boltzmann distribution [30]. Protein dynamics
is required for the function of most proteins, for instance the global tertiary structure motions for
myglobin to bind oxygen and move it around the body [57], or the beta-sheet transition to a disordered
strand for insulin to dissociate and find and bind to its receptor [5]. Similarly, drug discovery on
protein kinases depends on characterizing kinase conformational ensembles [26]. In general the
search for druggable ‘cryptic pockets’ requires understanding protein dynamics [15], and antibody
design is deeply affected by conformational ensembles [23]. However, while machine learning (ML)
methods for molecular structure prediction have experienced enormous success recently, ML methods
for dynamics have yet to have similar impact. ML models for generating molecular ensembles are
widely considered the ‘next frontier’ [11, 57, 91]. In this work, we present JAMUN (Walk-Jump
Accelerated Molecular ensembles with Universal Noise), a generative ML model which advances this
frontier by demonstrating improvements in both speed and transferability over previous approaches.
While the importance of protein dynamics is well-established, it can be exceedingly difficult to
sufficiently sample large biomolecular systems. The most common sampling method is molecular
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

