SeerAttention: Self-distilled Attention Gating for
Efficient Long-context Prefilling

Yizhao Gao1∗† Zhichen Zeng2∗† Dayou Du3† Shijie Cao4‡ Peiyuan Zhou5
Jiaxing Qi5 Junjie Lai5 Hayden Kwok-Hay So1 Ting Cao6 Fan Yang4 Mao Yang4
1
University of Hong Kong 2 University of Washington
3
University of Edinburgh 4 Microsoft Research 5 NVIDIA 6 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Attention is the cornerstone of modern Large Language Models (LLMs). Yet
its quadratic complexity hinders efficiency and scalability, especially for longcontext processing. A promising approach is to leverage sparsity in attention.
However, existing sparsity-based solutions predominantly rely on predefined patterns or heuristics at the attention head level, struggling to adapt dynamically to
different contexts efficiently. We propose SeerAttention, a simple yet effective
attention mechanism that directly learns the block-level attention sparsity from
the LLM itself. Inspired by the gating mechanism in Mixture of Experts (MoE),
SeerAttention augments the conventional attention with a learnable gate that selectively activates important blocks within the attention map. Specifically, the
gate first pools the query (Q) and key (K) tensors along the sequence dimension
and processes them through learnable linear layers. The resulting matrices are
then multiplied together to produce the gating scores, which are used to predict
block-level attention sparsity. Combined with our block-sparse FlashAttention
kernel, SeerAttention can achieve significant speedup on GPUs. When applied to
pre-trained LLMs, SeerAttention only requires training the gate parameters in a
lightweight self-distillation manner, allowing rapid convergence. Our evaluation
results demonstrate that SeerAttention achieves better model accuracy and lower
latency for long-context pre-filling compared to prior methods. Code is available
at: https://github.com/microsoft/SeerAttention.

1

Introduction

Attention is a fundamental mechanism in transformer-based LLMs [51]. Despite its effectiveness, the
quadratic complexity of attention demands substantial computation and memory resources, limiting
the scalability and efficiency of LLMs, especially for long-context windows. This challenge has
become an active research topic in the community. One potential solution is to replace the quadratic
attention with cheaper architectures like linear attention or recurrent networks [30, 20, 40, 47] with
subquadratic complexity. While these approaches are more efficient, the majority of state-of-the-art
large language models (LLMs) continue to use full attention to achieve better performance.
A promising approach with increasing interests is to leverage sparsity in attention. Sparsity commonly
exists in attention maps, and it becomes more prominent in longer contexts. In certain LLM attention
heads, the sparsity ratio can reach 95% or even 99%, posing great opportunities for efficiency
improvements. However, prior post-training methods often rely on predefined sparsity patterns or
heuristics to approximate the attention mechanism [28, 18, 32, 64, 22, 54]. The sparsity observed in
∗

Equal Contribution.
Work partially done during the internship at Microsoft Research.
‡
Corresponding author: shijiecao@microsoft.com.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

