Efficient Representativeness-Aware Coreset Selection

Zihao Cheng1∗, Binrui Wu1∗, Zhiwei Li1 , Yuesen Liao1 ,
Su Zhao2 , Shuai Chen2 , Yuan Gao3 , Weizhong Zhang1,4†
1
Fudan University, 2 Meituan Inc, 3 Wuhan University
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{zhcheng25, brwu23, zwli23, ysliao24}@m.fudan.edu.cn
{zhaosu04, chenshuai31}@meituan.com, ethan.y.gao@gmail.com
weizhongzhang@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Dynamic coreset selection is a promising approach for improving the training
efficiency of deep neural networks by periodically selecting a small subset of
the most representative or informative samples, thereby avoiding the need to
train on the entire dataset. However, it remains inherently challenging due not
only to the complex interdependencies among samples and the evolving nature
of model training, but also to a critical coreset representativeness degradation
issue identified and explored in-depth in this paper, that is, the representativeness
or information content of the coreset degrades over time as training progresses.
Therefore, we argue that, in addition to designing accurate selection rules, it is
equally important to endow the algorithms with the ability to assess the quality of
the current coreset. Such awareness enables timely re-selection, mitigating the risk
of overfitting to stale subsets-a limitation often overlooked by existing methods.
To this end, this paper proposes an Efficient Representativeness-Aware Coreset
Selection (ERACS) method for deep neural networks, a lightweight framework
that enables dynamic tracking and maintenance of coreset quality during training.
While the ideal criterion—gradient discrepancy between the coreset and the full
dataset—is computationally prohibitive, we introduce a scalable surrogate based on
the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of gradients within the coreset, which is the main
technical contribution of this paper and is also supported by our theoretical analysis.
Intuitively, a decline in SNR indicates overfitting to the subset and declining representativeness. Leveraging this observation, our method triggers coreset updates
without requiring costly Hessian or full-batch gradient computations, maintaining
minimal computational overhead. Experiments on multiple datasets confirm the
effectiveness of our approach. Notably, compared with existing gradient-based dynamic coreset selection baselines, our method achieves up to a 5.4% improvement
in test accuracy across multiple datasets.

1

Introduction

The success of modern deep neural networks largely relies on large-scale datasets, which are typically
collected from the internet. These datasets often contain a significant amount of redundancy, noise,
and even mislabeled samples[24]. To address this issue, coreset selection has been extensively
studied, originally proposed in the context of classical machine learning models, e.g., SVM [23],
logistic regression [12] and Gaussian mixture model [19]. The goal is to find a small subset of
weighted training samples, referred to as a coreset, which ensures that training on this coreset yields
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

