Interpreting Emergent Features in Deep
Learning-based Side-channel Analysis

Sengim Karayalçin
Leiden University, The Netherlands
s.karayalcin@liacs.leidenuniv.nl

Marina Krček
Radboud University, The Netherlands
marina.krcek@ru.nl

Stjepan Picek
University of Zagreb Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, Croatia &
Radboud University, The Netherlands
stjepan.picek@ru.nl

Abstract
Side-channel analysis (SCA) poses a real-world threat by exploiting unintentional
physical signals to extract secret information from secure devices. Evaluation
labs also use the same techniques to certify device security. In recent years,
deep learning has emerged as a prominent method for SCA, achieving state-ofthe-art attack performance at the cost of interpretability. Understanding how
neural networks extract secrets is crucial for security evaluators aiming to defend
against such attacks, as only by understanding the attack can one propose better
countermeasures.
In this work, we apply mechanistic interpretability to neural networks trained
for SCA, revealing how models exploit what leakage in side-channel traces. We
focus on sudden jumps in performance to reverse engineer learned representations,
ultimately recovering secret masks and moving the evaluation process from blackbox to white-box. Our results show that mechanistic interpretability can scale to
realistic SCA settings, even when relevant inputs are sparse, model accuracies are
low, and side-channel protections prevent standard input interventions.

1

Introduction

Side-channel analysis (SCA) is a realistic security threat that consists of diverse methods that allow
for the extraction and exploitation of unintentionally observable information of internally processed
data [23]. SCA enables the establishment of a relationship between passively observable information
and the internal state of a device under investigation. As such, it poses a major threat to devices that
handle sensitive data like keys, private certificates, or intellectual property (see, e.g., [40, 41]). In
SCA, sensitive information gets extracted from a device by observing its physical characteristics
during computation (e.g., power consumption, timing).
Since 2016 [25], deep learning-based side-channel analysis (DLSCA) has received significant attention from the research community [36]. The main benefits of using deep learning (DL) over classical
techniques are that assumptions about attacker capabilities can be relaxed, leading to better attack
performance. Thus, integration of these techniques into evaluation procedures for cryptographic
implementations has become standardized [12].
One of the main open challenges for black-box evaluations using DL is interpretability [36]. A model
that can extract the key confirms there is some exploitable leakage, but does not indicate how the
network exploits what leakage. Notably, this does not allow the evaluator to provide any feedback
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

