Fairness-aware Bayes optimal functional classification

Xiaoyu Hu ∗

Gengyu Xue ∗

School of Mathematics and Statistics

Department of Statistics

Xi’an Jiaotong University

University of Warwick

huxiaoyu2019@gmail.com

gengyu.xue.1@warwick.ac.uk

Zhenhua Lin

Yi Yu

Department of Statistics and Data Science

Department of Statistics

National University of Singapore

University of Warwick

linz@nus.edu.sg

yi.yu.2@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Algorithmic fairness has become a central topic in machine learning, and mitigating disparities across different subpopulations has emerged as a rapidly growing
research area. In this paper, we systematically study the classification of functional data under fairness constraints, ensuring the disparity level of the classifier is controlled below a pre-specified threshold. We propose a unified framework for fairness-aware functional classification, tackling an infinite-dimensional
functional space, addressing key challenges from the absence of density ratios
and intractability of posterior probabilities, and discussing unique phenomena in
functional classification. We further design a post-processing algorithm Fair Functional Linear Discriminant Analysis classifier (Fair-FLDA), which targets at homoscedastic Gaussian processes and achieves fairness via group-wise thresholding. Under weak structural assumptions on eigenspace, theoretical guarantees on
fairness and excess risk controls are established. As a byproduct, our results cover
the excess risk control of the standard FLDA as a special case, which, to the best
of our knowledge, is first time seen. Our theoretical findings are complemented
by extensive numerical experiments on synthetic and real datasets, highlighting
the practicality of our designed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Driven by technological advancements that enable high-resolution data collection and analysis, functional data analysis (FDA) has gained increasing attention over the past two decades. A wide range
of statistical research has been carried out in this area, and we refer readers to Wang et al. (2016) for
a comprehensive review of recent developments.
Across a variety of statistical tasks, functional classification has emerged as one of the central focuses, with applications in many areas including neuroscience (e.g. Heinrichs et al., 2023; Lila et al.,
2024), genetics (e.g. Coffey et al., 2014), handwriting recognition (e.g. Hubert et al., 2017) and others. Various classifiers have been proposed and thoroughly studied in the literature, among which are
classifiers based on projection (e.g. Delaigle and Hall, 2012; Kraus and Stefanucci, 2019), Radon–
Nikodym derivatives (e.g. Berrendero et al., 2018; Torrecilla et al., 2020), principal component score
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

