DreamLight: Towards Harmonious and Consistent
Image Relighting

Yong Liu1∗, Wenpeng Xiao2∗, Qianqian Wang2 , Junlin Chen2 , Shiyin Wang2 ,
Yitong Wang2 , Xinglong Wu2 , Yansong Tang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 ByteDance Inc.
liuyong23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, tang.yansong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We introduce a model named DreamLight for universal image relighting in this
work, which can seamlessly composite subjects into a new background while maintaining aesthetic uniformity in terms of lighting and color tone. The background
can be specified by natural images (image-based relighting) or generated from
unlimited text prompts (text-based relighting). Existing studies primarily focus
on image-based relighting, while with scant exploration into text-based scenarios.
Some works employ intricate disentanglement pipeline designs relying on environment maps to provide relevant information, which grapples with the expensive data
cost required for intrinsic decomposition and light source. Other methods take this
task as an image translation problem and perform pixel-level transformation with
autoencoder architecture. While these methods have achieved decent harmonization effects, they struggle to generate realistic and natural light interaction effects
between the foreground and background. To alleviate these challenges, we reorganize the input data into a unified format and leverage the semantic prior provided
by the pretrained diffusion model to facilitate the generation of natural results.
Moreover, we propose a Position-Guided Light Adapter (PGLA) that condenses
light information from different directions in the background into designed light
query embeddings, and modulates the foreground with direction-biased masked
attention. In addition, we present a post-processing module named Spectral Foreground Fixer (SFF) to adaptively reorganize different frequency components of
subject and relighted background, which helps enhance the consistency of foreground appearance. Extensive comparisons and user study demonstrate that our
DreamLight achieves remarkable relighting performance.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of generative models in recent years [1, 2, 3, 4], image composition has
received increasing attention owing to its capacity for controlled generation [5, 6, 7]. However, since
the implanted foreground and the new background originate from different sources, this discrepancy
can easily lead to an unrealistic perception of the composite image. In this paper, we focus on a
challenging task named universal image relighting, which aims to seamlessly composite a subject into
a new background while maintaining realism and aesthetic uniformity in terms of lighting and color
tone. The background can either be specified by provided natural images (image-based relighting),
or be created from unlimited text prompts (text-based relighting). This task ensures that users and
digital elements coexist naturally within any environment and has wide application in virtual reality
and intelligent editing for the film and advertising industries [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
* Equal Contribution
†

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

