Attack via Overfitting: 10-shot Benign Fine-tuning to
Jailbreak LLMs
Zhixin Xie, Xurui Song, and Jun Luo∗
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract
Despite substantial efforts in safety alignment, recent research indicates that Large
Language Models (LLMs) remain highly susceptible to jailbreak attacks. Among
these attacks, finetuning-based ones that compromise LLMs’ safety alignment via
fine-tuning stand out due to its stable jailbreak performance. In particular, a recent
study indicates that fine-tuning with as few as 10 harmful question-answer (QA)
pairs can lead to successful jailbreaking across various harmful questions. However,
such malicious fine-tuning attacks are readily detectable and hence thwarted by
moderation models. In this paper, we demonstrate that LLMs can be jailbroken
by fine-tuning with only 10 benign QA pairs; our attack exploits the increased
sensitivity of LLMs to fine-tuning data after being overfitted. Specifically, our
fine-tuning process starts with overfitting an LLM via fine-tuning with benign QA
pairs involving identical refusal answers. Further fine-tuning is then performed
with standard benign answers, causing the overfitted LLM to forget the refusal
attitude and thus provide compliant answers regardless of the harmfulness of a
question. We implement our attack on the ten LLMs and compare it with five
existing baselines. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves significant
advantages in both attack effectiveness and attack stealth. Our findings expose
previously unreported security vulnerabilities in current LLMs and provide a new
perspective on understanding how LLMs’ security is compromised, even with
benign fine-tuning. Our code is available at https://github.com/ZHIXINXIE/
ten_benign.git.

1

Introduction

Modern Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 [1] and Llama-3 [10] possess exceptional
language understanding and generation capabilities. In practice, adapting these pre-trained models for
specific tasks or domains often requires a fine-tuning process. In response to this need, LLM vendors
deliver Fine-tuning-as-a-Service (FaaS) [34, 36], providing a mechanism for users to achieve custom
models aligned with their particular needs without the need for training from scratch. Unfortunately,
this convenience introduces a new attack vector, allowing adversaries to design specific fine-tuning
datasets aiming to break model alignment, which we intuitively term fine-tuning attack. Some recent
research observes that fine-tuning with only a small amount of the harmful QA pairs can jailbreak the
model [47, 61, 24]; this type of attacks is commonly referred to as malicious fine-tuning. However,
as the QA pairs used in the attack are explicitly harmful, such attacks are easily detected and blocked
by moderation models [11, 21, 22, 23].
To increase the stealth of the attack, subsequent research aims to conceal the harmful content of
the fine-tuning dataset to bypass the moderation models. The attack in [12] proposes to hide the
harmfulness in the dataset by encryption. It first fine-tunes LLMs to learn encryption and decryption,
∗

Correspondence to: junluo@ntu.edu.sg

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

