Demystifying Reasoning Dynamics with Mutual
Information: Thinking Tokens are Information Peaks
in LLM Reasoning

Chen Qian1,2‹ , Dongrui Liu2‹ , Haochen Wen3 , Zhen Bai4 , Yong Liu1 , Jing Shao2:
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
University College London, University of London 4 Dalian University of Technology
{qianchen2022,liuyonggsai}@ruc.edu.cn

{liudongrui,shaojing}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Large reasoning models (LRMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in
complex problem-solving, yet their internal reasoning mechanisms remain poorly
understood. In this paper, we investigate the reasoning trajectories of LRMs from
an information-theoretic perspective. By tracking how mutual information (MI)
between intermediate representations and the correct answer evolves during LRM
reasoning, we observe an interesting MI peaks phenomenon: the MI at specific
generative steps exhibits a sudden and significant increase during LRM’s
reasoning process. We theoretically analyze such phenomenon and show that as
MI increases, the probability of model’s prediction error decreases. Furthermore,
these MI peaks often correspond to tokens expressing reflection or transition, such as “Hmm”, “Wait” and “Therefore,” which we term as the thinking
tokens. We then demonstrate that these thinking tokens are crucial for LRM’s
reasoning performance, while other tokens has minimal impacts. Building on
these analyses, we propose two simple yet effective methods to improve LRM’s
reasoning performance, by delicately leveraging these thinking tokens. Overall, our
work provides novel insights into the reasoning mechanisms of LRMs and offers
practical ways to improve their reasoning capabilities. The code is available at
https://github.com/ChnQ/MI-Peaks.

1

Introduction

The reasoning ability of large language models (LLMs) has emerged as one of their most powerful and
crucial capabilities [53, 21, 22]. By explicitly thinking through a question before providing an answer
and breaking down complex problems into multiple steps, LLMs have made impressive progress in
complex reasoning tasks, such as mathematics, programming, and logical inference [28, 60, 45, 7].
Understanding and improving LLMs’ reasoning ability represents a crucial pathway toward achieving
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) [56, 52, 43].
By undergoing reasoning-intensive training on foundational LLMs, recent large reasoning models
(LRMs) such as OpenAI’s o1 [22], DeepSeek’s R1 [19], and QwQ [46] have demonstrated exceptional
reasoning capabilities, significantly pushing the boundaries of complex problem-solving. However,
despite recent advances, the mechanisms underlying these capabilities remain largely under-explored.
The internal dynamics of the reasoning process, as well as the influence of each intermediate step on
the final answer, are still largely a “black box.” While some research in the field of trustworthy AI
‹

Equal contribution. This work was done during an internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
supervised by Dongrui Liu. : Corresponding author
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

