A Generalized Binary Tree Mechanism for Private
Approximation of All-Pair Shortest Distances

Zongrui Zou, Jingcheng Liu∗
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, New Cornerstone Science Laboratory
Nanjing University
zou.zongrui@smail.nju.edu.cn, liu@nju.edu.cn
Chenglin Fan
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Seoul National University
fanchenglin@gmail.com
Michael Dinitz†
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
mdinitz@cs.jhu.edu
Jalaj Upadhyay‡
Management Science & Information Systems Department
Rutgers University
jalaj.upadhyay@rutgers.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of approximating all-pair distances in a weighted undirected
graph with differential privacy, introduced by Sealfon [Sea16]. Given a publicly
known undirected graph, we treat the weights of edges as sensitive information,
and two graphs are neighbors if their edge weights differ in one edge by at most
one. We obtain efficient algorithms with significantly improved bounds on a
broad class of graphs which we refer to as recursively separable. In particular,
for any n-vertex Kh -minor-free graph, our algorithm achieve an additive error of
e
O(h(nW
)1/3 ), where W represents the maximum edge weight;
√ For grid graphs,
the same algorithmic scheme achieve additive error of e
O(n1/4 W ). Our approach
can be seen as a generalization of the celebrated binary tree mechanism for range
queries, as releasing range queries is equivalent to computing all-pair distances
on a path graph. In essence, our approach is based on generalizing the binary tree
mechanism to graphs that are recursively separable.

∗

JL and ZZ have been supported by National Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62472212 and
the New Cornerstone Science Foundation.
†
Supported in part by NSF award 2228995
‡
JU’s research was funded by the NSF CNS 2433628, Google Seed Fund grant, Google Research Scholar
Award, Dean Research Seed Fund, and Rutgers Decanal Grant no. 302918.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

