3DPE-Gaze:Unlocking the Potential of 3D Facial
Priors for Generalized Gaze Estimation
Yangshi Ge Yiwei Bao Feng Lu∗
State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
{geyangshi, baoyiwei, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, face-based deep-learning gaze estimation methods have achieved
significant advancements. However, while face images provide supplementary
information beneficial for gaze inference, the substantial extraneous information
they contain also increases the risk of overfitting during model training and compromises generalization capability. To alleviate this problem, we propose the
3DPE-Gaze framework, explicitly modeling 3D facial priors for feature decoupling
and generalized gaze estimation. The 3DPE-Gaze framework consists of two core
modules: the 3D Geometric Prior Module (3DGP) incorporating the FLAME
model to parameterize facial structures and gaze-irrelevant facial appearances
while extracting gaze features; the Semantic Concept Alignment Module (SCAM)
separates gaze-related and unrelated concepts through CLIP-guided contrastive
learning. Finally, the 3DPE-Gaze framework combines 3D facial landmark as
prior for generalized gaze estimation. Experimental results show that 3DPE-Gaze
outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on four major cross-domain tasks,
with particularly outstanding performance in challenging scenarios such as lighting
variations, extreme head poses, and glasses occlusion.

1

Introduction

Gaze estimation has wide applications in computer vision, being an essential technology in scenarios such as human-computer interaction[13, 28, 29], virtual/augmented reality[25, 31], and
driving monitoring[1, 19, 27]. Gaze estimation methods can be broadly categorized into two types:
model-based approaches and appearance-based approaches. Model-based approaches calculate gaze
direction by simulating the anatomical structure of the eyeball, offering higher accuracy but typically
requiring specialized hardware and controlled environments. Appearance-based approaches, on
the other hand, learn gaze mapping relationships directly from image features, offering broader
application potential.
Appearance-based gaze estimation research has undergone a critical transition from focusing solely
on eye regions to utilizing full-face information. Early research primarily extracted local features
from eye regions[26, 20], but this approach overlooked the important contextual information provided
by other facial areas. Zhang et al.[38] pioneered the use of full-face input and introduced a spatial
weighting mechanism, significantly improving prediction accuracy. Since then, full-face input has
become the mainstream approach in gaze estimation research.
However, the full-face input strategy is a double-edged sword: while it contains rich gaze-related
structural information, the eye region occupies only a small proportion of the image, simultaneously
introducing numerous domain-specific interferences (such as lighting variations, skin color differences, expression changes, etc.)[33]. These irrelevant information easily lead to models overfitting to
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

