Orthogonal Survival Learners for Estimating
Heterogeneous Treatment Effects from Time-to-Event
Data
Dennis Frauen∗, Maresa Schröder∗, Konstantin Hess, Stefan Feuerriegel
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
{frauen, maresa.schroeder, k.hess, feuerriegel}@lmu.de

Abstract
Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects (HTEs) is crucial for personalized
decision-making. However, this task is challenging in survival analysis, which
includes time-to-event data with censored outcomes (e.g., due to study dropout).
In this paper, we propose a toolbox of orthogonal survival learners to estimate
HTEs from time-to-event data under censoring. Our learners have three main
advantages: (i) we show that learners from our toolbox are guaranteed to be
orthogonal and thus robust with respect to nuisance estimation errors; (ii) our
toolbox allows for incorporating a custom weighting function, which can lead to
robustness against different types of low overlap, and (iii) our learners are modelagnostic (i.e., they can be combined with arbitrary machine learning models). We
instantiate the learners from our toolbox using several weighting functions and,
as a result, propose various neural orthogonal survival learners. Some of these
coincide with existing survival learners (including survival versions of the DR- and
R-learner), while others are novel and further robust w.r.t. low overlap regimes
specific to the survival setting (i.e., survival overlap and censoring overlap). We
then empirically verify the effectiveness of our learners for HTE estimation in
different low-overlap regimes through numerical experiments. In sum, we provide
practitioners with a large toolbox of learners that can be used for randomized and
observational studies with censored time-to-event data.

1

Introduction

Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects (HTEs) is crucial in personalized medicine [10, 15]. HTEs
quantify the causal effect of a treatment on an outcome (e.g., survival), conditional on individual
patient characteristics (e.g., age, gender, prior diseases). This enables clinicians to make individualized
treatment decisions aimed at improving patient outcomes. For example, knowing the HTE of an
anticancer drug on patient survival can inform treatment decisions that are tailored to a patient’s
unique medical history, thereby maximizing the probability of survival.
A common setting in medicine is survival analysis [26, 51]. Survival analysis is aimed at modeling
medical outcomes, particularly in cancer care, where the dataset involves time-to-event data [54].
That is, the outcome of interest is a time to an event that we are interested in maximizing. For
example, in cancer care, a treatment should maximize the time until death or tumor progression [24,
43]. Hence, this requires tailored methods for HTE estimation from time-to-event data.
The fundamental problem that distinguishes survival analysis from standard causal inference is
censoring [47]. Censoring refers to the phenomenon that some individuals may not have experienced
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

