On Vanishing Gradients, Over-Smoothing, and
Over-Squashing in GNNs:
Bridging Recurrent and Graph Learning

Álvaro Arroyo1,˚ Alessio Gravina2,˚
Claudio Gallicchio2 Xiaowen Dong1
1

University of Oxford

2

Benjamin Gutteridge 1 Federico Barbero 1
Michael Bronstein1,3 Pierre Vandergheynst4

University of Pisa

3

AITHYRA

4

EPFL

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are models that leverage the graph structure
to transmit information between nodes, typically through the message-passing
operation. While widely successful, this approach is well-known to suffer from
representational collapse as the number of layers increases and insensitivity to
the information contained at distant and poorly connected nodes. In this paper,
we present a unified view of the appearance of these issues through the lens of
vanishing gradients, using ideas from linear control theory for our analysis. We
propose an interpretation of GNNs as recurrent models and empirically demonstrate
that a simple state-space formulation of a GNN effectively alleviates these issues at
no extra trainable parameter cost. Further, we show theoretically and empirically
that (i) Traditional GNNs are by design prone to extreme gradient vanishing
even after a few layers; (ii) Feature collapse is directly related to the mechanism
causing vanishing gradients; (iii) Long-range modeling is most easily achieved by
a combination of graph rewiring and vanishing gradient mitigation. We believe our
work will help bridge the gap between the recurrent and graph learning literature
and unlock the design of new effective models that benefit from both worlds.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [98, 45, 94, 76, 17, 29] have become a widely used architecture for
processing information on graph domains. Most GNNs operate via message passing, where information is exchanged between neighboring nodes, giving rise to Message-Passing Neural Networks
(MPNNs). Some of the most popular instances of this type of architecture include GCN [67], GAT
[101], GIN [106], and GraphSAGE [56].
Despite its widespread use, this paradigm also suffers from some fundamental limitations. Most
importantly, we highlight the issue of feature collapse (sometimes termed as over-smoothing) [79, 18],
where feature representations become exponentially similar as the number of layers increases,
and over-squashing [1, 100, 30], which describes the difficulty of propagating information across
faraway nodes, as the exponential growth in a node’s receptive field results in many messages being
compressed into fixed-size vectors. Although these two issues have been studied extensively, and there
exists evidence that they are trade-offs of each other [44], there is no unified theoretical framework
that explains why architectures that solve these problems work and whether there exists a common
underlying cause that governs these problems.
In this work, we analyze these issues arising from GNN depth through the lens of vanishing
gradients. In particular, we ask several questions regarding the appearance and consequences of this
˚

Equal contribution. Correspondance to alvaro.arroyo@univ.ox.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

