Efficient PAC Learning for Realizable-Statistic Models
via Convex Surrogates

Shivani Agarwal
University of Pennsylvania
ashivani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
A central question in the theory of machine learning concerns the identification of
classes of data distributions for which one can provide computationally efficient
learning algorithms with provable statistical learning guarantees. Indeed, in the
context of probably approximately correct (PAC) learning, there has been much
interest in exploring intermediate PAC learning models that, unlike the realizable
PAC learning setting, allow for some stochasticity in the labels, and unlike the
fully agnostic PAC learning setting, also admit computationally efficient learning
algorithms with finite sample complexity bounds. Some examples of such models
include random classification noise (RCN), probabilistic concepts, Massart noise,
and generalized linear models (GLMs); in general, most of this work has focused
on binary classification problems. In this paper, we study what we call realizablestatistic models (RSMs), wherein we allow stochastic labels but assume that some
vector-valued statistic of the conditional label distribution comes from some known
function class. RSMs are a flexible class of models that interpolate between the
realizable and fully agnostic settings, and that also recover several previously
studied models as special cases. We show that for a broad range of RSM learning
problems, where the statistic of interest can be accurately estimated via a convex
‘strongly proper composite’ surrogate loss, minimizing this convex surrogate loss
yields a computationally efficient learning algorithm with finite sample complexity
bounds. We then apply this result to show that various commonly used (and in some
cases, not so commonly used) convex surrogate risk minimization algorithms yield
computationally efficient learning algorithms with finite sample complexity bounds
for a variety of RSM learning problems including binary classification, multiclass
classification, multi-label prediction, and subset ranking. For the special case
of binary classification with sigmoid-of-linear class probabilities (also a special
case of GLMs), our results show that minimizing the standard binary logistic
loss has a similar sample complexity as the GLM-tron algorithm of Kakade et al.
(2011), but is computationally more efficient. In terms of the distribution over
the domain/instance space, our results are all distribution-independent. To our
knowledge, these are the first such results for PAC learning with stochastic labels
for such a broad range of learning problems.

1

Introduction

The probably approximately correct (PAC) learning model is a cornerstone in the theory of machine
learning. The two most widely studied settings, namely the realizable and fully agnostic settings,
both represent somewhat extreme tradeoffs between computational efficiency and statistical modeling
power: The realizable setting, as originally proposed by Valiant [38], often admits computationally
efficient learning algorithms, but makes the restrictive statistical assumption that examples are labeled
by a deterministic target function (from some known function class); the (fully) agnostic setting
[23, 29] allows for fully general joint probability distributions on the labeled examples, but often fails
to admit computationally efficient learning algorithms. Consequently, there has been much interest
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

