Permissioned LLMs: Enforcing Access Control in
Large Language Models

Bargav Jayaraman
Oracle Labs
bargav.jayaraman@oracle.com

Virendra J. Marathe
Oracle Labs
virendra.marathe@oracle.com

Hamid Mozaffari
Oracle Labs
hamid.mozaffari@oracle.com

William F. Shen
University of Cambridge
fs604@cam.ac.uk

Krishnaram Kenthapadi
Oracle Health
krishnaram.kenthapadi@oracle.com

Abstract
In enterprise settings, organizational data is segregated, siloed and carefully protected by elaborate access control frameworks. These access control structures can
completely break down if an LLM fine-tuned on the siloed data serves requests,
for downstream tasks, from individuals with disparate access privileges. We propose Permissioned LLMs (PermLLM), a new class of LLMs that superimpose
the organizational data access control structures on query responses they generate.
We formalize abstractions underpinning the means to determine whether access
control enforcement happens correctly over LLM query responses. Our formalism
introduces the notion of a relevant response that can be used to prove whether a
PermLLM mechanism has been implemented correctly. We also introduce a novel
metric, called access advantage, to empirically evaluate the efficacy of a PermLLM
mechanism. We introduce three novel PermLLM mechanisms that build on Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning to achieve the desired access control. We furthermore
present two instantiations of access advantage–(i) Domain Distinguishability Index
(DDI) based on Membership Inference Attacks, and (ii) Utility Gap Index (UGI)
based on LLM utility evaluation. We demonstrate the efficacy of our PermLLM
mechanisms through extensive experiments on five public datasets (GPQA, RCV1,
SimpleQA, WMDP, and PubMedQA), in addition to evaluating the validity of DDI
and UGI metrics themselves for quantifying access control in LLMs.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), due to their unprecedented natural language processing capabilities,
are being adopted in a vast range of applications across the entire computing industry [21, 48]. The
day may not be too far off when LLMs become the primary interface to a large swath of computing
and information extraction tasks. In this paper, we focus on enterprise settings where LLMs are used
to perform a wide variety of computing tasks using organization-wide data. Using LLMs that have a
wide purview over organizational data brings massive troves of information and utility, including the
ability to combine learnings from disparate information silos of the organization, to the finger tips of
individuals in the organization. However, making all the learnings from organizational data available
to any individual who can query the LLM becomes a critical security challenge: Organizations have
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

