Performative Validity of Recourse Explanations

Gunnar König1,2 , Hidde Fokkema3 , Timo Freiesleben4,5 ,
Celestine Mendler-Dünner1,6 , Ulrike von Luxburg1,2
1
Tübingen AI Center, 2 University of Tübingen
3
Korteweg-de Vries Institute for Mathematics, University of Amsterdam
4
LMU Munich, 5 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
6
ELLIS Institute Tübingen, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
g.koenig.edu@pm.me

Abstract
When applicants get rejected by a high-stakes algorithmic decision system, recourse
explanations provide actionable suggestions for applicants on how to change their
input features to get a positive evaluation. A crucial yet overlooked phenomenon is
that recourse explanations are performative: When many applicants act according to
their recommendations, their collective behavior may shift the data distribution and,
once the model is refitted, also the decision boundary. Consequently, the recourse
algorithm may render its own recommendations invalid, such that applicants who
make the effort of implementing their recommendations may be rejected again
when they reapply. In this work, we formally characterize the conditions under
which recourse explanations remain valid under their own performative effects. In
particular, we prove that recourse actions may become invalid if they are influenced
by or if they intervene on non-causal variables. Based on this analysis, we caution
against the use of standard counterfactual explanation and causal recourse methods,
and instead advocate for recourse methods that recommend actions exclusively on
causal variables.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning systems can significantly impact people’s lives. Automated systems may
determine whether someone receives a loan, is admitted to a graduate program, or gets invited to a
job interview. In such high-stakes scenarios, applicants who receive an unfavorable decision – such
as being rejected for a loan or a job interview – often seek guidance on how to improve their chances
in the future. To address this need, recourse explanations are employed: they inform applicants of
concrete changes they could implement to achieve the desired outcome from the system [Karimi
et al., 2022]. For example, rejected loan applicants might be recommended to reduce their credit card
utilization, and rejected job applicants might be advised to obtain a master’s degree and reapply.
Ideally, recourse explanations are valid – meaning that if applicants follow the recommended actions
(e.g., obtaining a master’s degree), they will indeed receive the desired outcome when reevaluated
by the machine learning model (e.g., be invited to the interview). In practice, however, deployed
prediction models are rarely static. Model owners routinely monitor for distribution shifts and
retrain their models to maintain performance. Recent work has shown that model updates can
undermine the validity of recourse [Rawal et al., 2020, Upadhyay et al., 2021, Nguyen et al., 2023].
These studies examine how different types of distribution shift – such as data corrections, temporal
drift, or geospatial variability – can affect recourse validity, and propose methods for generating
recommendations that remain robust under such shifts.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

