OrdShap: Feature Position Importance
for Sequential Black-Box Models

Davin Hill∗
Northeastern University

Brian L. Hill†
Age Bold

Vijay S. Nori
Optum AI

Robert E. Tillman
Optum AI

Aria Masoomi
Northeastern University
Jennifer Dy
Northeastern University

Abstract
Sequential deep learning models excel in domains with temporal or sequential dependencies, but their complexity necessitates post-hoc feature attribution methods
for understanding their predictions. While existing techniques quantify feature
importance, they inherently assume fixed feature ordering — conflating the effects
of (1) feature values and (2) their positions within input sequences. To address
this gap, we introduce OrdShap, a novel attribution method that disentangles these
effects by quantifying how a model’s predictions change in response to permuting feature position. We establish a game-theoretic connection between OrdShap
and Sanchez-Bergantiños values, providing a theoretically grounded approach to
position-sensitive attribution. Empirical results from health, natural language, and
synthetic datasets highlight OrdShap’s effectiveness in capturing feature value and
feature position attributions, and provide deeper insight into model behavior.

1

Introduction

As complex and opaque deep learning models are increasingly used in high-stakes applications, it is important to understand the
factors that contribute to their predictions.
Feature attribution methods are a widely
used approach that seeks to quantify the sensitivity of model predictions to changes in
individual input features, thus generating
scores that represent that feature’s importance or relevance [5, 89]. In particular,
local methods generate separate scores for
each given input sample; this helps users
to understand individual model predictions
rather than relying solely on global attribution scores. Many recent feature attribution
methods have adapted the Shapley Value
framework [65] from the field of cooperative game theory [43, 75]. Shapley-based
methods have demonstrated their utility in
a wide range of domains [70, 28, 9] and satisfy a number of theoretical properties [43].
∗
†

Original Sequence

Figure 1: Predicting hospital Length-of-Stay (LOS)
≥ 3 days for a patient using a sequence of medical
tokens, representing tests and medications (App. A.2).
Traditional feature attribution methods capture model
sensitivity to token values. However, we observe that
permuting token order has a significant effect on the
predicted risk over time (Left) and final prediction
(Right), even when token values are unchanged.

Corresponding author. Email: hill.davi@northeastern.edu
Work done while at Optum AI

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

