Functional Complexity-adaptive Temporal Tensor
Decomposition
Panqi Chen1 Lei Cheng1, 2 ∗ Jianlong Li1 Weichang Li1
Weiqing Liu3 Jiang Bian3 Shikai Fang1, 3∗
1
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of
Multi-Modal Communication Networks and Intelligent Information Processing
3
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Tensor decomposition is a fundamental tool for analyzing multi-dimensional data
by learning low-rank factors to represent high-order interactions. While recent
works on temporal tensor decomposition have made signiﬁcant progress by incorporating continuous timestamps in latent factors, they still struggle with general
tensor data with continuous indexes not only in the temporal mode but also in
other modes, such as spatial coordinates in climate data. Moreover, the challenge
of self-adapting model complexity is largely unexplored in functional temporal
tensor models, with existing methods being inapplicable in this setting. To address
these limitations, we propose functional Complexity-Adaptive Temporal Tensor
dEcomposition (C ATTE). Our approach encodes continuous spatial indexes as
learnable Fourier features and employs neural ODEs in latent space to learn the
temporal trajectories of factors. To enable automatic adaptation of model complexity, we introduce a sparsity-inducing prior over the factor trajectories. We develop
an efﬁcient variational inference scheme with an analytical evidence lower bound,
enabling sampling-free optimization. Through extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets, we demonstrate that C ATTE not only reveals the
underlying ranks of functional temporal tensors but also signiﬁcantly outperforms
existing methods in prediction performance and robustness against noise. The
code is available at https://github.com/OceanSTARLab/CATTE.

1

Introduction

Tensor is a ubiquitous data structure for organizing multi-dimensional data. For example, a fourmode tensor (longitude, latitude, depth, time) can serve as a uniﬁed representation of spatiotemporal
signals in the ocean, such as temperature or ﬂow speed. Tensor decomposition is a prevailing framework for multiway data analysis that estimates latent factors to reconstruct the unobserved entries.
Methods like CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP)[1] and Tucker decomposition[2] are widely applied
across ﬁelds, including climate science, oceanography, and social science.
An emerging trend in tensor community is to leverage the continuous timestamp of observed entries
and build temporal tensor models, as the real-world tensor data is often irregularly collected in time,
e.g., physical signals, accompanied with rich and complex time-varying patterns. The temporal
tensor methods expand the classical tensor framework by using polynomial splines [3], Gaussian
processes [4, 5], ODE [6] and energy-based models [7] to estimate the continuous temporal dynamics in latent space, instead of discretizing the time mode and setting a ﬁxed number of factors.
∗

Correspond to lei_cheng@zju.edu.cn, fsk@zju.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

