Understand Before You Generate: Self-Guided
Training for Autoregressive Image Generation
Xiaoyu Yue1,2 Zidong Wang3 Yuqing Wang4 Wenlong Zhang1
Xihui Liu4 Wanli Ouyang1,3 Lei Bai1 Luping Zhou2
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 University of Sydney
3
Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Recent studies have demonstrated the importance of high-quality visual representations in image generation and have highlighted the limitations of generative models
in image understanding. As a generative paradigm originally designed for natural
language, autoregressive models face similar challenges. In this work, we present
the first systematic investigation into the mechanisms of applying the next-token
prediction paradigm to the visual domain. We identify three key properties that
hinder the learning of high-level visual semantics: local and conditional dependence, inter-step semantic inconsistency, and spatial invariance deficiency. We
show that these issues can be effectively addressed by introducing self-supervised
objectives during training, leading to a novel training framework, Self-guided
Training for AutoRegressive models (ST-AR). Without relying on pre-trained representation models, ST-AR significantly enhances the image understanding ability
of autoregressive models and leads to improved generation quality. Specifically,
ST-AR brings approximately 42% FID improvement for LlamaGen-L and 49% FID
improvement for LlamaGen-XL, while maintaining the same sampling strategy1 .

1

Introduction

The field of image generation has witnessed remarkable progress through various approaches, including diffusion models [27, 43, 32, 52, 18, 37, 34, 41, 33, 38, 20], Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [21, 22, 42], and autoregressive models (AR) [19, 44]. Among these, autoregressive models,
originally developed for natural language processing (NLP), have demonstrated exceptional generative capabilities as the foundational paradigm for large language models (LLMs) such as GPT [2]
and Llama [47, 48]. When adapted to image generation, autoregressive models achieve performance
comparable to modality-specific methods, indicating their potential as a unified generative framework
across diverse data modalities [5, 8, 16, 45, 49].
Recent studies have highlighted the importance of image understanding in enhancing generation performance. For instance, REPA [54] enhances the generative capabilities of diffusion models [34, 51]
by distilling self-supervised representations into their intermediate layers. Similarly, ImageFolder [31]
introduces semantic regularization to the quantizer of the tokenizer to inject semantic constraints.
These methods rely on pre-trained representation models to provide additional semantic information,
as denoising and compressing may not be appropriate tasks for learning semantically meaningful
image representations [54]. In contrast, the next-token prediction paradigm used by autoregressive
models has proven to be an effective pre-training approach for capturing contextual information
in natural language processing [39, 28, 40]. However, when adapted to vision, due to the inherent
differences between image and text modalities, next-token prediction also faces challenges in learning
high-level visual representations.
1

Project Page: https://github.com/yuexy/ST-AR

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

