A multiscale analysis of mean-field transformers in the
moderate interaction regime

Giuseppe Bruno
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Bern
giuseppe.bruno@unibe.ch

Federico Pasqualotto
Department of Mathematics
University of California, San Diego
fpasqualotto@ucsd.edu

Andrea Agazzi
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Bern
andrea.agazzi@unibe.ch

Abstract
We study the evolution of tokens through the depth of encoder-only transformer
models at inference time by modeling them as a mean-field interacting particle
system, and analyzing the corresponding dynamics. More specifically, we consider
this problem in the moderate interaction regime, where the number N of tokens is
large and the inverse temperature parameter β of the model scales together with
N . In this regime, the dynamics of the system displays a multiscale behavior: a
fast phase, where the token empirical measure collapses on a low-dimensional
subspace, an intermediate phase, where the measure further collapses into clusters,
and a slow phase, where such clusters sequentially merge into a single one. We
characterize the limiting dynamics in each phase, exemplifying our results with
some simulations.

1

Introduction

The transformer architecture [49], through its extensive use in Large Language Models, has played a
crucial role in the recent, unprecedented developments in machine learning and artificial intelligence.
One of the key innovations at the heart of this architecture are self-attention modules [6], allowing
to capture long-range dependencies in the data, e.g., in prompts with a large number N of tokens.
To further improve their performance, practitioners have implemented these models in different
hyperparameter regimes, e.g., choosing the model’s inverse temperature parameter β (a parameter
that scales the query-key dot products in the self-attention layer) as a function of N [37, 43].
However, the groundbreaking empirical success of these machine learning models remains largely
unexplained from the theoretical perspective. In particular, a precise mathematical description of the
internal representations learned by transformers, and of how these representations behave in different
hyperparameter regimes, is still lacking.
A promising approach to fill this gap was presented in the work [46], where the authors interpret
tokens traveling through a deep stack of transformer layers as particles evolving in time and interacting
in a mean-field way. A subsequent line of work [24] has then observed that tokens in this model tend
to organize into clusters, offering - in a simplified setting - a compelling qualitative explanation of
how transformer models build representation of complex input data.
Despite its apparent simplicity, this interacting particle system exhibits a remarkably rich dynamical
behavior. Indeed, recent studies have identified distinct dynamical phases, characterized by quali39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

