Approximation theory for 1-Lipschitz ResNets

Davide Murari
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
University of Cambridge
dm2011@cam.ac.uk
Takashi Furuya
Faculty of Life and Medical Sciences, Department of Biomedical Engineering
Doshisha University
RIKEN AIP
takashi.furuya0101@gmail.com
Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
University of Cambridge
cbs31@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
1-Lipschitz neural networks are fundamental for generative modelling, inverse
problems, and robust classifiers. In this paper, we focus on 1-Lipschitz residual networks (ResNets) based on explicit Euler steps of negative gradient flows and study
their approximation capabilities. Leveraging the Restricted Stone–Weierstrass
Theorem, we first show that these 1-Lipschitz ResNets are dense in the set of
scalar 1-Lipschitz functions on any compact domain when width and depth are
allowed to grow. We also show that these networks can exactly represent scalar
piecewise affine 1-Lipschitz functions. We then prove a stronger statement: by
inserting norm-constrained linear maps between the residual blocks, the same
density holds when the hidden width is fixed. Because every layer obeys simple
norm constraints, the resulting models can be trained with off-the-shelf optimisers.
This paper provides the first universal approximation guarantees for 1-Lipschitz
ResNets, laying a rigorous foundation for their practical use.

1

Introduction

The flexibility of neural network parameterisations allows them to approximate any regular enough
target function arbitrarily well [8, 17, 20, 28, 40, 41]. Despite this desirable aspect, there are
several reasons why one would not want a completely unconstrained parameterisation. For instance,
unconstrained networks tend to be overly sensitive to input adversarial perturbations because their
local Lipschitz constants can be large, making them unreliable classifiers [34]. There are also
situations where one is purely interested in modelling specific sets of functions, for example, to turn
a constrained optimisation problem into an unconstrained one [19, 31, e.g]. A prominent example
is the critic in Wasserstein GANs [2], which must be 1-Lipschitz to yield a valid estimate of the
1-Wasserstein distance via the Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality [37]. In this paper, we focus on
scalar-valued neural networks that are constrained to be 1-Lipschitz in the Euclidean ℓ2 norm. These
networks have found extensive applications in inverse problems [16, 32, 33], generative modelling
[14, 21, 24], and as a means to improve network resilience to adversarial attacks [23, 29, 33, 35, 36].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

