Uncertainty Quantification for Physics-Informed
Neural Networks with Extended Fiducial Inference
Frank Shih
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
New York, NY 10017
shihf@mskcc.org

Zhenghao Jiang
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
jiang976@purdue.edu

Faming Liang
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
fmliang@purdue.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) in scientific machine learning is increasingly
critical as neural networks are widely adopted to tackle complex problems across
diverse scientific disciplines. For physics-informed neural networks (PINNs), a
prominent model in scientific machine learning, uncertainty is typically quantified
using Bayesian or dropout methods. However, both approaches suffer from a
fundamental limitation: the prior distribution or dropout rate required to construct
honest confidence sets cannot be determined without additional information. In
this paper, we propose a novel method within the framework of extended fiducial
inference (EFI) to provide rigorous uncertainty quantification for PINNs. The
proposed method leverages a narrow-neck hyper-network to learn the parameters
of the PINN and quantify their uncertainty based on imputed random errors in the
observations. This approach overcomes the limitations of Bayesian and dropout
methods, enabling the construction of honest confidence sets based solely on
observed data. This advancement represents a significant breakthrough for PINNs,
greatly enhancing their reliability, interpretability, and applicability to real-world
scientific and engineering challenges. Moreover, it establishes a new theoretical
framework for EFI, extending its application to large-scale models, eliminating the
need for sparse hyper-networks, and significantly improving the automaticity and
robustness of statistical inference.
Keywords: Adaptive Stochastic Gradient MCMC, Deep Learning, Black-Scholes
Model, Partial Differential Equation, Porous-FKPP Model

1

Introduction

Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019) are a class of scientific machine
learning models that integrate physical principles directly into the training process of the DNN models.
They achieve this by incorporating terms derived from ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or
partial differential equations (PDEs) into the DNN’s loss function. PINNs take spatial-temporal
coordinates as input and produce functions that approximate the solutions to the differential equations.
Because they embed physics-based constraints, PINNs can typically address problems that are
described by few data while ensuring adherence to the given physical laws (Zou et al., 2025; Cuomo
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

