Learning a Cross-Modal Schrödinger Bridge for
Visual Domain Generalization
Hao Zheng1 †, Jingjun Yi2,3 †, Qi Bi4 , Huimin Huang1 , Haolan Zhan5 , Yawen Huang1 ,
Yuexiang Li6 , Xian Wu1 , Yefeng Zheng2
†: equal contribution
1
Tencent Jarvis Lab, China, 2 Westlake University, China
3
University of Alberta, Canada, 4 University of Amsterdam, the Netherland
5
Monash University, Australia, 6 University of Macau, Macau
q.bi@ieee.org, yuexiang.li@ieee.org
zhengyefeng@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain generalization aims to train models that perform robustly on unseen target
domains without access to target data. The realm of vision-language foundation
model has opened a new venue owing to its inherent out-of-distribution generalization capability. However, the static alignment to class-level textual anchors
remains insufficient to handle the dramatic distribution discrepancy from diverse
domain-specific visual features. In this work, we propose a novel cross-domain
Schrödinger Bridge (SB) method, namely SBGen, to handle this challenge, which
explicitly formulates the stochastic semantic evolution, to gain better generalization to unseen domains. Technically, the proposed SBGen consists of three key
components: (1) text-guided domain-aware feature selection to isolate semantically
aligned image tokens; (2) stochastic cross-domain evolution to simulate the SB
dynamics via a learnable time-conditioned drift; and (3) stochastic domain-agnostic
interpolation to construct semantically grounded feature trajectories. Empirically,
SBGen achieves state-of-the-art performance on domain generalization in both
classification and segmentation. This work highlights the importance of modeling
domain shifts as structured stochastic processes grounded in semantic alignment.

1

Introduction

Distribution shift is a fundamental challenge in both machine learning and computer vision. Domain
Generalization (DG) addresses this challenge by training models on one or more source domains
that can generalize well to unseen target domains [45, 31, 75, 16]. A generalizable representation
is especially critical for trust-worthy artificial intelligence and plays a pivot role in safety-crucial
applications, such as autonomous driving [32, 74, 8, 77, 21] and medical imaging [11, 68, 7, 76],
where target environments are not available during training.
In visual domain generalization, the images from various domains are usually diverse in terms of
the contrast, texture, illumination, and resolution [88, 59, 48]. The emergence of vision-language
models (VLM) [59] has opened up a new venue to approach the DG problem. Its general idea is that,
the category-wise text description is capable to anchor high-level semantics despite the distribution
shift of the images from various unseen domains [31]. Specifically, existing VLM based DG methods
usually treat the VLM as a static feature extractor and apply fixed alignment strategies such as prompt
learning [86], cosine matching [1] and adversarial regularization [81] to enforce similarity between
image features and class-level text queries.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

