Inference with correlated priors using sisters cells

Sina Tootoonian and Andreas T. Schaefer
Sensory Circuits and Neurotechnology Laboratory
The Francis Crick Institute
London, UK
[sina.tootoonian|andreas.schaefer]@crick.ac.uk

Abstract
A common view of sensory processing is as probabilistic inference of latent causes
from receptor activations. Standard approaches often assume these causes are
a priori independent, yet real-world generative factors are typically correlated.
Representing such structured priors in neural systems poses architectural challenges,
particularly when direct interactions between units representing latent causes are
biologically implausible or computationally expensive. Inspired by the architecture
of the olfactory bulb, we propose a novel circuit motif that enables inference with
correlated priors without requiring direct interactions among latent cause units.
The key insight lies in using sister cells: neurons receiving shared receptor input
but connected differently to local interneurons. The required interactions among
latent units are implemented indirectly through their connections to the sister cells,
such that correlated connectivity implies anti-correlation in the prior and vice
versa. We use geometric arguments to construct connectivity that implements
a given prior and to bound the number of causes for which such priors can be
constructed. Using simulations, we demonstrate the efficacy of such priors for
inference in noisy environments and compare the inference dynamics to those
experimentally observed. Finally, we show how, under certain assumptions on latent
representations, the prior used can be inferred from sister cell activations. While
biologically grounded in the olfactory system, our mechanism generalises to other
natural and artificial sensory systems and may inform the design of architectures
for efficient inference under correlated latent structure.

1

Introduction

A common view of sensory processing is as probabilistic inference of latent causes,
x ≜ [x1 , . . . , xN ],
from receptor inputs [1]. Causes are often assumed to be a priori independent [2], so that
p(x) = p(x1 , x2 , . . . , xN ) ∝

N
Y

e−ϕi (xi ) .

i=1

This assumption is not only mathematically convenient, but is also appropriate in some settings.
For example, in the celebrated ‘cocktail party problem,’ signals from multiple microphones must
be demixed into as many simultaneous conversations, and it is reasonable to assume that the audio
waveforms from different conversations will be independent.
In other situations, however, the independence assumption may not be appropriate. For example,
some notable models [3, 4] of the early visual system describe it as explaining retinal input in terms
of simple features like oriented Gabors. Although they arrive at such features by searching for
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

