Hankel Singular Value Regularization for Highly
Compressible State Space Models

Paul Schwerdtner
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
paul.schwerdtner@nyu.edu

Jules Berman
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
jmb1174@nyu.edu

Benjamin Peherstorfer
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
pehersto@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks using state space models as layers are well suited for longrange sequence tasks but can be challenging to compress after training. We use
that regularizing the sum of Hankel singular values of state space models leads to a
fast decay of these singular values and thus to compressible models. To make the
proposed Hankel singular value regularization scalable, we develop an algorithm
to efficiently compute the Hankel singular values during training iterations by
exploiting the specific block-diagonal structure of the system matrices that we
use in our state space model parametrization. Experiments on Long Range Arena
benchmarks demonstrate that the regularized state space layers are up to 10× more
compressible than standard state space layers while maintaining high accuracy.

1

Introduction

1.1

Compressing state space models

As deep neural networks (DNNs) get bigger, compression via quantization [27, 32], pruning [64, 39,
62], and distillation [29, 43] becomes ever more important [9, 65, 19]. In this work, we focus on
compressing neural networks for long-sequence modeling. In particular, we focus on DNNs with state
space models (SSMs) as layers [21, 22, 24, 15], which have been shown to achieve state-of-the-art
accuracy while reducing training and inference costs compared to transformer models [21, 53, 59].
Significant progress was necessary to make SSM layers competitive for long-sequence tasks [22, 15].
After the initial success of S4 layers [22], a big step forward were S5 layers [53], which contain linear
time-invariant systems that have diagonal system matrices and reach state of the art performance while
balancing expressivity with training and inference costs. Additionally, initialization of SSMs has
been identified as being critical for training success, for which HiPPO matrices are now commonly
used [22].
In this work, we build on DNNs with SSM layers that are well suited for long-sequence tasks and
aim to further reduce inference costs by training neural networks such that the SSM layers are highly
compressible: The critical quantity in SSMs that controls inference costs is the order n, which is
the dimension of the internal state [26]. Therefore, instead of training DNNs with general SSMs
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

