Functional data analysis for multivariate distributions
through Wasserstein slicing

Han Chen
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
nahchen@ucdavis.edu

Hans-Georg Müller
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
hgmueller@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
The modeling of samples of distributions is a major challenge since distributions do
not form a vector space. While various approaches exist for univariate distributions,
including transformations to a Hilbert space, far less is known about the multivariate case. We utilize a transformation approach to map multivariate distributions to
a Hilbert space via a Wasserstein slicing method that is invertible. This approach
combines functional data analysis tools, such as functional principal component
analysis and modes of variation, with the facility to map back to interpretable
distributions. We also provide convergence guarantees for the Hilbert space representations under a broad class of such transforms. The method is illustrated using
joint systolic and diastolic blood pressure data.

1

Introduction

Data that consist of multivariate distributions are becoming increasingly available. Instances of
such data encompass anthropometric data distributions [24], stock price data distributions [19] and
distributions of temperatures in climate modeling. Analyzing distributional data presents distinctive
challenges, as they do not form a vector space, rendering conventional methods designed for vector
and functional data inapplicable.
For data that correspond to samples of univariate distributions, invertible global transformations
such as the log quantile density transform and log hazard transform have been employed to map
distributions to a Hilbert space L2 [35]. While various maps were proposed to embed metric spaces
into a Hilbert space, starting with Schoenberg’s kernel embedding [43, 44] and also including the
centered log-ratio transformation [23, 30, 24], these maps are generally not 1:1 and therefore not
invertible. However, invertibility is crucial as functional principal component analysis or regression
in Hilbert space involves elements that can be located anywhere in the Hilbert space. To get back
to the original distribution space, which is a must for interpretability and visualization, therefore
requires invertibility of the map.
Another example of such a non-invertible embedding for the Wasserstein space of univariate distributions is to use Riemannian type log maps to map densities to tangent bundles. The resulting tangent
spaces, are Hilbert spaces, where the development of principal component analysis [5] and regression
models [12] is straightforward, however the reverse exp map is not defined on the entire Hilbert
space but only on a convex cone and this poses a major problem, as only ad hoc solutions such as
projecting elements outside the invertibility cone on the cone are available. Statistical regression
models targeting univariate distributions as responses and Euclidean predictors can be implemented
with Fréchet regression [36], where also other distribution-to-distribution regression models with
viable implementations have been proposed [16, 49].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

