Robust Hallucination Detection in LLMs via
Adaptive Token Selection

Mengjia Niu1,2∗, Hamed Haddadi1 , Guansong Pang2†
1
Imperial College London, UK
2
Singapore Management University, Singapore
m.niu21@imperial.ac.uk, h.haddadi@imperial.ac.uk, gspang@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Hallucinations in large language models (LLMs) pose significant safety concerns
that impede their broader deployment. Recent research in hallucination detection
has demonstrated that LLMs’ internal representations contain truthfulness hints,
which can be harnessed for detector training. However, the performance of these
detectors is heavily dependent on the internal representations of predetermined
tokens, fluctuating considerably when working on free-form generations with
varying lengths and sparse distributions of hallucinated entities. To address this,
we propose HaMI, a novel approach that enables robust detection of hallucinations
through adaptive selection and learning of critical tokens that are most indicative
of hallucinations. We achieve this robustness by an innovative formulation of the
Hallucination detection task as Multiple Instance (HaMI) learning over tokenlevel representations within a sequence, thereby facilitating a joint optimisation
of token selection and hallucination detection on generation sequences of diverse
forms. Comprehensive experimental results on four hallucination benchmarks show
that HaMI significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches. Code is
available at https://github.com/mala-lab/HaMI.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in Large Language Models (LLMs) has demonstrated impressive capabilities across
a wide range of applications. However, the ever-growing popularity of LLMs also gives rise to
concerns about the reliability of their outputs [12, 22]. Some research has indicated that LLMs are
susceptible to hallucinations, which can be described as unfaithful or incorrect generations [2, 18, 33].
This tendency not only impedes the broader applications of LLMs but also poses potential safety risks,
especially in high-stake fields such as legal and medical services. Therefore, the reliable detection of
hallucinations is critical for the safe deployment of LLMs.
Various approaches have been developed to detect hallucinations. Recent studies indicate that predictive uncertainty can serve as useful detection features [9, 15, 25], as predictions with low confidence
often correlate with the presence of hallucinated content. Some research focuses on the evaluation
of a single generation [6, 34] while some harness the information contained in multiple generations.
Compared to single-generation methods, approaches utilising multiple generations demonstrate
greater effectiveness since they capture a broader set of hallucination signals. Such signals include
semantic consistency [17] for the repeated queries, as well as behaviour inconsistency when LLMs
are presented with a set of unrelated follow-up questions [38] after the initial question. Nevertheless, these methods are mainly based on the final generation output, rendering them ineffective in
leveraging important semantics in the internal representations.
∗
†

The work was done when Mengjia Niu visited Singapore Management University.
Corresponding author: G. Pang (gspang@smu.edu.sg)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

