Forging Time Series with Language: A Large
Language Model Approach to Synthetic Data
Generation
Cécile Rousseau
IBM Research Europe
rousseau.cecile@ibm.com

Tobia Boschi
IBM Research Europe
tobia.boschi@ibm.com

Giandomenico Cornacchia
IBM Research Europe
Giandomenico.Cornacchia1@ibm.com

Dhaval Salwala
IBM Research Europe
dhaval.vinodbhai.salwala@ibm.com

Alessandra Pascale
IBM Research Europe
apascale@ie.ibm.com

Juan Bernabe Moreno
IBM Research Europe
juan.bernabe-moreno@ibm.com

Abstract
SDForger is a flexible and efficient framework for generating high-quality multivariate time series using LLMs. Leveraging a compact data representation, SDForger
provides synthetic time series generation from a few samples and low-computation
fine-tuning of any autoregressive LLM. Specifically, the framework transforms
univariate and multivariate signals into tabular embeddings, which are then encoded
into text and used to fine-tune the LLM. At inference, new textual embeddings are
sampled and decoded into synthetic time series that retain the original data’s statistical properties and temporal dynamics. Across a diverse range of datasets, SDForger
outperforms existing generative models in many scenarios, both in similarity-based
evaluations and downstream forecasting tasks. By enabling textual conditioning
in the generation process, SDForger paves the way for multimodal modeling and
the streamlined integration of time series with textual information. The model is
open-sourced at https://github.com/IBM/fms-dgt/tree/main/fms_dgt/
public/databuilders/time_series.

1

Introduction

In the era of foundation models, integrating time-series analysis with language models (LLMs) has
emerged as a key research priority, spurring work on specialized models for forecasting, anomaly
detection and root cause analysis (Liang et al., 2024). These efforts aim to harness the representational
power of LLMs to tackle complex temporal dependencies. Despite these advancements, foundation
models for time series still struggle with concept drift, high variability, and face performance
degradation over long horizons. In addition, the scarcity of large and diverse time-series datasets
often limits model generalization, especially in domains where data collection is expensive or
operationally constrained, such as climate science, finance, or plasma physics (Kit et al., 2024).
In this context, synthetic data generation has emerged as a complementary research direction to
improve scalability and model performance, particularly in low-quality or data-scarce settings. In
particular, synthetic data can be leveraged to fine-tune machine learning models on domain-specific
distributions, reducing the need to train models from scratch and improving sample efficiency. Indeed,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

