Reasoning by Superposition: A Theoretical
Perspective on Chain of Continuous Thought

Hanlin Zhu∗
UC Berkeley
hanlinzhu@berkeley.edu
Jiantao Jiao
UC Berkeley
jiantao@berkeley.edu

Shibo Hao∗
UCSD
s5hao@ucsd.edu
Stuart Russell
UC Berkeley
russell@cs.berkeley.edu

Zhiting Hu
UCSD
zhh019@ucsd.edu
Yuandong Tian
Meta AI
yuandong@meta.com

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance
in many applications, including challenging reasoning problems via chain-ofthought (CoT) techniques that generate “thinking tokens” before answering the
questions. While existing theoretical works demonstrate that CoT with discrete
tokens boosts the capability of LLMs, recent work on continuous CoT lacks a
theoretical understanding of why it outperforms discrete counterparts in various
reasoning tasks, such as directed graph reachability, a fundamental graph reasoning
problem that includes many practical domain applications as special cases. In this
paper, we prove that a two-layer transformer with D steps of continuous CoT can
solve the directed graph reachability problem, where D is the diameter of the graph,
while the best known result of constant-depth transformers with discrete CoT
requires O(n2 ) decoding steps where n is the number of vertices (D < n). In our
construction, each continuous thought vector is a superposition state that encodes
multiple search frontiers simultaneously (i.e., parallel breadth-first search (BFS)),
while discrete CoT must choose a single path sampled from the superposition state,
which leads to a sequential search that requires many more steps and may be trapped
in local solutions. We also performed extensive experiments to verify that our
theoretical construction aligns well with the empirical solution obtained via training
dynamics. Notably, encoding of multiple search frontiers as a superposition state
automatically emerges in training continuous CoT, without explicit supervision to
guide the model to explore multiple paths simultaneously. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Ber666/reasoning-by-superposition.

1

Introductions

Large language models (LLMs) have shown strong performance in many reasoning tasks, especially
when empowered with chain-of-thought (CoT) [Wei et al., 2022] (e.g., hard problems like AIME
and math proving). However, they also struggle with tasks that require more sophisticated reasoning
capability [Kambhampati, 2024], e.g., reasoning and planning problems of increasing scales [Zheng
et al., 2024, Xie et al., 2024], even with CoT [Valmeekam et al., 2024, Zhou et al., 2025].
It remains an open problem how to expand existing discrete CoT to solve more complex reasoning
problems. Recently, Hao et al. [2024] proposes C OCONUT (chain-of-continuous-thought) that uses
*

Equal contributions.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

