RiverMamba: A State Space Model for Global River
Discharge and Flood Forecasting

Mohamad Hakam Shams Eddin

Juergen Gall

Institute of Computer Science, University of Bonn
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
{shams, gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de
Yikui Zhang

Stefan Kollet

Institute of Bio- and Geosciences Agrosphere (IBG-3), Research Centre Jülich
Centre for High-Performance Scientific Computing in Terrestrial Systems,
Geoverbund ABC/J, Jülich
{yik.zhang, s.kollet}@fz-juelich.de

Abstract
Recent deep learning approaches for river discharge forecasting have improved the
accuracy and efficiency in flood forecasting, enabling more reliable early warning
systems for risk management. Nevertheless, existing deep learning approaches in
hydrology remain largely confined to local-scale applications and do not leverage
the inherent spatial connections of bodies of water. Thus, there is a strong need for
new deep learning methodologies that are capable of modeling spatio-temporal relations to improve river discharge and flood forecasting for scientific and operational
applications. To address this, we present RiverMamba, a novel deep learning model
that is pretrained with long-term reanalysis data and that can forecast global river
discharge and floods on a 0.05◦ grid up to 7 days lead time, which is of high relevance in early warning. To achieve this, RiverMamba leverages efficient Mamba
blocks that enable the model to capture spatio-temporal relations in very large river
networks and enhance its forecast capability for longer lead times. The forecast
blocks integrate ECMWF HRES meteorological forecasts, while accounting for
their inaccuracies through spatio-temporal modeling. Our analysis demonstrates
that RiverMamba provides reliable predictions of river discharge across various
flood return periods, including extreme floods, and lead times, surpassing both AIand physics-based models. The source code and datasets are publicly available at
the project page https://hakamshams.github.io/RiverMamba.

1

Introduction

Riverine floods are one of the most destructive natural disasters, with their risk anticipated to rise
in the future as a result of climate change and socioeconomic developments [1–5]. They arise from
compound effects, including atmospheric conditions like heavy precipitation caused by circulation
patterns and snowmelt succeeding high temperature, all shaped by the specific characteristics of the
river drainage area [6]. The interaction of these elements influences flood timing, scale, and severity
[6]. This complexity makes future flood risk assessment challenging, as a changing climate may
alter these drivers in unpredictable ways [7]. Therefore, early prediction of flood risk, especially for
extreme floods, is a key measure for effective flood risk mitigation [8, 9].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

