Dynamic Diameter in High-Dimensions against
Adaptive Adversary and Beyond∗

Kiarash Banihashem†
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
kiarash@umd.edu

Jeff Giliberti†
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
jeffgili@umd.edu

Samira Goudarzi†
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
samirag@umd.edu

MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi†
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
hajiagha@umd.edu

Peyman Jabbarzade†
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
peymanj@umd.edu

Morteza Monemizadeh†
TU Eindhoven
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
M.Monemizadeh@tue.nl

Abstract
In this paper, we study the fundamental problems of maintaining the diameter and
a k-center clustering of a dynamic point set P ⊂ Rd , where points may be inserted
or deleted over time and the ambient dimension d is not constant and may be high.
Our focus is on designing algorithms that remain effective even in the presence of
an adaptive adversary—an adversary that, at any time t, knows the entire history
of the algorithm’s outputs as well as all the random bits used by the algorithm up
to that point. We present a fully dynamic algorithm that maintains a 2-approximate
diameter with a worst-case update time of poly(d, log n), where n is the length
of the stream. Our result is achieved by identifying a robust representative of the
dataset that requires infrequent updates, combined with a careful deamortization.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first efficient fully-dynamic algorithm
for diameter in high dimensions that simultaneously achieves a 2-approximation
guarantee and robustness against an adaptive adversary. We also give an improved
dynamic (4 + ϵ)-approximation algorithm for the k-center problem, also resilient
to an adaptive adversary. Our clustering algorithm achieves an amortized update
time of k 2.5 d · poly(ϵ−1 , log n), improving upon the amortized update time of
k 6 d · poly(ϵ−1 , log n) by Biabani et al. [NeurIPS’24].

1

Introduction

Maintaining representative properties of a dynamic point set, such as its current diameter and k-center
clusters, is a fundamental computing task. Given a set of points P in a d-dimensional Euclidean space,
with P subject to insertions and deletions, our goal is to efficiently compute and maintain approximate
diameter, minimum enclosing ball and k-center clustering. We are interested in algorithms that are
robust against an adaptive adversary, that is, the algorithm performance is evaluated against an
instance that adapts to the previous choices of the algorithm.
Approximating the diameter of a dataset—the greatest pairwise distance—is a fundamental geometric
operation with direct relevance to machine learning. It is commonly used in clustering to measure
∗

The work is partially supported by DARPA QuICC, ONR MURI 2024 award on Algorithms, Learning,
and Game Theory, Army-Research Laboratory (ARL) grant W911NF2410052, NSF AF:Small grants 2218678,
2114269, 2347322.
†
Equal Contribution
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

