InfantAgent-Next: A Multimodal Generalist Agent
for Automated Computer Interaction

Bin Lei1∗ Weitai Kang2∗ Zijian Zhang1 Winson Chen1 Xi Xie3 Shan Zuo3
Mimi Xie4 Ali Payani5 Mingyi Hong1 Yan Yan2 Caiwen Ding1
1
University of Minnesota 2 University of Illinois Chicago
3
University of Connecticut 4 The University of Texas at San Antonio 5 Cisco Research
lei00126@umn.edu, wkang126@uic.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces I NFANTAGENT-N EXT, a generalist agent capable of interacting with computers in a multimodal manner, encompassing text, images, audio,
and video. Unlike existing approaches that either build intricate workflows around
a single large model or only provide workflow modularity, our agent integrates
tool-based and pure vision agents within a highly modular architecture, enabling
different models to collaboratively solve decoupled tasks in a step-by-step manner.
Our generality is demonstrated by our ability to evaluate not only pure vision-based
real-world benchmarks (i.e., OSWorld), but also more general or tool-intensive
benchmarks (e.g., GAIA and SWE-Bench). Specifically, we achieve a 7.27% accuracy gain over Claude-Computer-Use on OSWorld. Codes and evaluation scripts
are open-sourced at https://github.com/bin123apple/InfantAgent.

1

Introduction

Automated AI agents [28, 41, 35, 47, 29, 22] are vital in today’s digital era. By integrating large
language models (LLMs) [2, 19] and visual large language models (vLLMs) [36, 6, 32, 46, 10],
they can multimodally understand user intents—including text, images, voice, and video—and,
with minimal human intervention, convert these intents into precise sequences of interface actions.
Through LLM / vLLM-driven planning, advanced perception of UI elements (such as buttons, text
fields, and images), and a modular execution framework, they significantly reduce manual effort and
enable the efficient execution of complex workflows across diverse software environments.
Current automated AI agents can be broadly classified into two categories, and they have not made
sufficiently fine-grained distinctions at the agent’s tool selection and execution levels, which leads
to significant limitations in practice. ❶ The first category consists of tool-based agents, such as
OpenHands [47], OWL [29], and AutoGPT [18], that equip LLMs with a suite of predefined tools
(e.g., code generation tools, web search tools) to boost task-specific accuracy. However, because
these agents usually rely on a single model to decide when and how to use each tool, they require
the manual definition and integration of tools for every possible desktop scenario—an infeasible
and brittle approach that limits generality. ❷ The second category comprises pure vision-based
agents, such as UI-TARS [40], and Aguvis [54], which use vLLMs to control computers via GUI.
This design allows broader applicability, since it bypasses the need for tool integration. However,
high-resolution reasoning with a single model hurts accuracy on tasks that could be easily handled
by simple tool calls, such as document editing or code manipulation—where tool-based agents
excel. ❸ Although advanced models (e.g., Claude-3.7-Sonnet [6], o3 [38]) can decompose complex
problems into precise, step-by-step plans, they frequently fail at execution—mislocalizing GUI click
∗

Equal Contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

