Nonlinear Laplacians: Tunable principal component
analysis under directional prior information

Yuxin Ma
Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21211
yma93@jhu.edu

Dmitriy Kunisky
Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21211
kunisky@jhu.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new family of algorithms for detecting and estimating a rank-one
signal from a noisy observation under prior information about that signal’s direction,
focusing on examples where the signal is known to have entries biased to be positive.
Given a matrix observation Y , our algorithms construct a nonlinear Laplacian,
another matrix of the form Y + diag(σ(Y 1)) for a nonlinear σ : R → R, and
examine the top eigenvalue and eigenvector of this matrix. When Y is the (suitably
normalized) adjacency matrix of a graph, our approach gives a class of algorithms
that search for unusually dense subgraphs by computing a spectrum of the graph
“deformed” by the degree profile Y 1. We study the performance of such algorithms
compared to direct spectral algorithms (the case σ = 0) on models of sparse
principal component analysis with biased signals, including the Gaussian planted
submatrix problem. For such models, we rigorously characterize the strength
of rank-one signal, as a function of the nonlinearity σ, required for an outlier
eigenvalue to appear in the spectrum of a nonlinear Laplacian matrix. While
identifying the σ that minimizes the required signal strength in closed form seems
intractable, we explore three approaches to design σ numerically: exhaustively
searching over simple classes of σ, learning σ from datasets of problem instances,
and tuning σ using black-box optimization of the critical signal strength. We find
both theoretically and empirically that, if σ is chosen appropriately, then nonlinear
Laplacian spectral algorithms substantially outperform direct spectral algorithms,
while retaining the conceptual simplicity of spectral methods compared to broader
classes of computations like approximate message passing or general first order
methods.

1

Introduction

Principal component analysis (PCA) is one of the most ubiquitous computational tasks in statistics
and data science, seeking to extract informative low-rank structures from noisy observations organized
into matrices (see, e.g., [AW10, JC16, JP18, GGH+ 22] for a few of the huge number of available
surveys). We will study a family of mathematical models of such problems involving detecting
or recovering these low-rank structures. These problems are specified by a family of probability
measures Pn,β on n × n symmetric matrices, where β is a signal-to-noise parameter. The observed
matrix is biased in the direction of a low-rank signal: there is a latent unobserved unit vector
x ∈ Sn−1 ⊂ Rn such that, when Y ∼ Pn,β , then
√
E [Y | x] ≈ β n · xx⊤ .
For this class of problems, we consider two computational tasks:
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

