Blackbox Model Provenance via Palimpsestic
Membership Inference

Rohith Kuditipudi∗
rohithk@stanford.edu

Jing Huang∗
hij@stanford.edu

Diyi Yang†
diyiy@cs.stanford.edu

Christopher Potts†
cgpotts@stanford.edu

Sally Zhu∗
salzhu@stanford.edu
Percy Liang†
psl@stanford.edu

Department of Computer Science
Stanford University

Abstract
Suppose Alice trains an open-weight language model and Bob uses a blackbox
derivative of Alice’s model to produce text. Can Alice prove that Bob is using
her model, either by querying Bob’s derivative model (query setting) or from the
text alone (observational setting)? We formulate this question as an independence
testing problem—in which the null hypothesis is that Bob’s model or text is
independent of Alice’s randomized training run—and investigate it through the
lens of palimpsestic memorization in language models: models are more likely
to memorize data seen later in training, so we can test whether Bob is using
Alice’s model using test statistics that capture correlation between Bob’s model
or text and the ordering of training examples in Alice’s training run. If Alice has
randomly shuffled her training data, then any significant correlation amounts to
exactly quantifiable statistical evidence against the null hypothesis, regardless of
the composition of Alice’s training data. In the query setting, we directly estimate
(via prompting) the likelihood Bob’s model gives to Alice’s training examples and
their training order; we correlate the likelihoods of over 40 fine-tunes of various
Pythia and OLMo base models ranging from 1B to 12B parameters with the base
model’s training data order, achieving a p-value on the order of at most 1 × 10−8
in all but six cases. In the observational setting, we try two approaches based on
estimating 1) the likelihood of Bob’s text overlapping with spans of Alice’s training
examples and 2) the likelihood of Bob’s text with respect to different versions of
Alice’s model we obtain by repeating the last phase (e.g., 1%) of her training run
on reshuffled data. The second approach can reliably distinguish Bob’s text from as
little as a few hundred tokens; the first does not involve any retraining but requires
many more tokens (several hundred thousand) to achieve high power.

1

Introduction

Definition 1. A palimpsest is a “writing material (such as a parchment or tablet) used one or more
times after earlier writing has been erased” [1].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Equal advising.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

