Individually Fair Diversity Maximization

Ruien Li
School of Data Science and Engineering
East China Normal University
Shanghai, China
reli@stu.ecnu.edu.cn

Yanhao Wang∗
School of Data Science and Engineering
East China Normal University
Shanghai, China
yhwang@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider the problem of diversity maximization from the perspective of individual fairness: given a set P of n points in a metric space, we aim to extract a
subset S of size k from P so that (1) the diversity of S is maximized and (2) S is
individually fair in the sense that every point in P has at least one of its nk -nearest
neighbors as its “representative” in S. We propose (O(1), 3)-bicriteria approximation algorithms for the individually fair variants of the three most common diversity
maximization problems, namely, max-min diversification, max-sum diversification,
and sum-min diversification. Specifically, the proposed algorithms provide a set
of points where every point in the dataset finds a point within a distance at most 3
times its distance to its nk -nearest neighbor while achieving a diversity value at most
O(1) times lower than the optimal solution. Numerical experiments on real-world
and synthetic datasets demonstrate that the proposed algorithms generate solutions
that are individually fairer than those produced by unconstrained algorithms and
incur only modest losses in diversity.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) algorithms are widely used in automated decision-making processes such
as banking, hiring, and education, concerns have been raised about their negative social consequences
[30, 32], e.g., discriminatory treatment against specific individuals. Recently, there has been extensive
literature on algorithmic fairness, aiming to define the notion of fairness in ML problems and design
effective and efficient fairness-aware algorithms [10, 31]. Such considerations have been taken into
account in many data-driven ML tasks, including classification [12], clustering [44], ranking [34, 48],
matching [41], and data summarization [8, 23].
This paper focuses on the diversity maximization problem and addresses its individually fair variants.
Diversity maximization is a fundamental combinatorial optimization problem with broad applications
in feature selection [47], search [15, 42], and recommendation [4, 7]. Generally, its objective is to
extract a subset S of size k from a set P of n points so that the diversity of S (measured by the
point-wise dissimilarity) is maximized. The existing studies on diversity maximization primarily
consider three objectives, namely max-min diversification, which aims to maximize the minimum
distance between any pair of selected points, max-sum diversification, which aims to maximize
the sum of pairwise distances between selected points, and sum-min diversification, which aims to
maximize the sum of the minimum distances from each selected point to its nearest neighbor among
the other selected points. All three problems have been extensively investigated in the literature
[6, 9, 20, 27], where they are also, respectively, referred to as remote-edge, remote-clique, and
remote-pseudoforest. The unconstrained max-min diversification problem is NP-complete in metric
spaces, and a greedy algorithm [16] offers a 2-approximation, which has also been shown to be tight
[39]. For unconstrained max-sum and sum-min diversification problems, it is impossible to obtain an
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

