Unsupervised Learning for Optimal Transport plan
prediction between unbalanced graphs

Sonia Mazelet
CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique
Palaiseau, France
sonia.mazelet@polytechnique.edu

Rémi Flamary
CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique
Palaiseau, France
remi.flamary@polytechnique.edu

Bertrand Thirion
Mind, Inria-Saclay
Palaiseau, France
bertrand.thirion@inria.fr

Abstract
Optimal transport between graphs, based on Gromov-Wasserstein and other extensions, is a powerful tool for comparing and aligning graph structures. However,
solving the associated non-convex optimization problems is computationally expensive, which limits the scalability of these methods to large graphs. In this work,
we present Unbalanced Learning of Optimal Transport (ULOT), a deep learning
method that predicts optimal transport plans between two graphs. Our method is
trained by minimizing the fused unbalanced Gromov-Wasserstein (FUGW) loss.
We propose a novel neural architecture with cross-attention that is conditioned on
the FUGW tradeoff hyperparameters. We evaluate ULOT on synthetic stochastic
block model (SBM) graphs and on real cortical surface data obtained from fMRI.
ULOT predicts transport plans with competitive loss up to two orders of magnitude
faster than classical solvers. Furthermore, the predicted plan can be used as a warm
start for classical solvers to accelerate their convergence. Finally, the predicted
transport plan is fully differentiable with respect to the graph inputs and FUGW
hyperparameters, enabling the optimization of functionals of the ULOT plan.

1

Introduction

Graph alignment In many graph data applications, aligning or matching nodes between two graphs
is necessary. Examples include object detection, where semantic correspondences between objects
in two images from different domains can make the model more adaptive [12]; graph edit distance
[22, 18], where the goal is to compute the distance between two graphs, which requires finding the
best correspondence between their nodes; shape matching [20], or brain alignment across subjects
[30].
But the problem of graph matching is challenging because of the combinatorial nature of the problem,
which can often be reformulated as a Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP) known to be NP-hard
[16]. One strategy that has been proposed recently is to use deep learning to learn the matching in
a supervised setting [36], [25]. These methods typically rely on a graph neural network (GNN) to
learn a representation of the nodes and then use a matching algorithm to compute the correspondence
between the nodes. However, the problem is even more difficult when the graphs are unbalanced, i.e.
when they have different numbers of nodes or when some nodes have noisy features or connections.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

