An Investigation of Memorization Risk in Healthcare
Foundation Models
Sana Tonekaboni∗
MIT
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
Vector Institute
stonekab@mit.edu

Lena Stempfle∗
MIT
Chalmers University of Technology
University of Gothenburg
stempfle@mit.edu

Adibvafa Fallahpour∗
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
University Health Network (UHN)
adibvafa.fallahpour@mail.utoronto.ca

Walter Gerych
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
Computer Science Department
wgerych@wpi.edu

Marzyeh Ghassemi
MIT
mghassem@mit.edu

Abstract
Foundation models trained on large-scale de-identified electronic health records
(EHRs) hold promise for clinical applications. However, their capacity to memorize
patient information raises important privacy concerns. In this work, we introduce
a suite of black-box evaluation tests to assess privacy-related memorization risks
in foundation models trained on structured EHR data. Our framework includes
methods for probing memorization at both the embedding and generative levels,
and aims to distinguish between model generalization and harmful memorization in
clinically relevant settings. We contextualize memorization in terms of its potential
to compromise patient privacy, particularly for vulnerable subgroups. We validate
our approach on a publicly available EHR foundation model and release an opensource toolkit to facilitate reproducible and collaborative privacy assessments in
healthcare AI. 2

1

Introduction

Foundation models trained on Electronic Health Records (EHR-FM) have been proposed as a
promising direction for advancing healthcare [38]. However, there are concerns that large models
trained on sensitive patient data may memorize and expose private health information [36], even
under legal de-identification. Previous work on memorization in Large Language Models (LLMs)
found that targeted prompts can reveal private data from training data sets [11, 9, 5, 50, 30, 26]. For
EHR-FM, the risk is comparable, but the sensitivity of clinical data makes it even more critical to
proactively assess and mitigate memorization threats.
Model memorization is often studied through the lens of adversarial privacy attacks, such as membership inference, attribute inference, and training data reconstruction, that aim to extract sensitive
∗
2

Equal contribution.
Code available at https://github.com/sanatonek/EHR-FM_memorization

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

