RCCDA: Adaptive Model Updates in the Presence of
Concept Drift under a Constrained Resource Budget

Adam Piaseczny
Purdue University
apiasecz@purdue.edu

Md Kamran Chowdhury Shisher
Purdue University
mshisher@purdue.edu

Shiqiang Wang
IBM Research
shiqiang.wang@ieee.org

Christopher G. Brinton
Purdue University
cgb@purdue.edu

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) algorithms deployed in real-world environments are often
faced with the challenge of adapting models to concept drift, where the task data
distributions are shifting over time. The problem becomes even more difficult
when model performance must be maintained under adherence to strict resource
constraints. Existing solutions often depend on drift-detection methods that produce high computational overhead for resource-constrained environments, and fail
to provide strict guarantees on resource usage or theoretical performance assurances. To address these shortcomings, we propose RCCDA: a dynamic model
update policy that optimizes ML training dynamics while ensuring compliance
to predefined resource constraints, utilizing only past loss information and a tunable drift threshold. In developing our policy, we analytically characterize the
evolution of model loss under concept drift with arbitrary training update decisions.
Integrating these results into a Lyapunov drift-plus-penalty framework produces a
lightweight greedy-optimal policy that provably limits update frequency and cost.
Experimental results on four domain generalization datasets demonstrate that our
policy outperforms baseline methods in inference accuracy while adhering to strict
resource constraints under several schedules of concept drift, making our solution
uniquely suited for real-time ML deployments.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning (DL) models have become popular in resource-constrained environments
[1, 2, 3, 4], e.g., on mobile devices, where computational power and memory are limited. These
settings typically assume static data distributions during inference, in part due to resource limitations
[5, 6, 7]. In practice, this poses a major challenge in the form of concept drift, which is a phenomenon
where the underlying relationships in data shift over time, causing model performance to degrade
[8, 9]. The computational demands of frequent updates that may be necessary to overcome rapid drifts
present a significant challenge in resource-constrained settings. As a result, effectively managing
model updates to adapt to such drift while adhering to resource constraints becomes a critical problem.
To address concept drift and mitigate model performance deterioration, researchers have proposed
a variety of adaptive learning methods [10, 11, 12]. These strategies are often tailored to different
operational contexts and environment characteristics [13, 14, 15, 16]. While most are heuristic,
validating their efficacy empirically [17, 18], certain techniques have offered convergence guarantees
to give principled insights into algorithm design, e.g., [19, 20]. Even so, these theoretical analyses
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

