Co-PatcheR: Collaborative Software Patching with
Component(s)-specific Small Reasoning Models

Yuheng Tang1 Hongwei Li1 Kaijie Zhu1
Michael Yang1 Yangruibo Ding2 Wenbo Guo1
1

University of California, Santa Barbara

2

University of California, Los Angeles

{yuhengtang, hongwei, kaijiezhu, yang335, henrygwb}@ucsb.edu
yrbding@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the success of general-purpose large language models (LLMs) in
software patching, recent works started to train specialized patching models. Most
works trained one model to handle the end-to-end patching pipeline (including
issue localization, patch generation, and patch validation). However, it is hard for a
small model to handle all tasks, as different sub-tasks have different workflows and
require different expertise. As such, by using a 70 billion model, SOTA methods
can only reach up to 41% resolved rate on SWE-bench-Verified. Motivated by
the collaborative nature, we propose Co-PatcheR, the first collaborative patching
system with small and specialized reasoning models for individual components.
Our key technique novelties are the specific task designs and training recipes. First,
we train a model for localization and patch generation. Our localization pinpoints
the suspicious lines through a two-step procedure, and our generation combines
patch generation and critique. We then propose a hybrid patch validation that
includes two models for crafting issue-reproducing test cases with and without
assertions and judging patch correctness, followed by a majority vote-based patch
selection. Through extensive evaluation, we show that Co-PatcheR achieves 46%
resolved rate on SWE-bench-Verified with only 3×14B models This makes CoPatcheR the best patcher with specialized models, requiring the least training
resources and the smallest models. We conduct a comprehensive ablation study to
validate our recipes, as well as our choice of training data number, model size, and
testing-phase scaling strategy.

1

Introduction

Software patching is a time-intensive and cognitively demanding task, especially for large and complex codebases. In the real world, effective patching often requires a combination of complementary
skills: locating the faulty component, generating plausible fixes, and validating the changes. Recent
works leverage general-purpose LLMs [32, 3, 34, 33, 15, 4] to construct patching agents with three
components, responsible for localization, generation, and validation, respectively. They demonstrate
remarkable performance on SOTA benchmarks (e.g., SWE-bench [22]) and show significant potential
to automate patching in the real world. Despite these promising results, concerns about cost efficiency and data privacy further motivate the development of customized patching models. Current
approaches train one model for the end-to-end patching pipeline through supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
or reinforcement learning. Specifically, early works [54, 29] fine-tune 72B and 32B models through
simple supervised data and achieve around 30% resolved rates on SWE-bench-Verified. More recent
methods implement rule-based rewards and train reasoning models with reinforcement learning,
with SWE-RL [50] achieving the highest resolved rate of 41% on SWE-bench-Verified using a 70B
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

