GPSToken: Gaussian Parameterized
Spatially-adaptive Tokenization for
Image Representation and Generation
†

Zhengqiang Zhang1,2 , Rongyuan Wu1,2 , Lingchen Sun1,2 , Lei Zhang1,2,
1
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
OPPO Research Institute
zhengqiang.zhang,rong-yuan.wu,ling-chen.sun@connect.polyu.hk,
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
†
Corresponding author
https://github.com/xtudbxk/GPSToken

Abstract
Effective and efficient tokenization plays an important role in image representation and generation. Conventional methods, constrained by uniform 2D/1D grid
tokenization, are inflexible to represent regions with varying shapes and textures
and at different locations, limiting their efficacy of feature representation. In this
work, we propose GPSToken, a novel Gaussian Parameterized Spatially-adaptive
Tokenization framework, to achieve non-uniform image tokenization by leveraging
parametric 2D Gaussians to dynamically model the shape, position, and textures of
different image regions. We first employ an entropy-driven algorithm to partition
the image into texture-homogeneous regions of variable sizes. Then, we parameterize each region as a 2D Gaussian (mean for position, covariance for shape)
coupled with texture features. A specialized transformer is trained to optimize
the Gaussian parameters, enabling continuous adaptation of position/shape and
content-aware feature extraction. During decoding, Gaussian parameterized tokens
are reconstructed into 2D feature maps through a differentiable splatting-based
renderer, bridging our adaptive tokenization with standard decoders for end-to-end
training. GPSToken disentangles spatial layout (Gaussian parameters) from texture
features to enable efficient two-stage generation: structural layout synthesis using
lightweight networks, followed by structure-conditioned texture generation. Experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of GPSToken, which achieves
rFID and FID scores of 0.65 and 1.50 on image reconstruction and generation tasks
using 128 tokens, respectively. Codes and models of GPSToken can be found at
https://github.com/xtudbxk/GPSToken.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in latent generative models such as VQGAN [11], LDM [29], MaskGIT [3],
DiT [26], SiT [23], VAR [32], and SD3 [10] have revolutionized the research and application of
image generation. Most of these methods adopt a two-stage framework. First, an auto-encoder is
employed to convert original images into compact latent representations with reduced dimensionality
(e.g., 256×256 → 32×32 in LDM), serving as an effective “image tokenizer”. Then, generative
models [11, 29, 3, 26, 23, 32, 10, 40] are trained in the latent space, alleviating computational
burdens while enabling high-quality generation. The primary goal of an image tokenizer is to learn
effective representations through reconstruction tasks, encoding images into a latent space with
minimal loss. Early methods such as VAE [20] transform images into continuous latent spaces.
LDM [29] performs diffusion in the latent space, reducing computational cost while improving visual
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

