Image Tokens Matter: Mitigating Hallucination in
Discrete Tokenizer-based Large Vision-Language
Models via Latent Editing

Weixing Wang 1∗, Zifeng Ding 2∗, Jindong Gu 3†, Rui Cao2
Gerard de Melo1 , Christoph Meinel4 , Haojin Yang1
1
Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam, 2 University of Cambridge
3
University of Oxford, 4 German University of Digital Science
weixing.wang@hpi.de,zd320@cam.ac.uk,jindong.gu@outlook.com

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) with discrete image tokenizers unify
multimodal representations by encoding visual inputs into a finite set of tokens.
Despite their effectiveness, we find that these models still hallucinate non-existent
objects. We hypothesize that this may be due to visual priors induced during training: When certain image tokens frequently co-occur in the same spatial regions
and represent shared objects, they become strongly associated with the verbalizations of those objects. As a result, the model may hallucinate by evoking visually
absent tokens that often co-occur with present ones. To test this assumption, we
construct a co-occurrence graph of image tokens using a segmentation dataset
and employ a Graph Neural Network (GNN) with contrastive learning followed
by a clustering method to group tokens that frequently co-occur in similar visual
contexts. We find that hallucinations predominantly correspond to clusters whose
tokens dominate the input, and more specifically, that the visually absent tokens in
those clusters show much higher correlation with hallucinated objects compared
to tokens present in the image. Based on this observation, we propose a hallucination mitigation method that suppresses the influence of visually absent tokens
by modifying latent image embeddings during generation. Experiments show our
method reduces hallucinations while preserving expressivity. Code is available at
https://github.com/weixingW/CGC-VTD/tree/main

1

Introduction

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved remarkable progress in understanding and
generating multimodal content. However, they are still prone to hallucination, often generating
descriptions of non-existent objects. To address this issue, recent efforts have explored decoding-time
interventions—such as Contrastive Decoding [1, 2, 3, 4]—as well as techniques that leverage latent
feature representations to detect and mitigate hallucinations [5, 6].
A promising direction in advancing LVLMs is the integration of discrete image tokenizers [7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13], which quantize continuous image features into sequences of discrete tokens using a
finite codebook. These tokens are structurally analogous to text tokens, enabling unified token-based
processing across modalities within a single transformer architecture [14]. Despite the potential
of this approach, we find that LVLMs built with discrete image tokenizers remain susceptible to
hallucinations, i.e., generating false or misleading content based on the input image and prompt, such
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

