DualMPNN: Harnessing Structural Alignments for
High-Recovery Inverse Protein Folding
Xuhui Liao, Qiyu Wang, Zhiqiang Liang, Liwei Xiao, Junjie Chen→
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
{xuhuiliao,qiyuwang,liangzhiqiang,liweixiao}@stu.hit.edu.cn
junjiechen@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Inverse protein folding addresses the challenge of designing amino acid sequences
that fold into a predetermined tertiary structure, bridging geometric and evolutionary constraints to advance protein engineering. Inspired by the pivotal role
of multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) in structure prediction models like AlphaFold, we hypothesize that structural alignments can provide an informative
prior for inverse folding. In this study, we introduce DualMPNN, a dual-stream
message passing neural network that leverages structurally homologous templates
to guide amino acid sequence design of predefined query structures. DualMPNN
processes the query and template proteins via two interactive branches, coupled
through alignment-aware cross-stream attention mechanisms that enable exchange
of geometric and co-evolutionary signals. Comprehensive evaluations across on
CATH 4.2, TS50 and T500 benchmarks demonstrate DualMPNN achieves state-ofthe-art recovery rates of 65.51%, 70.99%, and 70.37%, significantly outperforming
base model ProteinMPNN by 15.64%, 16.56%, 12.29%, respectively. Further
template quality analysis and structural foldability assessment underscore the value
of structural alignment priors for protein design.

1

Introduction

Protein inverse folding addresses the computational challenge of identifying amino acid sequences that
fold into a predefined tertiary structure[1]. As the inverse of the traditional protein folding problem
that predicts structures from sequences, this task is critical for advancing protein engineering[2, 3,
4], enabling broad applications in drug discovery, peptide design, synthetic biology, and enzyme
design[5, 6, 7]. Despite its broad utility, protein inverse folding remains hindered by three key
challenges: (1) the non-injective mapping between sequences and structures, where diverse sequences
can adopt geometrically similar folds (structural degeneracy); (2) the computational intractability
of exhaustively exploring the vast sequences space; (3) the difficulty of ensuring thermodynamic
stability and experimental feasibility in designed sequences.
Recent advances in computational methods have made incremental progress. Energy-based methods
(Rosetta[8], K Yue et al. [9]) leverage physical potentials but struggle with conformational sampling.
Combinatorial optimizing methods (Craig et al.[10], Kleinberg et al.[11]) address sequence space
complexity but lack scalability. Deep learning models (ProteinMPNN[12], GraDe-IF[13], ESMIF[14]) have improved design efficiency through learned sequence-structure relationships. However,
these methods often fail to resolve structural degeneracy, producing sequences that prioritize structural
compatibility over functional stability. Consequently, achieving high-recovery sequence design that
both fold into target structures and exhibit native-like stability remains an open challenge.
→

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

