Meta-D2AG: Causal Graph Learning with
Interventional Dynamic Data

Tian Gao∗
IBM Research

Songtao Lu∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Debarun Bhattacharjya
IBM Research

Junkyu Lee
IBM Research

Yue Yu
Lehigh University

Elliot Nelson
Independent

Miao Liu
IBM Research

Abstract
Causal discovery in the form of a directed acyclic graph (DAG) for dynamic time
series data has been widely studied in various applications. In this work, we
propose a dynamic DAG discovery algorithm, Meta-D2 AG, based on online metalearning. Meta-D2 AG is designed to learn dynamic DAG structures from potentially
nonlinear and non-stationary time series datasets, accounting for changes in both
parameters and graph structures. Unlike most of the existing work focusing on
observational, offline, and/or stationary settings, Meta-D2 AG explicitly treats
data collected at different time points with distribution shifts as distinct domains,
which is assumed to occur as a result of external interventions. Moreover, MetaD2 AG involves a new online meta-learning framework to take advantage of the
temporal transition among existing domains such that it can quickly adapt to new
domains with few measurements. A first-order optimization approach is utilized to
efficiently solve the meta-learning framework, and theoretical analysis establishes
the identifiability conditions and the convergence of the learning process. We
demonstrate the promising performance of the proposed meta learning framework
through better accuracy on benchmark datasets against state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models [50, 32] and causal graphical models [51] have been an active area of
research in machine learning. Dynamic probabilistic graphical models [3] are particularly suitable to
capture dynamics in temporal data like time series by explicitly modeling how variables change over
time. These probabilistic models have been successfully applied to real-world problems, such as for
neuroscience [55], molecular biology [35] and computer vision [42] tasks.
Dynamic Bayesian networks (DBNs) [12, 43] are among the most popular dynamic graphical models
in the literature, initially proposed for discrete-time models with discrete variables. Later, plenty
of subsequent work extended these models to consider continuous variables that are more suitable
for time series data since they often involve continuous-valued measurements. For example, DBNs
are used for structured vector auto-regressive (SVAR) models in the statistics and econometrics
literature [56, 57, 13, 64, 34, 30, 66, 65]. Parameter learning and directed acyclic graph (DAG)
structure learning from observational time series data are the typical learning tasks for DBNs.
One can categorize standard structure learning methods into score-based [23, 8, 5], constraintsbased [62, 67, 10, 40, 17, 60], or more recently, neural-based methods [41]. A more tractable
continuous optimization framework has been proposed based on the algebraic characterization of the
DAG [77] to address super-exponential computational complexity in exact structure learning. This
∗

Equal Contributions. Corresponds to:{tgao@us.ibm.com, stlu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk}.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

