Kernel conditional tests from learning-theoretic
bounds
Pierre-François Massiani1

Christian Fiedler1,2,∗

Friedrich Solowjow1

Lukas Haverbeck1

Sebastian Trimpe1

1

Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University
Department of Mathematics, School of Computation, Information and Technology,
Technical University of Munich, and Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
{massiani,christian.fiedler,solowjow,trimpe}@dsme.rwth-aachen.de
lukas.haverbeck@rwth-aachen.de
2

Abstract
We propose a framework for hypothesis testing on conditional probability distributions, which we then use to construct statistical tests of functionals of conditional
distributions. These tests identify the inputs where the functionals differ with high
probability, and include tests of conditional moments or two-sample tests. Our key
idea is to transform confidence bounds of a learning method into a test of conditional expectations. We instantiate this principle for kernel ridge regression (KRR)
with subgaussian noise. An intermediate data embedding then enables more general
tests — including conditional two-sample tests — via kernel mean embeddings of
distributions. To have guarantees in this setting, we generalize existing pointwisein-time or time-uniform confidence bounds for KRR to previously-inaccessible yet
essential cases such as infinite-dimensional outputs with non-trace-class kernels.
These bounds also circumvent the need for independent data, allowing for instance
online sampling. To make our tests readily applicable in practice, we introduce
bootstrapping schemes leveraging the parametric form of testing thresholds identified in theory to avoid tuning inaccessible parameters. We illustrate the tests
on examples, including one in process monitoring and comparison of dynamical
systems. Overall, our results establish a comprehensive foundation for conditional
testing on functionals, from theoretical guarantees to an algorithmic implementation, and advance the state of the art on confidence bounds for vector-valued least
squares estimation.

1

Introduction and related work

Deciding whether the inputs and outputs of two phenomena obey the same conditional relationship is
essential in many areas of science. In control and robotics, one may want to detect changes in the
dynamics over time or detect unusual perturbations; in industrial monitoring, to identify the performance of an equipment in varying operating conditions; and in medical studies, to compare treatment
responses based on patient characteristics. These examples exhibit the common characteristic that
they concern the conditional distribution of an output (next state, performance, treatment response,
∗
Work conducted while with the Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering, RWTH Aachen
University

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

