Evolutionary Prediction Games

Eden Saig
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
edens@cs.technion.ac.il

Nir Rosenfeld
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
nirr@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
When a prediction algorithm serves a collection of users, disparities in prediction
quality are likely to emerge. If users respond to accurate predictions by increasing
engagement, inviting friends, or adopting trends, repeated learning creates a feedback loop that shapes both the model and the population of its users. In this work,
we introduce evolutionary prediction games, a framework grounded in evolutionary
game theory which models such feedback loops as natural-selection processes
among groups of users. Our theoretical analysis reveals a gap between idealized
and real-world learning settings: In idealized settings with unlimited data and computational power, repeated learning creates competition and promotes competitive
exclusion across a broad class of behavioral dynamics. However, under realistic
constraints such as finite data, limited compute, or risk of overfitting, we show that
stable coexistence and mutualistic symbiosis between groups becomes possible. We
analyze these possibilities in terms of their stability and feasibility, present mechanisms that can sustain their existence, and empirically demonstrate our findings.

1

Introduction

Accurate predictions have become essential for any platform that supports user decision-making.
Improvements in prediction accuracy often directly translate to better quality of service with benefits
to both the platform and its users. This is one reason why modern platforms ranging from content
recommendation and online marketplaces to personalized education and medical services have
come to rely on machine learning as their backbone, and are investing much effort and resources in
continually improving their predictions. However, while generally beneficial, promoting accuracy
blindly can have unexpected, and in some cases undesired, consequences [9, 59, 24]. It is therefore
important to understand the possible downstream and long-term effects of learning on social outcomes.
Conventional learning approaches aim to maximize accuracy on a given, predetermined data
distribution. But in social settings, the distributions are composed of those users who choose to use
the platform. When such choices depend on the quality of predictions, learning becomes a driver
of user self-selection, and thus gains influence over its user population. This creates a feedback loop:
model deployment shifts the population, and population changes trigger model retraining. We are
interested in understanding the general tendencies and possible long-term outcomes of this process.
In particular, our focus is on user feedback dynamics in which accurate predictions encourage
engagement or adoption, and prediction errors discourage them. Such dynamics arise across domains:
accurate recommendations drive network-effect growth as users invite peers [39]; successful content
strategies on social media are mimicked by others [4]; precise credit-risk models reduce premiums
and therefore attract more clients to loan programs [32]; and medical providers with higher diagnostic
accuracy draw more patients [3]. Common to the above is that individual choices adhere to some
form of group structure in the population, and that in aggregate, these groups tend to grow when
prediction quality is higher. Note that this notion of “group” is flexible, as groups can represent
different demographics, behaviors, or roles, and with memberships being either inherent or chosen.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

