Polyline Path Masked Attention for Vision
Transformer
Zhongchen Zhao1 , Chaodong Xiao2,3 , Hui Lin1 , Qi Xie1,∗, Lei Zhang2,3 , Deyu Meng1,4
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 3 OPPO Research
4
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu) Institute
zhongchenzhao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, xie.qi@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Global dependency modeling and spatial position modeling are two core issues of
the foundational architecture design in current deep learning frameworks. Recently,
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved remarkable success in computer vision,
leveraging the powerful global dependency modeling capability of the self-attention
mechanism. Furthermore, Mamba2 has demonstrated its significant potential in
natural language processing tasks by explicitly modeling the spatial adjacency prior
through the structured mask. In this paper, we propose Polyline Path Masked
Attention (PPMA) that integrates the self-attention mechanism of ViTs with an
enhanced structured mask of Mamba2, harnessing the complementary strengths
of both architectures. Specifically, we first ameliorate the traditional structured
mask of Mamba2 by introducing a 2D polyline path scanning strategy and derive
its corresponding structured mask, polyline path mask, which better preserves the
adjacency relationships among image tokens. Notably, we conduct a thorough theoretical analysis on the structural characteristics of the proposed polyline path mask
and design an efficient algorithm for the computation of the polyline path mask.
Next, we embed the polyline path mask into the self-attention mechanism of ViTs,
enabling explicit modeling of spatial adjacency prior. Extensive experiments on
standard benchmarks, including image classification, object detection, and segmentation, demonstrate that our model outperforms previous state-of-the-art approaches
based on both state-space models and Transformers. For example, our proposed
PPMA-T/S/B models achieve 48.7%/51.1%/52.3% mIoU on the ADE20K semantic segmentation task, surpassing RMT-T/S/B by 0.7%/1.3%/0.3%, respectively.
Code is available at https://github.com/zhongchenzhao/PPMA.

1

Introduction

The research of foundational models has long been a cornerstone of deep learning. In computer vision,
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [20, 19] and Vision Transformers (ViTs) [46, 9, 31, 22]
currently represent the dominant architectures. Notably, ViTs have become the most mainstream
architecture in large models through the powerful self-attention mechanism, which can capture
the non-local self-similarity within global receptive fields. However, the quadratic complexity of
the Transformer, when implementing self-attention, severely limits its application in large image
processing models. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), classic positional encoding methods [46, 31, 38]
in ViTs lack the explicit modeling capability of spatial distance between image tokens, and largely
ignore the important spatial adjacency priors in texture, shape, semantics, and so on. This increases
the learning pressure and limits its capability for fine-grained image feature extraction.
Compared to CNNs and Transformers, the recently proposed Mamba [11] achieves linear complexity
while maintaining global receptive fields, demonstrating strong potential as the next-generation architecture. Specifically, Mamba follows the State Space Models (SSMs) paradigm and employs the selective scan mechanism with the state transition matrix to recursively propagate dependencies among
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

