Finding Low-Rank Matrix Weights in DNNs via
Riemannian Optimization: RAdaGrad and RAdamW

Fengmiao Bian1 , Jinyang Zheng1 , Ziyun Liu1 , Jianzhou Luo1 , Jian-Feng Cai1∗
1

Department of Mathematics
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, CHINA
{mafmbian,jfcai}@ust.hk,{jzhengbp,zliueq,jluobn}@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
Finding low-rank matrix weights is a key technique for addressing the high memory
usage and computational demands of large models. Most existing algorithms
rely on the factorization of the low-rank matrix weights, which is non-unique
and redundant. Their convergence is slow especially when the target low-rank
matrices are ill-conditioned, because the convergence rate depends on the condition
number of the Jacobian operator for the factorization and the Hessian of the loss
function with respect to the weight matrix. To address this challenge, we adopt
the Riemannian gradient descent (RGD) algorithm on the Riemannian manifold of
fixed-rank matrices to update the entire low-rank weight matrix. This algorithm
completely avoids the factorization, thereby eliminating the negative impact of the
Jacobian condition number. Furthermore, by leveraging the geometric structure
of the Riemannian manifold and selecting an appropriate metric, it mitigates the
negative impact of the Hessian condition number. Ultimately, this results in our two
plug-and-play optimizers: RAdaGrad and RAdamW, which are RGD with metrics
adapted from AdaGrad and AdamW and restricted to the manifold. Our algorithms
can be seamlessly integrated with various deep neural network architectures without
any modifications. We evaluate the effectiveness of our algorithms through finetuning experiments on large language models and diffusion models. Experimental
results consistently demonstrate that our algorithms provide superior performance
compared to state-of-the-art methods. Additionally, our algorithm is not only
effective for fine-tuning large models but is also applicable to deep neural network
(DNN) compression.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in tasks such as image classification
[19], object detection [20], and semantic segmentation [8]. However, their high memory and
computational demands pose significant challenges for deployment on resource-constrained devices.
For example, ResNet-50 requires up to 4G FLOPs for a single image classification task [6], making
it unsuitable for embedded systems. To address these limitations, techniques such as pruning
[17, 48] and quantization [28, 44] have been developed. While effective, these methods often rely on
specialized hardware for acceleration, limiting their general applicability.
Low-rank matrix approximation has emerged as a promising alternative, widely used in DNN
compression [30, 37, 43], fine-tuning of large models (LMs) [18, 21, 47], and prompt engineering
[15, 24]. By representing weight matrices as the product of two low-rank factors, this approach
∗

Correspondence to: Jian-Feng Cai<jfcai@ust.hk>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

