Optimal Regret of Bandits under Differential Privacy

Achraf Azize∗
FairPlay Joint Team
CREST, ENSAE Paris
achraf.azize@ensae.fr

Yulian Wu†
King Abdullah University of Science & Technology (KAUST)
Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
yulian.wu@kaust.edu.sa

Junya Honda
Kyoto University
RIKEN AIP
honda@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Francesco Orabona
King Abdullah University for Science & Technology (KAUST)
Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
francesco@orabona.com

Shinji Ito
The University of Tokyo
RIKEN AIP
shinji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Debabrota Basu
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189-CRIStAL
debabrota.basu@inria.fr

Abstract
As sequential learning algorithms are increasingly applied to real life, ensuring
data privacy while maintaining their utilities emerges as a timely question. In
this context, regret minimisation in stochastic bandits under ϵ-global Differential
Privacy (DP) has been widely studied. The present literature poses a significant gap
between the best-known regret lower and upper bound in this setting, though they
“match in order”. Thus, we revisit the regret lower and upper bounds of ϵ-global DP
bandits and improve both. First, we prove a tighter regret lower bound involving a
novel information-theoretic quantity characterising the hardness of ϵ-global DP in
stochastic bandits. This quantity smoothly interpolates between Kullback–Leibler
divergence and Total Variation distance, depending on the privacy budget ϵ. Then,
we choose two asymptotically optimal bandit algorithms, i.e., KL-UCB and IMED,
and propose their DP versions using a unified blueprint, i.e., (a) running in armdependent phases, and (b) adding Laplace noise to achieve privacy. For Bernoulli
bandits, we analyse the regrets of these algorithms and show that their regrets
asymptotically match our lower bound up to a constant arbitrary close to 1. At the
core of our algorithms lies a new concentration inequality for sums of Bernoulli
variables under Laplace mechanism, which is a new DP version of the Chernoff
bound. Finally, our numerical experiments validate that DP-KLUCB and DP-IMED
achieve lower regret than the existing ϵ-global DP bandit algorithms.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit is a classical setup of sequential decision-making under partial information,
where the agent collects more information about an environment by interacting with it. To understand
the setting, let us consider a clinical trial, where a doctor has K candidate medicines to choose
from and wants to recommend “effective” medicines to their patients. At each step t of the trial, a
new patient pt arrives, the doctor prescribes at ∈ [K] ≜ {1, . . . , K} one of the K medicines, and
∗
†

Part of the work is done during A. Azize’s visit to Kyoto University and PhD at Scool Team, Inria Lille.
Part of the work is done during Y. Wu’s internship at RIKEN AIP and visit to Kyoto University.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

