DOTA: DistributiOnal Test-time Adaptation of
Vision-Language Models

Zongbo Han1,2∗ , Jialong Yang3 , Guangyu Wang1,2 , Junfan Li4 ,Qianli Xu5 ,
Mike Zheng Shou6∗ , Changqing Zhang3∗
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications1
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen4
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR Research Entities (ARES)5
Show Lab, National University of Singapore6

Abstract
Vision-language foundation models (VLMs), such as CLIP, exhibit remarkable
performance across a wide range of tasks. However, deploying these models can
be unreliable when significant distribution gaps exist between training and test
data, while fine-tuning for diverse scenarios is often costly. This creates a need
for methods that can efficiently adapt to new data at test time without expensive
retraining. Cache-based test-time adapters serve this purpose by storing representative test samples to guide subsequent classifications. Yet, these methods
typically employ naive cache management with limited capacity, leading to severe
catastrophic forgetting when samples are inevitably dropped during updates. In
this paper, we propose Dota (DistributiOnal Test-time Adaptation), a simple yet effective method addressing this limitation. Crucially, instead of merely memorizing
individual test samples, Dota continuously estimates the underlying distribution
of the test data stream. Test-time posterior probabilities are then computed using
these dynamically estimated distributions via Bayes’ theorem for adaptation. This
distribution-centric approach enables the model to continually learn and adapt to
the deployment environment. Extensive experiments validate that Dota significantly mitigates forgetting and achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to
existing methods. Code is available at https://github.com/skylineeeeen/DOTA.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in vision-language foundation models have shown remarkable vision understanding
capabilities across a broad range of tasks by training on web-scale image-text pairs [39, 30, 51].
Taking CLIP as an example, it can conduct zero-shot classification without the need for additional
training data using predefined prompts [39]. However, CLIP may still face challenges when handling
various specific applications during test time, especially when there is a significant distribution gap
between the training and test data [41, 25, 13]. To adapt a foundational model to diverse deployment
environments and personalized application requirements, fine-tuning is often necessary, which can be
resource-intensive in terms of time, computational effort, and training data requirements.
Test-time adaptation (TTA) methods provide an efficient solution for addressing distributional shifts
between training and testing domains [5, 6, 45]. TTA allows for the dynamic adjustment of a pre∗

Corresponding author: zongbo@bupt.edu.cn, mike.zheng.shou@gmail.com, zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

