G RA SS : Scalable Data Attribution with
Gradient Sparsification and Sparse Projection

1

Pingbang Hu1 Joseph Melkonian2 Weijing Tang3 Han Zhao1 Jiaqi W. Ma1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Womp Labs 3 Carnegie Mellon University

{pbb,hanzhao,jiaqima}@illinois.edu

joe@womplabs.ai

weijingt@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Gradient-based data attribution methods, such as influence functions, are critical
for understanding the impact of individual training samples without requiring
repeated model retraining. However, their scalability is often limited by the high
computational and memory costs associated with per-sample gradient computation.
In this work, we propose G RA SS, a novel gradient compression algorithm and
its variants FACT G RA SS for linear layers specifically, that explicitly leverage
the inherent sparsity of per-sample gradients to achieve sub-linear space and
time complexity. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach, achieving substantial speedups while preserving data influence fidelity.
In particular, FACT G RA SS achieves up to 165% faster throughput on billion-scale
models compared to the previous state-of-the-art baselines.†

1

Introduction

Data attribution [Deng et al., 2025] aims to measure the impact of individual training samples on a
machine learning model and has been widely applied to data-centric problems in modern AI, such as
data curation [Koh and Liang, 2017], fact tracing [Lin et al., 2024], and data compensation [Deng et al.,
2024b]. There are two major categories of data attribution methods, gradient-based and retrainingbased [Hammoudeh and Lowd, 2024]. The former category, such as influence functions [Koh and
Liang, 2017] and its variants, has gained increasing popularity in large-scale applications as it does
not require costly model retraining. One common feature of gradient-based methods is their reliance
on the per-sample gradient—the gradient of the loss with respect to model parameters for each
individual data point—to capture the local sensitivity of the model with respect to each training
sample, providing a fine-grained understanding of data influence.
However, gradient-based methods still face significant scalability challenges for very large models,
such as large language models (LLMs). Specifically, computing and storing per-sample gradients for
a model with n training samples and p parameters requires O(np) memory and compute, creating a
severe bottleneck for large-scale models. To address this, recent work has explored compressing these
high-dimensional gradients into lower-dimensional representations, reducing memory requirements
to O(nk) for a target compression dimension k ≪ p [Wojnowicz et al., 2016, Park et al., 2023,
Choe et al., 2024]. However, this compression often introduces additional computational overhead,
as the most common approach—random matrix projection with the Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL)
guarantee—requires dense matrix multiplications, resulting in an overall time complexity of O(nkp).
To overcome these limitations, more specialized approaches have been proposed. For example,
the fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform (FJLT) used in T RAK’s official implementation [Park
et al., 2023] exploits structured random matrices, reducing the projection time to O((p + k) log p)
per sample. Alternatively, recent work by Choe et al. [2024] proposed L O G RA that leverages the
†

Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/TRAIS-Lab/GraSS.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

