Establishing Linear Surrogate Regret Bounds for
Convex Smooth Losses via Convolutional
Fenchel–Young Losses

Yuzhou Cao1 Han Bao2 Lei Feng3∗ Bo An1,4
1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
2
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
4
Skywork AI
yuzhou002@e.ntu.edu.sg bao.han@ism.ac.jp
fenglei@seu.edu.cn boan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Surrogate regret bounds, also known as excess risk bounds, bridge the gap between
the convergence rates of surrogate and target losses. The regret transfer is lossless
if the surrogate regret bound is linear. While convex smooth surrogate losses
are appealing in particular due to the efficient estimation and optimization, the
existence of a trade-off between the loss smoothness and linear regret bound has
been believed in the community. Under this scenario, the better optimization and
estimation properties of convex smooth surrogate losses may inevitably deteriorate
after undergoing the regret transfer onto a target loss. We overcome this dilemma
for arbitrary discrete target losses by constructing a convex smooth surrogate loss,
which entails a linear surrogate regret bound composed with a tailored prediction
link. The construction is based on Fenchel–Young losses generated by the convolutional negentropy, which are equivalent to the infimal convolution of a generalized
negentropy and the target Bayes risk. Consequently, the infimal convolution enables us to derive a smooth loss while maintaining the surrogate regret bound linear.
We additionally benefit from the infimal convolution to have a consistent estimator
of the underlying class probability. Our results are overall a novel demonstration of
how convex analysis penetrates into optimization and statistical efficiency in risk
minimization.

1

Introduction

The risk of a machine learning model is often measured by the expectation of a target loss ℓ that
quantifies the error between the model prediction t and a natural label y. However, minimizing the
target risk over a dataset is often computationally hard because a target prediction problem is usually
discretely structured, including multiclass, multilabel, top-k prediction problems. For this reason, a
tractable surrogate risk induced by a surrogate loss L(θ, y) serves as an essential proxy with a score
θ ∈ Rd . The resulting surrogate optimization is no longer discretely constrained.
An ideal surrogate loss should be convex, smooth (or entailing a Lipschitz continuous gradient),
and calibrated toward a given target prediction problem. Convexity and smoothness have been
fundamental both in optimization and statistical estimation—indeed, classical optimization theory
reveals that convex smooth functions can be optimized with first-order methods more efficiently than
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

