Unleashing the Potential of Multimodal LLMs for
Zero-Shot Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding

Yuhao Liu† Gerhard Hancke Rynson W.H. Lau†
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
{zaiquyang2-c, yuhliu9-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk
{gp.hancke, Rynson.Lau}@cityu.edu.hk

Zaiquan Yang

Abstract
Spatio-temporal video grounding (STVG) aims at localizing the spatio-temporal
tube of a video, as specified by the input text query. In this paper, we utilize
multimodal large language models (MLLMs) to explore a zero-shot solution in
STVG. We reveal two key insights about MLLMs: (1) MLLMs tend to dynamically
assign special tokens, referred to as grounding tokens, for grounding the text query;
and (2) MLLMs often suffer from suboptimal grounding due to the inability to fully
integrate the cues in the text query (e.g., attributes, actions) for inference. Based on
these insights, we propose a MLLM-based zero-shot framework for STVG, which
includes novel decomposed spatio-temporal highlighting (DSTH) and temporalaugmented assembling (TAS) strategies to unleash the reasoning ability of MLLMs.
The DSTH strategy first decouples the original query into attribute and action
sub-queries for inquiring the existence of the target both spatially and temporally.
It then uses a novel logit-guided re-attention (LRA) module to learn latent variables
as spatial and temporal prompts, by regularizing token predictions for each subquery. These prompts highlight attribute and action cues, respectively, directing
the model’s attention to reliable spatial and temporal related visual regions. In
addition, as the spatial grounding by the attribute sub-query should be temporally
consistent, we introduce the TAS strategy to assemble the predictions using the
original video frames and the temporal-augmented frames as inputs to help improve
temporal consistency. We evaluate our method on various MLLMs, and show that
it outperforms SOTA methods on three common STVG benchmarks. The code will
be available at https://github.com/zaiquanyang/LLaVA_Next_STVG.

1

Introduction

Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding (STVG) aims to localize a target object in a video both spatially
and temporally, given an input text query. This task is fundamental to many different applications
(e.g., video surveillance and autonomous driving [67]). However, it is also very challenging as it
requires the model to be able to distinguish the target from distractors over time and identify the
precise temporal boundary of the action. While existing methods handle the STVG task mainly
in a fully-supervised setting [13; 59; 54], which often relies on costly frame-level annotations,
several works [29; 3; 61; 21; 60; 25] attempt to introduce the weakly-supervised or zero-shot
setting to alleviate the burden of dense annotations. For example, E3M [3] integrates CLIP [43]
and an expectation maximization strategy to optimize spatio-temporal localization in a zero-shot
manner. However, CLIP is known to be weak in localization [75; 14] as it simply aligns the global
representation of image-text pairs.
†

Joint corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

