Graph Data Selection for Domain Adaptation:
A Model-Free Approach

Ting-Wei Li
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, IL USA
twli@illinois.edu

Ruizhong Qiu
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, IL USA
rq5@illinois.edu

Hanghang Tong
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, IL USA
htong@illinois.edu

Abstract
Graph domain adaptation (GDA) is a fundamental task in graph machine learning,
with techniques like shift-robust graph neural networks (GNNs) and specialized
training procedures to tackle the distribution shift problem. Although these modelcentric approaches show promising results, they often struggle with severe shifts
and constrained computational resources. To address these challenges, we propose
a novel model-free framework, G RA DATE (GRAph DATa sElector), that selects
the best training data from the source domain for the classification task on the target
domain. G RA DATE picks training samples without relying on any GNN model’s
predictions or training recipes, leveraging optimal transport theory to capture and
adapt to distribution changes. G RA DATE is data-efficient, scalable and meanwhile
complements existing model-centric GDA approaches. Through comprehensive
empirical studies on several real-world graph-level datasets and multiple covariate
shift types, we demonstrate that G RA DATE outperforms existing selection methods
and enhances off-the-shelf GDA methods with much fewer training data.

1

Introduction

Graphs have emerged as a fundamental data structure for representing complex relationships across
diverse domains, from modeling molecular interactions in biological networks [23, 6, 37, 85] to
capturing user behaviors in recommendation systems [15, 19, 8, 9, 73]. In graph-level classification
tasks [64, 66, 81, 20, 38], where the goal is to categorize graph structures, the distribution shift
between source and target domains poses significant challenges. While numerous graph neural
network (GNN) methods have been proposed for graph domain adaptation (GDA) [61, 12, 62, 55, 34],
they predominantly relies on model architecture design and training strategies, which are inherently
model-dependent and brittle. This model-centricity introduces practical challenges: (i) the need
for extensive resources to train and validate different architectural variants and (ii) the ignorance
of source data quality. To address these aforementioned issues, rather than relying on sophisticated
GNN architectures or training procedures, we aim to answer a fundamental question:
How to select the most relevant source domain data, based on available validation data, for better
graph-level classification accuracy evaluated on the target domain ?
In this paper, we propose a model-free method, G RA DATE (GRAph DATa sElector), that selects a
subset of important training data in the source domain independently of any specific GNN model
design, making it both data-efficient and versatile. G RA DATE reduces computational overhead and
enables quick adaptation to unseen graph domains based on available validation data. Conceptually,
G RA DATE first leverages Fused Gromov-Wasserstein (FGW) distance [57] to compare graph samples.
We provide a theoretical justification to demonstrate FGW’s unique advantage over multi-layer GNNs
for graph comparison. Then, FGW is used as a building block to measure the dataset-level distance
between training and validation sets, which is termed as Graph Dataset Distance (GDD). Through
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

