Factor Decorrelation Enhanced Data Removal from
Deep Predictive Models

Wenhao Yang
Wuhan University of Technology, China
342471@whut.edu.cn

Lin Li∗
Wuhan University of Technology, China
cathylilin@whut.edu.cn

Xiaohui Tao
University of Southern Queensland
Queensland, Australia
Xiaohui.Tao@unisq.edu.au

Kaize Shi
University of Southern Queensland
Queensland, Australia
Kaize.Shi@unisq.edu.au

Abstract
The imperative of user privacy protection and regulatory compliance necessitates
sensitive data removal in model training, yet this process often induces distributional shifts that undermine model performance-particularly in out-of-distribution
(OOD) scenarios. To address this issue we propose a novel data removal approach that enhances deep predictive models through factor decorrelation and
loss perturbation. Our approach introduces: (1) a discriminative-preserving factor
decorrelation module employing dynamic adaptive weight adjustment and iterative
representation updating to reduce feature redundancy and minimize inter-feature
correlations. (2) a smoothed data removal mechanism with loss perturbation that
creates information-theoretic safeguards against data leakage during removal operations. Extensive experiments on five benchmark datasets show that our approach
outperforms other baselines and consistently achieves high predictive accuracy
and robustness even under significant distribution shifts. The results highlight its
superior efficiency and adaptability in both in-distribution and out-of-distribution
scenarios.

1

Introduction

Removing specific data in the machine learning model training process is crucial to protect user
privacy and regulatory compliance [1, 2, 3]. For example, users of e-commerce platforms may
invoke data deletion rights for product reviews that have been incorporated into the training corpus
of recommendation models. Satisfying such requests entails removing the associated entries from
front-end systems while also ensuring that the date’s influence is purged from the model’s internal
representations and parameter space. In addition, financial clients can request the removal of
transaction histories or loan application records that have contributed to the training of credit scoring
models. These scenarios highlight that data removal requests are distributed in widely scenarios with
domain-specific regulatory and operational constraints. Furthermore, such removals can induce shifts
in the underlying data distribution, while retraining the overall model for each of the specific cases is
impractical since the computational costs [4, 5]. Therefore, generalizable approaches to data removal
are essential for adapting to varied and evolving deletion demands.
The primary challenge confronting data removal methodologies lies in the inadequate exploration
and adaptation to out-of-distribution (OOD) data scenarios [6, 7]. Existing data removal mechanisms
∗

Corresponding author. Email: cathylilin@whut.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

