Towards Implicit Aggregation:
Robust Image Representation for Place Recognition
in the Transformer Era
Feng Lu1,2∗ Tong Jin3,4∗ Canming Ye1 Yunpeng Liu3† Xiangyuan Lan2,5† Chun Yuan1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Pengcheng Laboratory 3 Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu)
lufengrv@gmail.com jintong@sia.cn ycm24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
ypliu@sia.cn lanxy@pcl.ac.cn yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual place recognition (VPR) is typically regarded as a specific image retrieval
task, whose core lies in representing images as global descriptors. Over the past
decade, dominant VPR methods (e.g., NetVLAD) have followed a paradigm that
first extracts the patch features/tokens of the input image using a backbone, and
then aggregates these patch features into a global descriptor via an aggregator.
This backbone-plus-aggregator paradigm has achieved overwhelming dominance
in the CNN era and remains widely used in transformer-based models. In this
paper, however, we argue that a dedicated aggregator is not necessary in the
transformer era, that is, we can obtain robust global descriptors only with the
backbone. Specifically, we introduce some learnable aggregation tokens, which
are prepended to the patch tokens before a particular transformer block. All these
tokens will be jointly processed and interact globally via the intrinsic self-attention
mechanism, implicitly aggregating useful information within the patch tokens to
the aggregation tokens. Finally, we only take these aggregation tokens from the
last output tokens and concatenate them as the global representation. Although
implicit aggregation can provide robust global descriptors in an extremely simple
manner, where and how to insert additional tokens, as well as the initialization of
tokens, remains an open issue worthy of further exploration. To this end, we also
propose the optimal token insertion strategy and token initialization method derived
from empirical studies. Experimental results show that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on several VPR datasets with higher efficiency and ranks
1st on the MSLS challenge leaderboard. The code is available at https://github.
com/lu-feng/image.

1

Introduction

Visual place recognition (VPR) involves identifying the coarse geographical location of a query place
image by retrieving the most similar images from a geo-tagged database captured at previously visited
places [46]. It is a fundamental and essential task in a wide range of computer vision and robotics
applications, e.g., augmented reality [53], autonomous driving [21], and SLAM [15]. Thus, it has
garnered significant attention and study. Despite recent advances, there still exist some challenges
in VPR, including condition variations, viewpoint changes, and perceptual aliasing (images from
different places showing high similarity) [46], etc.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

