Collaborative and Confidential Junction Trees for
Hybrid Bayesian Networks

Roberto Gheda∗
Delft University of Technology
r.gheda@tudelft.nl

Abele Mălan
University of Neuchâtel
abele.malan@unine.ch

Thiago Guzella
ASML The Netherlands B.V.
thiago.guzella@asml.com

Carlo Lancia
ASML The Netherlands B.V.
carlo.lancia@asml.com

Robert Birke
University of Turin
robert.birke@unito.it

Lydia Y. Chen
Delft University of Technology
y.chen-10@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Bayesian Network models are a powerful tool to collaboratively optimize production processes in various manufacturing industries. When interacting, collaborating
parties must preserve their business secrets by maintaining the confidentiality of
their model structures and parameters. While most realistic industry scenarios
involve hybrid settings, handling both discrete and continuous data, current state-ofthe-art methods for collaborative and confidential inference only support discrete
data and have high communication costs. In a centralized setting, Junction Trees
enable efficient inference even in hybrid scenarios without discretizing continuous
variables, but no extension for collaborative and confidential scenarios exists. To
address this research gap, we introduce Hybrid CCJT, the first framework for confidential multiparty inference in hybrid domains with semi-honest, non-colluding
adversaries, comprising: (i) a method to construct a strongly-rooted Junction Tree
across collaborating parties through a novel construct of interface cliques; and, (ii)
a protocol for confidential inference built upon multiparty computation primitives
comprising a one-time alignment phase and a belief propagation system for combining the inference results across the Junction Tree cliques. Extensive evaluation
on nine datasets shows that Hybrid CCJT improves the predictive accuracy of
continuous target variables by 32% on average compared to the state-of-the-art,
while reducing communication costs by a median 10.4× under purely discrete
scenarios.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Networks (BNs) are probabilistic models that incorporate domain knowledge while retaining interpretability [1]. This makes them a powerful tool for optimizing manufacturing processes
in numerous industrial domains [2, 3, 4]. One example is semiconductor manufacturing, which
involves complex procedures and machines. Production process optimization within the field increasingly requires the collaboration between parties like manufacturers (with domain knowledge on
the product design and manufacturing steps) and equipment vendors (with expertise on the equipment performance) [5]. However, such collaboration must preserve the confidentiality of the BNs’
structure and parameters, which encode sensitive industrial knowledge and the parties’ evidence.
Moreover, most real-world applications require models to handle discrete (∆) and continuous (Γ)
data simultaneously [6], achieved using Hybrid Bayesian Networks [7].
∗

Work partly done while interning at ASML.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

