Predicting Empirical AI Research Outcomes
with Language Models

1

Jiaxin Wen1 , Chenglei Si2 , Chen Yueh-Han3 , He He3 , Shi Feng4
UC Berkeley 2 Stanford 3 New York University 4 George Washington University

Abstract
Many promising-looking ideas in AI research fail to deliver, but their validation
takes substantial human labor and compute. Predicting an idea’s chance of success
is thus crucial for accelerating empirical AI research, a skill that even expert
researchers can only acquire through substantial experience. We build the first
benchmark for this task and compare LMs with human experts. Concretely, given
two research ideas (e.g., two jailbreaking methods), we aim to predict which will
perform better on a set of benchmarks. We scrape ideas and experimental results
from conference papers, yielding 1,444 human-verified idea pairs published after
our base model’s cut-off date for testing, and 6,000 pairs for training. We then
develop a system that combines a fine-tuned GPT-4.1 with a paper retrieval agent,
and we recruit 25 human experts to compare with. In the NLP domain, our system
beats human experts by a large margin (64.4% v.s. 48.9%). On the full test set, our
system achieves 77% accuracy, while off-the-shelf frontier LMs like o3 perform
no better than random guessing, even with the same retrieval augmentation. We
verify that our system does not exploit superficial features like idea complexity
through extensive human-written and LM-designed robustness tests. Finally, we
evaluate our system on unpublished novel ideas, including ideas generated by an
AI ideation agent. Our system achieves 63.6% accuracy, demonstrating its potential
as a reward model for improving idea generation models. Altogether, our results
outline a promising new direction for LMs to accelerate empirical AI research.

Figure 1: Our system is more accurate than human NLP experts. Majority aggregates predictions
from all annotators, while Best keeps only the best-performing annotator per research topic. For
the stress test, we select a subset of idea pairs where the mathematically complex one is actually
ineffective. While humans often get misled by this feature, our model does not.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

