On the Robustness of Transformers against Context
Hijacking for Linear Classification

Tianle Li1∗, Chenyang Zhang2∗, Xingwu Chen2 , Yuan Cao2 , Difan Zou1,2†
1
Institute of Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
2
School of Computing & Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
{tianleli, chyzhang, xingwu}@connect.hku.hk
{yuancao, dzou}@hku.hk

Abstract
Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated powerful
in-context learning capabilities. However, their predictions can be disrupted by
factually correct context, a phenomenon known as context hijacking, revealing
a significant robustness issue. To understand this phenomenon theoretically, we
explore an in-context linear classification problem based on recent advances in
linear transformers. In our setup, context tokens are designed as factually correct
query-answer pairs, where the queries are similar to the final query but have
opposite labels. Then, we develop a general theoretical analysis on the robustness
of the linear transformers, which is formulated as a function of the model depth,
training context lengths, and number of hijacking context tokens. A key finding
is that a well-trained deeper transformer can achieve higher robustness, which
aligns with empirical observations. We show that this improvement arises because
deeper layers enable more fine-grained optimization steps, effectively mitigating
interference from context hijacking. This is also well supported by our numerical
and real-world experiments. Our findings provide theoretical insights into the
benefits of deeper architectures and contribute to enhancing the understanding of
transformer architectures.

1

Introduction

Transformers [67] have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in various fields of deep learning, such
as natural language processing [60, 1, 68, 66, 52, 26]. A common view of the superior performance
of transformers lies in its remarkable in-context learning ability [14, 18, 44], that is, transformers can
flexibly adjust predictions based on additional data given in context contained in the input sequence
itself, without updating parameters. This impressive ability has triggered a series of theoretical studies
attempting to understand the in-context learning mechanism of transformers [51, 30, 77, 31, 76].
These studies suggest that transformers can behave as meta learners [18], implementing certain meta
algorithms (such as gradient descent [69, 2, 85]) based on context examples, and then applying these
algorithms to the queried input.
Despite the benefits of in-context learning abilities in transformers, this feature can also lead to
certain negative impacts. Specifically, while well-designed in-context prompts can help generate
desired responses, they can also mislead the transformer into producing incorrect or even harmful
outputs, raising significant concerns about the robustness of transformers [21, 45, 86]. For instance,
a significant body of work focuses on jailbreaking attacks [15, 50, 62, 25, 81], which aim to design
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

