Eliciting Reasoning in Language Models with
Cognitive Tools

Brown Ebouky
IBM Research - Zurich
ETH Zurich
Brown.Ebouky@ibm.com

Andrea Bartezzaghi
IBM Research - Zurich
abt@zurich.ibm.com

Mattia Rigotti
IBM Research - Zurich
mrg@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract
The recent advent of reasoning models like OpenAI’s o1 was met with excited speculation by the AI community about the mechanisms underlying these capabilities in
closed models, followed by a rush of replication efforts, particularly from the open
source community. These speculations were largely settled by the demonstration
from DeepSeek-R1 that chain-of-thought and reinforcement learning (RL) can
effectively replicate reasoning on top of base LLMs. However, it remains valuable
to explore alternative methods for theoretically eliciting reasoning that could help
elucidate the underlying mechanisms, as well as providing additional methods that
may offer complementary benefits.
Here, we build on the long-standing literature in cognitive psychology and cognitive architectures, which postulates that reasoning arises from the orchestrated,
sequential execution of a set of modular, predetermined cognitive operations. Crucially, we implement this key idea within a modern agentic tool-calling framework.
In particular, we endow an LLM with a small set of “cognitive tools” encapsulating
specific reasoning operations, each executed by the LLM itself. Surprisingly, this
simple strategy results in considerable gains in performance on standard mathematical reasoning benchmarks compared to base LLMs, for both closed and
open-weight models. For instance, providing our “cognitive tools” to GPT-4.1 increases its pass@1 performance on AIME2024 from 32% to 53%, even surpassing
the performance of o1-preview.
In addition to its practical implications, this demonstration contributes to the debate
regarding the role of post-training methods in eliciting reasoning in LLMs versus
the role of inherent capabilities acquired during pre-training, and whether posttraining merely uncovers these latent abilities.

1

Introduction

The recent introduction of Large Language Models (LLMs) with reasoning capabilities has showcased
the potential of unfolding test-time compute as chain-of-thought traces representing intermediate
steps toward obtaining an answer to a query. The success of the first reasoning models like OpenAI’s
proprietary o1-preview demonstrated marked improvements on coding, mathematical, and general
reasoning benchmarks [OpenAI, 2024], igniting enthusiasm across the AI community and a race to
replicate these results in the open.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

