DON’T NEED RETRAINING:
A Mixture of DETR and Vision Foundation Models for
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Object Detection
Changhan Liu, Xunzhi Xiang, Zixuan Duan, Wenbin Li, Qi FanB , Yang Gao
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
https://github.com/lch216/VFMDETR

Abstract
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Object Detection (CD-FSOD) aims to generalize to unseen domains by leveraging a few annotated samples of the target domain, requiring
models to exhibit both strong generalization and localization capabilities. However,
existing well-trained detectors typically have strong localization capabilities but
suffer from limited generalization, whereas vision foundation models (VFMs)
generally exhibit better generalization but lack accurate localization capabilities. In
this paper, we propose a novel Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) structure that integrates
the detector’s localization capability and the VFM’s generalization by using VFM
features to improve detector features. Specifically, we propose Expert-wise Router
(ER) that dynamically selects the most relevant VFM experts for each backbone
layer, and Region-wise Router (RR) that emphasizes foreground and suppress
background. To bridge representation gaps, we further propose Shared Expert
Projection (SEP) module and Private Expert Projection (PEP) module, which align
VFM features to the detector feature space while decoupling shared image feature
from private image feature in the VFM feature map. Finally, we construct MoE
module to transfer the VFM’s generalization to the detector without modifying
the original detector architecture. Furthermore, our method extend well-trained
detectors for detecting novel classes in unseen domains without re-training on the
base classes. Experimental results on multiple cross-domain datasets validate the
effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Few-Shot Object Detection (FSOD) aims to detect objects of novel classes with a few labeled
support data. Existing FSOD methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] have achieved notable progress in
generalizing to various in-domain novel categories. However, these methods often struggle with
domain shifts, where training and testing data originate from different domains. This challenge
underscores the significance of Cross-Domain Few-Shot Object Detection (CD-FSOD). CD-FSOD
aims to generalize object detection models to detect novel classes in unseen domains by using a few
training samples. This challenging task typically requires model to combine strong generalization
and accurate localization capability.
Existing well-trained object detection methods [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15] usually excel at localizing
and recognizing seen objects but struggle to generalize to unseen categories or knowledge. To address
this problem, previous CD-FSOD methods [16, 17, 18] mainly adopt a two-stage training paradigm
that first involves base training on a large-scale dataset of base classes, follow by novel fine-tuning
B indicates corresponding author.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

