Revisiting 1-peer exponential graph for enhancing
decentralized learning efficiency

Kenta Niwa
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
<kenta.niwa@ntt.com>

Guoqiang Zhang
University of Exeter
<G.Z.Zhang@exeter.ac.uk>

Yuki Takezawa
Kyoto University
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology
<yuki-takezawa@ml.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp>
W. Bastiaan Kleijn
Victoria University of Wellington
<bastiaan.kleijn@vuw.ac.nz>

Abstract
For communication-efficient decentralized learning, it is essential to employ dynamic graphs designed to improve the expected spectral gap by reducing deviations
from global averaging. The 1-peer exponential graph demonstrates its finite-time
convergence property–achieved by maximizing the expected spectral gap–but
only when the number of nodes n is a power of two. However, its efficiency
across any n and the commutativity of mixing matrices remain unexplored. We
delve into the principles underlying the 1-peer exponential graph to explain its
efficiency across any n and leverage them to develop new dynamic graphs. We
propose two new dynamic graphs: the k-peer exponential graph and the nullcascade graph. Notably, the null-cascade graph achieves finite-time convergence
for any n while ensuring commutativity. Our experiments confirm the effectiveness
of these new graphs, particularly the null-cascade graph, in most test settings.
https://github.com/garden1984/NullCascadeGraph

1

Introduction

In the era of large-scale datasets, complex models (e.g., Deep Neural Networks: DNNs), and powerful computing resources capable of high throughput and simultaneous multicasting, decentralized
learning of models over arbitrary network topologies (graphs)–for tasks such as natural language
processing and image recognition–has been essential for advanced collective intelligence. The convergence rates of decentralized learning algorithms, including DSGD [20, 26], are primarily influenced
by the graphs used for partial averaging of models within n ∈ N nodes [13]. Thus, optimizing the
communication graphs to improve the expected spectral gap (by reducing deviations from global
averaging), given a maximum degree k ∈ N (i.e., the maximum number of connections or multicast
transmissions per node), is vital for communication-efficient decentralized learning.
Graphs used in decentralized learning are broadly categorized into static (τ =1) and dynamic (τ ≥2),
with the dynamic graphs undergoing changes involving a periodic interval τ ∈N. In contrast, static
graphs, such as the ring, grid, torus [24], and exponential graph [1, 43], remain unchanged over time.
Dynamic graphs rely on τ mixing matrices, specifying varying connection paths and weights. A noteworthy dynamic graph is the 1-peer exponential graph [43], characterized by 1-peer communication
and known to achieve desirable finite-time convergence–i.e., the expected spectral gap of the product
of τ mixing matrices is maximized when n is a power of two, as in Table 1.
The introduction of k-peer communication with k≥2 offers the potential for improved decentralized
learning, especially in settings where simultaneous multicasting is supported. This scenario has been
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

