Brain-Like Processing Pathways Form in Models With
Heterogeneous Experts

Jack Cook1 Danyal Akarca2 Rui Ponte Costa1,∗ Jascha Achterberg1,∗
1
Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour, University of Oxford
2
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London
∗
Joint senior authors

Abstract
The brain is made up of a vast set of heterogeneous regions that dynamically
organize into pathways as a function of task demands. Examples of such pathways
can be found in the interactions between cortical and subcortical networks during
learning, or in sub-networks specializing for task characteristics such as difficulty or
modality. Despite the large role these pathways play in cognition, the mechanisms
through which brain regions organize into pathways remain unclear. In this work,
we use an extension of the Heterogeneous Mixture-of-Experts architecture to
show that heterogeneous regions do not form processing pathways by themselves,
implying that the brain likely implements specific constraints which result in the
reliable formation of pathways. We identify three biologically relevant inductive
biases that encourage pathway formation: a routing cost imposed on the use of
more complex regions, a scaling factor that reduces this cost when task performance
is low, and randomized expert dropout. When comparing our resulting Mixtureof-Pathways model with the brain, we observe that the artificial pathways in our
model match how the brain uses cortical and subcortical systems to learn and
solve tasks of varying difficulty. In summary, we introduce a novel framework for
investigating how the brain forms task-specific pathways through inductive biases,
and the effects these biases have on the behavior of Mixture-of-Experts models.

1

Introduction

The brain is made up of many heterogeneous regions distinguished by features such as connectivity,
cell types, neurotransmitters, and functional specialization [1–4]. To support complex behavior, the
mammalian brain dynamically organizes these regions into diverse networks and processing pathways
[5], allowing it to adapt to different inputs and task demands. This principle spans sensory systems
[6–8], cognitive networks [9], emotion-related circuits [10], and face perception [11]. Notably,
pathway formation is highly dynamic: regions can participate in many pathways, allowing cognitive
processes to arise from the joint activations of specific groups of regions. While theoretical work
has shown how heterogeneous regions and modules can develop within networks [12–14], how these
organize into large-scale pathways remains poorly understood.
The importance of studying pathway formation and coordination extends beyond neuroscience: it is
also becoming increasingly relevant in machine learning research. As models have evolved from small
networks with a couple of layers to large system-level architectures, achieving complex function while
maintaining efficiency has become critical. One recent development toward this goal is the Mixture-ofExperts (MoE) architecture [15, 16], which contains specialized experts that are selectively activated
based on the current input. This should create pathways between experts that selectively respond to
inputs of varying complexity [17] to make efficient use of computational resources [18, 19]. However,
this theorized specialization of experts appears to be limited in practice [20, 21], making it difficult
for specialized task-complexity-related pathways to form.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

