Generating Full-ﬁeld Evolution of Physical Dynamics
from Irregular Sparse Observations
Panqi Chen1 Yifan Sun1 Lei Cheng1, 2 ∗ Yang Yang3 Weichang Li1
Yang Liu4 Weiqing Liu4 Jiang Bian4 Shikai Fang1, 4 ∗
1
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of
Multi-Modal Communication Networks and Intelligent Information Processing
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
4
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Modeling and reconstructing multidimensional physical dynamics from sparse
and off-grid observations presents a fundamental challenge in scientiﬁc research.
Recently, diffusion-based generative modeling shows promising potential for
physical simulation. However, current approaches typically operate on on-grid
data with preset spatiotemporal resolution, but struggle with the sparsely observed and continuous nature of real-world physical dynamics. To ﬁll the gaps,
we present SDIFT, Sequential DIffusion in Functional Tucker space, a novel
framework that generates full-ﬁeld evolution of physical dynamics from irregular sparse observations. SDIFT leverages the functional Tucker model as the
latent space representer with proven universal approximation property, and represents observations as latent functions and Tucker core sequences. We then
construct a sequential diffusion model with temporally augmented UNet in the
functional Tucker space, denoising noise drawn from a Gaussian process to generate the sequence of core tensors. At the posterior sampling stage, we propose
a Message-Passing Posterior Sampling mechanism, enabling conditional generation of the entire sequence guided by observations at limited time steps. We
validate SDIFT on three physical systems spanning astronomical (supernova explosions, light-year scale), environmental (ocean sound speed ﬁelds, kilometer
scale), and molecular (organic liquid, millimeter scale) domains, demonstrating
signiﬁcant improvements in both reconstruction accuracy and computational efﬁciency compared to state-of-the-art approaches. The code is available at https:
//github.com/OceanSTARLab/SDIFT.

1

Introduction

Modeling and reconstructing spatiotemporal physical dynamics in the real world has been a longstanding challenge in science and engineering. In ﬁelds such as aeronautics, oceanography, and
climate simulation, we often need to infer the evolution of physical dynamics in continuous spacetime from sparse observations. For example, meteorologists must predict weather patterns from
limited station data, while ocean scientists reconstruct underwater current dynamics from sparse
sensors. Traditional numerical methods have been widely applied, but they typically require substantial computational resources and struggle to ensure ﬁne-scale prediction in complex scenarios.
Recently, generative models – particularly diffusion models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] – have achieved remarkable success in computer vision and related ﬁelds. These models have demonstrated strong capa∗

Correspond to lei_cheng@zju.edu.cn, fsk@zju.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

