LoSplit: Loss-Guided Dynamic Split for TrainingTime Defense Against Graph Backdoor Attacks
Di Jin1 Yuxiang Zhang1 Bingdao Feng1∗ Xiaobao Wang1 Dongxiao He1 Zhen Wang2
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
{jindi,yzhang4062,fengbingdao,wangxiaobao,hedongxiao}@tju.edu.cn
w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are vulnerable to backdoor attacks. Existing
defenses primarily rely on detecting structural anomalies, distributional outliers,
or perturbation-induced prediction instability, which struggle to handle the more
subtle, feature-based attacks that do not introduce obvious topological changes. Our
empirical analysis reveals that both structure-based and feature-based attacks not
only cause early loss convergence of target nodes but also induce a class-coherent
loss drift, where this early convergence gradually spreads to nearby clean nodes,
leading to significant distribution overlap. To address this issue, we propose LoSplit,
the first training-time defense framework in graph that leverages this early-stage
loss drift to accurately split target nodes. Our method dynamically selects epochs
with maximal loss divergence, clusters target nodes via Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMM), and applies a Decoupling-Forgetting strategy to break the association
between target nodes and malicious label. Extensive experiments on multiple realworld datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, significantly reducing
attack success rates while maintaining high clean accuracy across diverse backdoor
attack strategies. Our code is available at: github.com/zyx924768045/LoSplit.

1

Introduction

Graphs serve as a ubiquitous form of data structure [1] in many real-world applications such as social
networks [2], recommendation systems [3], and financial applications [4], where nodes represent
entities and edges capture their relationships. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [5, 6, 7] effectively
capture graph information via iterative message passing, and have shown strong performance in tasks
like node classification [8].
However, GNNs have been shown to be susceptible to backdoor attacks [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16],
where adversaries embed triggers (either predefined or adaptively generated) in the form of nodes,
subgraphs or feature perturbations, into training data to create shortcuts between target nodes and
malicious labels. Due to the message-passing mechanism, these triggers will deceive GNNs to
misclassify trigger attached nodes into malicious label during inference, while preserving high
performance on clean nodes, thereby posing serious risks in safety-critical applications.
Existing defense against such attack adopt various strategies to detect and mitigate backdoor impact.
Prune [11] drops edges that link nodes that exhibit low cosine similarity. OD [12] identifies outlier
nodes based on distributional differences and removes them to neutralize trigger influence. RIGBD
[17] observes that simple pruning and outlier detection methods can be easily bypassed by carefully
crafted triggers, and thus introduces a combination of randomized edge dropping and robust training
to weaken trigger influence and restore model integrity. However, defending against more subtle,
feature-based backdoor attacks remains a significant challenge. Unlike structural perturbations
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

