On the Hardness of Approximating Distributions with
Tractable Probabilistic Models
John Leland
YooJung Choi
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence
Arizona State University
jslelan1@asu.edu, yj.choi@asu.edu

Abstract
A fundamental challenge in probabilistic modeling is to balance expressivity and
inference efficiency. Tractable probabilistic models (TPMs) aim to directly address
this tradeoff by imposing constraints that guarantee efficient inference of certain
queries while maintaining expressivity. In particular, probabilistic circuits (PCs)
provide a unifying framework for many TPMs, by characterizing families of models
as circuits satisfying different structural properties. Because the complexity of
inference on PCs is a function of the circuit size, understanding the size requirements of different families of PCs is fundamental in mapping the trade-off between
tractability and expressive efficiency. However, the study of expressive efficiency
of circuits are often concerned with exact representations, which may not align
with model learning, where we look to approximate the underlying data distribution
closely by some distance measure. Moreover, due to hardness of inference tasks,
exactly representing distributions while supporting tractable inference often incurs
exponential size blow-ups. In this paper, we consider a natural, yet so far underexplored, question: can we avoid such size blow-up by allowing for some small
approximation error? We study approximating distributions with probabilistic circuits with guarantees based on f -divergences, and analyze which inference queries
remain well-approximated under this framework. We show that approximating an
arbitrary distribution with bounded f -divergence is NP-hard for any model that
can tractably compute marginals. In addition, we prove an exponential size gap for
approximation between the class of decomposable PCs and that of decomposable
and deterministic PCs.

1

Introduction

The expressive power of probabilistic and generative models has increased rapidly in recent years:
from Bayesian networks [18], GANs [26], VAEs [29], and normalizing flows [35], to diffusion
models [27] and transformers [46] have demonstrated remarkable success in capturing complex
distributions. Yet, despite their expressivity, many of these models do not support efficient computation of fundamental probabilistic queries, such as marginals and conditionals, which are critical for
inference in domains such as healthcare [40], neuro-symbolic AI [43], environmental science [5],
and algorithmic fairness [9].
Tractable probabilistic models—such as probabilistic circuits [8], probabilistic generating circuits
[50], determinantal point processes [1], and more—address the need for probabilistic queries by
balancing expressivity and tractable inference, achieved through enforcing constraints on the models.
To more compactly describe the constraints enforced, we focus on probabilistic circuits, which also
have extensive literature on the conditions of tractability [8]. While these structural constraints
enable efficient inference, they introduce a tradeoff by potentially affecting the models’ ability to
compactly represent distributions (i.e., their expressive power). Naturally, there have been many
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

