I NST-IT: Boosting Instance Understanding via
Explicit Visual Prompt Instruction Tuning
Wujian Peng1,2∗ Lingchen Meng1∗ Yitong Chen1,2 Yiweng Xie1 Yang Liu1
Tao Gui1,2 Hang Xu3 Xipeng Qiu1,2 Zuxuan Wu1,2† Yu-Gang Jiang1
1
2

Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
Shanghai Innovation Institute 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
https://inst-it.github.io

Abstract
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have made significant breakthroughs with the
advancement of instruction tuning. However, while existing models can understand images and videos at a holistic level, they still struggle with instance-level
understanding that requires a more fine-grained comprehension and alignment.
Instance-level understanding is crucial for LMMs, as it focuses on the specific
elements that we are most interested in. Excitingly, existing works find that the
state-of-the-art LMMs exhibit strong instance understanding capabilities when provided with explicit visual cues. Motivated by this, we proposed I NST-IT, a solution
to enhance LMMs in Instance understanding via explicit visual prompt Instruction
Tuning for instance guidance. I NST-IT consists of a benchmark to diagnose multimodal instance-level understanding, a large-scale instruction-tuning dataset, and
a continuous instruction-tuning training paradigm to effectively enhance spatialtemporal instance understanding capabilities of existing LMMs. Experimental
results show that, enhanced by I NST-IT, our models not only achieve outstanding
performance on I NST-IT Bench and other instance understanding benchmarks,
but also demonstrate significant improvements across various generic image and
video understanding benchmarks. This highlights that our method not only boosts
instance-level understanding but also strengthens the overall capabilities of generic
image and video comprehension.

1

Introduction

Recently, Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have seen remarkable advancements. A key breakthrough is visual instruction tuning [45, 17], enabling models to follow any type of user instructions.
This paves the way to building general-purpose multimodal assistants capable of handling a wide
range of real-world tasks [32]. Inspired by this initial work, numerous follow-up studies have
emerged in both image-language [43, 60, 106, 9, 13] and video-language [51, 22, 99, 84, 82] modeling. However, although they can understand images or videos at a holistic level, they still struggle to
comprehend instance-specific content that the users are most interested in, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a).
Instance-level understanding involves comprehending the attributes of individual instances within an
image or video, as well as the relationships and interactions between them. This requires models to
exhibit nuanced comprehension and fine-grained alignment. Instance understanding has been a longstanding pursuit of the community with extensive efforts devoted to object detection [73, 71, 23, 58],
instance segmentation [74, 29, 59], and object tracking [19, 76]. This capability is essential for
∗

Equal contributions; † Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

