VaporTok: RL-Driven Adaptive Video Tokenizer with
Prior & Task Awareness
Minghao Yang1∗
3

Zechen Bai2 ∗

Jing Lin3

Haoqian Wang1† Alex Jinpeng Wang4 †

1
Tsinghua University 2 National University of Singapore
Nanyang Technological University 4 Central South University

Abstract
Recent advances in visual tokenizers have demonstrated their effectiveness for
multimodal large language models and autoregressive generative models. However,
most existing visual tokenizers rely on a fixed downsampling rate at a given
visual resolution, and consequently produce a constant number of visual tokens,
ignoring the fact that visual information of varying complexity warrant different
token budgets. Motivated by this observation, we propose an adaptive video
tokenizer "VaporTok" with two core contributions: Probabilistic Taildrop: We
introduce a novel taildrop mechanism that learns a truncation index sampling
distribution conditioned on visual complexity of the video. During both training
and inference, the decoder reconstructs videos at adaptive token lengths, allocating
more tokens to complex videos and fewer to simpler ones. Parallel Sample
GRPO with Vapor Reward: By leveraging the probability distribution produced
by probabilistic taildrop, we reformulate the visual tokenization pipeline as a
sequential decision process. To optimize this process, we propose a variant of
GRPO and a composite reward encompassing token efficiency, reconstruction
fidelity, and generative quality, thus enabling metrics-aware adaptive tokenization
across diverse objectives. Extensive experiments on standard video generation
benchmarks confirm our analysis, showing that our adaptive approach matches or
outperforms fixed-rate baselines and naive taildrop while using fewer tokens.

1

Introduction

Visual generative models have undergone rapid advancements in recent years, progressing from
VAEs[22] and GANs[17] to diffusion models[18]. More recently, autoregressive (AR) based
approaches[7, 5, 42, 45] have emerged as a prominent direction, demonstrating competitiveness with
diffusion models. The superior performance is largely due to the scalability and flexibility of the
AR paradigm, as demonstrated by large language models (LLMs) [58, 46, 10]. Similar to LLMs,
AR-based visual generative models necessitate a visual tokenizer, which is essential for converting
image or video data into vector representations that the model can process. Consequently, research
into visual tokenizers has become a central focus in visual generative models.
Despite their remarkable performance, AR models still face fundamental limitations inherent in
the AR paradigm. Specifically, the computational complexity of processing token sequences grows
quadratically with their length. In addition, the prediction errors can accumulate progressively as
observed in numerous works[1, 8, 36]. Intuitively, a shorter, more compact visual token sequence can
be a favorable option. Existing visual tokenizers[47, 60, 29, 62] generally output a predetermined
number of latent tokens for subsequent generation tasks. While there are some attempts at adaptive
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

