On-Policy Optimization with Group Equivalent
Preference for Multi-Programming Language
Understanding

Haoyuan Wu1∗ Rui Ming1∗ Jilong Gao1∗ Hangyu Zhao1 Xueyi Chen1
Yikai Yang1 Haisheng Zheng2 Zhuolun He1,2 Bei Yu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 ChatEDA Tech
{hywu24, byu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) achieve remarkable performance in code generation tasks. However, a significant performance disparity persists between popular
programming languages (e.g., Python, C++) and others. To address this capability
gap, we leverage the code translation task to train LLMs, thereby facilitating the
transfer of coding proficiency across diverse programming languages. Moreover,
we introduce OORL for training, a novel reinforcement learning (RL) framework
that integrates on-policy and off-policy strategies. Within OORL, on-policy RL
is applied during code translation, guided by a rule-based reward signal derived
from unit tests. Complementing this coarse-grained rule-based reward, we propose
Group Equivalent Preference Optimization (GEPO), a novel preference optimization method. Specifically, GEPO trains the LLM using intermediate representations
(IRs) groups. LLMs can be guided to discern IRs equivalent to the source code from
inequivalent ones, while also utilizing signals about the mutual equivalence between IRs within the group. This process allows LLMs to capture nuanced aspects
of code functionality. By employing OORL for training with code translation tasks,
LLMs improve their recognition of code functionality and their understanding of
the relationships between code implemented in different languages. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our OORL for LLMs training with code translation
tasks achieves significant performance improvements on code benchmarks across
multiple programming languages.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancement of LLMs [2], code-specific language models have garnered significant
attention within the research community. Building upon pre-trained LLMs, code LLMs such as the
StarCoder series [12, 16], CodeLlama series [23], DeepSeekCoder series [27], QwenCoder [20] series,
and CodeStral [18] have demonstrated superior performance in code generation tasks. However,
although current state-of-the-art code generation LLMs excel at generating code using popular
programming languages (e.g., Python, C++), their performance diminishes when applied to solving
the same problems using other programming languages [19]. This capability gap limits the universal
applicability of these powerful LLMs and hinders developers working in diverse programming
language ecosystems.
Consequently, it is crucial to enhance LLMs’ proficiency across a wider range of programming
languages to match their performance in widely used ones [26, 19]. We address this challenge by
training LLMs on code translation tasks, requiring them to translate code from one programming
∗

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

