Efficient Safe Meta-Reinforcement Learning: Provable
Near-Optimality and Anytime Safety

Siyuan Xu & Minghui Zhu
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16801
{spx5032, muz16}@psu.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of safe meta-reinforcement learning (safe metaRL), where an agent efficiently adapts to unseen tasks while satisfying safety
constraints at all times during adaptation. We propose a framework consisting
of two complementary modules: safe policy adaptation and safe meta-policy
training. The first module introduces a novel one-step safe policy adaptation
method that admits a closed-form solution, ensuring monotonic improvement,
constraint satisfaction at every step, and high computational efficiency. The second
module develops a Hessian-free meta-training algorithm that incorporates safety
constraints on the meta-policy and leverages the analytical form of the adapted
policy to enable scalable optimization. Together, these modules yield three key
advantages over existing safe meta-RL methods: (i) superior optimality, (ii) anytime
safety guarantee, and (iii) high computational efficiency. Beyond existing safe
meta-RL analyses, we prove the anytime safety guarantee of policy adaptation
and provide a lower bound of the expected total reward of the adapted policies
compared with the optimal policies, which shows that the adapted policies are
nearly optimal. Empirically, our algorithm achieves superior optimality, strict
safety compliance, and substantial computational gains—up to 70% faster training
and 50% faster testing—across diverse locomotion and navigation benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [47] has achieved significant successes in various domains, from
video games [37, 46, 26] to robotics [28, 27, 35, 36]. The RL problem is formulated as a Markov
decision process (MDP) and aims to maximize the expected total reward. Safe RL [58, 55, 15, 57]
addresses additional safety requirements, such as collision avoidance for robots [51, 21] and operation
restrictions in financial management [1]. Typically, the safe RL problem is formulated as a constrained
MDP (CMDP) [4], which aims to maximize the expected total reward while ensuring that the expected
safety costs are below given thresholds. As noted in [15], the goals of reward maximization and
constraint enforcement are not completely aligned, aggravating the challenge of the inherent trade-off
between exploration and exploitation.
Meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) [5] aims to extract common knowledge from multiple existing
RL tasks, accelerating the learning process and increasing the data efficiency of RL algorithms. Safe
meta-RL [24, 55, 59] integrates safe RL and meta-RL and inherits the benefits of both. On the
other hand, existing safe meta-RL methods face three new challenges: optimality, computational
efficiency, and anytime safety. Meta-CRPO [24] considers an online safe meta-RL problem. In
each round, it computes the task-specific policy by CRPO [55] and updates the meta-policy that
has the minimal average distance to the task-specific policies of all previous tasks. However, the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

