Metropolis-Hastings Sampling for
3D Gaussian Reconstruction
Hyunjin Kim1
1

Haebeom Jung2

UC San Diego

hyk071@ucsd.edu

2

Jaesik Park2

Seoul National University

{haebeom.jung, jaesik.park}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose an adaptive sampling framework for 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
that leverages comprehensive multi-view photometric error signals within a unified
Metropolis-Hastings approach. Vanilla 3DGS heavily relies on heuristic-based
density-control mechanisms (e.g., cloning, splitting, and pruning), which can
lead to redundant computations or premature removal of beneficial Gaussians.
Our framework overcomes these limitations by reformulating densification and
pruning as a probabilistic sampling process, dynamically inserting and relocating
Gaussians based on aggregated multi-view errors and opacity scores. Guided
by Bayesian acceptance tests derived from these error-based importance scores,
our method substantially reduces reliance on heuristics, offers greater flexibility,
and adaptively infers Gaussian distributions without requiring predefined scene
complexity. Experiments on benchmark datasets, including Mip-NeRF360, Tanks
and Temples and Deep Blending, show that our approach reduces the number
of Gaussians needed, achieving faster convergence while matching or modestly
surpassing the view-synthesis quality of state-of-the-art models. Our project page
is available at https://hjhyunjinkim.github.io/MH-3DGS.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis (NVS) focuses on creating photo-realistic images of a 3D scene from unseen
viewpoints. It is significant due to its broad applicability across various real-world scenarios. While
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [36] has largely advanced Novel View Synthesis by mapping 3D locations and view directions to view-dependent colors and volumetric densities, its slow rendering speed
hinders real-world deployment. To address these limitations, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [20]
recently emerged, enabling real-time photo-realistic rendering by representing complex scenes with
explicit 3D Gaussians, each of which is projected to the screen and defined by its position, anisotropic
covariance, and opacity.
Despite these advantages, 3DGS and its extensions [18, 20, 56] rely heavily on heuristic-based
adaptive density control mechanisms, such as cloning, splitting, and pruning by introducing fixed
thresholds on opacity, size, and positional gradients in the view space. This leads to inflation of
memory with redundant Gaussians when thresholds are loose, or to a sacrifice of fidelity when
they are tight. To tackle this problem, Kheradmand et al. [22] recast 3DGS updates as Stochastic
Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD), framing Gaussian updates as Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) samples from an underlying probability distribution representing scene fidelity. As SGLD
updates Gaussians in the direction of the image-reconstruction gradient and adds a small noise term,
the procedure behaves like a gradient-based optimizer. Although it replaces heuristics with state
transitions, it still fixes the total number of Gaussians upfront, limiting adaptability to scenes of
varying complexity.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

