Learning Human-Like RL Agents through Trajectory
Optimization with Action Quantization

Jian-Ting Guo1∗, Yu-Cheng Chen1∗ , Ping-Chun Hsieh1† , Kuo-Hao Ho1
Po-Wei Huang1 , Ti-Rong Wu2† , I-Chen Wu1,3
1

Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
2
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
3
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

{gjt.cs13, yucheng.cs11, pinghsieh, lukewayne123.cs05}@nycu.edu.tw
a311551048.cs11@nycu.edu.tw, tirongwu@iis.sinica.edu.tw, icwu@cs.nycu.edu.tw

Abstract
Human-like agents have long been one of the goals in pursuing artificial intelligence.
Although reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved superhuman performance in
many domains, relatively little attention has been focused on designing human-like
RL agents. As a result, many reward-driven RL agents often exhibit unnatural
behaviors compared to humans, raising concerns for both interpretability and
trustworthiness. To achieve human-like behavior in RL, this paper first formulates human-likeness as trajectory optimization, where the objective is to find an
action sequence that closely aligns with human behavior while also maximizing
rewards, and adapts the classic receding-horizon control to human-like learning as a
tractable and efficient implementation. To achieve this, we introduce Macro Action
Quantization (MAQ), a human-like RL framework that distills human demonstrations into macro actions via Vector-Quantized VAE. Experiments on D4RL Adroit
benchmarks show that MAQ significantly improves human-likeness, increasing
trajectory similarity scores, and achieving the highest human-likeness rankings
among all RL agents in the human evaluation study. Our results also demonstrate
that MAQ can be easily integrated into various off-the-shelf RL algorithms, opening a promising direction for learning human-like RL agents. Our code is available
at https://rlg.iis.sinica.edu.tw/papers/MAQ.

1

Introduction

Designing human-like agents has been an important goal on the path toward artificial intelligence.
One of the most well-known benchmarks is the Turing Test, which evaluates whether an agent can
perform intelligent behavior that is indistinguishable from a human. To pass the Turing Test, agents
are designed not only to achieve the goal of the given task but also to behave in a human-like manner.
While the pursuit of human-like agents has been investigated in natural language processing (NLP),
such as in large language models (LLMs) that aim to generate responses aligned with human
preferences [1], it has not yet been widely explored in the field of deep reinforcement learning (DRL).
In recent years, DRL has made significant progress in various domains, such as gaming [2, 3, 4] or
robotics control [5, 6]. However, researchers have noticed RL agents often exhibit unnatural behaviors,
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

