Act to See, See to Act: Diffusion-Driven
Perception-Action Interplay for Adaptive Policies

Jing Wang1

Weiting Peng2 Jing Tang2 Zeyu Gong2 Xihua Wang1
Bo Tao2 Li Cheng1
1
2
University of Alberta
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{jing39, xihua, lcheng5}@ualberta.ca
{u202210565, j_tang, gongzeyu, taobo}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing imitation learning methods decouple perception and action, which overlooks the causal reciprocity between sensory representation and action execution
that humans naturally leverage for adaptive behaviors. To bridge this gap, we introduce Action-Guided Diffusion Policy (DP-AG), a unified representation learning
that explicitly models a dynamic interplay between perception and action through
probabilistic latent dynamics. DP-AG encodes latent observations into a Gaussian
posterior via variational inference and evolves them using an action-guided SDE,
where the Vector–Jacobian Product (VJP) of the diffusion policy’s noise predictions
serves as a structured stochastic force driving latent updates. To promote bidirectional learning between perception and action, we introduce a cycle-consistent
contrastive loss that organizes the gradient flow of the noise predictor into a coherent perception–action loop, enforcing mutually consistent transitions in both
latent updates and action refinements. Theoretically, we derive a variational lower
bound for the action-guided SDE, and prove that the contrastive objective enhances
continuity in both latent and action trajectories. Empirically, DP-AG significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art methods across simulation benchmarks and real-world
UR5 manipulation tasks. As a result, our DP-AG offers a promising step toward
bridging biological adaptability and artificial policy learning. Code is available on
our project website: https://jingwang18.github.io/dp-ag.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) enables agents to replicate expert behavior from demonstrations. Direct
mapping methods, such as [Codevilla et al., 2018, Mandlekar et al., 2022, Florence et al., 2022], learn
a direct mapping between observations and actions. In contrast, generative models such as Diffusion
Policy (DP) [Chi et al., 2023] and flow-matching methods [Hu et al., 2024, Zhang et al., 2025] model
action distributions to improve continuity across time steps. Vision-Language-Action (VLA) [Kim
et al., 2024, Black et al., 2024] improves perception by leveraging Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
to interpret environmental cues and high-level instructions. Despite progress, existing methods treat
observation features as static during each action sequence generation (extracting them from a single
time-point observation and holding them fixed while generating a short sequence of actions), thus
overlooking the opportunity for the intermediate action feedback to refine perception.
Robust decision-making relies on a continuous interplay between perception and action [O’regan and
Noë, 2001]. Humans naturally embody this principle by dynamically refining their environmental
understanding through feedback from their own actions [Brooks, 1991]. Motivated by this, we propose
Action-Guided Diffusion Policy (DP-AG), a representation learning framework for IL that explicitly
models the perception–action interplay through probabilistic latent dynamics. We build upon DP
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

