Diffusion Generative Modeling on Lie Group
Representations

Marco Bertolini∗, Tuan Le∗ & Djork-Arné Clevert
Machine Learning Research
Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development
Friedrichstraße 110, 10117 Berlin, Germany
{marco.bertolini,tuan.le,djork-arne.clevert}@pfizer.com

Abstract
We introduce a novel class of score-based diffusion processes that operate directly
in the representation space of Lie groups. Leveraging the framework of Generalized
Score Matching, we derive a class of Langevin dynamics that decomposes as a
direct sum of Lie algebra representations, enabling the modeling of any target
distribution on any (non-Abelian) Lie group. Standard score-matching emerges as
a special case of our framework when the Lie group is the translation group. We
prove that our generalized generative processes arise as solutions to a new class of
paired stochastic differential equations (SDEs), introduced here for the first time.
We validate our approach through experiments on diverse data types, demonstrating
its effectiveness in real-world applications such as SO(3)-guided molecular conformer generation and modeling ligand-specific global SE(3) transformations for
molecular docking, showing improvement in comparison to Riemannian diffusion
on the group itself. We show that an appropriate choice of Lie group enhances
learning efficiency by reducing the effective dimensionality of the trajectory space
and enables the modeling of transitions between complex data distributions.

1

Introduction

Deep probabilistic generative modeling amounts to creating data from a known tractable prior
distribution. Score-based models (Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Huang et al., 2021; Song et al., 2021, 2020b) achieve this by learning to reverse a corruption
process of the data. Most algorithms assume an Euclidean data space X, yet many scientific
applications (Brehmer & Cranmer, 2020; Zhang et al., 2024; Klimovskaia et al., 2020; Karpatne
et al., 2018) involve distributions on curved manifolds M. While significant progress has been
made in developing the theory of diffusion in curved spaces (De Bortoli et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2022), key challenges remain: parametrizing vector fields on general M is unsolved, and Langevin
updates require projection to preserve the manifold structure. Even when M = G is a Lie group,
denoising score-matching remains a challenge for general non-Abelian groups, thus necessitating
explicit trajectory simulation. Recent findings (Abramson et al., 2024) highlight this complexity, as
diffusion was performed in raw Cartesian coordinates rather than explicitly modeling the torsion
space, given its representational difficulty and lack of performance gain.
An appropriate representation that leverages the symmetry property of the data should, however,
enable models to better capture the underlying physical laws. The limited performance of manifoldbased diffusion must thus stem from technical and computational difficulties rather than fundamental
principles. This work seeks to reconcile this expectation with the empirical findings by addressing
the question: Given a Lie group G acting on Euclidean space X through a map (representation)
∗

Shared first authorship.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

