RUAGO: Effective and Practical Retain-Free
Unlearning via Adversarial Attack and OOD
Generator

1

Sangyong Lee1 , Sangjun Chung2 , Simon S. Woo1, 2, 3 ∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
3
Secure Machines Lab Inc, South Korea
{sang8961,hyjk826,swoo}@g.skku.edu

Abstract
With increasing regulations on private data usage in AI systems, machine unlearning
has emerged as a critical solution for selectively removing sensitive information
from trained models while preserving their overall utility. While many existing
unlearning methods rely on the retain data to mitigate the performance decline
caused by forgetting, such data may not always be available (retain-free) in realworld scenarios. To address this challenge posed by retain-free unlearning, we
introduce RUAGO, utilizing adversarial soft labels to mitigate over-unlearning and
a generative model pretrained on out-of-distribution (OOD) data to effectively distill
the original model’s knowledge. We introduce a progressive sampling strategy
to incrementally increase synthetic data complexity, coupled with an inversionbased alignment step that ensures the synthetic data closely matches the original
training distribution. Our extensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets
and architectures demonstrate that our approach consistently outperforms existing
retain-free methods and achieves comparable or superior performance relative
to retain-based approaches, demonstrating its effectiveness and practicality in
real-world, data-constrained environments.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the success of machine learning across diverse domains has been driven by the
availability of massive datasets. A prominent example is GPT-4, a milestone in advancing machine
learning, which was trained on approximately 5 trillion data points [1]. However, these advancements
have raised serious privacy concerns due to including sensitive or unauthorized information in
training data. Widely deployed models such as ChatGPT have also demonstrated risks of information
leakage [2]. In response, regulations [3, 4] such as the EU/US Copyright Law [5] and the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) emphasize the Right to be Forgotten, ensuring “the data subject
shall have the right to obtain from the controller the erasure of personal data concerning him or
her without undue delay” [6]. Consequently, model owners, including those of AI systems, must
carefully manage personal data and comply with removal requests. However, removing data may alter
the original model’s behavior and can lead to performance degradation. The most straightforward
solution is to retrain the model without the requested data, referred to as the forget data, but this
strategy is computationally and financially prohibitive.
To address rising privacy concerns and regulatory demands, Machine Unlearning (MU) [7, 8] has
emerged as a framework for removing specific training data. While early work focused on simple
∗

Simon S. Woo is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

