Sampling from multi-modal distributions with
polynomial query complexity in ﬁxed dimension via
reverse diffusion
Adrien Vacher
CREST, ENSAE
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
adrien.vacher@ensae.fr

Omar Chehab
CREST, ENSAE
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
omar.chehab@ensae.fr

Anna Korba
CREST, ENSAE
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
anna.korba@ensae.fr

Abstract
Even in low dimensions, sampling from multi-modal distributions is challenging.
We provide the ﬁrst sampling algorithm for a broad class of distributions — including all Gaussian mixtures — with a query complexity that is polynomial in the
parameters governing multi-modality, assuming ﬁxed dimension. Our sampling
algorithm simulates a time-reversed diffusion process, using a self-normalized
Monte Carlo estimator of the intermediate score functions. Unlike previous works,
it avoids metastability, requires no prior knowledge of the mode locations, and relaxes the well-known log-smoothness assumption which excluded general Gaussian mixtures so far.

1

Introduction

Sampling from a distribution whose density is only known up to a normalization constant is a
fundamental
problem in statistics. Formally, given some potential V : Rd → R such that
R −V (x)
e
dx < ∞, the sampling problem consists in obtaining a sample from some distribution
p such that p is ϵ-close to the target µ ∝ e−V with respect to some divergence while maintaining
the complexity, i.e., the number of queries to V and possibly to its derivatives, as low as possible.
Depending on the shape of the distribution, the typical complexity of existing sampling algorithms
can signiﬁcantly differ.
Log-concave and "PL-like" distributions As in Euclidean optimization, a common assumption
in the sampling literature is to assume that µ is log-concave and log-smooth or equivalently, that V
is convex and smooth. Speciﬁcally, when the potential V is assumed to be α-strongly convex and to
have an L-Lipschitz gradient, the popular Unajusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) is known to achieve
fast convergence [Durmus and Moulines, 2017, Dalalyan and Karagulyan, 2019]. Because stronglog concavity implies uni-modality, thus excluding many distributions of interest, this assumption
was further relaxed to µ verifying an α−1 -log-Sobolev inequality, later interpreted as a Polyak–
Łojasiewicz type condition on KL(·|µ) for the Wasserstein geometry [Blanchet and Bolte, 2018].
Under these conditions, ULA was shown to achieve ϵ-error in Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence in
Õ(L2 α−2 dϵ−1 ) queries to ∇V [Vempala and Wibisono, 2019]. While these polynomial guarantees
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

