Contextual Dynamic Pricing
with Heterogeneous Buyers

Thodoris Lykouris
MIT
lykouris@mit.edu

Sloan Nietert
EPFL
sloan.nietert@epfl.ch

Chara Podimata
MIT
podimata@mit.edu

Princewill Okoroafor
Harvard University
pco9@cornell.edu

Julian Zimmert
Google
zimmert@google.com

Abstract
We initiate the study of contextual dynamic pricing with a heterogeneous population
of buyers, where a seller repeatedly posts prices (over T rounds) that depend on the
observable d-dimensional context and receives binary purchase feedback. Unlike
prior work assuming homogeneous buyer types, in our setting the buyer’s valuation
type is drawn from an unknown distribution with finite support size K⋆ . We
develop a contextual
pricing algorithm based on optimistic posterior sampling with
√
e ⋆ dT ), which we prove to be tight in d and T up to logarithmic terms.
regret O(K
Finally, we refine our analysis for the non-contextual pricing case, proposing a
variance-aware zooming algorithm that achieves the optimal dependence on K⋆ .

1

Introduction

In online learning for contextual pricing, a learner (aka seller) repeatedly sets prices for different
products with the goal of maximizing revenue through interactions with agents (aka buyers or
customers). Concretely, in each round t = 1, . . . , T , nature selects a product with a d-dimensional
feature representation ut (context) and the seller selects a price pt ≥ 0. In the simplest variant, the
linear valuation model, customers have a fixed intrinsic valuation model (type) that is unknown to
the learner; this has a d-dimensional representation θ⋆ whose coordinates reflect the valuation that
each product feature adds, i.e., the customer’s valuation is vt = ⟨θ⋆ , ut ⟩ + εt where εt is a noise term.
The customer makes a purchase only when their valuation is higher than the price, i.e., vt ≥ pt . The
learner’s goal is to maximize revenue, i.e., the sum of the prices in rounds when purchases occur. An
equivalent objective is to minimize regret, which is measured against a benchmark that always selects
the customer’s valuation as the price for the given round.
Before outlining our contributions, we highlight the unique challenge of online learning in contextual
pricing. One key difficulty is that the learner faces both an infinite action space (i.e., all possible
prices) and a discontinuous revenue function; indeed, even small price increases can deter a buyer
from purchasing, hence causing sharp revenue loss for the learner. However, the problem offers a
richer feedback structure than classical multi-armed bandits: a non-purchase indicates that all higher
prices would also be rejected by the buyer, while a purchase confirms that all lower prices would
be accepted too. The two primary approaches from the literature to tackle this problem involve
estimating the unknown parameter θ⋆ through online regression or multi-dimensional binary search
(see Section 1.1 for further discussion).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

