PanoWan: Lifting Diffusion Video Generation Models
to 360◦ with Latitude/Longitude-aware Mechanisms
∗

∗

Yifei Xia1,2,3 Shuchen Weng4
Siqi Yang5 Jingqi Liu1,2 Chengxuan Zhu6
†
1,2
Minggui Teng
Zijian Jia7 Han Jiang3 Boxin Shi1,2
1
State Key Lab of Multimedia Info. Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Nat’l Eng. Research Ctr. of Visual Tech., School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
OpenBayes Information Technology Co., Ltd. 4 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
6
Nat’l Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
7
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{yfxia,shuchenweng,yousiki,peterzhu,minggui_teng,shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn
liujingqi@stu.pku.edu.cn
jiazijian@bupt.edu.cn
hahn@openbayes.com

Abstract
Panoramic video generation enables immersive 360° content creation, valuable
in applications that demand scene-consistent world exploration. However, existing panoramic video generation models struggle to leverage pre-trained generative priors from conventional text-to-video models for high-quality and diverse
panoramic videos generation, due to limited dataset scale and the gap in spatial
feature representations. In this paper, we introduce PanoWan to effectively lift
pre-trained text-to-video models to the panoramic domain, equipped with minimal
modules. PanoWan employs latitude-aware sampling to avoid latitudinal distortion, while its rotated semantic denoising and padded pixel-wise decoding ensure
seamless transitions at longitude boundaries. To provide sufficient panoramic
videos for learning these lifted representations, we contribute PANOV ID, a highquality panoramic video dataset with captions and diverse scenarios. Consequently,
PanoWan achieves state-of-the-art performance in panoramic video generation
and demonstrates robustness for zero-shot downstream tasks. Our project page is
available at https://panowan.variantconst.com.

1

Introduction

Text-based panoramic video generation aims to produce a complete 360° view, ensuring coherent
spatial and visual relationships between elements within the scene. Such inherent property is highly
valuable for conventional VR content, the construction of interactive game worlds [35, 8], and the
simulation of environments for embodied AI [18].
The remarkable capabilities of conventional text-to-video models [28, 33, 4] motivate researchers
to leverage their generative priors to panoramic video generation. One intuitive strategy generates
local perspective conventional videos and integrates them during inference. While these trainingfree methods [12, 21] entirely preserve generative priors, they sacrifice overall consistency as they
struggle to establish cross-view long-range dependencies. Alternatively, fine-tuning conventional
text-to-video models [32, 41] also faces challenges. On one hand, existing panoramic video datasets
are limited in scope and scale compared to conventional ones. On the other hand, the gap in spatial
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

