MIHC: Multi-View Interpretable Hypergraph Neural
Networks with Information Bottleneck for Chip
Congestion Prediction

Zeyue Zhanga* Heng Pingb* Peiyu Zhangb Nikos Kanakarisc**
Xiaoling Lua Paul Bogdanb† Xiongye Xiaod†

a

Center for Applied Statistics, School of Statistics, Innovation Platform, Renmin University of China;
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California;
c
Amazon Web Services, Seattle; and d Min H. Kao Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, University of Tennessee, Knoxville
b

Abstract
With the advancement of artificial intelligence (AI) and increasing integrated circuit
(IC) design complexity, efficient chip design through electronic design automation
(EDA) has become critical. Fast and accurate congestion prediction in chip layout
and routing can significantly enhance automated design performance. Existing
congestion modeling methods are limited by (i) ineffective processing and fusion
of multi-view circuit data information, and (ii) insufficient reliability and interpretability in the prediction process. To address these challenges, we propose the
Multi-view Interpretable Hypergraph for Chip (MIHC), a trustworthy multi-view
hypergraph neural network framework that (i) processes both graph and image information in unified hypergraph representations, capturing topological and geometric
circuit data; (ii) implements a novel subgraph Information Bottleneck mechanism,
identifying critical congestion-correlated regions to guide predictions. This work
is the first attempt to incorporate such interpretability into congestion prediction
through informative graph reasoning. Experiments show that the MIHC method
reduces NMAE by 16.67% and 8.57% in cell-based and grid-based predictions on
ISPD2015, and 5.26% and 2.44% on CircuitNet-N28, respectively, compared to
state-of-the-art methods. Rigorous cross-design generalization experiments further
validate our method’s capability to handle entirely unseen circuit designs.

1

Introduction

Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and cyber-physical systems (CPS) [23] require a continuous
and increasing demand for computational power supported by integrated circuits (ICs). This necessitates rapid, accurate IC design through electronic design automation (EDA)[12]. Efficient quality
assessment of generated circuits is crucial to the design process [9], with circuit congestion prediction
being particularly vital as it directly impacts reliability, performance, and manufacturability.
Circuit congestion occurs when routing resources are exceeded by wires attempting to traverse
the same physical region [4]. This issue arises when cells (i.e., electronic components) that are
logically connected by nets (i.e., connecting wires) are physically placed far apart or when many
nets must share limited routing space. These situations commonly result from the mismatch between
circuit connectivity requirements and physical layout constraints [10]. Therefore, accurate congestion
*

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors: pbogdan@usc.edu and xxiao9@utk.edu.
**
The work does not relate to the author’s position at Amazon.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

