Controllable Human-centric Keyframe Interpolation
with Generative Prior
Zujin Guo1

Size Wu1 Zhongang Cai2 Wei Li1∗ Chen Change Loy1∗
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
SenseTime Research
https://gseancdat.github.io/projects/PoseFuse3D_KI

Abstract
Existing interpolation methods use pre-trained video diffusion priors to generate
intermediate frames between sparsely sampled keyframes. In the absence of 3D geometric guidance, these methods struggle to produce plausible results for complex,
articulated human motions and offer limited control over the synthesized dynamics.
In this paper, we introduce PoseFuse3D Keyframe Interpolator (PoseFuse3D-KI), a
novel framework that integrates 3D human guidance signals into the diffusion process for Controllable Human-centric Keyframe Interpolation (CHKI). To provide
rich spatial and structural cues for interpolation, our PoseFuse3D, a 3D-informed
control model, features a novel SMPL-X encoder that transforms 3D geometry
and shape into the 2D latent conditioning space, alongside a fusion network that
integrates these 3D cues with 2D pose embeddings. For evaluation, we build
CHKI-Video, a new dataset annotated with both 2D poses and 3D SMPL-X parameters. We show that PoseFuse3D-KI consistently outperforms state-of-the-art
baselines on CHKI-Video, achieving a 9% improvement in PSNR and a 38% reduction in LPIPS. Comprehensive ablations demonstrate that our PoseFuse3D model
improves interpolation fidelity.

1

Introduction

Frame interpolation aims to generate new frames between two consecutive video frames to improve
temporal smoothness. Traditional interpolation methods [12, 46, 17] assume small, simple motion
over short time spans. These methods are challenged when the input frames are widely separated,
known as keyframe interpolation or generative inbetweening [56, 47, 41, 11], where the motion
between them becomes complex and ambiguous. This challenge is magnified in human-centric videos,
where articulated body movements encompass diverse poses and shapes. With human subjects being
prevalent in today’s video content, there is a growing need for interpolation methods to handle large
temporal gaps and intricate human motion while offering plausible results.
Human-centric keyframe interpolation remains challenging for current methods. Recent approaches [11, 47, 41] leverage generative priors from image-to-video (I2V) models to bridge the
temporal gap. These methods condition the interpolation solely on the input keyframes without intermediate guidance. Consequently, they often struggle to resolve motion ambiguities and accurately
capture the complex articulated dynamics of human motion. For instance, when keyframes involve
large occlusions or non-rigid joint movements, these methods often produce implausible or distorted
interpolations (Figure 1(a)) due to insufficient intermediate guidance. FCVG [56] has explored
interpolation keyframes with 2D skeletons as control signals for human subjects. However, 2D lines
cannot convey full body shape and geometry, leading to unrealistic results (see Figure 1(b)). These
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

