Space Group Equivariant Crystal Diffusion

Rees Chang1∗, Angela Pak1 , Alex Guerra2 , Ni Zhan2 , Nick Richardson2 ,
Elif Ertekin3 , Ryan P. Adams2
1
Department of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
3
Materials Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Accelerating inverse design of crystalline materials with generative models has
significant implications for a range of technologies. Unlike other atomic systems,
3D crystals are invariant to discrete groups of isometries called the space groups.
Crucially, these space group symmetries are known to heavily influence materials
properties. We propose SGEquiDiff, a crystal generative model which naturally
handles space group constraints with space group invariant likelihoods. SGEquiDiff consists of an SE(3)-invariant, telescoping discrete sampler of crystal lattices;
permutation-invariant, transformer-based autoregressive sampling of Wyckoff positions, elements, and numbers of symmetrically unique atoms; and space group
equivariant diffusion of atomic coordinates. We show that space group equivariant
vector fields automatically live in the tangent spaces of the Wyckoff positions.
SGEquiDiff achieves state-of-the-art performance on standard benchmark datasets
as assessed by quantitative proxy metrics and quantum mechanical calculations.
Our code is available at https://github.com/rees-c/sgequidiff.

1

Introduction

Crystals comprise critical technologies like batteries [66], topological materials [90], electronic
devices [96], photovoltaics [28], and more. Materials scientists have catalogued O(105 ) crystals
experimentally [7] and O(106 ) in silico with density functional theory (DFT) simulation [15, 39, 79].
In contrast, the number of stable crystalline materials with five elements or less is estimated to exceed
1013 , and even higher-order compositions are common in real materials [16]. Generative models
offer a promising path to rapidly explore the vast space of crystals [100, 40, 62, 10].
Unlike molecules, crystals span the periodic table and exhibit discrete spatial symmetries according to
one of 230 space groups [2]. Specifically, crystals have invariances to discrete translations, rotations,
reflections, and sequences thereof that transform atoms into themselves or into identical atoms. The
list of space group actions which map a point into itself is called a stabilizer group. When a set of
points in R3 have conjugate stabilizer groups, the set is called a Wyckoff position. Importantly, as
shown in Figure 1, Wyckoff positions can have zero volume, comprising points, lines, or planes.
These zero volume sets are referred to as special Wyckoff positions. We give a more formal treatment
of space groups and Wyckoff positions in Sec. 3.
Despite the fact that most existing crystal generative models ignore space groups and Wyckoff
positions, they are critical for modeling real materials. Firstly, space groups and Wyckoff positions
correlate strongly with materials properties; Neumann’s principle states that all crystal properties
share the same invariances as the crystal itself [65]. Thus even slightly perturbing atoms out of
special Wyckoff positions will reduce the crystal’s space group symmetry and can subsequently cause
significant (even discontinuous) changes to its macroscopic properties [14, 11, 82, 9]. Secondly, we
∗

Correspondence to reeswc2@illinois.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

