Discovering Opinion Intervals
from Conflicts in Signed Graphs

Peter Blohm∗
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
peter.blohm@aalto.fi

Florian Chen∗
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
florian.chen@cs.ox.ac.uk

Aristides Gionis
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Digital Futures
Stockholm, Sweden
argioni@kth.se

Stefan Neumann
TU Wien
Vienna, Austria
stefan.neumann@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
Online social media provide a platform for people to discuss current events and
exchange opinions with their peers. While interactions are predominantly positive,
in recent years, there has been a lot of research to understand the conflicts in social
networks and how they are based on different views and opinions. In this paper,
we ask whether the conflicts in a network reveal a small and interpretable set of
prevalent opinion ranges that explain the users’ interactions. More precisely, we
consider signed graphs, where the edge signs indicate positive and negative interactions of node pairs, and our goal is to infer opinion intervals that are consistent with
the edge signs. We introduce an optimization problem that models this question,
and we give strong hardness results and a polynomial-time approximation scheme
by utilizing connections to interval graphs and the C ORRELATION C LUSTERING
problem. We further provide scalable heuristics and show that in experiments they
yield more expressive solutions than C ORRELATION C LUSTERING baselines. We
also present a case study on a novel real-world dataset from the German parliament,
showing that our algorithms can recover the political leaning of German parties
based on co-voting behavior.

1

Introduction

Online social networks are essential parts of modern societies and are used by billions of people to
discuss current events. Even though a majority of the interactions on such networks are positive,
there are a substantial number of conflicts, particularly due to tensions among people with differing
viewpoints [48, 47].
As a result, gaining a deeper understanding of these conflicts has become essential. This question is
often studied using signed graphs [29, 48, 47], where each edge has a sign that is either positive (+)
if two nodes interact amicably, or negative (−) if the interaction is conflicting. A classic formulation
used to analyze signed graphs and gain insights about the graph structure and potentially the opinions
of nodes is the C ORRELATION C LUSTERING problem [4]. In C ORRELATION C LUSTERING, we ask
to partition the nodes of a given signed graph into clusters, so as to maximize the number of edges
that are consistent with the clustering (or minimize the number of inconsistent edges).
∗ Equal contribution. This work was done while the authors were at TU Wien.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

