Preference-Guided Diffusion for Multi-Objective
Offline Optimization

Yashas Annadani∗ 1,3 Syrine Belakaria2 Stefano Ermon2
Stefan Bauer1,3 Barbara Engelhardt2,4
1
TU Munich 2 Stanford University
3
Helmholtz AI, Munich 4 Gladstone Institutes

Abstract
Offline multi-objective optimization aims to identify Pareto-optimal solutions
given a dataset of designs and their objective values. In this work, we propose
a preference-guided diffusion model that generates Pareto-optimal designs by
leveraging a classifier-based guidance mechanism. Our guidance classifier is a
preference model trained to predict the probability that one design dominates
another, directing the diffusion model toward optimal regions of the design space.
Crucially, this preference model generalizes beyond the training distribution,
enabling the discovery of Pareto-optimal solutions outside the observed dataset.
We introduce a novel diversity-aware preference guidance, augmenting Pareto
dominance preference with diversity criteria. This ensures that generated solutions
are optimal and well-distributed across the objective space, a capability absent in
prior generative methods for offline multi-objective optimization. We evaluate our
approach on various continuous offline multi-objective optimization tasks and find
that it consistently outperforms other inverse/generative approaches while remaining competitive with forward/ surrogate-based optimization methods. Our results
highlight the effectiveness of classifier-guided diffusion models in generating
diverse and high-quality solutions that approximate the Pareto front well.

1

Introduction

Several design problems in science and engineering require optimizing a black-box, expensive-toevaluate function. For example, in antibiotic drug discovery, the goal is to identify novel molecules
with high antibacterial activity [39]. This can be formulated as a single-objective optimization
problem. However, in practice, most real-world design challenges involve balancing multiple
conflicting objectives. For example, in drug discovery, in addition to maximizing antibacterial
activity, we also want to minimize toxicity and production costs [38]. This constitutes a multiobjective experimental design problem.
Prior work in both single and multi-objective optimization (MOO) has largely focused on adaptive
experimental design using online methods such as Bayesian optimization [33]. These approaches
rely on training surrogate models for each objective function and designing acquisition functions that
are typically optimized via gradient-based techniques [3] or evolutionary algorithms to determine the
next candidate for evaluation. This process is iteratively repeated to optimize the objectives. However,
in many real-world applications, sequential evaluations—where inputs are tested one at a time or in
small batches—are impractical. In some cases, we have only a single opportunity to evaluate the
function, and we must allocate the entire evaluation budget efficiently.
∗

Correspondence to yashas.annadani@gmail.com. Code available at https://github.com/yannadani/pgd_moo.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

