Linear Mixture Distributionally Robust Markov
Decision Processes
Zhishuai Liu
Department of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
zhishuai.liu@duke.edu

Pan Xu
Department of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
pan.xu@duke.edu

Abstract
Many real-world decision-making problems face the off-dynamics challenge: the
agent learns a policy in a source domain and deploys it in a target domain with
different state transitions. The distributionally robust Markov decision process
(DRMDP) addresses this challenge by finding a robust policy that performs well under the worst-case environment within a pre-specified uncertainty set of transition
dynamics. Its effectiveness heavily hinges on the proper design of these uncertainty
sets, based on prior knowledge of the dynamics. In this work, we propose a novel
linear mixture DRMDP framework, where the nominal dynamics is assumed to be a
linear mixture model. In contrast with existing uncertainty sets directly defined as a
ball centered around the nominal kernel, linear mixture DRMDPs define the uncertainty sets based on a ball around the mixture weighting parameter. We show that
this new framework provides a more refined representation of uncertainties compared to conventional models based on (s, a)-rectangularity and d-rectangularity,
when prior knowledge about the mixture model is present. We propose a meta
algorithm for robust policy learning in linear mixture DRMDPs with general f divergence defined uncertainty sets, and analyze its sample complexities under
three divergence metrics instantiations: total variation, Kullback-Leibler, and χ2
divergences. These results establish the statistical learnability of linear mixture
DRMDPs, laying the theoretical foundation for future research on this new setting.

1

Introduction

In off-dynamics reinforcement learning (RL) [21, 48, 10, 45], an agent trains a policy in a source
domain and then deploys the learned policy in an unknown target domain with possible dynamics
shift from the source one. The dynamics shift may arise from the sim-to-real gap [34, 57, 7] when
the policy is trained on a simulator that mimics the real environment. The dynamics shift may cause
catastrophic failure since the policies learned from the source domain would admit distinct behaviors
in the target domain which thereby deviate the agent from achieving its goal, e.g., maximizing a long
term cumulative reward in the target domain.
A line of literature have tried to solve off-dynamics RL problems from various perspectives
differentiated by the extend of information we can collect from the source and target domains
[21, 48, 10, 45, 24]. In this work, we are particularly interested in the case where we can only collect
data from the source domain for policy learning. In other words, the agent has little knowledge
about the target domain but only holds the belief that its dynamics should be structurally close to
the source domain. Such large uncertainty in the target domain necessitates robust policy learning to
train policies that generalize well across a wide range of target domain. To this end, the agent usually
has to adopt a pessimism philosophy in the face of large uncertainty to prepare for the worst case
dynamics.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

