Markov Persuasion Processes:
Learning to Persuade From Scratch

Francesco Bacchiocchi∗
Politecnico di Milano
francesco.bacchiocchi@polimi.it

Francesco Emanuele Stradi∗
Politecnico di Milano
francescoemanuele.stradi@polimi.it

Matteo Castiglioni
Politecnico di Milano
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it

Alberto Marchesi
Politecnico di Milano
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it

Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Abstract
In Bayesian persuasion, an informed sender strategically discloses information to
a receiver so as to persuade them to undertake desirable actions. Recently, Markov
persuasion processes (MPPs) have been introduced to capture sequential scenarios
where a sender faces a stream of myopic receivers in a Markovian environment.
The MPPs studied so far in the literature suffer from issues that prevent them
from being fully operational in practice, e.g., they assume that the sender knows
receivers’ rewards. We fix such issues by addressing MPPs where the sender has no
knowledge about the environment. We design a learning algorithm for the sender,
working with partial feedback. We prove that its regret with respect to an optimal
information-disclosure policy grows sublinearly in the number of episodes, as it
is the case for the loss in persuasiveness cumulated while learning. Moreover, we
provide lower bounds for our setting matching the guarantees of our algorithm.

1

Introduction

Bayesian persuasion [Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011] studies how an informed sender should
strategically disclose information to influence the behavior of a self-interested receiver. Bayesian
persuasion has received a growing attention over the last years, since it captures several fundamental
problems arising in real-world applications, such as, e.g., online advertising [Bro Miltersen and
Sheffet, 2012, Emek et al., 2014, Badanidiyuru et al., 2018, Bacchiocchi et al., 2022], voting [Cheng
et al., 2015, Alonso and Câmara, 2016, Castiglioni et al., 2020a, Castiglioni and Gatti, 2021], traffic
routing [Vasserman et al., 2015, Bhaskar et al., 2016, Castiglioni et al., 2021a], recommendation systems [Mansour et al., 2016], e-commerce [Castiglioni et al., 2022], security [Rabinovich et al., 2015,
Xu et al., 2016], marketing [Babichenko and Barman, 2017, Candogan, 2019], clinical trials [Kolotilin,
2015], and financial regulation [Goldstein and Leitner, 2018].
Most of the works on Bayesian persuasion focus on one-shot interactions, where information disclosure is performed “one shot”. Despite real-world problems are usually sequential, there are only
few exceptions that consider multi-step information disclosure [Wu et al., 2022, Gan et al., 2022,
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

