Non-Uniform Multiclass Learning with Bandit
Feedback
Steve Hanneke
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Amirreza Shaeri
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
amirreza.shaeiri@gmail.com

Hongao Wang
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
wang5270@purdue.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of multiclass learning with bandit feedback in both the
i.i.d. batch and adversarial online models. In the uniform learning framework,
it is well known that no hypothesis class H is learnable in either model when
the effective number of labels is unbounded. In contrast, within the universal
learning framework, recent works by Hanneke et al. [2025b] and Hanneke et al.
[2025a] have established surprising exact equivalences between learnability under
bandit feedback and full supervision in both the i.i.d. batch and adversarial online
models, respectively. This raises a natural question: What happens in the nonuniform learning framework, which lies between the uniform and universal learning
frameworks? Our contributions are twofold: (1) We provide a combinatorial
characterization of learnable hypothesis classes in both models, in the realizable
and agnostic settings, within the non-uniform learning framework. Notably, this
includes elementary and natural hypothesis classes, such as a countably infinite
collection of constant functions over some domain that is learnable in both models.
(2) We construct a hypothesis class that is non-uniformly learnable under full
supervision in the adversarial online model (and thus also in the i.i.d. batch model),
but not non-uniformly learnable under bandit feedback in the i.i.d. batch model
(and thus also not in the adversarial online model). This serves as our main
novel technical contribution that reveals a fundamental distinction between the
non-uniform and universal learning frameworks.

1

Introduction

Learnability lies at the core of learning theory. Intuitively, it explores the conditions under which
there exists an algorithm that can accurately predict unseen instances based on a finite set of examples.
To rigorously study this phenomenon, various abstract learning frameworks, including uniform,
non-uniform, and universal learning frameworks, have been proposed in the literature so far. This
manuscript focuses on the non-uniform learning framework.
The classical work of Benedek and Itai [1988] introduced the non-uniform learning framework.
Moreover, they gave a combinatorial characterization of non-uniform PAC learnability for the binary
classification setting. The recent contribution of Lu [2024] gave a combinatorial characterization of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

