Purity Law for Neural Routing Problem Solvers with
Enhanced Generalizability

Wenzhao Liu1

Haoran Li1
Anqi Li3

1

Congying Han1∗

Zicheng Zhang2

Tiande Guo1

School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
JD.com
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Nankai University

{liuwenzhao22,lihaoran21}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, hancy@ucas.ac.cn
zhangzicheng6@jd.com, anqili@nankai.edu.cn, tdguo@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Achieving generalization in neural approaches across different scales and distributions remains a significant challenge for routing problems. A key obstacle is
that neural networks often fail to learn robust principles for identifying universal
patterns and deriving optimal solutions from diverse instances. In this paper, we
first uncover Purity Law, a fundamental structural principle for optimal solutions
of routing problems, defining that edge prevalence grows exponentially with the
sparsity of surrounding vertices. Statistically and theoretically validated across diverse instances, Purity Law reveals a consistent bias toward local sparsity in global
optima. Building on this insight, we propose Purity Policy Optimization (PUPO),
a novel training paradigm that explicitly aligns characteristics of neural solutions
with Purity Law during the solution construction process to enhance generalization.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that PUPO can be seamlessly integrated with
popular neural solvers, significantly enhancing their generalization performance
without incurring additional computational overhead during inference. The code is
available at https://github.com/Kejun0627/PUPO.

1

Introduction

Routing problems, such as Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) and Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP),
are fundamental combinatorial optimization (CO) problems with broad applications in operations
research and computer science fields, including scheduling [38, 3], circuit compilation [36, 9], and
computational biology [25, 15]. Due to their NP-hard nature, even the most advanced exact solver [2]
could not efficiently find the optimal solution for large-scale instances within a reasonable time
frame. As a result, approximate heuristic algorithms, such as LKH3 [16, 17] and HGS [42], have
been developed to find near-optima with improved efficiency. However, these approaches still face
significant computational overhead owing to their iterative search processes for each instance.
Deep learning, particularly deep reinforcement learning, holds significant promise for developing fast
and advanced neural routing problem heuristics. Learning-based approaches generally fall into two
categories: methods that learn to construct solutions step by step [4, 24, 26, 18], and learn to search
for better solutions iteratively [30, 7, 11]. Among these, neural constructive methods excel in faster
inference and higher performance, enabling real-time applications. However, they often struggle with
generalization and exhibit limited performance on large-scale or heterogeneous instances.
∗

Corresponding author: hancy@ucas.ac.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

