Asymmetric Dual Self-Distillation for 3D
Self-Supervised Representation Learning

Remco F. Leijenaar∗
Hamidreza Kasaei
Department of AI, University of Groningen, The Netherlands

Abstract
Learning semantically meaningful representations from unstructured 3D point
clouds remains a central challenge in computer vision, especially in the absence of
large-scale labeled datasets. While masked point modeling (MPM) is widely used in
self-supervised 3D learning, its reconstruction-based objective can limit its ability
to capture high-level semantics. We propose AsymDSD, an Asymmetric Dual
Self-Distillation framework that unifies masked modeling and invariance learning
through prediction in the latent space rather than the input space. AsymDSD builds
on a joint embedding architecture and introduces several key design choices: an
efficient asymmetric setup, disabling attention between masked queries to prevent
shape leakage, multi-mask sampling, and a point cloud adaptation of multi-crop.
AsymDSD achieves state-of-the-art results on ScanObjectNN (90.53%) and further
improves to 93.72% when pretrained on 930k shapes, surpassing prior methods.

1

Introduction

As domains such as robotics, autonomous driving, AR/VR, and remote sensing continue to grow, the
importance of three-dimensional (3D) data becomes increasingly pronounced. A central challenge
in 3D vision lies in learning semantically meaningful representations from unstructured 3D point
clouds. In contrast to 2D computer vision—where large labeled datasets like ImageNet [1] have
played a prominent role in driving progress—3D datasets remain limited in both scale and diversity
(see Fig. 1). This scarcity, which has been referred to as the data desert problem [2], is exacerbated
by the difficulty of annotating 3D data, particularly at the point level [3]. Although recent efforts
such as Objaverse [4, 5] mark progress toward web-scale 3D data collection, they still lag behind
the scale achieved in 2D vision and natural language processing (NLP). The lack of labeled 3D
data has fueled a growing interest in self-supervised representation learning (SSL/SSRL) for 3D
understanding [6]. SSL has proven highly effective in both NLP [7, 8] and 2D vision [9–12], offering
strong scalability [13–16], and robust down-stream capabilities [17, 18, 16], even with minimal
labeled data [19]. These successes have inspired SSRL techniques to be adapted to point cloud data.
Particularly, masked point modeling (MPM) approaches have gained traction [20–26], given their
effectiveness and conceptual alignment with masked modeling frameworks for 2D and NLP.
Despite their popularity, we argue that MPM-based approaches have fundamental limitations. Reconstruction objectives tend to emphasize short-range dependencies and high-frequency details [27, 28],
which are often dominated by noise rather than semantically meaningful structure. This issue is
exacerbated in complex 3D geometries, where undersampling introduces high target variance. More
broadly, MPM may not lead to the semantic abstraction crucial for robust downstream performance.
This is backed by empirical findings that demonstrate that these models underperform compared
to invariance-based alternatives in low-shot and linear probing regimes [19]. To overcome these
limitations, several works have attempted to fuse generative reconstruction with invariance-based
objectives [21, 26]. However, the pattern differences of these objectives can cause them to interfere
∗

Code available at https://github.com/RFLeijenaar/AsymDSD

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

