Clustering via Hedonic Games: New Concepts and
Algorithms

Gergely Csáji
ELTE Centre of Economic and Regional Studies
Budapest, Hungary
csaji.gergely@krtk.elte.hu
Jörg Rothe
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
Düsseldorf, Germany
rothe@hhu.de

Alexander Gundert
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
Düsseldorf, Germany
Alexander.Gundert@hhu.de

Ildikó Schlotter
ELTE Centre of Economic and Regional Studies
Budapest, Hungary
schlotter.ildiko@krtk.elte.hu

Abstract
We study fundamental connections between coalition formation games and clustering, illustrating the cross-disciplinary relevance of these concepts. We focus on
graphical hedonic games where agents’ preferences are compactly represented by
a friendship graph and an enmity graph. In the context of clustering, friendship
relations naturally align with data point similarities, whereas enmity corresponds to
dissimilarities. We consider two stability notions based on single-agent deviations:
local popularity and local stability. Exploring these concepts from an algorithmic
viewpoint, we design efficient mechanisms for finding locally stable or locally
popular partitions. Besides gaining theoretical insight into the computational
complexity of these problems, we perform simulations that demonstrate how our
algorithms can be successfully applied in clustering and community detection.

1

Introduction

Coalition formation and clustering are two research areas that capture different aspects of grouping a
set of entities in a meaningful or optimal way. While coalition formation studies autonomous agents
who have preferences over the various ways in which they can be partitioned into groups, clustering
aims to unearth hidden structure and similarities within a set of datapoints. Despite the shared theme
of group formation, there is no substantial interplay between these two research fields.
This study aims to investigate how different solution concepts emerging from coalition formation—in
particular, from hedonic games—can be used in data clustering. Traditional clustering metrics
measure the quality of the boundaries between the clusters or the average similarities within clusters.
We propose a criterion that is based on a form of stability: we aim for a clustering where no deviation
by a single agent (or data point) should lead to a more preferred outcome. We aim to investigate how
such stability notions can be harnessed in clustering algorithms.
Similarities and dissimilarities, the baseline concepts used by all clustering algorithms, can be
associated with relations of compatibility and of conflict between two agents. Leveraging this idea,
we focus on a model in coalition formation due to Dimitrov et al. [16] where agents’ preferences over
different coalitions are determined by their friendships and their enmities, represented as two graphs.
More precisely, we adopt the model of hedonic friends–enemies–neutrals (FEN) games [33, 37, 27]
where agents classify all other agents as a friend, an enemy, or a neutral, and each agent evaluates a
given partition based on the number of friends and the number of enemies in their coalition.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

