Memo: Training Memory-Efficient Embodied Agents
with Reinforcement Learning

Gunshi Gupta∗
University of Oxford

Karmesh Yadav
Georgia Tech University

Yarin Gal
University of Oxford

Zsolt Kira
Georgia Tech University

Rahaf Aljundi
Toyota Motor Europe

Abstract
To enable embodied agents to operate effectively over extended timeframes, it is
crucial to develop models that form and access memories to stay contextualized in
their environment. In the current paradigm of training transformer-based policies
for embodied sequential decision-making tasks, visual inputs often overwhelm the
context limits of transformers, while humans can maintain and utilize a lifetime
of experience compressed as memories. Significant compression is possible in
principle, as much of the input is irrelevant and can be abstracted. However,
existing approaches predominantly focus on either recurrent models with fixed-size
memory or transformers with full-context reliance. In this work, we propose Memo,
a transformer-based architecture and training recipe for reinforcement learning
(RL) on memory-intensive, long-horizon tasks. Memo incorporates the creation
and retrieval of memory by interleaving periodic summarization tokens with the
inputs of a model during training. We demonstrate Memo’s effectiveness on a gridworld meta-RL benchmark and a multi-object navigation task in photo-realistic
indoor settings. Memo outperforms naive long-context transformer baselines while
being more compute and storage efficient. Additionally, Memo generalizes better
to longer contexts at inference time and remains robust in streaming settings, where
historical context must be truncated to fit inference constraints.

1

Introduction

Humans intuitively prioritize and retain memories relevant to their current tasks, filtering out irrelevant details such as the color of a house’s walls along a route unless it serves as a crucial navigation
landmark. Similarly, reinforcement learning (RL) agents must learn to selectively retain and access
task-specific memories guided by task objectives rather than predefined rules. This ability is especially critical for long-horizon tasks, where delayed rewards make credit assignment challenging
and necessitate efficient training and inference over extended timescales to effectively capture the
relationship between past and future events.
Recently, Transformers have become the go-to framework for sequence modeling due to their flexible
and expressive encoding, free from the fixed-size constraints of recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
[8, 14]. However, it assumes access to all past information at each step rather than selectively retaining
relevant memories, which can lead to inefficiencies and make it harder to extract task-relevant
information for decision-making. Their quadratic attention complexity further limits scalability,
making it challenging to process long contexts efficiently, especially when gradients must propagate
over large sequences. At test time, Transformers face another practical challenge: storing an
∗

Correspondence to: gunshi.gupta@lmh.ox.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

