Mind the GAP! The Challenges of Scale in Pixel-based
Deep Reinforcement Learning

Ghada Sokar
Google DeepMind
gsokar@google.com

Pablo Samuel Castro
Google DeepMind
psc@google.com

Abstract
Scaling deep reinforcement learning in pixel-based environments presents a significant challenge, often resulting in diminished performance. While recent works
have proposed algorithmic and architectural approaches to address this, the underlying cause of the performance drop remains unclear. In this paper, we identify the
connection between the output of the encoder (a stack of convolutional layers) and
the ensuing dense layers as the main underlying factor limiting scaling capabilities;
we denote this connection as the bottleneck, and we demonstrate that previous
approaches implicitly target this bottleneck. As a result of our analyses, we present
Global Average Pooling (GAP) as a simple yet effective way of targeting the
bottleneck, thereby avoiding the complexity of earlier approaches.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is widely considered one of the most effective approaches for complex
sequential decision-making problems [Mnih et al., 2015, Vinyals et al., 2019, Bellemare et al., 2020,
Degrave et al., 2022, Wurman et al., 2022], in particular when combined with deep neural networks
(typically referred to as deep RL). In contrast to the so-called “scaling laws” observed in supervised
learning (where larger networks typically result in improved performance) [Kaplan et al., 2020], it
is difficult to scale RL networks without sacrificing performance. There has been a recent line of
work aimed at developing techniques for effectively scaling value-based networks, such as via the use
of mixtures-of-experts [Obando Ceron* et al., 2024], network pruning [Obando Ceron et al., 2024],
tokenization [Sokar et al., 2025], and regularization [Nauman et al., 2024]. Most of these techniques
tend to focus on structural modifications to standard deep RL networks by leveraging sparse-network
training techniques from the supervised learning literature.
Obando Ceron* et al. [2024] first demonstrated that naïvely scaling the penultimate (dense) layer in
an RL network results in decreased performance, and proposed the use of soft mixtures-of-experts
[SoftMoEs; Puigcerver et al., 2024] to enable improved performance from this form of scaling.
Sokar et al. [2025] argued that the gains from SoftMoEs were mostly due to the use of tokenization.
Relatedly, Obando Ceron et al. [2024] demonstrated that naïvely scaling the convolutional layers hurts
performance, and showed that incremental parameter pruning yields gains that grow with the size of
the original, unpruned, network. While effective, all these methods are non-trivial to implement and
can result in increased computational costs.
One unifying aspect of the aforementioned works is that they tend to be most effective on networks that
process pixel inputs, such as when training on the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) [Bellemare
et al., 2013]. These networks are typically divided into an encoder ϕ consisting of a series of
convolutional layers, followed by a series of dense layers ψ; thus, for an input x, the network output
is given by ψ(ϕ(x)). Obando Ceron* et al. [2024] and Sokar et al. [2025] scaled the first layer of
ψ while Obando Ceron et al. [2024] scaled all layers in ϕ. It is worth highlighting that ψ ◦ ϕ is, in
practice, a set of weights connecting the output of ϕ(x) with the input layer of ψ.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

