Feedback Guidance of Diffusion Models
Felix Koulischer1,*
Florian Handke2
Johannes Deleu1
1,†
Thomas Demeester
Luca Ambrogioni2,†
2

1
Ghent University - imec
Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University

Abstract
While Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) has become standard for improving sample
fidelity in conditional diffusion models, it can harm diversity and induce memorization by applying constant guidance regardless of whether a particular sample needs
correction. We propose FeedBack Guidance (FBG), which uses a state-dependent
coefficient to self-regulate guidance amounts based on need. Our approach is
derived from first principles by assuming the learned conditional distribution is linearly corrupted by the unconditional distribution, contrasting with CFG’s implicit
multiplicative assumption. Our scheme relies on feedback of its own predictions
about the conditional signal informativeness to adapt guidance dynamically during inference, challenging the view of guidance as a fixed hyperparameter. The
approach is benchmarked on ImageNet512x512, where it significantly outperforms
Classifier-Free Guidance and is competitive to Limited Interval Guidance (LIG)
while benefitting from a strong mathematical framework. On Text-To-Image generation, we demonstrate that, as anticipated, our approach automatically applies
higher guidance scales for complex prompts than for simpler ones and that it can
be easily combined with existing guidance schemes such as CFG or LIG. Our code
is available at this link.

1

Introduction

At the heart of the image and video generation revolution led by diffusion models Sohl-Dickstein et al.
[2015], Ho et al. [2020], Song et al. [2021a,b], Karras et al. [2022] lies the conditioning algorithm
most well-known as the guidance mechanism Dhariwal and Nichol [2021], Ho and Salimans [2021].
The need for diffusion guidance stems from the inherent challenge of learning conditional distributions
with limited paired data, which is why further emphasizing the signal using a parameter referred to
as the guidance scale proves advantageous in practice Dhariwal and Nichol [2021]. This parameter
allows to push the predictions from the conditional model further from those of the unconditional
model, essentially reinforcing the difference between them Ho and Salimans [2021], Karras et al.
[2024a]. This is more well-known as the Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) algorithm Ho and Salimans
[2021]. It is only after the introduction of the guidance algorithm, that diffusion models gained
the impressive performance they are nowadays known for. Recent works have however made clear
that applying guidance on the entire sampling trajectory is not only unnecessary but also harms
performance Kynkäänniemi et al. [2024], Sadat et al. [2024]. By applying guidance in the beginning
of the generative process, the model tends to converge to specific condition-dependent low frequency
details Dieleman [2024], Ho and Salimans [2021], Kynkäänniemi et al. [2024], severely reducing
the diversity of the generated samples. On the other hand, applying guidance towards the end of the
generative process is largely unnecessary as both unconditional and conditional estimates converge,
†
*

Joint Senior Authors
Corresponding author: felix.koulischer@ugent.be

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

