From Flat to Hierarchical: Extracting Sparse
Representations with Matching Pursuit

Valérie Costa1∗ Thomas Fel2∗ Ekdeep Singh Lubana3,4∗
Bahareh Tolooshams5,6†
Demba Ba2,7†
1

EPFL 2 Kempner Institute, Harvard University
CBS-NTT Program in Physics of Intelligence, Harvard University
4
Physics of Artificial Intelligence Group, NTT Research, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA
5
University of Alberta 6 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii) 7 SEAS, Harvard University
3

Abstract
Motivated by the hypothesis that neural network representations encode abstract,
interpretable features as linearly accessible, approximately orthogonal directions,
sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have become a popular tool in interpretability literature.
However, recent work has demonstrated phenomenology of model representations
that lies outside the scope of this hypothesis, showing signatures of hierarchical,
nonlinear, and multi-dimensional features. This raises the question: do SAEs
represent features that possess structure at odds with their motivating hypothesis?
If not, does avoiding this mismatch help identify said features and gain further
insights into neural network representations? To answer these questions, we take
a construction-based approach and re-contextualize the popular matching pursuit
(MP) algorithm from sparse coding to design MP-SAE—an SAE that unrolls its
encoder into a sequence of residual-guided steps, allowing it to capture hierarchical
and nonlinearly accessible features. Comparing this architecture with existing
SAEs on a mixture of synthetic and natural data settings, we show: (i) hierarchical
concepts induce conditionally orthogonal features, which existing SAEs are unable
to faithfully capture, and (ii) the nonlinear encoding step of MP-SAE recovers
highly meaningful features, helping us unravel shared structure in the seemingly
dichotomous representation spaces of different modalities in a vision-language
model, hence demonstrating the assumption that useful features are solely linearly
accessible is insufficient. We also show that the sequential encoder principle of MPSAE affords an additional benefit of adaptive sparsity at inference time, which may
be of independent interest. Overall, we argue our results provide credence to the
idea that interpretability should begin with the phenomenology of representations,
with methods emerging from assumptions that fit it.

1

Introduction

Modern neural networks trained on large-scale datasets have achieved unprecedented performance
on several practical tasks [1–10], prompting efforts towards understanding how these abilities are
implemented within a model [11–13]. To this end, Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) [14–23], motivated
by the Linear Representation Hypothesis (LRH) [24, 25], have become a popular tool for interpreting
neural networks. Specifically, LRH, a phenomenological model of organization and computation of
neural network representations [24–28], posits that neural network representations of dimension m
can be decomposed along a basis of p ≫ m approximately orthogonal directions that reflect abstract,
interpretable concepts underlying the data distribution. Here, approximate orthogonality is argued
to be necessary for circumventing the problem of packing more unique vectors (concepts) than the
∗

Equal contribution. † Equal advising. Emails: btolooshams@ualberta.ca, demba@seas.harvard.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

