Single GPU Task Adaptation of Pathology Foundation
Models for Whole Slide Image Analysis

Neeraj Kumar
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
kumarn6@mskcc.org

Chad Vanderbilt
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
vanderbc@mskcc.org

Abstract
Pathology foundation models (PFMs) have emerged as powerful tools for analyzing
whole slide images (WSIs). However, adapting these pretrained PFMs for specific
clinical tasks presents considerable challenges, primarily due to the availability of
only weak (WSI-level) labels for gigapixel images, necessitating multiple instance
learning (MIL) paradigm for effective WSI analysis. This paper proposes a novel
approach for single-GPU Task Adaptation of PFMs (TAPFM) that uses vision
transformer (ViT) attention for MIL aggregation while optimizing both for feature
representations and attention weights. The proposed approach maintains separate
computational graphs for MIL aggregator and the PFM to create stable training
dynamics that align with downstream task objectives during end-to-end adaptation.
Evaluated on mutation prediction tasks for bladder cancer and lung adenocarcinoma across institutional and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohorts, TAPFM
consistently outperforms conventional approaches, with H-Optimus-0 (TAPFM)
outperforming the benchmarks. TAPFM effectively handles multi-label classification of actionable mutations as well. Thus, TAPFM makes adaptation of powerful
pre-trained PFMs practical on standard hardware for various clinical applications.

1

Introduction

Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining is the most common slide preparation method in pathology,
used for visualizing tissue architecture and cellular details for cancer diagnosis. Whole slide images
(WSIs) serve as high-resolution digital representations of these tissue slides, commonly scanned at
either 20× or 40× optical resolution that captures 0.50µ2 or 0.25µ2 of tissue per pixel, respectively.
WSIs form the basis of computational pathology that employs machine learning (ML) and computer
vision techniques for digital cancer assessment [1]. Due to memory constraints preventing direct
processing of gigapixel WSIs and the availability of only slide-level labels for clinical tasks, WSI
processing adopts a multiple instance learning (MIL) approach. In the MIL framework, each WSI is
represented as a bag of smaller tiles (e.g., 224 × 224 × 3); a neural network encodes each tile into a
feature embedding, and the tile embeddings are then aggregated into a slide-level bag representation
to compute predictions using only bag-level labels during training [2, 3], as illustrated in Figure 1.
Computational pathology has experienced a paradigm shift with the introduction of pathology
foundation models (PFMs), which learn powerful representations from large collections of WSIs
through self-supervised pre-training of vision transformers (ViTs) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. For specific
downstream applications such as gene mutation prediction, survival analysis, and treatment response
estimation, existing methods typically use these PFMs as fixed feature extractors and train separate
MIL aggregators to generate slide-level predictions [2, 10]. The fixed-feature approach fails to
adapt PFM parameters to the specific downstream task, potentially limiting performance [11, 12, 13].
To address this limitation, we propose a novel Task Adaptation of Pathology Foundation Models
(TAPFM) approach that: (1) leverages ViT’s internal attention mechanism for MIL aggregation,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

