Direct Fisher Score Estimation for Likelihood
Maximization
Sherman Khoo ∗

Yakun Wang ∗

Song Liu ∗

Mark Beaumont †

Abstract
We study the problem of likelihood maximization when the likelihood function is
intractable but model simulations are readily available. We propose a sequential,
gradient-based optimization method that directly models the Fisher score based on
a local score matching technique which uses simulations from a localized region
around each parameter iterate. By employing a linear parameterization for the
surrogate score model, our technique admits a closed-form, least-squares solution.
This approach yields a fast, flexible, and efficient approximation to the Fisher score,
effectively smoothing the likelihood objective and mitigating the challenges posed
by complex likelihood landscapes. We provide theoretical guarantees for our score
estimator, including bounds on the bias introduced by the smoothing. Empirical
results on a range of synthetic and real-world problems demonstrate the superior
performance of our method compared to existing benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Implicit simulator-based models are now routine in many scientific fields, such as biology [Csillery
et al., 2010], cosmology [Schafer and Freeman, 2012], neuroscience [Sterratt et al., 2011], engineering
[Bharti et al., 2021], and other scientific applications [Toni et al., 2009]. In traditional statistical
models, there is a prescribed probabilistic model, which provides an explicit parameterization for the
data distribution, allowing development of the likelihood function for further inference. In contrast,
simulation-based models define the distribution implicitly through a computational simulator. Thus,
while simulation of the data for various parameter settings is possible, the probability density function
of the data or the likelihood function is often unavailable in closed form. This problem setting is
known as likelihood-free inference or simulation-based inference (SBI) [Cranmer et al., 2020].
Traditionally, methods in this setting have focused on a Bayesian inference technique known as
approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) [Beaumont et al., 2002]. Fundamentally, the ABC method
builds an approximation to the Bayesian posterior distribution by drawing parameter samples from the
prior distribution, generating datasets from the drawn parameter values, and filtering parameter values
through a rejection algorithm based on the distance of the generated summary statistic of the dataset
from the observations. In recent years, there has been a rise of generative modeling or unsupervised
learning in machine learning, which aims to recover a data distribution given a set of samples.
Such generative models are often built from neural networks [Mohamed and Lakshminarayanan,
2017], and given the fundamental similarity with the SBI problem setting, this has led to significant
cross-pollination across the two fields, with the development of many SBI inference methods using
generative neural networks [Durkan et al., 2018, Papamakarios et al., 2017].
While significant progress in SBI has come from Bayesian approaches, such methods are often
computationally demanding; furthermore, many scientific disciplines retain a preference towards
∗

School of Mathematics, University of Bristol
School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol
Correspondence to: Sherman Khoo <sherman.khoo@bristol.ac.uk>
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

