Self-Calibrating BCIs: Ranking and Recovery of
Mental Targets Without Labels

Jonathan Grizou∗
GrizAI
University of Glasgow
jonathan.grizou@grizai.com

Carlos de la Torre-Ortiz*
University of Helsinki
carlos.delatorreortiz@helsinki.fi

Tuukka Ruotsalo
LUT University
University of Copenhagen
tuukka.ruotsalo@lut.fi

Abstract
We consider the problem of recovering a mental target (e.g., an image of a face)
that a participant has in mind from paired EEG (i.e., brain responses) and image
(i.e., perceived faces) data collected during interactive sessions without access to
labeled information. The problem has been previously explored with labeled data
but not via self-calibration, where labeled data is unavailable. Here, we present the
first framework and an algorithm, CURSOR, that learns to recover unknown mental
targets without access to labeled data or pre-trained decoders. Our experiments
on naturalistic images of faces demonstrate that CURSOR can (1) predict image
similarity scores that correlate with human perceptual judgments without any label
information, (2) use these scores to rank stimuli against an unknown mental target,
and (3) generate new stimuli indistinguishable from the unknown mental target
(validated via a user study, N = 53). We release the brain response data set
(N = 29), associated face images used as stimuli data, and a codebase to initiate
further research on this novel task.
Website — https://jgrizou.github.io/neurips-self-calibrating-bci/
Code and Data — https://github.com/jgrizou/neurips-self-calibrating-bci/

1

Introduction

We tackle the problem of recovering a mental target (e.g., an image of a face) that a participant holds
in mind, using only unlabeled EEG responses (i.e., brain activity) recorded while the participant views
a sequence of unlabeled images (i.e., perceived faces). These images, along with the mental target, are
represented as high-dimensional vectors in the latent embedding space of a generative model. Thus,
unlike traditional brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) that classify brain responses into a few discrete
classes (e.g., yes/no or up/down/left/right), our task requires mapping EEG responses to distances
in this high-dimensional space in order to recover the mental target iteratively. The challenge lies
in probing these continuous high-dimensional spaces (image and EEG spaces) without discretizing
them into labeled classes and only relying on paired data of image and brain representations.
Previous BCI methods operating in continuous domains — such as decoding a distance to a mental
target — required an explicit calibration phase relying on labeled data (i.e., known targets) to train a
∗

equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

