Constrained Posterior Sampling: Time Series
Generation with Hard Constraints
Sai Shankar Narasimhan

Shubhankar Agarwal

Sanjay Shakkottai

Litu Rout

Sandeep Chinchali

Chandra Family Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 78712.
{nsaishankar,somi.agarwal,litu.rout,sanjay.shakkottai,sandeepc}@utexas.edu

Abstract
Generating realistic time series samples is crucial for stress-testing models and
protecting user privacy by using synthetic data. In engineering and safety-critical
applications, these samples must meet certain hard constraints that are domainspecific or naturally imposed by physics or nature. Consider, for example, generating electricity demand patterns with constraints on peak demand times. This can be
used to stress-test the functioning of power grids during adverse weather conditions.
Existing approaches for generating constrained time series are either not scalable or
degrade sample quality. To address these challenges, we introduce Constrained Posterior Sampling (CPS), a diffusion-based sampling algorithm that aims to project
the posterior mean estimate into the constraint set after each denoising update.
Notably, CPS scales to a large number of constraints (∼ 100) without requiring
additional training. We provide theoretical justifications highlighting the impact
of our projection step on sampling. Empirically, CPS outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in sample quality and similarity to real time series by around 70% and
22%, respectively, on real-world stocks, traffic, and air quality datasets.

1

Introduction

Metadata
Realistic time series generation plays a cru- Correlated Stocks
Lowest Price
Highest Price
Stock Name
XYZ
cial role in tasks such as “what-if” scenario
Stock Price
Month
analysis [1], stress-testing machine learnSeptember
CPS
ing models [2, 3], and anonymizing private
user data [4]. Current approaches leverage
Opening Price <= Highest Price
Closing Price <= Highest Price
state-of-the-art generative models, includOpening Price >= Lowest Price
Days
Closing Price >= Lowest Price
ing Diffusion Models (DMs) [1, 5, 6] and
Opening Price
Closing Price
Mean(Closing Price) == $35
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
Constraints
[7, 8], to sample from time series distribu- Figure 1: Our Proposed Constrained Posterior Samtions. Ensuring realism and high fidelity pling (CPS). CPS is a novel diffusion-based sampling
through constraint satisfaction remains a approach to generate time series samples that satisfy
key challenge in domain-specific time se- hard constraints. Here, we show an example where
ries generation. For example, generating CPS generates a daily stock price time series with natudaily Open-High-Low-Close (OHLC) chart ral constraints such as the bounds on the opening and
for stock prices of an S&P 500 company closing prices of the stock.
requires the high and low values to bound
the opening and closing prices (Figure 1). Similarly, generating stock price time series with user-

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

