Dynamic and Chemical Constraints to Enhance the
Molecular Masked Graph Autoencoders

Jiahui Zhang1,2 , Wenjie Du1,2,† , Yang Wang1,2,†
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, China
kongping@mail.ustc.edu.cn {duwenjie, angyan}@ustc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Masked Graph Autoencoders (MGAEs) have gained significant attention recently.
Their proxy tasks typically involve random corruption of input graphs followed
by reconstruction. However, in the molecular domain, two main issues arise: the
predetermined mask ratio and reconstruction objectives can lead to suboptimal
performance or negative transfer due to overly simplified or complex tasks, and
these tasks may deviate from chemical priors. To tackle these challenges, we
propose Dynamic and Chemical Constraints (DyCC) for MGAEs. This includes a
masking strategy called GIBMS, which preserves essential semantic information
during graph masking while adaptively adjusting the mask ratio and content for
each molecule. Additionally, we introduce a Soft Label Generator (SLG) that
reconstructs masked tokens as learnable prototypes (soft labels) rather than hard
labels. These components adhere to chemical constraints and allow dynamic
variation of proxy tasks during training. We integrate the model-agnostic DyCC
into various MGAEs and conduct comprehensive experiments, demonstrating
significant performance improvements. Our code is available at https://github.
com/forever-ly/DyCC.

1

Introduction

Molecular Representation Learning (MRL) plays a pivotal role in many related applications such as
drug discovery, material design, and reaction prediction [8, 11, 44]. By representing molecules as
graphs, where atoms are treated as nodes and bonds as edges, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [43,
20, 14] have exhibited remarkable performance across a wide range of tasks. However, a significant
challenge is the scarcity of labeled data, which limits the effectiveness of supervised learning. Inspired
by the remarkable progress in self-supervised pretraining in natural language processing [12], Masked
Graph Autoencoders (MGAEs) [17, 41, 25, 16] have arisen as a promising approach to addressing
these challenges. The pioneering work [17] on this topic introduced the pretraining of GNNs using a
mask-then-recontruction task called AttrMask. Specifically, they randomly mask some proportions
of atoms and then pretrain the models to predict them. AttrMask has emerged as a fundamental
pretraining task and many subsequent works [16, 54] adopt it as a subtask for pretraining. Despite
their success, we have identified two limitations that still lack exploration.
The first limitation is that proxy tasks are predetermined and lack dynamic adaptability. The
effectiveness of MGAEs is largely governed by their proxy tasks, which are defined by the graphmasking strategy and the reconstruction objective. Prior approaches rely on fixed mask strategies and
tokenizers, which result in suboptimal performance. From the perspective of input corruption, the
† corresponding author
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

