Searching Efficient Semantic Segmentation
Architectures via Dynamic Path Selection

Yuxi Liu1,2∗ Min Liu1,2∗ Shuai Jiang1,2 Yi Tang3† Yaonan Wang1,2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hunan University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Robot Visual Perception and Control Technology
3
Department of Data and Systems Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
yuxi_liu@hnu.edu.cn yiitang@hku.hk

Abstract
Existing NAS methods for semantic segmentation typically apply uniform optimization to all candidate networks (paths) within a one-shot supernet. However,
the concurrent existence of both promising and suboptimal paths often results in
inefficient weight updates and gradient conflicts. This issue is particularly severe
in semantic segmentation due to its complex multi-branch architectures and large
search space, which further degrade the supernet’s ability to accurately evaluate
individual paths and identify high-quality candidates. To address this issue, we
propose Dynamic Path Selection (DPS), a selective training strategy that leverages
multiple performance proxies to guide path optimization. DPS follows a stagewise paradigm, where each phase emphasizes a different objective: early stages
prioritize convergence, the middle stage focuses on expressiveness, and the final
stage emphasizes a balanced combination of expressiveness and generalization. At
each stage, paths are selected based on these criteria, concentrating optimization
efforts on promising paths, thus facilitating targeted and efficient model updates.
Additionally, DPS integrates a dynamic stage scheduler and a diversity-driven
exploration strategy, which jointly enable adaptive stage transitions and maintain
structural diversity among selected paths. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that, under the same search space, DPS can discover efficient models with strong
generalization and superior performance.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision which focuses on pixel-level
classification of images. In recent years, deep neural networks have achieved impressive success
in semantic segmentation [1, 2, 3]. A critical factor behind this progress is the design of network
architectures, which greatly impact overall performance. However, designing architectures that are
both accurate and efficient often require substantial expertise and iterative experimentation.
To address this challenge, neural architecture search (NAS) has been proposed to automatically
discover optimal architectures and reduce the need for manual effort. Current NAS methods [4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9] typically embed the search space into a one-shot supernet and optimize it through weight
sharing. Compared to traditional NAS methods, which usually require training thousands of networks,
one-shot NAS significantly reduces the computational cost while having superior performance.
Nevertheless, the search space in NAS is enormous, especially for multi-branch segmentation
networks (e.g., FasterSeg [8], with a search space of 1058 ). Such space makes it difficult for the
supernet’s parameters to adapt to different subnets (paths) [10], leading to gradient oscillations [11].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

