3DLLM-Mem: Long-Term Spatial-Temporal Memory
for Embodied 3D Large Language Model

Wenbo Hu1B Yining Hong1 Yanjun Wang1 Leison Gao1 Zibu Wei1
Xingcheng Yao1 Nanyun Peng1 Yonatan Bitton2 Idan Szpektor2 Kai-Wei Chang1
1

University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Google Research
https://3dllm-mem.github.io

Prepare the
most suitable
gift box for
the teddy
bear.

❶ <Explore the

❷ <Navigate to the bedroom

❸<Navigate to the living room

environment>
Found the teddy bear.
<Pick up the teddy bear>

and search for a gift box>
<Try placing the teddy bear
into the gift box> Too small.

and search for a gift box>
<Try placing the teddy bear into
the gift box>
It fits, but it's a bit loose.

❹<Navigate to the
kitchen and search
for a gift box>
<Try placing the
teddy bear into the
gift box>
It fits, but too large.
Recall: the living
room box is the
most suitable.

❺<Navigate to
the gift box in
the living room>
<Place the teddy
bear into the gift
box>
Task complete.

Figure 1: We propose 3DLLM-M EM, a memory-enhanced 3D embodied agent that explores and
incorporates feedback from the environment, interacts with objects, and incrementally builds and
maintains a task-relevant long-term memory throughout its trajectory. For illustration purposes,
agents from multiple time steps are shown simultaneously.

Abstract
Humans excel at performing complex tasks by leveraging long-term memory
across temporal and spatial experiences. In contrast, current Large Language
Models (LLMs) struggle to effectively plan and act in dynamic, multi-room 3D
environments. We posit that part of this limitation is due to the lack of proper 3D
spatial-temporal memory modeling in LLMs. To address this, we first introduce
3DM EM -B ENCH, a comprehensive benchmark comprising over 26,000 trajectoPrepare a
mostries and 2,892 embodied tasks, question-answering and captioning, designed to
suitable
evaluate an agent’s ability to reason over long-term memory in 3D environments.
present
Second, we propose 3DLLM-M EM, a novel dynamic memory management and
box for the
fusion model for embodied spatial-temporal reasoning and actions in LLMs. Our
teddy bear.
model uses working memory tokens, which represents current observations, as
queries to selectively attend to and fuse the most useful spatial and temporal features from episodic memory, which stores past observations and interactions. Our
approach allows the agent to focus on task-relevant information while maintaining
memory efficiency in complex, long-horizon environments. Experimental results
B

Contact at whu@cs.ucla.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

