Practical Bayes-Optimal
Membership Inference Attacks

Marcus Lassila1
1

Johan Östman2

Khac-Hoang Ngo3

Chalmers University of Technology

2

AI Sweden

Alexandre Graell i Amat1
3

Linköping University

Abstract
We develop practical and theoretically grounded membership inference attacks
(MIAs) against both independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data and graphstructured data. Building on the Bayesian decision-theoretic framework of [1],
we derive the Bayes-optimal membership inference rule for node-level MIAs
against graph neural networks, addressing key open questions about optimal query
strategies in the graph setting. We introduce BASE and G-BASE, tractable approximations of the Bayes-optimal membership inference. G-BASE achieves superior
performance compared to previously proposed classifier-based node-level MIA
attacks. BASE, which is also applicable to non-graph data, matches or exceeds
the performance of prior state-of-the-art MIAs, such as LiRA and RMIA, at a
significantly lower computational cost. Finally, we show that BASE and RMIA
are equivalent under a specific hyperparameter setting, providing a principled,
Bayes-optimal justification for the RMIA attack.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are known to leak information about their training data [2–5], driving
growing interest in understanding and quantifying such leakage. Due to the complexity of modern
models, formally characterizing their information leakage remains a formidable challenge. As a
result, privacy is often assessed empirically via so-called privacy auditing—designing attacks to
identify data leakage and guide mitigation strategies.
Membership inference attacks (MIAs), where an adversary seeks to infer whether a specific data
point was included in the training set of a model, represent the most fundamental privacy attack.
Importantly, MIAs already pose a serious privacy threat: disclosing the mere presence of a data
point in the training set may constitute a serious privacy violation and directly contravenes privacy
regulations such as the GDPR. The European Data Protection Board explicitly cites MIAs in its
guidance on when a machine learning model can be considered anonymous [6]. Moreover, MIAs can
serve as a key component in data reconstruction attacks by filtering out unlikely candidates, thereby
narrowing the search space [7], and can be used to establish lower bounds on the privacy guarantees
of differentially-private algorithms [8].
State-of-the-art MIAs often rely on shadow models—auxiliary models trained under similar conditions as the target model—to empirically characterize behavioral differences between training and
non-training data. Existing attacks fall into two main categories: classifier-based and statistic-based.
Classifier-based attacks use features from shadow models, such as losses or logits, to train a binary
classifier [2, 9, 10]. Statistic-based attacks instead compute statistical metrics using signals from both
the target and shadow models [1, 11–13]. A Bayes-optimal strategy to membership inference was
proposed in [1], but an exact computation is intractable, necessitating approximations. State-of-the-art
methods such as LiRA [11] and RMIA [13], instead, are based on a hypothesis testing formula39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

