Self-Verifying Reflection
Helps Transformers with CoT Reasoning

Zhongwei Yu1 , Wannian Xia2 , Xue Yan2 , Bo Xu2 , Haifeng Zhang2 , Yali Du3 , Jun Wang4
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
King’s College London 4 University College London
1
zyu950@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
2
{xiawannian2020, yanxue2021, xubo, haifeng.zhang}@ia.ac.cn,
3
yali.du@kcl.ac.uk, 4 jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Advanced large language models (LLMs) frequently reflect in reasoning chainof-thoughts (CoTs), where they self-verify the correctness of current solutions
and explore alternatives. However, given recent findings that LLMs detect limited
errors in CoTs, how reflection contributes to empirical improvements remains
unclear. To analyze this issue, in this paper, we present a minimalistic reasoning framework to support basic self-verifying reflection for small transformers
without natural language, which ensures analytic clarity and reduces the cost of
comprehensive experiments. Theoretically, we prove that self-verifying reflection
guarantees improvements if verification errors are properly bounded. Experimentally, we show that tiny transformers, with only a few million parameters, benefit
from self-verification in both training and reflective execution, reaching remarkable
LLM-level performance in integer multiplication and Sudoku. Similar to LLM
results, we find that reinforcement learning (RL) improves in-distribution performance and incentivizes frequent reflection for tiny transformers, yet RL mainly
optimizes shallow statistical patterns without faithfully reducing verification errors.
In conclusion, integrating generative transformers with discriminative verification
inherently facilitates CoT reasoning, regardless of scaling and natural language.

1

Introduction

Numerous studies have explored the ability of large language models (LLMs) to reason through a
chain of thought (CoT), an intermediate sequence leading to the final answer. While simple prompts
can elicit CoT reasoning [13], subsequent works have further enhanced CoT quality through reflective
thinking [10] and the use of verifiers [4]. Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) [33] has achieved
notable success in advanced reasoning models, such as OpenAI-o1 [20] and Deepseek-R1 [5], which
show frequent reflective behaviors that self-verify the correctness of current solutions and explore
alternatives, integrating generative processes with discriminative inference. However, researchers also
report that the ability of these LLMs to detect errors is rather limited, and a large portion of reflection
fails to bring correct solutions [11]. Given the weak verification ability, the experimental benefits of
reflection and the emergence of high reflection frequency in RL require further explanation.
To address this challenge, we seek to analyze two main questions in this paper: 1) what role selfverifying reflection plays in training and execution of reasoning models, and 2) how reflective
reasoning evolves in RL with verifiable outcome rewards [15]. However, the complexity of natural
language and the prohibitive training cost of LLMs make it difficult to draw clear conclusions from
theoretical abstraction and comprehensive experiments across settings. Inspired by Zeyuan et al.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

