On Geometry-Enhanced Parameter-Efficient
Fine-Tuning for 3D Scene Segmentation

Liyao Tang
The University of Sydney

ltan9687@uni.sydney.edu.au

Zhe Chen1∗
La Trobe University

zhe.chen@latrobe.edu.au

Dacheng Tao2∗
Nanyang Technological University
dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
The emergence of large-scale pre-trained point cloud models has significantly
advanced 3D scene understanding, but adapting these models to specific downstream tasks typically demands full fine-tuning, incurring high computational and
storage costs. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques, successful in
natural language processing and 2D vision tasks, would underperform when naively
applied to 3D point cloud models due to significant geometric and spatial distribution shifts. Existing PEFT methods commonly treat points as orderless tokens,
neglecting important local spatial structures and global geometric contexts in 3D
modeling. To bridge this gap, we introduce the Geometric Encoding Mixer (GEM),
a novel geometry-aware PEFT module specifically designed for 3D point cloud
transformers. GEM explicitly integrates fine-grained local positional encodings
with a lightweight latent attention mechanism to capture comprehensive global context, thereby effectively addressing the spatial and geometric distribution mismatch.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that GEM achieves performance comparable
to or sometimes even exceeding full fine-tuning, while only updating 1.6% of the
model’s parameters, fewer than other PEFT methods. With significantly reduced
training time and memory requirements, our approach thus sets a new benchmark
for efficient, scalable, and geometry-aware fine-tuning of large-scale 3D point
cloud models. Code is available at https://github.com/LiyaoTang/GEM.

1

Introduction

Point cloud semantic segmentation is a fundamental task for scene understanding that underpins
many real-world applications, from autonomous driving and unmanned aerial vehicles to augmented
reality [20, 83, 46]. Recent breakthroughs in large-scale models for language and 2D vision [16,
50, 59, 14, 58, 49] have spurred an analogous trend toward training powerful point cloud backbones
capable of capturing rich semantics from 3D scenes [76, 77, 79].
Despite significant capabilities, adapting large pre-trained backbone models to specific downstream
target domains is non-trivial. The typical strategy heavily relies on full fine-tuning, a process that
is both computationally expensive and storage-intensive, since each downstream task demands an
independent copy of all model parameters. Furthermore, fine-tuning large models typically requires
extensive datasets to prevent overfitting and catastrophic forgetting [4, 51], while large datasets are
usually inaccessible when adapted to smaller, specialized tasks. To address these issues, parameterefficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods offer a promising performance in reducing the cost of adaptation
while reaching the performance of full fine-tuning with significantly fewer parameters.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

* Corresponding authors.
1
2

Also affiliated with Cisco - La Trobe Centre for AI and IoT.
College of Computing and Data Science, NTU, Singapore 639798.

