Rising from Ashes: Generalized Federated Learning
via Dynamic Parameter Reset

Jiahao Wu1 , Ming Hu2∗ , Yanxin Yang1 , Xiaofei Xie2 , Zekai Chen1 ,
Chenyu Song1 , Mingsong Chen1∗
1
MoE Eng. Research Center of SW/HW Co-Design Tech. and App., East China Normal University
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
hu.ming.work@gmail.com, mschen@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Although Federated Learning (FL) is promising for privacy-preserving collaborative model training, it suffers from low inference performance due to heterogeneous client data. Due to heterogeneous data across clients, FL training easily learns client-speciﬁc overﬁtting features. Existing FL methods adopt coarsegrained averaging, which can easily cause the global model to get stuck in local optima, leading to poor generalization. Speciﬁcally, this paper presents a
novel FL framework, FedPhoenix, to address this issue. It stochastically resets partial parameters in each round to destroy some features of the global
model, guiding FL training to learn multiple generalized features for inference
rather than speciﬁc overﬁtting features. Experimental results on various wellknown datasets demonstrate that compared to SOTA FL methods, FedPhoenix can
achieve up to 20.73% higher accuracy. The implementation is publicly available
at https://github.com/UniString/FedPhoenix.

1

Introduction

With Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) technologies widely used in privacy-sensitive applications, protecting data privacy during model training has become an urgent requirement. To address this issue,
Federated Learning [1–7] as a privacy-preserving distributed machine learning paradigm has been
proposed and used in various AI applications, such as Artiﬁcial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) systems [8–12], recommender systems [13, 14], and healthcare systems [15, 16], which enables multiple clients to collaboratively train a global model without exposure of their raw data. Speciﬁcally,
conventional FL consists of a cloud server and multiple clients. In each FL training round, the cloud
server sends the global model to each client. Clients use their raw data to train the received model
and then upload the trained model back to the cloud server. By aggregating all uploaded models, the
cloud server can generate a new global model for the next round of training.
However, due to clients’ diverse preferences and data volumes, client data is often not Independent
and Identically Distributed (non-IID), leading to the “client drifting” problem [17–20]. Speciﬁcally,
different data distributions lead to different optimization directions for local models. The traditional
FedAvg strategy aggregates all local models to generate the global model, which may cause the
global model’s optimization directions to deviate from the optimal direction, leading it to easily
get stuck in local optima. To optimize the FL training process, existing methods attempt to utilize
correction terms [21, 17], knowledge distillation (KD) [22–25], model mutation [26, 27], client
clustering [28–31], and multi-model searching [32–34] strategies.
∗

Ming Hu and Mingsong Chen are corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

