Towards Building Model/Prompt-Transferable
Attackers against Large Vision-Language Models

Xiaowen Cai1∗, Daizong Liu2∗† , Xiaoye Qu1 , Xiang Fang3 , Jianfeng Dong4 ,
Keke Tang5 , Pan Zhou1‡ , Lichao Sun6 , Wei Hu7‡
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Wuhan University
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Zhejiang Gongshang University 5 Guangzhou University
6
Lehigh University 7 Peking University
{xwcai,xiaoye,panzhou}@hust.edu.cn, daizongliu@whu.edu.cn,xfang9508@gmail.com
djf@zjgsu.edu.cn,tangbohutbh@gmail.com,lis221@lehigh.edu,forhuwei@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Although Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) exhibit impressive multimodal
capabilities, their vulnerability to adversarial examples has raised serious security
concerns. Existing LVLM attackers simply optimize adversarial images that easily
overfit a certain model/prompt, making them ineffective once they are transferred
to attack a different model/prompt. Motivated by this research gap, this paper aims
to develop a more powerful attack that is transferable to black-box LVLM models
of different structures and task-aware prompts of different semantics. Specifically, we introduce a new perspective of information theory to investigate LVLMs’
transferable characteristics by exploring the relative dependence between outputs
of the LVLM model and input adversarial samples. Our empirical observations
suggest that enlarging/decreasing the mutual information between outputs and the
disentangled adversarial/benign patterns of input images helps to generate more
agnostic perturbations for misleading LVLMs’ perception with better transferability.
In particular, we formulate the complicated calculation of information gain as an
estimation problem and incorporate such informative constraints into the adversarial learning process. Extensive experiments on various LVLM models/prompts
demonstrate our significant transfer-attack performance.

1

Introduction

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have garnered significant attention for their impressive
capabilities in both visual perception and language interaction. Unlike pure-text Large Language
Models, LVLMs incorporate visual encoders, enabling them to excel in a variety of multimodal tasks
such as text-to-image generation [1, 2, 3], visual question-answering [4, 5, 6], and etc.. However,
since model complexity increases and their applications expand into real-world scenarios, security
concerns [7] of LVLM models have become increasingly prominent.
Recent studies [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] have revealed that LVLMs are highly vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, which can significantly degrade performance and pose serious security risks. Specifically,
these works [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 9] manipulate LVLMs by injecting imperceptible perturbations
into benign images, misleading the model to produce incorrect or jailbreak results. Despite the
progress in this area, existing attack methods face primary challenges. In particular, they are typically
optimized for specific LVLM architectures or fixed prompts, making the generated adversarial
examples difficult to transfer effectively across different models or downstream tasks. That is, they
∗

Equal Contributions.

†

Project Lead.

‡

Corresponding Authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

