Learning to Price with Resource Constraints: From
Full Information to Machine-Learned Prices
Ruicheng Ao
MIT
aorc@mit.edu

Jiashuo Jiang
HKUST
jiang@ust.hk

David Simchi-Levi
MIT
dslevi@mit.edu

Abstract
Dynamic pricing with resource constraints is a critical challenge in online learning,
requiring a delicate balance between exploring unknown demand patterns and
exploiting known information to maximize revenue. We propose three tailored
algorithms to address this problem across varying levels of prior knowledge: (1) a
Boundary Attracted Re-solve Method for the full information setting, achieving
O(log T ) regret without imposing additional conditions; (2) an √
online learning
algorithm for the no information setting, delivering an optimal O( T ) regret; and
(3) an estimate-then-select re-solve algorithm for the informed price setting, leveraging machine-learned prices with known error bounds to bridge the gap between
full and no information scenarios. Moreover, through numerical experiments, we
demonstrate the robustness and practical applicability of our approaches. This
work advances dynamic pricing by offering scalable solutions that adapt to diverse
informational contexts while relaxing classical assumptions.

1

Introduction

Dynamic pricing is a classical problem in online learning and decision-making. With the growth of
e-commerce, there has been an increasing focus on the development of efficient dynamic pricing
policies in the recent literature, see for example Amin et al. [2014], Javanmard and Nazerzadeh
[2019], Shah et al. [2019], Cohen et al. [2020], Xu and Wang [2021], Bu et al. [2022], Xu and Wang
[2022], Xu et al. [2025].
Dynamic pricing is challenging due to the unknown relationship between the posted price and the
corresponding demand. Usually, one can model the dynamic pricing problem as a bandit problem to
balance the exploration of the price-demand relationship and the exploitation of setting the optimal
price, where the price option is regarded as an arm and the corresponding revenue (demand multiplied
price) is regarded as the reward for the arm. However, different from the classical multi-arm-bandit
model where there is a finite number of arms, the price option can be infinite and continuous, which
brings significant challenge to the learning part.
Another challenge to dynamic pricing is the existence of resource constraints. In practice, a product
usually enjoys a fixed initial inventory to be sold during the horizon and the pricing decision is made
to balance the demand such that the total revenue is maximized subject to the resource constraints.
Note that the existence of resource constraints will significantly complicate the problem because the
optimal decision is no longer to maximize the revenue but to balance the revenue versus resource
consumption in an optimal way. Past work on dynamic pricing mainly focuses on dealing with the
learning challenge, but ignores the challenge of resource allocation (e.g. Keskin and Zeevi [2014]).
In our paper, we address this fundamental issue by developing near-optimal learning policies for
dynamic pricing problems with resource constraints.
1.1 Preliminaries
To study this problem, we consider a setting with m resources and n products over a horizon of T
periods. At each period t, the decision-maker (DM) sets a price vector pt ∈ [L, U ]n , observes a
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

