Temporal Chain of Thought:
Long-Video Understanding by Thinking in Frames

Anurag Arnab∗ Ahmet Iscen∗ Mathilde Caron Alireza Fathi
Google DeepMind

Cordelia Schmid

Abstract
Despite recent advances in Vision-Language Models (VLMs), long-video understanding remains a challenging problem. Although state-of-the-art long-context
VLMs can process around 1000 input frames, they still struggle to effectively leverage this sequence length, and succumb to irrelevant distractors within the context
window. We present Temporal Chain of Thought, an inference strategy for video
question-answering that curates the model’s input context. We use the VLM itself
to iteratively identify and extract the most relevant frames from the video, which
are then used for answering. We demonstrate how leveraging more computation at
inference-time to select the most relevant context leads to improvements in accuracy, in agreement with recent work on inference-time scaling of LLMs. Moreover,
we achieve state-of-the-art results on 4 diverse video question-answering datasets,
showing consistent improvements with 3 different VLMs. In particular, our method
shines on longer videos which would not otherwise fit within the model’s context
window: On longer videos of more than 1 hour on LVBench, our approach using a
context window of 32K outperforms the same VLM using standard inference with
a 700K context window by 2.8 points.

1

Introduction

Despite recent advances in Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [6, 31, 32, 34, 55], understanding long
videos remains a challenging problem. This difficulty stems from the fact that this task requires a VLM
to process a long sequence of input tokens, and requires the model to possess a host of interrelated
abilities including action and scene understanding, long-term memory, and tracking state changes
and interactions among others. The long-context ability of leading VLMs, that enables models to
process hundreds or even a thousand frames of input context [36, 55, 56], is a valuable step forward
in this regard. However, numerous studies have shown that processing longer contexts can saturate or
degrade accuracy, as the model is overwhelmed with irrelevant or misleading content [23, 28, 37, 64].
Based on the observation that too large of an input context can be distracting, we propose an inference
strategy, Temporal Chain of Thought, which first aggregates relevant context from the input video,
and then uses it to answer the question (Fig. 1). Prior works based on the principle of removing
distracting context from a video [28, 45, 61, 62] used an ensemble of multiple models, typically using
one model to caption individual frames, another to find relevant ones, and finally answer the question
with an LLM. In contrast, we use only a single VLM to both select the relevant context, and to answer
the question, and show how our inference strategy provides substantial improvements.
Our approach is motivated by recent studies in Large Language Models (LLMs) which suggest that
scaling inference-time computation is more effective than scaling the number of model parameters [9,
20, 52, 65]. Similarly, we show how leveraging more computation to aggregate relevant information
from the video results in higher accuracy. In addition, as our approach iteratively extracts relevant
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

