MR. Video: MapReduce as an Effective Principle for
Long Video Understanding

Ziqi Pang
Yu-Xiong Wang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{ziqip2, yxw}@illinois.edu

Abstract
The fundamental challenge of long video understanding, e.g., question answering,
lies in the extensive number of frames, making it infeasible to densely understand
the local details while comprehensively digest the global contexts, especially within
a limited context length. To address this problem, our insight is to process short
video segments individually and combine these segment-level analyses into a final
response. This intuition is noted in the well-established MapReduce principle in
big data processing and is naturally compatible with inference scaling at the system
level. Motivated by this, we propose MR. Video1 , a long video understanding
framework adopting the MapReduce principle. We define the standard operations
of MapReduce in a long video understanding context: the Map steps conduct
independent and sequence-parallel dense perception on short video segments,
covering local details, while the Reduce steps comprehensively aggregate the
segment-level results into an answer with global contexts. Thanks to the low cost
and convenience of building video agents, we instantiate such Map and Reduce
operations as an effective video agent capable of attending to local details and global
contexts. Based on such abilities, we further introduce two critical yet previously
under-explored long video understanding designs: (a) consistent character/object
names in the captions, benefiting the reasoning of actions and stories across long
horizons; (b) question intention analysis, which changes the key-frame retrieval in
previous video agents to localizing the relevant information via jointly reasoning
the whole video contexts and questions. Our MR. Video achieves a >7% accuracy
improvement on the challenging LVBench over state-of-the-art video agents and
vision-language models (VLMs) and demonstrates a clear advantage on multiple
long video benchmarks, highlighting the potential of the MapReduce principle.
The code is at https://github.com/ziqipang/MR-Video.

1

Introduction

Considering a challenging example for long video understanding (Fig. 1, left): suppose we are
watching a fast-paced sports video and wanting to count the number of specific events, e.g., goals
by a player, a model should carefully go through every action to inspect the criteria of “a goal by
No. 11,” and then comprehensively aggregate across the whole video duration, especially when the
number of events is as large as 200. Such an example reveals the fundamental challenge in long video
understanding: how to digest global contexts while perceiving local details.
Unfortunately, existing sequence-to-sequence vision-language models (VLMs) [16, 17, 24, 26, 27, 28,
61] that rely on using large language models (LLMs) to process video tokens are limited in context
lengths. So they are forced to sample frames sparsely or compress tokens (Fig. 1(a)), losing the dense
local details, e.g., missing the events in the example video or failing to recognize the correct person.
Although video agents [8, 42, 45, 53] emerge to bypass the VLMs’ context length limitations via
strategically selecting a small set of video clips to perceive, they sacrifice the other aspects of long
video understanding: (1) they generally rely on multi-round exploration of video segment selection
1

pronounced as “mister video”

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

