Geometric Imbalance in Semi-Supervised Node
Classification
Liang Yan1 , Shengzhong Zhang1 , Bisheng Li1 , Menglin Yang4 , Chen Yang1 ,
Min Zhou5 , Weiyang Ding1 , Yutong Xie3∗, Zengfeng Huang1,2∗
1
Fudan University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute 3 MBZUAI
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 5 Logs AI
Project Page: https://divinyan.com/UNREAL
Code: https://github.com/yanliang3612/UNREAL

Abstract
Class imbalance in graph data presents a significant challenge for effective node
classification, particularly in semi-supervised scenarios. In this work, we formally
introduce the concept of geometric imbalance, which captures how message passing on class-imbalanced graphs leads to geometric ambiguity among minority-class
nodes in the riemannian manifold embedding space. We provide a rigorous theoretical analysis of geometric imbalance on the riemannian manifold and propose a
unified framework that explicitly mitigates it through pseudo-label alignment, node
reordering, and ambiguity filtering. Extensive experiments on diverse benchmarks
show that our approach consistently outperforms existing methods, especially under
severe class imbalance. Our findings offer new theoretical insights and practical
tools for robust semi-supervised node classification.

1

Introduction

Class imbalance is a prevalent challenge in real-world graph datasets, where the disproportionate
distribution of class labels often hinders the effectiveness and fairness of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) [73, 37]. While GNNs have achieved remarkable success in various graph-based learning
tasks [25, 54], their message passing mechanisms can amplify the negative impact of class imbalance,
especially for minority classes. This challenge is further exacerbated in semi-supervised settings,
where only a small fraction of nodes are labeled, making the reliable propagation of information even
more difficult.
Self-training (ST) [63, 48], which iteratively incorporates high-confidence pseudo-labeled nodes
into the training set, offers a simple yet effective approach for leveraging unlabeled data to address
class imbalance. Compared to oversampling [73, 37] or loss function engineering [6, 47], ST avoids
the complexities of synthesizing new nodes or edges and thus is naturally well-suited for graphstructured data. However, despite its practical success, existing ST-based work for imbalanced node
classification [75, 71, 27] lacks a principled theoretical and empirical understanding of self-training
in imbalanced node classification scenarios, especially regarding its inherent limitations under severe
imbalance.
In this work, we for the first time formally introduce and analyze the notion of geometric imbalance in
the context of semi-supervised imbalanced node classification. We rigorously characterize geometric
imbalance on riemannian manifold based on the von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution, and establish
its direct relationship with prediction uncertainty and class imbalance ratio. Our theoretical results
show that message passing, especially on class-imbalanced graphs, induces geometric ambiguity
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

