HeavyWater and SimplexWater: Distortion-free LLM
Watermarks for Low-Entropy Distributions

Dor Tsur∗
Ben Gurion University

Carol Xuan Long∗
Harvard University

Claudio Mayrink Verdun
Harvard University

Richard Chen
JPMorgan Chase

Haim Permuter
Ben Gurion University

Sajani Vithana†
Harvard University

Hsiang Hsu
JPMorgan Chase

Flavio P. Calmon†
Harvard University

Abstract
Large language model (LLM) watermarks enable authentication of text provenance,
curb misuse of machine-generated text, and promote trust in AI systems. Current
watermarks operate by changing the next-token predictions output by an LLM. The
updated (i.e., watermarked) predictions depend on random side information produced, for example, by hashing previously generated tokens. LLM watermarking
is particularly challenging when next-token predictions are near-deterministic. In
fact, over 90% of next-token distributions are low-entropy, with more than half of
the probability mass on a single token. In this paper, we propose an optimization
framework for watermark design for this regime. Our goal is to understand how
to most effectively use random side information to optimize the detection-quality
trade-off. Our analysis informs the design of two new watermarks: HeavyWater
and SimplexWater. Both watermarks are tunable, gracefully trading-off between
detection accuracy and text distortion. They can also be applied to any LLM
and are agnostic to side information generation. We evaluate the performance of
HeavyWater and SimplexWater across several benchmarks, demonstrating that
they achieve superior detection with minimal degradation in downstream quality across generation tasks. Our theoretical analysis also reveals surprising new
connections between LLM watermarking and coding theory.

1

Introduction

Watermarking large language models (LLMs) consists of embedding a signal into the text generation
process that allows reliable detection of machine-generated text. Over the past two years, there
have been increasing calls for LLM watermarking by both policymakers [1–3] and industry [4].
Watermarks enable authentication of text provenance [5], promote trust in AI systems [6], and can
address copyright and plagiarism issues [7, 8]. Ideally, watermarks should be detectable directly from
text without access to the underlying LLM. Watermarks should also be tamper-resistant – i.e., robust
to minor edits or paraphrasing of watermarked text [9] – and incur little degradation in text quality.
LLMs are watermarked by changing their next-token distributions according to random side information (see Fig. 2 for a visualization). Side information is typically generated by hashing previous
tokens and secret keys, then using the hash to seed a random number generator to produce a sample s
[10–12]. The side information s is then used to change the distribution from which the next token x
is sampled. Watermarks are detected by mapping a token x and corresponding side information s to
a score f (x, s). By averaging scores across a sequence of tokens, we can perform statistical tests
*
†

Equal contributions.
Equal contributing senior authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

