Any Large Language Model Can Be a Reliable Judge:
Debiasing with a Reasoning-based Bias Detector

Haoyan Yang1∗, Runxue Bao2†, Cao Xiao2 ,
Jun Ma , Parminder Bhatia2 , Shangqian Gao3†, Taha Kass-Hout2
2

1

New York University

2

GE Healthcare

3

Florida State University

Abstract
LLM-as-a-Judge has emerged as a promising tool for automatically evaluating
generated outputs, but its reliability is often undermined by potential biases in
judgment. Existing efforts to mitigate these biases face key limitations: in-context
learning-based methods fail to address rooted biases due to the evaluator’s limited
capacity for self-reflection, whereas fine-tuning is not applicable to all evaluator
types, especially closed-source models. To address this challenge, we introduce
the Reasoning-based Bias Detector (RBD), which is a plug-in module that identifies biased evaluations and generates structured reasoning to guide evaluator
self-correction. Rather than modifying the evaluator itself, RBD operates externally and engages in an iterative process of bias detection and feedback-driven
revision. To support its development, we design a complete pipeline consisting
of biased dataset construction, supervision collection, distilled reasoning-based
fine-tuning of RBD, and integration with LLM evaluators. We fine-tune four sizes
of RBD models, ranging from 1.5B to 14B, and observe consistent performance
improvements across all scales. Experimental results on 4 bias types—verbosity,
position, bandwagon, and sentiment—evaluated using 8 LLM evaluators demonstrate RBD’s strong effectiveness. For example, the RBD-8B model improves
evaluation accuracy by an average of 18.5% and consistency by 10.9%, and surpasses prompting-based baselines and fine-tuned judges by 12.8% and 17.2%,
respectively. These results highlight RBD’s effectiveness and scalability. Additional experiments further demonstrate its strong generalization across biases and
domains, as well as its efficiency.3

1

Introduction

Powered by the strong capabilities of LLMs, LLM-as-a-Judge has emerged as a promising alternative
to human evaluation in various NLP tasks [16, 27, 6, 57]. LLM-based evaluation provides a faster
and more scalable alternative to human judgment. It is now widely adopted in benchmarking and
automated evaluation pipelines. However, despite these advantages, LLM-based evaluation remains
imperfect. A key concern is the presence of bias, which can lead to unreliable or unfair assessments
[7, 51, 46, 26]. Our findings further confirm that even state-of-the-art models GPT-4o [35] and
Claude-3.5-sonnet [3] consistently exhibit detectable biases. Therefore, addressing these biases is
essential to improving the transparency and credibility of LLM-based evaluation.
To mitigate these biases, recent work has proposed two main strategies. Some approaches use
in-context learning (ICL), prompting the LLM evaluator with carefully crafted instructions and
∗

Work was done during the internship at GE Healthcare.
Correspondence to: Runxue Bao, Shangqian Gao (baorunxue@gmail.com, sgao@cs.fsu.edu)
3
All data and code are available at https://github.com/Joyyang158/Reasoning-Bias-Detector.

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

