Simultaneous Modeling of Protein Conformation and
Dynamics via Autoregression

Yuning Shen1⋆ , Lihao Wang1⋆ , Huizhuo Yuan1 , Yan Wang2† ,
Bangji Yang3† , Quanquan Gu1‡
2

1
ByteDance Seed
School of Mathematical Sciences, Tongji University
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
{yuning.shen,quanquan.gu}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Understanding protein dynamics is critical for elucidating their biological functions. The increasing availability of molecular dynamics (MD) data enables the
training of deep generative models to efficiently explore the conformational space
of proteins. However, existing approaches either fail to explicitly capture the
temporal dependencies between conformations or do not support direct generation of time-independent samples. To address these limitations, we introduce
C ONF ROVER, an autoregressive model that simultaneously learns protein conformation and dynamics from MD trajectories, supporting both time-dependent
and time-independent sampling. At the core of our model is a modular architecture comprising: (i) an encoding layer, adapted from protein folding models,
that embeds protein-specific information and conformation at each time frame
into a latent space; (ii) a temporal module, a sequence model that captures conformational dynamics across frames; and (iii) an SE(3) diffusion model as the
structure decoder, generating conformations in continuous space. Experiments on
ATLAS, a large-scale protein MD dataset of diverse structures, demonstrate the
effectiveness of our model in learning conformational dynamics and supporting
a wide range of downstream tasks. C ONF ROVER is the first model to sample
both protein conformations and trajectories within a single framework, offering a
novel and flexible approach for learning from protein MD data. Project website:
https://bytedance-seed.github.io/ConfRover.

1

Introduction

Proteins are flexible molecules that can adopt multiple structures, called conformations. Their
ability to transition between different conformations enables biological processes critical to life.
Characterizing the behavior of a protein, including its (1) dynamic motions, (2) conformational
distribution, and (3) transitions between different states, is crucial for understanding its function and
guiding the design of novel proteins [5, 12, 34]. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are the “gold
standard” for studying protein conformational changes [8, 21, 33]. These simulations use physical
models to describe the energy of a protein conformation and the forces acting on its atoms. By
simulating atomic motion through classical mechanics and iteratively sampling conformations over
time, MD enables researchers to explore different conformations, approximating the conformational
distribution at equilibrium, and gain mechanistic insights in protein functions. However, MD
simulations are both computationally expensive and technically challenging due to long simulation
times and the tendency to become trapped in local energy minima.
⋆

Equal contribution. † Work done during their internship at ByteDance. ‡ Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

