CoFFT: Chain of Foresight-Focus Thought
for Visual Language Models

Xinyu Zhang1,2 Yuxuan Dong1,2 Lingling Zhang1,2 ∗ Chengyou Jia 1,2
ZhuoHang Dang 1,2 Basura Fernando 4,6 Jun Liu1,3 Mike Zheng Shou 5 ∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security, China
3
Shaanxi Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering, China
4
IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
5
Show Lab, National University of Singapore
6
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
zhang1393869716@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zhanglling@xjtu.edu.cn, mikeshou@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Despite significant advances in Vision Language Models (VLMs), they remain constrained by the complexity and redundancy of visual input. When images contain
large amounts of irrelevant information, VLMs are susceptible to interference, thus
generating excessive task-irrelevant reasoning processes or even hallucinations.
This limitation stems from their inability to discover and process the required
regions during reasoning precisely. To address this limitation, we present the Chain
of Foresight-Focus Thought (CoFFT), a novel training-free approach that enhances
VLMs’ visual reasoning by emulating human visual cognition. Each ForesightFocus Thought consists of three stages: (1) Diverse Sample Generation: generates
diverse reasoning samples to explore potential reasoning paths, where each sample
contains several reasoning steps; (2) Dual Foresight Decoding: rigorously evaluates
these samples based on both visual focus and reasoning progression, adding the
first step of optimal sample to the reasoning process; (3) Visual Focus Adjustment:
precisely adjust visual focus toward regions most beneficial for future reasoning, before returning to stage (1) to generate subsequent reasoning samples until reaching
the final answer. These stages function iteratively, creating an interdependent cycle
where reasoning guides visual focus and visual focus informs subsequent reasoning.
Empirical results across multiple benchmarks using Qwen2.5-VL, InternVL-2.5,
and Llava-Next demonstrate consistent performance improvements of 3.1-5.8%
with controllable increasing computational overhead.

1

Introduction

Vision Language Models (VLMs) have demonstrated remarkable progress across numerous domains
[1, 2, 3], particularly in visual reasoning [4, 5, 6, 7]. However, their performance remains significantly
constrained by the inherent complexity and redundancy of visual inputs [8, 9, 10]. Visual Language
Models demonstrate high sensitivity to large, salient elements in images, often struggling to effectively
mitigate the impact of visually dominant but semantically irrelevant information, which leads to
deteriorated performance and flawed reasoning [11]. These limitations are especially pronounced
in complex reasoning tasks that require fine-grained image understanding such as mathematics
problem-solving [12, 13], chart understanding [14, 15], and geolocation inference [16].
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

