Neurosymbolic Diffusion Models

Emile van Krieken1 Pasquale Minervini1,2,∗ Edoardo Ponti1,∗ Antonio Vergari1,∗
1
2
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
Miniml.AI
e.van.krieken@vu.nl, {p.minervini, eponti, avergari}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Neurosymbolic (NeSy) predictors combine neural perception with symbolic
reasoning to solve tasks like visual reasoning. However, standard NeSy predictors
assume conditional independence between the symbols they extract, thus limiting
their ability to model interactions and uncertainty — often leading to overconfident
predictions and poor out-of-distribution generalisation. To overcome the limitations
of the independence assumption, we introduce neurosymbolic diffusion models
(N E S Y DM S), a new class of NeSy predictors that use discrete diffusion to model
dependencies between symbols. Our approach reuses the independence assumption
from NeSy predictors at each step of the diffusion process, enabling scalable learning while capturing symbol dependencies and uncertainty quantification. Across
both synthetic and real-world benchmarks — including high-dimensional visual
path planning and rule-based autonomous driving — N E S Y DM S achieve state-ofthe-art accuracy among NeSy predictors and demonstrate strong calibration.

1

Introduction

Neurosymbolic (NeSy) methods aim to develop reliable and interpretable AI systems by augmenting
neural networks with symbolic reasoning [25, 26, 77]. In particular, probabilistic neurosymbolic
predictors [52, 54, 57, 80] learn neural networks that extract high-level symbols, also called concepts,
from raw inputs. These concepts are latent variables used in interpretable symbolic programs to reason
and predict output labels. However, recent work highlights that the reliability of NeSy predictors is
not guaranteed, especially under certain common architectural choices.
More specifically, in many real-world settings, NeSy predictors fail silently: they can learn the wrong
concepts while achieving high accuracy on output labels [22, 27]. This issue arises when the data and
program together admit multiple concept assignments that are indistinguishable [54, 56]. How do we
design NeSy predictors that handle this ambiguity? Marconato et al. [55] argued that NeSy predictors
should express uncertainty over the concepts that are consistent with the data. Then, uncertainty can
guide user intervention, inform trust, or trigger data acquisition when the model is uncertain [55].
However, most existing NeSy predictors cannot properly model this uncertainty, as they rely on
neural networks that assume (conditional) independence between concepts [10, 80, 86]. While this
assumption enables efficient probabilistic reasoning [6, 73, 80, 86], it also prevents these NeSy
predictors from being aware of concept ambiguity and thus reliably generalising out-of-distribution
[39, 79]. Therefore, designing expressive, scalable and reliable NeSy predictors is an open problem.
To fill this gap, we design neurosymbolic diffusion models (N E S Y DM S). N E S Y DM S are the first class
of diffusion models that operate over the concepts of a NeSy predictor in conjunction with symbolic
programs. In theory, discrete diffusion models [9, 68] are particularly suited for NeSy predictors, as
each step of their denoising process involves predicting a discrete distribution that fully factorises.
*: Shared supervision.
Code is available at https://github.com/HEmile/neurosymbolic-diffusion.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

