MSTAR: Box-Free Multi-Query Scene Text Retrieval
with Attention Recycling

Liang Yin

Xudong Xie

Zhang Li

Xiang Bai

Yuliang Liu∗

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{liangyin, xdxie, zhangli, xbai, ylliu}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene text retrieval has made significant progress with the assistance of accurate
text localization. However, existing approaches typically require costly bounding
box annotations for training. Besides, they mostly adopt a customized retrieval
strategy but struggle to unify various types of queries to meet diverse retrieval
needs. To address these issues, we introduce Multi-query Scene Text retrieval
with Attention Recycling (MSTAR), a box-free approach for scene text retrieval.
It incorporates progressive vision embedding to dynamically capture the multigrained representation of texts and harmonizes free-style text queries with styleaware instructions. Additionally, a multi-instance matching module is integrated
to enhance vision-language alignment. Furthermore, we build the Multi-Query
Text Retrieval (MQTR) dataset, the first benchmark designed to evaluate the multiquery scene text retrieval capability of models, comprising four query types and
16k images. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method
across seven public datasets and the MQTR dataset. Notably, MSTAR marginally
surpasses the previous state-of-the-art model by 6.4% in MAP on Total-Text while
eliminating box annotation costs. Moreover, on the MQTR benchmark, MSTAR
significantly outperforms the previous models by an average of 8.5%. The code
and datasets are available at https://github.com/yingift/MSTAR.

1

Introduction

Scene text appears almost everywhere in daily life and is an essential ingredient for image-text
searching [6]. Traditional scene text retrieval [9] typically aims to search images based on word or
phrase queries and could benefit applications such as handwritten signature retrieval [54, 53] and
key frame extraction [35]. However, real-life retrieval needs could be diverse. For instance, people
often search for an article with several key words, which cannot be fulfilled with a single word.
Additionally, non-ocr visual semantics is also vital for scene text searching. In this work, we study the
multi-query scene text retrieval that aims to handle queries of various types within a unified model.
This could facilitate applications such as searching disambiguation [31, 16] and visual document
indexing [48, 4].
Off-the-shelf scene text retrieval methods [9, 38, 39] achieve text retrieval by explicitly localizing
the text and matching the query with scene text instances, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). A straightforward
solution is the text spotting methods [22, 20, 49]. They first spot the text in images and match it using
edit distance. However, the two divided stages could cause error accumulation between text spotting
and query matching. To mitigate this, detection-based methods [38, 41, 39] represent detected ROIs
in dense embedding, integrating text detection and similarity learning into an end-to-end framework.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

