Statistical Analysis of an Adversarial Bayesian Weak
Supervision Method

Steven An
Computer Science Department
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92037
sla001@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Programmatic Weak Supervision (PWS) aims to reduce the cost of constructing
large high quality labeled datasets often used in training modern machine learning
models. A major component of the PWS pipeline is the label model, which amalgamates predictions from multiple noisy weak supervision sources, i.e. labeling
functions (LFs), to label datapoints. While most label models are either probabilistic or adversarial, a recently proposed label model achieves strong empirical
performance without falling into either camp. That label model constructs a polytope of plausible labelings using the LF predictions and outputs the “center” of that
polytope as its proposed labeling. In this paper, we attempt to theoretically study
that strategy by proposing Bayesian Balsubramani-Freund (BBF), a label model
that implicitly constructs a polytope of plausible labelings and selects a labeling in
its interior. We show an assortment of statistical results for BBF: log-concavity of
its posterior, its form of solution, consistency, and rates of convergence. Extensive
experiments compare our proposed method against twelve baseline label models
over eleven datasets. BBF compares favorably to other Bayesian label models
and label models that don’t use datapoint features – matching or exceeding their
performance on eight out of eleven datasets.

1

Introduction

Large scale deep learning models often require a labeled training set of substantial size. However,
hiring experts to label every training point is not only expensive, but time consuming. Programmatic
Weak Supervision (PWS) aims to ameliorate this problem by cheaply generating labels. This is
done via combination of multiple weak supervision sources, called labeling functions (LFs). LFs
can be computer programs [Ratner et al., 2016], crowdsourcing workers, simple classifiers (like
linear classifiers), etc. Since LFs are noisy and provide contradictory predictions on a datapoint, it is
incumbent on the label model to combine the LF predictions to produce a single labeling of the data.
The construction of the label model serves as one of the main challenges in the PWS pipeline.
Most label models are either probabilistic or adversarial. Probabilistic label models [Dawid and
Skene, 1979, Ratner et al., 2016, Zhang et al., 2023] often specify a generative process for the
labels/LF outputs and compute the posterior label distribution for each datapoint. Much work has
been devoted to this approach and there are many examples of probabilistic label models that perform
well empirically. Adversarial label models [Balsubramani and Freund, 2015a, Mazzetto et al., 2021b,
Mazuelas et al., 2022] assume the existence of an adversary who assigns the labels, construct a
polytope of plausible labelings, and then predict a minimax optimal labeling to guard against the
worst case. While they come with theoretical guarantees, e.g. An and Dasgupta [2024], these label
models require (small amounts of) labeled data to construct the polytope. Arachie and Huang [2019]
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

