Diffusion Network Inference for Cross-layer Cascades

Siyu Huang˚
Department of Statistics
The Pennsylvania State University
sph6006@psu.edu

Yubai Yuan˚:
Department of Statistics
The Pennsylvania State University
yvy5509@psu.edu

Abdul Basit Adeel
Department of Sociology and Criminology
The Pennsylvania State University
axa6372@psu.edu

Abstract
A cascade over a network refers to the diffusion process where behavior changes
occurring in one part of an interconnected population lead to a series of sequential changes throughout the entire population. In recent years, there has been a
surge in interest and efforts to understand and model cascade mechanisms since
they motivate many significant research topics across different disciplines. The
propagation structure of cascades is governed by underlying diffusion networks
that are often hidden. Inferring diffusion networks thus enables interventions in
cascading process to maximize information propagation and provides insights
into the Granger causality of interaction mechanisms among individuals. In this
project, we propose a novel double network mixture model for inferring latent
diffusion network in presence of strong cascade heterogeneity. The new model
represents cascade pathways as a distributional mixture over diffusion networks
that capture different cascading patterns at the population level. We develop a
data-driven optimization method to infer diffusion networks using only visible
temporal cascade records, avoiding the need to model complex and heterogeneous
individual states. Both statistical and computational guarantees are established
for the proposed method. We apply the proposed model to analyze research topic
cascades in social sciences across U.S. universities and uncover the latent research
topic diffusion network among top U.S. social science programs.

1

Introduction

Cascades over network refer to the diffusion processes where behavior changes in a part of an
interconnected population lead to a series of sequential changes throughout the entire population. In
recent years, there are surging interests and efforts to understand and model the cascade mechanism
since it motivates many significant research topics in different areas, including social influence
[12, 13, 20], information propagation via social media [32, 1], diffusion of policy and social norms
[4, 33], viral marketing [25, 9], and contagion of infectious diseases [21, 35].
One fundamental problem is to understand the diffusion networks that govern cascade propagation
patterns. However, diffusion networks are often hidden and need to be inferred from observed
cascading behaviors. For example, in the case of infectious diseases, we can observe when an
individual is infected but need to impute the missing information on who infects this individual.
˚
:

Co-first authors.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

