Skill-Driven Neurosymbolic State Abstractions

Alper Ahmetoglu∗
Brown University

Steven James
University of the Witwatersrand

Sam Lobel
Brown University

David Abel
University of Edinburgh

Cameron Allen
UC Berkeley
George Konidaris
Brown University

Abstract
We consider how to construct state abstractions compatible with a given set of
abstract actions, to obtain a well-formed abstract Markov decision process (MDP).
We show that the Bellman equation suggests that abstract states should represent
distributions over states in the ground MDP; we characterize the conditions under
which the resulting process is Markov and approximately model-preserving, derive
an algorithm for constructing the abstract MDP, and apply it to visual chain and
maze tasks. We generalize these results to the factored actions case, characterize the
conditions that lead to factored abstract states, and apply the resulting algorithm to a
visual grid and Montezuma’s Revenge. These results provide a principled, powerful
framework for learning neurosymbolic abstract Markov decision processes.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [62] has achieved remarkable success solving tasks with complex
sensorimotor spaces [48, 43]. However, learning and planning at the pixel and motor level, while
necessary, must eventually be insufficient: the complexity of real-world tasks such as cooking a meal,
inter-city travel, and fixing a car is such that they can only be feasible if decision-making occurs at
an abstract level and the low-level details are abstracted away. This is especially true when a single
agent must perform all these tasks, necessitating a sensorimotor space complex enough to cover all of
them. Linking abstract reasoning to low-level action and perception, to enable fast decision-making
grounded in real sensorimotor interaction, is therefore critical for general intelligence [23, 38].
Hierarchical RL (HRL) [14] addresses this problem via high-level abstract actions, but does not
create correspondingly abstract states, leaving the agent in its original low-level state space. It would
be far preferable to combine both types of abstractions to construct an entirely abstract decision
process [38], which requires mutually compatible state and action abstractions: those that result in
a new, more compact decision process that is Markov and supports near-optimal policies over the
abstract actions in the original MDP. Following earlier work in robotics [40], we adopt an action-first
strategy, constructing state abstractions compatible with a pre-existing set of abstract actions.
We first focus on building an abstract MDP from a ground MDP augmented with a given set of abstract
actions, where the Bellman equation suggests that abstract states should represent distributions over
ground states. We use this insight to build an abstract decision process, and identify the conditions
under which it is Markov and approximately model-preserving [44, 1]. We develop algorithms for
constructing the abstraction from data and for planning with it, and apply them to visual chainwalk
and maze tasks. We then generalize these results to factored actions, which modify only some state
variables in the ground MDP. We characterize the conditions under which this generates factored
∗
Correspondence to Alper Ahmetoglu aahmetog@cs.brown.edu and George Konidaris gdk@brown.edu.
Extended results are available at neurosymbolic-mdps.github.io.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

