EquiTabPFN: A Target-Permutation Equivariant
Prior Fitted Network

1

Michael Arbel∗1 David Salinas∗2,3 Frank Hutter2,3,4
INRIA 2 University of Freiburg 3 ELLIS Institute Tübingen 4 PriorLabs
∗
Equal contribution

Abstract
Recent foundational models for tabular data, such as TabPFN, excel at adapting to
new tasks via in-context learning, but remain constrained to a fixed, pre-defined
number of target dimensions—often necessitating costly ensembling strategies. We
trace this constraint to a deeper architectural shortcoming: these models lack target
equivariance, so that permuting target dimension orderings alters their predictions.
This deficiency gives rise to an irreducible “equivariance gap,” an error term that
introduces instability in predictions. We eliminate this gap by designing a fully
target-equivariant architecture—ensuring permutation invariance via equivariant
encoders, decoders, and a bi-attention mechanism. Empirical evaluation on standard classification benchmarks shows that, on datasets with more classes than those
seen during pre-training, our model matches or surpasses existing methods while
incurring lower computational overhead.

1

Introduction

Tabular data, a prevalent format in many real-world applications, has historically presented unique
challenges to deep learning due to its lack of inherent structure compared to image or text data [10].
Foundation models, such as TabPFN [12], have recently been introduced to tackle classification tasks
in tabular domains. These models leverage in-context learning capabilities of transformers [3], to
perform both training and prediction in a single model evaluation, without requiring any parameter
updates, achieving remarkable performance.
At the core of these foundational models is a pre-training procedure in which a transformer model
is trained to predict test targets from test covariates, conditioned on training covariate/target pairs
all of which are randomly sampled from some well-designed generative model. While it might
seem surprising, at first, how a model pre-trained on synthetic data could perform well on real
unseen data, recent work, such as Nagler [26], provides a theoretical study that shades some light
on this phenomenon. These models, leverage the transformer architecture to perform attention
over rows—attending to all samples simultaneously to enable cross-sample comparison. Applying
attention over rows is crucial, as it enables the model to capture higher-order similarities between
samples while preserving an inherent symmetry of tabular data—namely, that row order is irrelevant
under the common i.i.d. assumption in supervised learning. Conveniently, such a mechanism also
allows, in theory, handling an arbitrary number of training samples—a property that enables the
model to generalize across tasks with varying dataset sizes without architectural modifications.
However, models such as TabPFN [12] are inherently confined to covariate–target pairs of fixed,
predefined dimension, thereby limiting their applicability to datasets that match these specifications.
This limitation can be alleviated via additional data pre-processing—e.g., projecting high-dimensional
covariates into a lower-dimensional subspace—or by post-processing model predictions,—e.g. employing hierarchical strategies for classification tasks with many classes [31, 5]. However, the
increased computational burden often offsets some of the benefits offered by in-context learning.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

