Conditional Distribution Compression via the Kernel
Conditional Mean Embedding

Dominic Broadbent
School of Mathematics
University of Bristol
Bristol, United Kingdom
dominic.broadbent@bristol.ac.uk
Robert Allison
School of Mathematics
University of Bristol
Bristol, United Kingdom

Nick Whiteley
School of Mathematics
University of Bristol
Bristol, United Kingdom

Tom Lovett
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom

Abstract
Existing distribution compression methods, like Kernel Herding (KH), were originally developed for unlabelled data. However, no existing approach directly
compresses the conditional distribution of labelled data. To address this gap, we
first introduce the Average Maximum Conditional Mean Discrepancy (AMCMD),
a metric for comparing conditional distributions, and derive a closed form estimator. Next, we make a key observation: in the context of distribution compression,
the cost of constructing a compressed set targeting the AMCMD can be reduced
from O(n3 ) to O(n). Leveraging this, we extend KH to propose Average Conditional Kernel Herding (ACKH), a linear-time greedy algorithm for constructing
compressed sets that target the AMCMD. To better understand the advantages
of directly compressing the conditional distribution rather than doing so via the
joint distribution, we introduce Joint Kernel Herding (JKH), an adaptation of KH
designed to compress the joint distribution of labelled data. While herding methods
provide a simple and interpretable selection process, they rely on a greedy heuristic. To explore alternative optimisation strategies, we also propose Joint Kernel
Inducing Points (JKIP) and Average Conditional Kernel Inducing Points (ACKIP),
which jointly optimise the compressed set while maintaining linear complexity.
Experiments show that directly preserving conditional distributions with ACKIP
outperforms both joint distribution compression and the greedy selection used in
ACKH. Moreover, we see that JKIP consistently outperforms JKH.

1

Introduction

Given a large unlabelled dataset D := {xi }ni=1 ⊂ X sampled i.i.d. from the distribution PX , a
major challenge is constructing a compressed set, C := {x̃j }m
j=1 with m ≪ n, that preserves the
essential statistical properties of the original data. This compressed set can then replace the full
dataset in downstream tasks, significantly reducing computational costs while maintaining statistical
fidelity. Existing distribution compression algorithms leverage the theory of Reproducing Kernel
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

