Segment Policy Optimization: Effective Segment-Level
Credit Assignment in RL for Large Language Models

Yiran Guo† , Lijie Xu†∗, Jie Liu†∗ , Dan Ye† , Shuang Qiu‡
†
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
†
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
‡
City University of Hong Kong
{guoyiran23, xulijie, ljie, yedan}@otcaix.iscas.ac.cn
shuanqiu@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large language models effectively using
reinforcement learning (RL) remains a crucial challenge. Existing approaches
primarily adopt two contrasting advantage estimation granularities: token-level
methods (e.g., PPO) aim to provide fine-grained advantage signals but suffer
from inaccurate estimation due to difficulties in training an accurate critic model.
On the other extreme, trajectory-level methods (e.g., GRPO) solely rely on a
coarse-grained advantage signal from the final reward, leading to imprecise credit
assignment. To address these limitations, we propose Segment Policy Optimization
(SPO), a novel RL framework that leverages segment-level advantage estimation at
an intermediate granularity, achieving a better balance by offering more precise
credit assignment than trajectory-level methods and requiring fewer estimation
points than token-level methods, enabling accurate advantage estimation based on
Monte Carlo (MC) without a critic model. SPO features three components with
novel strategies: (1) flexible segment partition; (2) accurate segment advantage
estimation; and (3) policy optimization using segment advantages, including a novel
probability-mask strategy. We further instantiate SPO for two specific scenarios:
(1) SPO-chain for short chain-of-thought (CoT), featuring novel cutpoint-based
partition and chain-based advantage estimation, achieving 6-12 percentage point
improvements in accuracy over PPO and GRPO on GSM8K. (2) SPO-tree for long
CoT, featuring novel tree-based advantage estimation, which significantly reduces
the cost of MC estimation, achieving 7-11 percentage point improvements over
GRPO on MATH500 under 2K and 4K context evaluation. We make our code
publicly available at https://github.com/AIFrameResearch/SPO.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has become the cornerstone for training state-of-the-art reasoning
large language models (LLMs), such as OpenAI o1 [11], DeepSeek R1 [7], Kimi K1.5 [31], and
Qwen3 [34]. These models demonstrate RL’s unique ability to cultivate advanced reasoning capabilities, particularly in complex, STEM-related tasks. However, achieving both effectiveness and
efficiency in RL training hinges on addressing a fundamental challenge: credit assignment, i.e.,
accurately attributing success or failure to individual actions within a sequence [30]. In the context
of LLMs, where actions correspond to generated tokens, this challenge is even greater due to sparse
and delayed rewards that are typically only available at the end of the response. Advantage estimation
is the common approach for credit assignment in RL, and existing methods differ in the granularity
of advantage estimation, typically operating at two extremes, each with its own limitations.
∗
Corresponding Authors. Lijie Xu, Jie Liu, and Dan Ye are also affiliated with Key Laboratory of System
Software (Chinese Academy of Sciences) and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

