VideoREPA: Learning Physics for Video Generation
through Relational Alignment with Foundation Models
Xiangdong Zhang1‡ , Jiaqi Liao, Shaofeng Zhang1 ,
Fanqing Meng1 , Xiangpeng Wan2 , Junchi Yan1 , Yu Cheng3†
1
School of AI & School of CS, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
NetMind.AI, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Recent advancements in text-to-video (T2V) diffusion models have enabled highfidelity and realistic video synthesis. However, current T2V models often struggle
to generate physically plausible content due to their limited inherent ability to
accurately understand physics. We found that while the representations within
T2V models possess some capacity for physics understanding, they lag significantly behind those from recent video self-supervised learning methods. To this
end, we propose a novel framework called VideoREPA, which distills physics
understanding capability from video understanding foundation models into T2V
models by aligning token-level relations. This closes the physics understanding
gap and enables more physics-plausible generation. Specifically, we introduce the
Token Relation Distillation (TRD) loss, leveraging spatio-temporal alignment to
provide soft guidance suitable for finetuning powerful pre-trained T2V models—a
critical departure from prior representation alignment (REPA) methods. To our
knowledge, VideoREPA is the first REPA method designed for finetuning T2V
models and specifically for injecting physical knowledge. Empirical evaluations
show that VideoREPA substantially enhances the physics commonsense of baseline
method, CogVideoX, achieving significant improvement on relevant benchmarks
and demonstrating a strong capacity for generating videos consistent with intuitive
physics. Code and more video results are available at Project Page.
CogVideoX
CogVideoX
+ REPA
VideoREPA
(ours)
Leather glove catching a hard baseball.

Maple syrup drizzling from a bottle onto pancakes.

(a) Physics understanding evaluation
on Physion (contain subset).

CogVideoX
CogVideoX
+ REPA
VideoREPA
(ours)
Glass shatters on the floor.

A child runs and catches a brightly colored frisbee...

(b) Physics understanding evaluation
on Physion (roll subset).

Figure 1: Left: Visual comparison of video generation results from CogVideoX [56] (baseline),
CogVideoX finetuned with REPA [58], and our proposed VideoREPA. Red rectangles denote phenomena that violate physical commonsense for easier distinguish. Our VideoREPA generates videos
that most closely adhere to real-world physical laws. Right: Evaluation of physics understanding
on the Object Contact Prediction (OCP) task within the Physion benchmark [6]. The plots illustrate a
significant gap in physics understanding between the SSL video encoder VideoMAEv2 and the T2V
model CogVideoX. The proposed VideoREPA substantially narrows this understanding gap.
‡

Interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory. † Corresponding author. chengyu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

