Towards Generalizable Retina Vessel Segmentation
with Deformable Graph Priors

Ke Liu 1

Shangde Gao 1 Yichao Fu 1 Shangqi Gao 2∗
1
Zhejiang University
2
University of Cambridge
{kliu, gaosd, fuyichao}@zju.edu.cn
sg2162@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Retinal vessel segmentation is critical for medical diagnosis, yet existing models
often struggle to generalize across domains due to appearance variability, limited annotations, and complex vascular morphology. We propose GraphSeg, a variational
Bayesian framework that integrates anatomical graph priors with structure-aware
image decomposition to enhance cross-domain segmentation. GraphSeg factorizes retinal images into structure-preserved and structure-degraded components,
enabling domain-invariant representation. A deformable graph prior, derived from
a statistical retinal atlas, is incorporated via a differentiable alignment and guided
by an unsupervised energy function. Experiments on three public benchmarks
(CHASE, DRIVE, HRF) show that GraphSeg consistently outperforms existing
methods under domain shifts. These results highlight the importance of jointly
modeling anatomical topology and image structure for robust generalizable vessel
segmentation. Code can be found at github.com/AI4MOL/GraphSeg.

1

Introduction

Retinal vessel segmentation is vital to assist in the diagnosis of common retinal diseases, such
as diabetic retinopathy, age-related macular degeneration, and retinal detachment, which have
been recognized as the leading causes of vision impairment and blindness globally by the World
Health Organization (WHO) 2 . However, automatic segmentation is challenging due to high image
heterogeneity. Particularly, retinal structures are changing with age, and some structures could be
overlapped or occluded due to retinal lesions [1]. Besides, imaging artifacts widely exist in retinal
images due to low contrast, eye movement, and noise, increasing the difficulties of distinguishing
fine structures like blood capillaries [2].
Conventional supervised models have shown promising performance in automatically recognizing
vascular structures and segmenting retinal vessels [3–5]. However, these models expect manual
annotation of retinal vessels, which requires expert ophthalmologists and is labor-intensive, especially
for blood capillaries [6]. Besides, while automatic vessel segmentation models have shown promising
performance in recognizing vascular structures, they struggle to distinguish fine structures mixed with
lesions or imaging artifacts, leading to discontinuous segmentation that breaks vascular structures.
Moreover, supervised models tend to be over-dependent on training data when annotations are limited,
and thus often deliver poor generalizability in unseen scenarios [7]. Furthermore, although large
amounts of unannotated images are readily available, models trained solely with supervised losses
often fail to generalize to unseen domains, due to their inherent reliance on labeled data.
∗
2

Corresponding author.
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/blindness-and-visual-impairment

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

