Bootstrap Off-policy with World Model

Guojian Zhan1,2 , Likun Wang1 , Xiangteng Zhang1 , Jiaxin Gao1 ,
Masayoshi Tomizuka2 , Shengbo Eben Li1∗
1

College of AI & School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University
2
Berkeley AI Research (BAIR), UC Berkeley

Abstract
Online planning has proven effective in reinforcement learning (RL) for improving
sample efficiency and final performance. However, using planning for environment
interaction inevitably introduces a divergence between the collected data and the
policy’s actual behaviors, degrading both model learning and policy improvement.
To address this, we propose BOOM (Bootstrap Off-policy with WOrld Model),
a framework that tightly integrates planning and off-policy learning through a
bootstrap loop: the policy initializes the planner, and the planner refines actions to
bootstrap the policy through behavior alignment. This loop is supported by a jointly
learned world model, which enables the planner to simulate future trajectories and
provides value targets to facilitate policy improvement. The core of BOOM is a
likelihood-free alignment loss that bootstraps the policy using the planner’s nonparametric action distribution, combined with a soft value-weighted mechanism
that prioritizes high-return behaviors and mitigates variability in the planner’s action
quality within the replay buffer. Experiments on the high-dimensional DeepMind
Control Suite and Humanoid-Bench show that BOOM achieves state-of-the-art
results in both training stability and final performance. The code is accessible at
https://github.com/molumitu/BOOM_MBRL.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive performance in a wide range of domains, from
industrial automation to autonomous driving and embodied intelligence [43, 36, 49]. Among the
various techniques developed to enhance RL, online planning stands out for its predictive optimization
ability to improve control performance using learned dynamics [29, 3, 50]. By performing look-ahead
rollouts, it enables agents to anticipate future consequences and iteratively refine actions [42, 37].
Compared to model-free approaches, which rely solely on trial-and-error learning, model-based
planning offers an effective tool to generate high-quality actions for environment interaction [6, 5].
A growing body of research has explored how to more effectively integrate planning into RL [17, 29].
Early methods such as PETS [4] and PlaNet [13] have proven that planning with learned dynamics
and reward signals can achieve impressive control performance. To further improve performance in
high-dimensional tasks, recent approaches have combined online planning with policy learning, where
the policy can provide a good initial solution to speed up planning [1]. For example, LOOP [39]
builds on SAC [11], an off-policy model-free algorithm, and integrates a planner guided by a
learned dynamics model to enable higher-quality environment interaction. Recently, TD-MPC
and TD-MPC2 [19, 18] jointly learn the dynamics, reward and value functions through temporal
differential (TD) learning, achieving strong performance through both algorithmic innovations and
∗

Corresponding author. lishbo@tsinghua.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

