Where Does It Exist from the Low-Altitude:
Spatial Aerial Video Grounding

Yang Zhan
Yuan Yuan∗
School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN)
Northwestern Polytechnical University
zhanyangnwpu@gmail.com, y.yuan1.ieee@gmail.com

Abstract
The task of localizing an object’s spatial tube based on language instructions
and video, known as spatial video grounding (SVG), has attracted widespread
interest. Existing SVG tasks have focused on ego-centric fixed front perspective
and simple scenes, which only involved a very limited view and environment.
However, UAV-based SVG remains underexplored, which neglects the inherent
disparities in drone movement and the complexity of aerial object localization. To
facilitate research in this field, we introduce the novel spatial aerial video grounding
(SAVG) task. Specifically, we meticulously construct a large-scale benchmark,
UAV-SVG, which contains over 2 million frames and offers 216 highly diverse
target categories. To address the disparities and challenges posed by complex
aerial environments, we propose a new end-to-end transformer architecture, coined
SAVG-DETR. The innovations are three-fold. 1) To overcome the computational
explosion of self-attention when introducing multi-scale features, our encoder
efficiently decouples the multi-modality and multi-scale spatio-temporal modeling
into intra-scale multi-modality interaction and cross-scale visual-only fusion. 2)
To enhance small object grounding ability, we propose the language modulation
module to integrate multi-scale information into language features and the multilevel progressive spatial decoder to decode from high to low level. The decoding
stage for the lower-level vision-language features is gradually increased. 3) To
improve the prediction consistency across frames, we design the decoding paradigm
based on offset generation. At each decoding stage, we utilize reference anchors to
constrict the grounding region, use context-rich object queries to predict offsets,
and update reference anchors for the next stage. From coarse to fine, our SAVGDETR gradually bridges the modality gap and iteratively refines reference anchors
of the referred object, eventually grounding the spatial tube. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our SAVG-DETR significantly outperforms existing state-of-theart methods. The dataset and code will be available at here.

1

Introduction

Grounding objects with natural language in visual contexts is a fundamental and important task
in multi-modal understanding [1, 2, 3]. Recently, the spatial video grounding (SVG) has drawn
significant attention [4, 5]. However, the SVG task has predominantly focused on the ego-centric
fixed front perspective and simple scene [6, 7, 8]. As shown in Figure 6 of the supplementary material,
they only provide a very limited view and environment. This means that existing methods can
only perform target localization in simple scenes on the ground. This overlooks another important
application scenario: moving aerial platforms in the sky [9, 10, 11]. As the low-altitude economy
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

