Pause Tokens Strictly Increase the Expressivity of
Constant-Depth Transformers

Charles London
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, OX1 3QG
charles.london@cs.ox.ac.uk

Varun Kanade
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, OX1 3QG
varun.kanade@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Pause tokens, simple filler symbols such as “...”, consistently improve Transformer
performance on both language and mathematical tasks, yet their theoretical effect
remains unexplained. We provide the first formal separation result, proving that
adding pause tokens to constant-depth, logarithmic-width Transformers strictly
increases their computational expressivity. With bounded-precision activations,
Transformers without pause tokens compute only a strict subset of AC0 functions,
while adding a polynomial number of pause tokens allows them to express the
entire class. For logarithmic-precision Transformers, we show that adding pause
tokens achieves expressivity equivalent to TC0 , matching known upper bounds.
Empirically, we demonstrate that two-layer causally masked Transformers can
learn parity when supplied with pause tokens, a function that they appear unable
to learn without them. Our results provide a rigorous theoretical explanation for
prior empirical findings, clarify how pause tokens interact with width, depth, and
numeric precision, and position them as a distinct mechanism, complementary to
chain-of-thought prompting, for enhancing Transformer reasoning.

1

Introduction

Transformers [38] have become ubiquitous in modern machine learning, achieving state-of-the-art
performance across a wide range of tasks, particularly in natural language processing. Despite
their empirical success, many aspects of their computational behaviour remain poorly understood.
An intriguing recently observed phenomenon is that adding pause tokens (e.g. a “...” token) to
Transformer inputs can improve performance on some question-answering and mathematical tasks
[30, 14]. This phenomenon has raised questions about the computational role of such seemingly
meaningless tokens, particularly in the context of chain-of-thought prompting and the faithfulness of
intermediate reasoning steps.
In this paper, we provide a theoretical explanation for how pause tokens might improve Transformer
performance. Specifically, we analyse how they affect the expressivity of Transformers through the
lens of circuit complexity. Our contributions are as follows:
1. Pause tokens allow Transformers to simulate Boolean circuit classes exactly. We prove that
constant-precision Transformers with a polynomial number of pause tokens are equivalent in
expressivity to AC0 (constant depth circuits with and/or/not gates), while logarithmic precision
Transformers with pause tokens match TC0 (circuits like AC0 with threshold gates).
2. Pause tokens strictly increase expressivity in constant-precision Transformers. We prove a
separation: Transformers without pause tokens are fundamentally less expressive than those with.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

