On the Global Optimality of Policy Gradient Methods
in General Utility Reinforcement Learning

Anas Barakat1 , Souradip Chakraborty2 , Peihong Yu2 , Pratap Tokekar2 , Amrit Singh Bedi3
1

2

Singapore University of Technology and Design,
University of Maryland-College Park, 3 University of Central Florida

Abstract
Reinforcement learning with general utilities (RLGU) offers a unifying framework
to capture several problems beyond standard expected returns, including imitation
learning, pure exploration, and safe RL. Despite recent fundamental advances
in the theoretical analysis of policy gradient (PG) methods for standard RL and
recent efforts in RLGU, the understanding of these PG algorithms and their scope
of application in RLGU still remain limited. In this work, we establish global
optimality guarantees of PG methods for RLGU in which the objective is a general
concave utility function of the state-action occupancy measure. In the tabular
setting, we provide global optimality results using a new proof technique building
on recent theoretical developments on the convergence of PG methods for standard
RL using gradient domination. Our proof technique opens avenues for analyzing
policy parameterizations beyond the direct policy parameterization for RLGU. In
addition, we provide global optimality results for large state-action space settings
beyond prior work which has mostly focused on the tabular setting. In this large
scale setting, we adapt PG methods by approximating occupancy measures within
a function approximation class using maximum likelihood estimation. Our sample
complexity only scales with the dimension induced by our approximation class
instead of the size of the state-action space.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning with general utilities (RLGU) has emerged as a general framework to unify a
range of RL applications where the objective of the RL agent cannot be simply cast as a standard
expected cumulative reward (Zhang et al., 2020). For instance, in imitation learning, the objective is
to learn a policy minimizing the divergence between the induced state-action occupancy measure and
expert demonstrations (Ho and Ermon, 2016). In pure exploration, the goal is to learn a policy to
explore the state space in a reward-free setting by maximizing the entropy of the state occupancy
measure induced by the agent’s policy (Hazan et al., 2019). Other examples include risk-averse and
constrained RL (Garcıa and Fernández, 2015), diverse skills discovery (Eysenbach et al., 2019), and
experiment design (Mutny et al., 2023).
It is well known that the standard RL objective can be written as a linear functional of the occupancy
measure. To capture all the aforementioned applications, the RLGU objective is a possibly nonlinear
functional of the state action occupancy measure induced by the policy (Zhang et al., 2020). Due
to non-linearity, policy gradient algorithms for solving RLGU problems face the major bottleneck
of occupancy measure estimation. Prior works (Hazan et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020) have mostly
focused on the tabular setting where the state-action occupancy measure needs to be estimated for
each state-action pair using Monte Carlo estimation via sampling trajectories. However, this setting
is restrictive for larger state and action spaces where tabular methods become intractable due to
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

