Diffusion Models and the Manifold Hypothesis:
Log-Domain Smoothing is Geometry Adaptive

Tyler Farghly ∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Peter Potaptchik ∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

George Deligiannidis
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Samuel Howard ∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Jakiw Pidstrigach
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved state-of-the-art performance, demonstrating remarkable generalisation capabilities across diverse domains. However, the mechanisms underpinning these strong capabilities remain only partially understood. A
leading conjecture, based on the manifold hypothesis, attributes this success to their
ability to adapt to low-dimensional geometric structure within the data. This work
provides evidence for this conjecture, focusing on how such phenomena could
result from the formulation of the learning problem through score matching. We
inspect the role of implicit regularisation by investigating the effect of smoothing
minimisers of the empirical score matching objective. Our theoretical and empirical
results confirm that smoothing the score function—or equivalently, smoothing in
the log-density domain—produces smoothing tangential to the data manifold. In
addition, we show that the manifold along which the diffusion model generalises
can be controlled by choosing an appropriate smoothing.

1

Introduction: Diffusion, manifolds and generalisation

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song and Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021) have emerged as a powerful class of generative models, achieving state-of-the-art performance
across domains (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021; Kong et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2022).
Beyond their ability to generate high-quality outputs, they are also capable of producing novel
samples not present in the training data, indicating a surprising capacity for generalisation.
The goal of diffusion models is to produce samples from a target distribution µdata on Rd , given only
a finite number of samples. They do this by learning to reverse a noising process, Xt , which begins
with a random sample of the data distribution X0 ∼ µdata and gradually transforms it into noise.
This process is defined by the stochastic differential equation (SDE),
√
dXt = −αXt dt + 2 dBt , X0 ∼ µdata ,
(1)
for some α ≥ 0, where Bt denotes the d-dimensional Brownian motion. It is well known (Haussmann
and Pardoux, 1986) that the time reversal Yt := XT −t of (1) satisfies
√
dYt = αYt dt + 2∇ log pT −t (Yt ) dt + 2 dBt ,
(2)
where pt denotes the density of Xt . Therefore, the task of generating samples from µdata can be solved
by simulating paths of (2). To that end, the unknown score function, ∇ log pt in (2), is approximated
∗

Authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence to {last name}@stats.ox.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

