VLForgery Face Triad: Detection, Localization and
Attribution via Multimodal Large Language Models

Xinan He1 , Yue Zhou2∗, Bing Fan3 , Bin Li2 , Guopu Zhu4 , Feng Ding1†
Nanchang University shahur@email.ncu.edu.cn; fengding@ncu.edu.cn
2
Shenzhen University 2450042008@email.szu.edu.cn; libin@szu.edu.cn
3
University of North Texas bingfan@my.unt.edu
4
Harbin Institute of Technology guopu.zhu@hit.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Faces synthesized by diffusion models (DMs) with high-quality and controllable
attributes pose a significant challenge for Deepfake detection. Most state-of-the-art
detectors only yield a binary decision, incapable of forgery localization, attribution
of forgery methods, and providing analysis on the cause of forgeries. In this
work, we integrate Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) within DMbased face forensics, and propose a fine-grained analysis triad framework called
VLForgery, that can 1) predict falsified facial images; 2) locate the falsified face
regions subjected to partial synthesis; and 3) attribute the synthesis with specific
generators. To achieve the above goals, we introduce VLF (Visual Language
Forensics), a novel and diverse synthesis face dataset designed to facilitate rich
interactions between ‘Visual’ and ‘Language’ modalities in MLLMs. Additionally,
we propose an extrinsic knowledge-guided description method, termed EkCot,
which leverages knowledge from the image generation pipeline to enable MLLMs
to quickly capture image content. Furthermore, we introduce a low-level vision
comparison pipeline designed to identify differential features between real and fake
that MLLMs can inherently understand. These features are then incorporated into
EkCot, enhancing its ability to analyze forgeries in a structured manner, following
the sequence of detection, localization, and attribution. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that VLForgery outperforms other state-of-the-art forensic approaches
in detection accuracy, with additional potential for falsified region localization and
attribution analysis.

1

Introduction

AI-generated faces have enriched human life by creating realistic virtual characters that enhance our
experiences in various creative industries. However, the domain of AI-generated face forensics is
encountering unprecedented challenges due to the rapid advancement of generative models [8, 55,
49, 12, 24, 57]. In particular, diffusion models [38, 35] generate synthetic faces with substantially
higher fidelity than earlier technologies such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) [41], rendering it
increasingly challenging for detectors to identify subtle forgery artifacts. This development has led to
a significant surge in the proliferation of forgeries, which present grave threats to personal privacy
and security.
Several pioneering studies [3, 17, 44, 4, 48, 54] have investigated diffusion model (DM)-generated
image forensics and demonstrated the effectiveness of their proposed models. However, a notable
∗
†

The author contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

