Covariate-moderated Empirical Bayes Matrix
Factorization
William R. P. Denault, Karl Tayeb, Peter Carbonetto & Matthew Stephens
Departments of Statistics and Human Genetics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637, USA
{wdenault,ktayeb,pcarbo,mstephens}@uchicago.edu
Jason Willwerscheid
Mathematics and Computer Science
Providence College
Providence, RI 02918, USA
jwillwer@providence.edu

Abstract
Matrix factorization is a fundamental method in statistics and machine learning
for inferring and summarizing structure in multivariate data. Modern data sets
often come with “side information” of various forms (images, text, graphs) that
can be leveraged to improve estimation of the underlying structure. However,
existing methods that leverage side information are limited in the types of data
they can incorporate, and they assume specific parametric models. Here, we
introduce a novel method for this problem, covariate-moderated empirical Bayes
matrix factorization (cEBMF). cEBMF is a modular framework that accepts any
type of side information that is processable by a probabilistic model or a neural
network. The cEBMF framework can accommodate different assumptions and
constraints on the factors through the use of different priors, and it adapts these
priors to the data. We demonstrate the benefits of cEBMF in simulations and in
analyses of spatial transcriptomics and collaborative filtering data. A PyTorchbased implementation of cEBMF with flexible priors is available at https://
github.com/william-denault/cebmf_torch.

1

Introduction

Matrix factorization methods, which include principal component analysis (PCA), factor analysis,
and non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) [1–3], are very widely used methods for inferring latent
structure from data, performing exploratory data analyses, and visualizing large data sets (e.g., [4–6]).
Matrix factorization methods are also instrumental in other statistical analyses such as adjusting for
unobserved confounding [7]. When factorizing a matrix, say Z, the matrix may be accompanied
by additional row or column data—“side information”—that may be able to “guide” the matrix
factorization algorithm toward a more accurate or interpretable factorization. A recent prominent
example of this in genomics research is spatial transcriptomics data [8], which is expression profiled
in many genes at many spatial locations (“pixels”) [9]. For a variety of reasons, one typically seeks
to factorize Z, the matrix of gene expression profiles. But the 2-d coordinates of the pixels also
provide important information about the biological context of the cells; for example, we might expect
nearby pixels to belong to the same cell type or tissue region. Therefore, “spatially aware” matrix
factorization methods have recently been proposed for spatial transcriptomics data [10–12].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

