KeeA∗: Epistemic Exploratory A∗ Search via
Knowledge Calibration

Dengwei Zhao1 , Shikui Tu1∗, Yanan Sun2 Lei Xu1,3∗
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Integrated Circuits, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy(SZ)
{zdwccc, tushikui, yannasun, leixu}@sjtu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
In recent years, neural network-guided heuristic search algorithms, such as MonteCarlo tree search and A∗ search, have achieved significant advancements across
diverse practical applications. Due to the challenges stemming from high statespace complexity, sparse training datasets, and incomplete environmental modeling,
heuristic estimations manifest uncontrolled inherent biases towards the actual expected evaluations, thereby compromising the decision-making quality of search
algorithms. Sampling exploration enhanced A∗ (SeeA∗ ) was proposed to improve
the efficiency of A∗ search by constructing an dynamic candidate subset through
random sampling, from which the expanded node was selected. However, uniform
sampling strategy utilized by SeeA∗ facilitates exploration exclusively through
the injection of randomness, which completely neglects the heuristic knowledge
relevant to open nodes. Moreover, the theoretical support of cluster sampling
remains ambiguous. Despite the existence of potential biases, heuristic estimations
still encapsulate certain valuable information. In this paper, epistemic exploratory
A∗ search (KeeA∗ ) is proposed to integrate heuristic knowledge for calibrating the
sampling process. We first theoretically demonstrate that SeeA∗ with cluster sampling outperforms uniform sampling due to the distribution-aware selection with
higher variance. Building on this insight, cluster scouting and path-aware sampling
are introduced in KeeA∗ to further exploit heuristic knowledge to increase the sampling mean and variance, respectively, thereby generating higher-quality extreme
candidates and enhancing overall decision-making performance. Finally, empirical results on retrosynthetic planning and logic synthesis demonstrate superior
performance of KeeA∗ compared to state-of-the-art heuristic search algorithms.

1

Introduction

With the rise of deep learning, neural networks are utilized as guiding heuristic functions within
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), which has contributed crucially to the successes of AlphaGo [41]
and also sparked the renaissance of classical search algorithms such as A∗ search [18]. Empowered
by the remarkable representational capabilities of neural networks, heuristic search algorithms
have demonstrated superhuman performance across a broad spectrum of real-world applications,
including games[39], de novo drug design [37], functional protein generation and optimization[48],
retrosynthetic planning of organic molecules [4, 40, 59], logic synthesis in very large scale integration
(VLSI) design [7], and combinatorial optimization tasks such as traveling salesman problem [6, 53]
and bin packing problem [21]. Moreover, heuristic search plays a critical role in state-of-the-art
∗

Correspondence authors are Shikui Tu and Lei Xu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

