Variational Learning Finds Flatter Solutions
at the Edge of Stability

Avrajit Ghosh1,∗ Bai Cong2,3 Rio Yokota2 Saiprasad Ravishankar1
Rongrong Wang1 Molei Tao 4 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan3 Thomas Möllenhoff3
1

3
∗

Michigan State University
RIKEN Center for AI Project

2

4

Institute of Science Tokyo
Georgia Institute of Technology

Work performed in part during internship at the RIKEN Center for AI Project.

Abstract
Variational Learning (VL) has recently gained popularity for training deep neural
networks. Part of its empirical success can be explained by theories such as PACBayes bounds, minimum description length and marginal likelihood, but little
has been done to unravel the implicit regularization in play. Here, we analyze
the implicit regularization of VL through the Edge of Stability (EoS) framework.
EoS has previously been used to show that gradient descent can find flat solutions
and we extend this result to show that VL can find even flatter solutions. This
result is obtained by controlling the shape of the variational posterior as well as
the number of posterior samples used during training. The derivation follows in a
similar fashion as in the standard EoS literature for deep learning, by first deriving
a result for a quadratic problem and then extending it to deep neural networks. We
empirically validate these findings on a wide variety of large networks, such as
ResNet and ViT, to find that the theoretical results closely match the empirical ones.
Ours is the first work to analyze the EoS dynamics of VL.

1

Introduction

Variational Learning (VL) has been used to perform deep learning from early on [Graves, 2011,
Blundell et al., 2015] and recently also started to show good results at large scale. It has been shown
to outperform state-of-the-art optimizers without any increase in the cost. For example, on ImageNet,
VL substantially improves overfitting commonly seen in AdamW and for pretraining GPT-2 from
scratch, VL achieves a lower validation perplexity than AdamW [Shen et al., 2024]. For low-rank
fine-tuning of Llama-2 (7B), VL improves both accuracy (by 2.8%) and calibration (by 4.6%) [Cong
et al., 2024, Li et al., 2025]. Moreover, VL methods explicitly derived by using PAC-Bayes bounds
[Wang et al., 2023b, Zhang et al., 2024b] have shown consistent improvements over AdamW. All
such results confirm the importance of VL for deep learning.
Despite these successes, the theoretical mechanisms behind the good performance of VL remain
poorly understood. It is often assumed that simplistic Gaussian posteriors, such as those used
currently for deep learning, may not be enough because they are poor approximations of the true
posterior; lack of a good prior is another issue. Despite these concerns, VL shows good performance
in practice. Theories such as minimum description length [Hinton and Van Camp, 1993, Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber, 1997, Blier and Ollivier, 2018], PAC-Bayes [Dziugaite and Roy, 2017, Zhou et al.,
2019, Lotfi et al., 2024, Alquier et al., 2024] and marginal likelihood [Smith and Le, 2017, Immer
et al., 2021] can partially explain the success. In particular, PAC-Bayes theory provides a natural
explanation for why flatter solutions may generalize better, see for instance the discussion in [Alquier
et al., 2024, Section 3.3]. However these theories say little about the regularizing properties of the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

