Evolution of Information in Interactive Decision
Making: A Case Study for Multi-Armed Bandits

Yuzhou Gu
New York University
yuzhougu@nyu.edu

Yanjun Han
New York University
yanjunhan@nyu.edu

Jian Qian
New York University
jianqian@nyu.edu

Abstract
We study the evolution of information in interactive decision making through
the lens of a stochastic multi-armed bandit problem. Focusing on a fundamental
example where a unique optimal arm outperforms the rest by a fixed margin, we
characterize the optimal success probability and mutual information over time.
Our findings reveal distinct growth phases in mutual information—initially linear,
transitioning to quadratic, and finally returning to linear—highlighting curious
behavioral differences between interactive and non-interactive environments. In
particular, we show that optimal success probability and mutual information can be
decoupled, where achieving optimal learning does not necessarily require maximizing information gain. These findings shed new light on the intricate interplay
between information and learning in interactive decision making.

1

Introduction

Consider the following instance of a stochastic multi-armed bandit problem: there are n arms in total,
where the optimal arm a⋆ ∈ [n] is uniformly at random, and the reward distribution of arm i is


if i = a⋆ ,
Ber 1+∆
i
2

r ∼
(1)
1−∆
Ber 2
otherwise.
Here ∆ ∈ (0, 1] is a fixed noise parameter. In other words, the best arm a⋆ is uniformly better than
the rest of the arms by a fixed margin ∆. Readers familiar with the bandit literature shall immediately
find that this is the lower bound instance for the multi-armed bandit, where it is well-known (see,
e.g., (Lattimore and
 Szepesvári, 2020, Chapter 15)) that the sample complexity of identifying the
best arm is Θ ∆n2 . In contrast, it is also a classical result (e.g., via
 Fano’s inequality) that in the
n log n
non-interactive setting, the sample complexity becomes Θ
. In other words, the interactive
∆2
sampling nature of multi-armed bandits offers a Θ(log n) gain in the sample complexity compared
with the non-interactive sampling.
In this paper, we take a closer look into this seemingly toy example, and investigate how an interactive
procedure starts to accumulate information and identify the best arm below the sample complexity,
i.e., when t < ∆n2 . Specifically, denoting by at ∈ [n] the action taken at time t and Ht =
σ(a1 , r1a1 , . . . , at , rtat ) the available history up to time t, we will study the following two quantities:
p⋆t = sup P(at+1 = a⋆ ),
Alg

It⋆ = sup I(a⋆ ; Ht ).

(2)

Alg

In other words, p⋆t is the optimal success probability of identifying the best arm a⋆ after t rounds,
and It⋆ is the optimal mutual information accumulated through a time horizon of t rounds. Here both
supremums are taken over all possible interactive algorithms with the knowledge of n and ∆. In the
rest of this paper, we will be interested in the evolution of p⋆t and It⋆ as a function of t, especially
for the curious regime of a small t. In fact, before the learner can reliably identify the best arm a⋆ ,
the optimal information It⋆ exhibits a nonlinear accumulation in t: for very small t we expect little
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

