Rethinking Hebbian Principle: Low-Dimensional
Structural Projection for Unsupervised Learning

Shikuang Deng1∗ , Jiayuan Zhang2∗ , Yuhang Wu1 , Ting Chen1 , Shi Gu3,4B
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, UESTC
2
Glasgow College, UESTC
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
4
State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, China
dengsk@uestc.edu.cn, gus@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Hebbian learning is a biological principle that intuitively describes how neurons
adapt their connections through repeated stimuli. However, when applied to machine learning, it suffers serious issues due to the unconstrained updates of the
connections and the lack of accounting for feedback mediation. Such shortcomings
limit its effective scaling to complex network architectures and tasks. To this end,
here we introduce the Structural Projection Hebbian Representation (SPHeRe), a
novel unsupervised learning method that integrates orthogonality and structural
information preservation through a local auxiliary nonlinear block. The loss for
structural information preservation backpropagates to the input through an auxiliary lightweight projection that conceptually serves as feedback mediation while
the orthogonality constraints account for the boundedness of updating magnitude.
Extensive experimental results show that SPHeRe achieves SOTA performance
among unsupervised synaptic plasticity approaches on standard image classification
benchmarks, including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and Tiny-ImageNet. Furthermore,
the method exhibits strong effectiveness in continual learning and transfer learning
scenarios, and image reconstruction tasks show the robustness and generalizability
of the extracted features. This work demonstrates the competitiveness and potential
of Hebbian unsupervised learning rules within modern deep learning frameworks,
demonstrating the possibility of efficient and biologically inspired learning algorithms without the strong dependence on strict backpropagation. Our code is
available at https://github.com/brain-intelligence-lab/SPHeRe.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning based on error backpropagation has achieved revolutionary developments in the field of artificial intelligence [1, 2]. However, the biological plausibility of backpropagation remains a subject of debate, particularly concerning its requirement for symmetric
feedback connections and precise global error signal transmission, mechanisms not readily observed
in biological neural circuits [3, 4]. At the same time, some neuroanatomical studies have found that
the plasticity regulation of cortical synapses mainly follows local rules, with the strength changes
dynamically dominated by the activities of pre-/postsynaptic neurons, occasionally under the synergistic regulation of higher-order signals such as neuromodulators. Based on these neuroanatomical
studies, researchers have proposed various biologically inspired learning algorithms to replace the
backpropagation algorithm. The Hebbian rule, as a canonical algorithm of this type, was first pro* Equal contribution
B Corresponding author
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

