Learning from positive and unlabeled examples
-Finite size sample bounds

Farnam Mansouri
University of Waterloo and Vector Institute
f5mansou@uwaterloo.ca

Shai Ben-David
University of Waterloo and Vector Institute
shai@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
PU (Positive Unlabeled) learning is a variant of supervised classiﬁcation learning
in which the only labels revealed to the learner are of positively labeled instances.
PU learning arises in many real-world applications. Most existing work relies
on the simplifying assumptions that the positively labeled training data is drawn
from the restriction of the data generating distribution to positively labeled instances and/or that the proportion of positively labeled points (a.k.a. the class
prior) is known apriori to the learner. This paper provides a theoretical analysis
of the statistical complexity of PU learning under a wider range of setups. Unlike
most prior work, our study does not assume that the class prior is known to the
learner. We prove upper and lower bounds on the required sample sizes (of both
the positively labeled and the unlabeled samples).

1

Introduction

Learning from positive and unlabeled data (PU learning) is a variant of binary classiﬁcation prediction semi-supervised learning, where the training data consist only of positively labeled and unlabeled examples. PU learning arises in many applications, such as personal advertisement (where a
person is labeled according to whether a given add is relevant to them. When a person responds to
the add, we know they belong to the set of positive instances. However, we cannot tell the label of
unresponsive customers), land cover classiﬁcation Li et al. (2010) (say, we wish to classify forest
land cover from aerial images, where training data consist of unlabeled land images and forest aerial
images), prediction of protein similarity Elkan and Noto (2008) and many other applications like
knowledge base completion Bekker and Davis (2020), disease-gene identiﬁcation Yang et al. (2012)
and more.
Standard machine learning paradigms, such as empirical risk minimization (namely, training a classiﬁer to minimize the miss-classiﬁcation loss over the training data) or regularized risk minimization
may fail badly in such settings, since their success guarantees rely on having access to labels from
both classes (positive and negative labels). We are interested in ﬁnite sample size generalization
guarantees. Having a weaker supervision than standard fully supervised learning, achieving generalization bounds for PU learning requires stronger assumptions. In this work, we show how some
of the common assumptions used in this domain can be relaxed, while also showing some negative,
impossibility results.
Various setups for PU learning. We consider the case in which both training samples (the positively
labeled and the unlabeled examples) are generated by random processes unknown to the learner.
The learner’s goal is to obtain a classiﬁer that minimizes misclassiﬁcation with respect to a target
evaluation distribution D over X × {0, 1} (where X is the domain set). Training data generating
setup can be viewed along two basic axes; The ﬁrst is whether the positively labeled data is generated
independently of the unlabeled sample (as opposed to the case where the positively labeled examples
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

