CoT Red-Handed:
Stress Testing Chain-of-Thought Monitoring

Benjamin Arnav∗1 Pablo Bernabeu-Pérez∗1 Nathan Helm-Burger∗1
Tim Kostolansky∗1 Hannes Whittingham∗1 Mary Phuong
1
LASR Labs

Abstract
As AI models are deployed with increasing autonomy, it is important to ensure they
do not take harmful actions unnoticed. As a potential mitigation, we investigate
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) monitoring, wherein a weaker trusted monitor model
continuously oversees the intermediate reasoning steps of a more powerful but
untrusted model. We compare CoT monitoring to action-only monitoring, where
only final outputs are reviewed, in a red-teaming setup where the untrusted model
is instructed to pursue harmful side tasks while completing a coding problem.
We find that while CoT monitoring is more effective than overseeing only model
outputs in scenarios where action-only monitoring fails to reliably identify sabotage,
reasoning traces can contain misleading rationalizations that deceive the CoT
monitors, reducing performance in obvious sabotage cases. To address this, we
introduce a hybrid protocol that independently scores model reasoning and actions,
and combines them using a weighted average. Our hybrid monitor consistently
outperforms both CoT and action-only monitors across all tested models and tasks,
with detection rates twice higher than action-only monitoring for subtle deception
scenarios.

1

Introduction

As AI models grow in capabilities and are deployed with increasing autonomy (METR, 2025), there
is a growing need to address risks from potential misalignment (Shah et al., 2025; UK AI Safety
Institute, 2025), i.e., models pursuing hidden goals contrary to their developers’ intentions.
One approach to ensuring safety despite potential misalignment is AI control (Greenblatt et al., 2024b;
Mallen et al., 2024; Bhatt et al., 2024). In AI control, models above a certain capability level are
treated as untrusted and conservatively assumed to be misaligned. Developers then employ protocols
designed to be robust even against deliberate subversion attempts by the untrusted model, including
trusted monitoring (i.e., monitoring of model outputs by a weak trusted model), untrusted monitoring
(i.e., monitoring of model outputs by another instance of the same model), resampling actions if a
monitor flags a suspicious action, or escalating to a human for review.
In this paper, we build on previous AI control research to investigate the value of monitoring the
model’s intermediate reasoning (Lanham, 2022), also known as its Chain-of-Thought (CoT), and
compare its effectiveness to monitoring only its final actions. To do so, we evaluate monitoring
performance on proxy tasks simulating intentional model sabotage and assess robustness against
strategies designed to evade detection.
*
Core contributors. All correspondence to research@benjaminarnav.com. Code is available at:
https://github.com/cotredhanded/code. Selected illustrative transcripts can be found at: https:
//cotredhanded.github.io.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

