E-MoFlow: Learning Egomotion and Optical Flow
from Event Data via Implicit Regularization

Wenpu Li1∗, Bangyan Liao1,2∗ , Yi Zhou3 , Qi Xu1,4 , Pian Wan5 ,
Peidong Liu1† ,
1

3

Westlake University 2 Zhejiang University
Hunan University 4 Wuhan University 5 Georgia Institute of Technology
Project Page: https://akawincent.github.io/EMoFlow/

Abstract
The estimation of optical flow and 6-DoF ego-motion, two fundamental tasks in
3D vision, has typically been addressed independently. For neuromorphic vision
(e.g., event cameras), however, the lack of robust data association makes solving
the two problems separately an ill-posed challenge, especially in the absence of
supervision via ground truth. Existing works mitigate this ill-posedness by either
enforcing the smoothness of the flow field via an explicit variational regularizer or
leveraging explicit structure-and-motion priors in the parametrization to improve
event alignment. The former notably introduces bias in results and computational
overhead, while the latter, which parametrizes the optical flow in terms of the
scene depth and the camera motion, often converges to suboptimal local minima.
To address these issues, we propose an unsupervised framework that jointly optimizes egomotion and optical flow via implicit spatial-temporal and geometric
regularization. First, by modeling camera’s egomotion as a continuous spline
and optical flow as an implicit neural representation, our method inherently embeds spatial-temporal coherence through inductive biases. Second, we incorporate
structure-and-motion priors through differential geometric constraints, bypassing
explicit depth estimation while maintaining rigorous geometric consistency. As
a result, our framework (called E-MoFlow) unifies egomotion and optical flow
estimation via implicit regularization under a fully unsupervised paradigm. Experiments demonstrate its versatility to general 6-DoF motion scenarios, achieving
state-of-the-art performance among unsupervised methods and competitive even
with supervised approaches.

1

Introduction

Optical flow estimation [1] and 6-DoF camera motion recovery [2] are two core building blocks in
many 3D vision tasks, playing a crucial role in providing motion and structural information for various
downstream applications such as object tracking [3, 4], scene reconstruction [5, 6], and Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [7–9]. In classical computer vision, these two problems have
been extensively studied and can be successfully solved independently, thanks to well-established
feature extraction techniques [10] and data association [11] algorithms. However, when applied to
the emerging field of neuromorphic vision [12], these traditional methods face significant challenges.
The unique nature of event cameras [12], which reports asynchronous and sparse events instead of
capturing frames, brings challenges in estimating optical flow and 6-DoF camera motion reliably.
For example, optical flow estimation from event data faces the well-known aperture problem [13],
where the learned flow is essentially the normal flow [14]. Furthermore, depth-free 6-DoF motion
∗
†

Equal Contribution: {liwenpu,liaobangyan}@westlake.edu.cn
Corresponding author: liupeidong@westlake.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

