Structure-Aware Cooperative Ensemble Evolutionary
Optimization on Combinatorial Problems with
Multimodal Large Language Models

Jie Zhao1 , Kang Hao Cheong1,2∗
1

School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
2
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have proven effective in exploring the vast solution spaces typical of graph-structured combinatorial problems. However, traditional encoding schemes, such as binary or numerical representations, often fail to
straightforwardly capture the intricate structural properties of networks. Through
employing the image-based encoding to preserve topological context, this study
utilizes multimodal large language models (MLLMs) as evolutionary operators to
facilitate structure-aware optimization over graph data. To address the visual clutter
inherent in large-scale network visualizations, we leverage graph sparsification
techniques to simplify structures while maintaining essential structural features. To
further improve robustness and mitigate bias from different sparsification views,
we propose a cooperative evolutionary optimization framework that facilitates
cross-domain knowledge transfer and unifies multiple sparsified variants of diverse
structures. Additionally, recognizing the sensitivity of MLLMs to network layout,
we introduce an ensemble strategy that aggregates outputs from various layout configurations through consensus voting. Finally, experiments on real-world networks
through various tasks demonstrate that our approach improves both the quality and
reliability of solutions in MLLM-driven evolutionary optimization.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured combinatorial problems in real-world complex systems occupy a central role in
various domains [1]. These problems require selecting an optimal set of nodes within a network
and are inherently NP-hard due to the combinatorial explosion of possible node combinations [2, 3].
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have been extensively employed to address such challenges because
of their ability to effectively deal with non-linearity and explore discrete search spaces [4].
The encoding scheme plays a fundamental role in addressing discrete optimization problems, as
it dictates how solutions are structured and operated within the EA framework [5, 6]. Different
combinatorial tasks have unique requirements, for example, permutation and path encodings are
commonly used for scheduling [7] and routing problems [8], while binary and index-based encodings
are often applied to node or edge subset selection tasks [9]. Despite their widespread use, conventional
encoding schemes represent data in an abstract way, overlooking their contextual significance within
the network. Therefore, evolutionary operators like crossover and mutation are applied blindly,
without recognizing the underlying structural relationships of solutions.
∗

Corresponding author: kanghao.cheong@ntu.edu.sg

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

