A Minimalist Example of Edge-of-Stability and
Progressive Sharpening

Liming Liu
Georgia Institute of Technology
lliu606@gatech.edu

Zixuan Zhang
Georgia Institute of Technology
zzhang3105@gatech.edu

Simon Shaolei Du
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Tuo Zhao
Georgia Institute of Technology
tourzhao@gatech.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning optimization have unveiled two intriguing phenomena under large learning rates: Edge of Stability (EoS) and Progressive Sharpening (PS), challenging classical Gradient Descent (GD) analyses. Current research
approaches, using either generalist frameworks or minimalist examples, face significant limitations in explaining these phenomena. This paper advances the minimalist
approach by introducing a two-layer network with a two-dimensional input, where
one dimension is relevant to the response and the other is irrelevant. Through
this model, we rigorously prove the existence of progressive sharpening and selfstabilization under large learning rates, and establish non-asymptotic analysis of
the training dynamics and sharpness along the entire GD trajectory. Besides, we
connect our minimalist example to existing works by reconciling the existence
of a well-behaved “stable set" between minimalist and generalist analyses, and
extending the analysis of Gradient Flow Solution sharpness to our two-dimensional
input scenario. These findings provide new insights into the EoS phenomenon from
both parameter and input data distribution perspectives, potentially informing more
effective optimization strategies in deep learning practice.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has revolutionized many fields, from computer vision to natural language processing.
However, this progress has also posed significant challenges to classical optimization theory. Most
classical gradient descent (GD) analysis assumes small learning rates for easing convergence analysis.
Consider minimizing a smooth loss function L(θ) with respect to the parameter θ, classical analyses
show that when choosing a learning rate η such that S(θ) ≤ 2/η, where S(θ) denotes the largest
eigenvalue of the Hessian matrix ∇2 L(θ), the optimization is “stable” and the loss function decreases
monotonically to guarantee convergence Nesterov [2013].
Recent works such as Cohen et al. [2021], however, have observed that such a stability assumption
does not hold when training modern neural networks with GD. In particular, they summarize two
specific phenomena: The first one is called “Progressive Sharpening"(PS), that is, S(θ), which
is also referred to as the “sharpness” in Cohen et al. [2021], keeps increasing until it reaches the
instability threshold 2/η during training; The second one is called “Edge of Stability"(EoS), that
is, the sharpness hovers at the instability threshold 2/η after progressive sharpening, with the loss
decreases continuously and nonmonotonically. These two phenomena undoubtedly challenge the
classical analyses and have already attracted the attention of many researchers.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

