Safe and Stable Control via Lyapunov-Guided
Diffusion Models
Xiaoyuan Cheng∗ Xiaohang Tang Yiming Yang
University College London, United Kingdom

Abstract
Diffusion models have made significant strides in recent years, exhibiting strong
generalization capabilities in planning and control tasks. However, most diffusionbased policies remain focused on reward maximization or cost minimization, often
overlooking critical aspects of safety and stability. In this work, we propose Safe
and Stable Diffusion (S 2 Diff), a model-based diffusion framework that explores
how diffusion models can ensure safety and stability from a Lyapunov perspective.
We demonstrate that S 2 Diff eliminates the reliance on both complex gradientbased solvers (e.g., quadratic programming, non-convex solvers) and controlaffine structures, leading to globally valid control policies driven by the learned
certificate functions. Additionally, we uncover intrinsic connections between
diffusion sampling and Almost Lyapunov theory, enabling the use of trajectorylevel control policies to learn better certificate functions for safety and stability
guarantees. To validate our approach, we conduct experiments on a wide variety of
dynamical control systems, where S 2 Diff consistently outperforms both certificatebased controllers and model-based diffusion baselines in terms of safety, stability,
and overall control performance.

1

Introduction

Real-world control tasks often go beyond simple cost minimization or reward maximization, requiring
safety [19] and stability [7] as essential requirements in various fields such as robotics and aerospace.
Specifically, safety ensures a risk-free trajectory during control, while stability drives the system
toward convergence to achieve a desired goal. However, achieving both safety and stability remains
an open problem in control theory due to the complexity of synthesizing numerous non-convex
constraints, including both equalities and inequalities [21], within a single formulation.
Model Predictive Control. A common approach to address this challenge is to leverage convex
optimization techniques, minimizing the accumulated costs under multiple constraints [11, 52]. One
of the most well-known methods is the model predictive control (MPC) [23] and its variants [17, 18].
While MPC is widely used to ensure safety and stability, the policies derived from MPC algorithms
often remain suboptimal in execution [38]. Moreover, MPC can easily become infeasible for some
problems with many safety constraints and tight control limitations. Another significant drawback of
MPC is its computational complexity [24]. Achieving better performance typically requires a longer
receding horizon, making MPC inefficient for high-dimensional nonlinear problems.
Certificate-Based Method. Another approach to ensuring safety and stability in control relies
on certificate functions, such as control Lyapunov functions (CLFs) [4, 6, 43] and control barrier
functions (CBFs) [5, 36, 46]. However, identifying a valid certificate function is challenging and
highly problem-dependent [1], as most existing methods rely on convex optimization with known
system dynamics [34, 37]. In addition, these approaches struggle to scale to high-dimensional control
∗

Corresponding to Xiaoyuan Cheng: ucesxc4@ucl.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

