Error Forcing in Recurrent Neural Networks

A. Erdem Sağtekin
New York University
University of Tübingen
aes10217@nyu.edu

Colin Bredenberg
University of Montreal
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
colin.bredenberg@mila.quebec
Cristina Savin
New York University
csavin@nyu.edu

Abstract
How should feedback influence recurrent neural network (RNN) learning? One
way to address the known limitations of backpropagation through time is to directly
adjust neural activities during the learning process. However, it remains unclear
how to effectively use feedback to shape RNN dynamics. Here, we introduce
error forcing (EF), where the network activity is guided orthogonally toward
the zero-error manifold during learning. This method contrasts with alternatives
like teaching forcing, which impose stronger constraints on neural activity and
thus induce larger feedback influence on circuit dynamics. Furthermore, EF can
be understood from a Bayesian perspective as a form of approximate dynamic
inference. Empirically, EF consistently outperforms other learning algorithms
across several tasks and its benefits persist when additional biological constraints
are taken into account. Overall, EF is a powerful temporal credit assignment
mechanism and a promising candidate model for learning in biological systems.

1

Introduction

Most theoretical neuroscience models posit that learning in the brain occurs via feedback projections
that guide local synaptic plasticity [1–12]. Such models—based on approximations of gradient
descent—assume that feedback signals are delivered without interfering with network activity,
for example by multiplexing feedforward and feedback signals [13], via global neuromodulatory
signals [14], or by only infinitesimally perturbing the network state [15, 16]. However, circuit-level
evidence of a crisp separation between learning and dynamics is less clear. Moreover, there is
substantial evidence that humans are able to learn both cognitive and motor skills with very few
feedback examples [17, 18], and that they can rapidly correct for systematic errors induced by various
manipulations (e.g. external force fields [19] or visuomotor manipulations [20]). This suggests
that the brain may use dynamic error-correcting mechanisms to affect within-trial neural activity in
order to rapidly improve performance before longer-timescale synaptic learning and consolidation
[21, 22]. However, previous models of dynamic error correction-based synaptic plasticity in the brain
have either been used in exclusively feedforward neural network architectures [23, 24], or have been
used in recurrent neural networks provided with dense feedback signals [25–27], without rigorous
quantification of the temporal credit assignment capabilities of the proposed learning algorithms.
Here, we introduce error forcing (EF), an algorithm designed to exploit both greedy error-based
guidance of circuit dynamics and temporal credit assignment to stabilize learning of long-term
temporal dependencies (Fig. 1a). Improving on generalized teacher forcing [28], we show that our
algorithm can better stabilize learning for supervised tasks with sparse feedback and long temporal
horizons. Further, we justify our approach through a theoretically principled connection to Bayesian
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

