DreamPRM: Domain-Reweighted Process Reward
Model for Multimodal Reasoning

Qi Cao
University of California, San Diego
q9cao@ucsd.edu

Ruiyi Wang
University of California, San Diego
ruiyi@ucsd.edu

Ruiyi Zhang
University of California, San Diego
ruz048@ucsd.edu

Sai Ashish Somayajula
University of California, San Diego
ssomayaj@ucsd.edu

Pengtao Xie
University of California, San Diego
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI)
p1xie@ucsd.edu

Project Page: https://github.com/coder-qicao/DreamPRM

Abstract
Reasoning has substantially improved the performance of large language models
(LLMs) on complicated tasks. Central to the current reasoning studies, Process
Reward Models (PRMs) offer a fine-grained evaluation of intermediate reasoning
steps and guide the reasoning process. However, extending PRMs to multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) introduces challenges. Since multimodal reasoning covers a wider range of tasks compared to text-only scenarios, the resulting
distribution shift from the training to testing sets is more severe, leading to greater
generalization difficulty. Training a reliable multimodal PRM, therefore, demands
large and diverse datasets to ensure sufficient coverage. However, current multimodal reasoning datasets suffer from a marked quality imbalance, which degrades
PRM performance and highlights the need for an effective data selection strategy.
To address the issues, we introduce DreamPRM, a domain-reweighted training
framework for multimodal PRMs which employs bi-level optimization. In the
lower-level optimization, DreamPRM performs fine-tuning on multiple datasets
with domain weights, allowing the PRM to prioritize high-quality reasoning signals and alleviating the impact of dataset quality imbalance. In the upper-level
optimization, the PRM is evaluated on a separate meta-learning dataset; this feedback updates the domain weights through an aggregation loss function, thereby
improving the generalization capability of trained PRM. Extensive experiments
on multiple multimodal reasoning benchmarks covering both mathematical and
general reasoning show that test-time scaling with DreamPRM consistently improves the performance of state-of-the-art MLLMs. Further comparisons reveal
that DreamPRM’s domain-reweighting strategy surpasses other data selection methods and yields higher accuracy gains than existing test-time scaling approaches.
Notably, DreamPRM achieves a top-1 accuracy of 85.2% on the M ATH V ISTA
leaderboard using the o4-mini model, demonstrating its strong generalization in
complex multimodal reasoning tasks.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

