GoalLadder: Incremental Goal Discovery
with Vision-Language Models

Alexey Zakharov
University of Oxford
alexey.zakharov@cs.ox.ac.uk

Shimon Whiteson
University of Oxford
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Natural language can offer a concise and human-interpretable means of specifying
reinforcement learning (RL) tasks. The ability to extract rewards from a language
instruction can enable the development of robotic systems that can learn from
human guidance; however, it remains a challenging problem, especially in visual
environments. Existing approaches that employ large, pretrained language models
either rely on non-visual environment representations, require prohibitively large
amounts of feedback, or generate noisy, ill-shaped reward functions. In this
paper, we propose a novel method, GoalLadder, that leverages vision-language
models (VLMs) to train RL agents from a single language instruction in visual
environments. GoalLadder works by incrementally discovering states that bring the
agent closer to completing a task specified in natural language. To do so, it queries
a VLM to identify states that represent an improvement in agent’s task progress
and to rank them using pairwise comparisons. Unlike prior work, GoalLadder does
not trust VLM’s feedback completely; instead, it uses it to rank potential goal states
using an ELO-based rating system, thus reducing the detrimental effects of noisy
VLM feedback. Over the course of training, the agent is tasked with minimising the
distance to the top-ranked goal in a learned embedding space, which is trained on
unlabelled visual data. This key feature allows us to bypass the need for abundant
and accurate feedback typically required to train a well-shaped reward function.
We demonstrate that GoalLadder outperforms existing related methods on classic
control and robotic manipulation environments with the average final success rate
of ∼95% compared to only ∼45% of the best competitor.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) relies critically on effective reward functions to guide agents toward
desired behaviours. However, crafting reward functions by hand requires significant human labour
and domain expertise. Fortunately, many RL tasks can be succinctly described in natural language
(e.g., ‘open the drawer’, ‘close the window’), from which humans can understand the task at hand and
approximate a reward function to reach the goal state. In particular, extracting a reward function from
a language instruction requires understanding the semantics of the task description, associating its
components with the given environment, and integrating this information with prior, common-sense
knowledge. The rise of large language models (LLMs) brings hope of automating this process – given
a language instruction, can we automatically extract an effective reward function?
Indeed, LLMs can perform well on open-ended question answering, code generation, and be vast
reservoirs of common-sense knowledge [1, 2, 3, 4]. Moreover, multimodal models have even broader
applicability to tasks involving images or other modalities [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. These properties
make pretrained language models potentially suitable for providing learning signals to reinforcement
learning algorithms, such as by generating preference-based feedback [11] or outputting a reward
function directly [12].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

