Controllable and Constrained Sampling in Diffusion
Models via Initial Noise Perturbation
Bowen Song1

Zecheng Zhang2

Zhengxu Tang1
1
3

Zhaoxu Luo 1

Jason Hu 1

Guanyang Wang3∗

Wei Yuan3

Jing Jia4

Liyue Shen1∗

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan 2 TraceRoot.AI
Department of Statistics, Rutgers University 4 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University

Abstract
Diffusion models have emerged as powerful tools for generative tasks, producing
high-quality outputs across diverse domains. However, how the generated data responds to the initial noise perturbation in diffusion models remains under-explored,
which hinders understanding the controllability of the sampling process. In this
work, we first observe an interesting phenomenon: the relationship between the
change of generation outputs and the scale of initial noise perturbation is highly
linear through the diffusion ODE sampling. Then we provide both theoretical
and empirical study to justify this linearity property of this input-output (noisegeneration data) relationship. Inspired by these new insights, we propose a novel
Controllable and Constrained Sampling (CCS) method, along with a new controller
algorithm for diffusion models, that enables control over both the proximity of
individual samples to a target image and the alignment of the sample mean with
the target, while preserving good sample quality. We perform extensive experiments to compare our proposed sampling approach with other methods on both
sampling controllability and sampled data quality. Results show that our CCS
method achieves more precisely controlled sampling while maintaining superior
sample quality and diversity, enhancing the applications of precise image editing.
The code is available at https://github.com/efzero/diffusioncontroller.

1

Introduction

Recently, diffusion models achieve remarkable success in generative tasks such as text-to-image
generation, audio synthesis [24, 31], as well as conditional generation tasks including inverse problem
solving, image or video restoration, image editing, and translation [3, 28, 44, 6, 34, 9, 26, 37, 20, 45].
Despite these successes, real-world scientific and engineering problems pose more challenges on
requesting reliable and controllable generation as well as data privacy.
To tackle this, one important question is: How to control the distribution of samples from a diffusion
model to match a specific target? Previous works on controllable generation with diffusion models
mostly focus on constraining the generation process sample-by-sample using either plug-and-play
approaches [29, 9, 26, 37] or modifying the unconditional score [31, 45, 16, 6], so that each sample
can satisfy a measurement constraint. However, most prior works focus on per-sample control, with
limited exploration of how to regulate the overall distribution of generated samples to meet specific
∗

Joint senior authors.
Correspondence: Bowen Song (bowenbw@umich.edu), Guanyang Wang (guanyang.wang@rutgers.edu), and
Liyue Shen (liyues@umich.edu)
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

