Scale-invariant attention
Ben Anson
School of Mathematics
University of Bristol
ben.anson@bristol.ac.uk

Xi Wang
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
xidulu@gmail.com

Laurence Aitchison
School of Computer Science
University of Bristol
laurence.aitchison@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
One persistent challenge in LLM research is the development of attention mechanisms that are able to generalise from training on shorter contexts to inference
on longer contexts. We propose two conditions that we expect all effective longcontext attention mechanisms to have: scale-invariant total attention, and scaleinvariant attention sparsity. Under a Gaussian assumption, we show that a simple
position-dependent transformation of the attention logits is sufficient for these
conditions to hold. Experimentally we find that the resulting scale-invariant attention scheme gives considerable benefits in terms of validation loss when zero-shot
generalising from training on short contexts to validation on longer contexts, and is
effective at long-context retrieval.

1

Introduction

One key challenge in modern LLMs is scaling up context length at inference time, while maintaining model performance. We approach this question of length generalisation by considering scale
invariance. In particular, we are inspired by the “scale-invariant” statistics of natural images (Van der
Schaaf & van Hateren, 1996). Scale invariance, for images, is actually highly intuitive, and means
that there is structure at all spatial scales. For example, in an image there might be big features that
are 100–1000 pixels across, and some small features that are only 1–10 pixels across. In natural
images, features at both spatial scales are important: you cannot remove features at either scale
without radically altering the image (Van der Schaaf & van Hateren, 1996).
For attention over text, instead of pixels, we considered token ranges at different scales:
• 1–10 tokens in the past (e.g. those in the same sentence),
• 10–100 tokens in the past (e.g. those in the same paragraph),
• 100–1,000 tokens in the past (e.g. those in the same section),
• 1,000–10,000 tokens in the past (e.g. those in the same document), and so on.
With this in mind, we define scale-invariant attention as any attention scheme that satisfies two
desiderata: scale-invariant total attention and scale-invariant attention sparsity.
Scale-invariant total attention is the property that the sum of attention weights in each of the above
ranges is roughly similar. Intuitively, that means that the model attends to both the local context (e.g.
10–100 tokens ago) while at the same time taking account of information from the global context
(e.g. 1,000–10,000 tokens ago). Scale-invariant total attention addresses a key issue with attention
mechanisms: as the context gets longer, models tend to pay more attention to distant tokens at the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

