Noise-Robustness Through Noise: A Framework
combining Asymmetric LoRA with Poisoning MoE

Zhaokun Wang1 , Jinyu Guo1∗, Jingwen Pu1 , Lingfeng Chen1 ,
Hongli Pu1 , Jie Ou1 , Libo Qin2 , Wenhong Tian1∗
1
School of Information and Software Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
{guojinyu, tian_wenhong}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Current parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods for adapting pre-trained language
models to downstream tasks are susceptible to interference from noisy data. Conventional noise-handling approaches either rely on laborious data pre-processing or
employ model architecture modifications prone to error accumulation. In contrast
to existing noise-process paradigms, we propose a noise-robust adaptation method
via asymmetric LoRA poisoning experts (LoPE), a novel framework that enhances
model robustness to noise only with generated noisy data. Drawing inspiration
from the mixture-of-experts architecture, LoPE strategically integrates a dedicated
poisoning expert in an asymmetric LoRA configuration. Through a two-stage
paradigm, LoPE performs noise injection on the poisoning expert during finetuning to enhance its noise discrimination and processing ability. During inference,
we selectively mask the dedicated poisoning expert to leverage purified knowledge acquired by normal experts for noise-robust output. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that LoPE achieves strong performance and robustness purely through
the low-cost noise injection, which completely eliminates the requirement of data
cleaning.

1

Introduction

Recently, pre-trained language models (PrLMs) have demonstrated remarkable success across various
natural language processing tasks (Gao et al., 2025; Bianchi et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025; Yang et al.,
2025). To further enhance model performance on downstream tasks, researchers typically employ
domain-specific corpora for targeted fine-tuning of pre-trained models (Li et al., 2024a). However,
this mainstream solution critically depends on the quality of training data in both pre-training and
fine-tuning stages, though with distinct emphases. Different from the pre-training stage, where
models acquire general linguistic knowledge through exposure to large-scale corpora, the fine-tuning
stage requires models to adapt to specific downstream tasks using comparatively smaller datasets,
thereby imposing stricter requirements on data quality (Mai et al., 2024; Shi and Lipani, 2023).
In downstream NLP applications (Ou et al., 2025), noise poses multiple critical challenges: 1) labeling
errors, syntactic irregularities, and extraneous content disrupt the model’s ability to capture and learn
effective features, leading to unstable training and hindering the establishment of precise, robust
knowledge systems (Mao et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024); 2) noise weakens model generalization when
encountering unseen data, impairing flexible knowledge transfer (Ahn et al., 2024); 3) noisy data
may introduce biases, causing models to disproportionately emphasize or neglect specific categories,
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

