Deep Video Discovery : Agentic Search with Tool Use
for Long-form Video Understanding

Xiaoyi Zhang∗ 1 Zhaoyang Jia∗2† Zongyu Guo1
Jiahao Li1 Bin Li1 Houqiang Li2 Yan Lu1
2

1
Microsoft Research Asia
University of Science and Technology of China

{xiaoyizhang, zongyuguo, jiahaoli, binli, yanlu}@microsoft.com
{jzy_ustc, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Long-form video understanding presents significant challenges due to extensive
temporal-spatial complexity and the difficulty of question answering under such extended contexts. While Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated considerable advancements in video analysis capabilities and long context handling, they
continue to exhibit limitations when processing information-dense hour-long videos.
To overcome such limitations, we propose the Deep Video Discovery (DVD) agent
to leverage an agentic search strategy over segmented video clips. Unlike previous
video agents that rely on predefined workflows applied uniformly across different
queries, our approach emphasizes the autonomous and adaptive nature of agents. By
providing a set of search-centric tools on multi-granular video database, our DVD
agent leverages the advanced reasoning capability of LLM to plan on its current
observation state, strategically selects tools to orchestrate adaptive workflow for
different queries in light of the gathered information. We perform comprehensive
evaluation on multiple long video understanding benchmarks that demonstrates our
advantage. Our DVD agent achieves state-of-the-art performance on the challenging LVBench dataset, reaching an accuracy of 74.2%, which substantially surpasses
all prior works, and further improves to 76.0% with transcripts. The code has been
released at https://github.com/microsoft/DeepVideoDiscovery.
LLM with
Reasoning
“Who gets the
lollipop last?”

Video
Database

Search
Toolset

Thought:
subtask(1) I need to first …
Tool use:
gathering info …
ClipSearch(“lollipop”)
Observation:
Relevant clips captions: …
Thought:
subtask(2) I need to …
Tool use:
GlobalBrowse()

“The zombie gets it at
last according to the
observation that…”

…

gathering info …

…

Figure 1: Left: Illustration of our Deep Video Discovery agent, which autonomously reasons on user
query, iterative use tools to obtain the final answer. Right: Performance comparison on LVBench.

∗
†

Equal contribution.
This work was done during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia as an open-source project.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

