OOD-Barrier: Build a Middle-Barrier for Open-Set
Single-Image Test Time Adaptation via Vision
Language Models

Boyang Peng1,2
Kai Chen1

Sanqing Qu1∗
Siheng Chen4

Tianpei Zou1
Yong Wu1

Fan Lu1
Ya Wu3
1,2∗
Guang Chen

1

3

Tongji University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute
CNNC Equipment Technology Research (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
In real-world environments, a well-designed model must be capable of handling
dynamically evolving distributions, where both in-distribution (ID) and out-ofdistribution (OOD) samples appear unpredictably and individually, making realtime adaptation particularly challenging. While open-set test-time adaptation has
demonstrated effectiveness in adjusting to distribution shifts, existing methods
often rely on batch processing and struggle to manage single-sample data stream
in open-set environments. To address this limitation, we propose Open-IRT, a
novel open-set Intermediate-Representation-based Test-time adaptation framework
tailored for single-image test-time adaptation with vision-language models. OpenIRT comprises two key modules designed for dynamic, single-sample adaptation in
open-set scenarios. The first is Polarity-aware Prompt-based OOD Filter module,
which fully constructs the ID-OOD distribution, considering both the absolute semantic alignment and relative semantic polarity. The second module, Intermediate
Domain-based Test-time Adaptation module, constructs an intermediate domain
and indirectly decomposes the ID-OOD distributional discrepancy to refine the
separation boundary during the test-time. Extensive experiments on a range of
domain adaptation benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of Open-IRT. Compared to previous state-of-the-art methods, it achieves significant improvements
on representative benchmarks, such as CIFAR-100C and SVHN — with gains of
+8.45% in accuracy, -10.80% in FPR95, and +11.04% in AUROC.

1

Introduction

In real-world environments, the model’s ability to perform real-time adaptation is particularly crucial
for handling the emergence of an unknown category or distributional shifts. This capability is
essential in safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving, where failure to adapt can have
serious consequences. Despite these demands, most approaches in computer vision [1–3] assume a
closed-set paradigm, where training and testing data come from the same distribution. In contrast,
real-world scenarios frequently encounter open-set environments [4–6], where models must handle
unknown distributions and unseen categories, as shown in Fig. 1. This fundamental deviation from
the closed-set assumption introduces fundamental challenges in maintaining model performance.
This transition from closed-world to open-set learning necessitates requiring innovative strategies
to effectively filter, classify, and adapt to both distributional and semantic shifts without explicit
supervision [7]. However, traditional approaches based on predefined categories are not equipped
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

