Distilling LLM Prior to Flow Model for Generalizable
Agent’s Imagination in Object Goal Navigation

Badi Li1,2 , Ren-Jie Lu1 , Yu Zhou1 , Jingke Meng1∗, Wei-Shi Zheng1,3
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education
badi.li.cs@connect.hku.hk, mengjke@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
The Object Goal Navigation (ObjectNav) task challenges agents to locate a specified object in an unseen environment by imagining unobserved regions of the
scene. Prior approaches rely on deterministic and discriminative models to complete semantic maps, overlooking the inherent uncertainty in indoor layouts and
limiting their ability to generalize to unseen environments. In this work, we propose
GOAL, a generative flow-based framework that models the semantic distribution
of indoor environments by bridging observed regions with LLM-enriched fullscene semantic maps. During training, spatial priors inferred from large language
models (LLMs) are encoded as two-dimensional Gaussian fields and injected into
target maps, distilling rich contextual knowledge into the flow model and enabling
more generalizable completions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GOAL
achieves state-of-the-art performance on MP3D and Gibson, and shows strong
generalization in transfer settings to HM3D. Codes and pretrained models are
available at https://github.com/Badi-Li/GOAL.

1

Introduction

Embodied navigation [2, 22, 30, 43, 56, 70], which enables agents to move purposefully through
complex, realistic environments, is a fundamental challenge in embodied intelligence. Within this
domain, Object Goal Navigation (ObjectNav) tasks an agent with locating an instance of a userspecified object category (e.g., “find a chair”) in an unseen environment, relying solely on visual
observations.
To succeed at ObjectNav, the agent must not only recognize the goal object when it becomes visible
but also infer its likely location before it is seen. This imagination step is particularly challenging,
as it requires reasoning about contextual and co-occurrence relationships between objects (e.g.,
chairs often appear near tables). Recent approaches [17, 25, 75] address this by incrementally
constructing top-down semantic maps and predicting full-scene semantic maps through discriminative
and deterministic models. However, their deterministic nature, which directly maps inputs to fixed
outputs with a strict one-to-one mapping, inherently limits generalization to unseen data.
In contrast, we argue that semantic map completion is inherently uncertain: Multiple plausible full
scenes can correspond to the same partial map, and multimodal outputs could benefit generalization
capabilities [10]. We therefore formulate this task as a probabilistic generation problem, leveraging recent advances in flow-based generative modeling [21, 26, 28, 53, 54] to learn the semantic
distribution of indoor scenes (illustrated in Fig. 1). However, while generative models offer better
generalizability, we find that applying generative models to ObjectNav poses three core challenges,
which we address in this work.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

