No Object Is an Island: Enhancing 3D Semantic
Segmentation Generalization with Diffusion Models

Fan Li 1

Xuan Wang 1 Xuanbin Wang1 Zhaoxiang Zhang1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University
lifan.messages@gmail.com

Yuelei Xu1∗

Abstract
Enhancing the cross-domain generalization of 3D semantic segmentation is a pivotal task in computer vision that has recently gained increasing attention. Most
existing methods, whether using consistency regularization or cross-modal feature
fusion, focus solely on individual objects while overlooking implicit semantic
dependencies among them, resulting in the loss of useful semantic information.
Inspired by the diffusion model’s ability to flexibly compose diverse objects into
high-quality images across varying domains, we seek to harness its capacity for
capturing underlying contextual distributions and spatial arrangements among
objects to address the challenging task of cross-domain 3D semantic segmentation. In this paper, we propose a novel cross-modal learning framework based
on diffusion models to enhance the generalization of 3D semantic segmentation,
named XDiff3D. XDiff3D comprises three key ingredients: (1) constructing object
agent queries from diffusion features to aggregate instance semantic information;
(2) decoupling fine-grained local details from object agent queries to prevent interference with 3D semantic representation; (3) leveraging object agent queries
as an interface to enhance the modeling of object semantic dependencies in 3D
representations. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our method,
achieving state-of-the-art performance across multiple benchmarks in different task
settings. Code is available at https://github.com/FanLiHub/XDiff3D.

1

Introduction

3D semantic segmentation, a fundamental task in computer vision with widespread applications in
autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality, has made significant advancements in recent
years [39, 40, 32, 48, 17, 10]. Despite these advancements, it still experiences severe performance
degradation when models trained on the source domain are applied to unseen target domains due to
the existence of a domain gap. This has sparked growing interest in Domain Generalized 3D Semantic
Segmentation (DG3SS) [28, 62, 24, 55, 68], aiming to learn domain-invariant features that enable
models to perform well on a variety of unseen target domains with similar semantic distribution.
Current approaches can be broadly categorized into uni-modal methods based solely on point clouds
and cross-modal methods that integrate both point cloud and image data, as shown in Figure 1. The
former focuses on reducing the domain gap between the source and target domains through domain
augmentation [24, 42, 44] or domain mixing [43, 25], but its performance remains limited. The latter
exploits image features paired with point clouds to perform consistency regularization [37, 19, 59, 55]
or cross-modal feature fusion [54, 28], substantially improving cross-domain generalization and
delivering impressive results. However, most existing approaches treat objects as isolated islands,
focusing solely on domain-invariant features of individual objects and overlooking the implicit
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

