Graph-Based Attention for
Differentiable MaxSAT Solving

1

Sota Moriyama1,2 Katsumi Inoue2
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI
2
National Institute of Informatics
{sotam,inoue}@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
The use of deep learning to solve fundamental AI problems such as Boolean
Satisfiability (SAT) has been explored recently to develop robust and scalable
reasoning systems. This work advances such neural-based reasoning approaches by
developing a new Graph Neural Network (GNN) to differentiably solve (weighted)
Maximum Satisfiability (MaxSAT). To this end, we propose SAT-based Graph
Attention Networks (SGATs) as novel GNNs that are built on t-norm based attention and message passing mechanisms, and structurally designed to approximate greedy distributed local search. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
model, we develop a local search solver that uses SGATs to continuously solve any
given MaxSAT problem. Experiments on (weighted) MaxSAT benchmark datasets
demonstrate that SGATs significantly outperform existing neural-based architectures, and achieve state-of-the-art performance among continuous approaches,
highlighting the strength of the proposed model.1

1

Introduction

Neuro-symbolic AI aims to develop robust and scalable reasoning systems by combining the strengths
of both symbolic logic and neural networks [20, 6]. Boolean Satisfiability (SAT), a fundamental
reasoning problem in AI and Computer Science, has long been examined as an important topic in
neuro-symbolic research. There have been many studies on developing SAT solving methods using
deep learning, which can either solve SAT problems in an end-to-end manner [22, 1], or can be
combined with existing discrete solvers to enhance their performance [21, 11].
Maximum Satisfiability (MaxSAT), an optimization generalization of SAT, has been viewed as a
promising approach towards accomplishing various neuro-symbolic tasks [9, 28]. SATNet is one
representative approach, capable of learning to solve structured reasoning tasks such as visual sudoku
by employing a differentiable MaxSAT solving layer [27]. This layer is built upon a continuous
optimization algorithm, specifically based on the use of Semidefinite Programming (SDP) [26]. While
this algorithm has proved effective on certain problem types, other promising approaches have also
been proposed, such as the use of Fourier analysis [12] and Graph Neural Networks [17]. The latter,
however, remains largely underexplored.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely used in relational and symbolic domains, as well
as in multiple neuro-symbolic systems [13]. There has recently been a surge of interest in using
GNNs as a key building block for combinatorial optimization problems [3]. In particular, several
works have applied GNNs to MaxSAT solving, either in an end-to-end manner [17], or by using their
predictions as heuristics for existing solvers [16]. In contrast, we propose GNN architectures capable
1

All used code is contained in the repository: https://github.com/sotam2369/SGAT-MS

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

