GeoSVR: Taming Sparse Voxels for Geometrically
Accurate Surface Reconstruction
Jiahe Li1 Jiawei Zhang1 Youmin Zhang2 Xiao Bai1,B Jin Zheng1,3,B Xiaohan Yu4 Lin Gu5
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Complex Critical
Software Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University
2
Rawmantic AI 3 State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beijing
4
Macquarie University 5 Tohoku University
{lijiahe, baixiao, jinzheng}@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1: Geometric Sparse-Voxel Reconstruction. Our method, abbreviated as GeoSVR, delivers
high-quality surface reconstruction for intricate real-world scenes based on explicit sparse voxels.
Our superiority is exhibited compared to the state-of-the-art approaches built upon Gaussian Splatting,
which encounter rough, inaccurate, or incomplete recovery problems even with help from external
estimators, excelling in delicate details capturing with high completeness and top-tier efficiency.

Abstract
Reconstructing accurate surfaces with radiance fields has achieved remarkable
progress in recent years. However, prevailing approaches, primarily based on
Gaussian Splatting, are increasingly constrained by representational bottlenecks. In
this paper, we introduce GeoSVR, an explicit voxel-based framework that explores
and extends the under-investigated potential of sparse voxels for achieving accurate,
detailed, and complete surface reconstruction. As strengths, sparse voxels support
preserving the coverage completeness and geometric clarity, while corresponding
challenges also arise from absent scene constraints and locality in surface refinement. To ensure correct scene convergence, we first propose a Voxel-Uncertainty
Depth Constraint that maximizes the effect of monocular depth cues while presenting a voxel-oriented uncertainty to avoid quality degradation, enabling effective and
robust scene constraints yet preserving highly accurate geometries. Subsequently,
Sparse Voxel Surface Regularization is designed to enhance geometric consistency
for tiny voxels and facilitate the voxel-based formation of sharp and accurate surfaces. Extensive experiments demonstrate our superior performance compared to
existing methods across diverse challenging scenarios, excelling in geometric accuracy, detail preservation, and reconstruction completeness while maintaining high
efficiency. Code is available at https://github.com/Fictionarry/GeoSVR.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

