Instance-Level Composed Image Retrieval

Bill Psomas1∗ George Retsinas2∗ Nikos Efthymiadis1 Panagiotis Filntisis2,4
Yannis Avrithis5 Petros Maragos2,3,4 Ondrej Chum1 Giorgos Tolias1
1

VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague 2 Robotics Institute, Athena Research Center
National Technical University of Athens 4 Hellenic Robotics Center of Excellence 5 IARAI

3

in an old
archival
photo

from an
aerial
viewpoint

during
sunset

at night,
with full
moon

image query

composed positives

visual hard negative

textual hard negatives

as a scale
model

composed hard negatives

Figure 1: We introduce i-nstance-level Composed Image Retrieval (i-CIR) evaluation dataset. Given
an image query depicting a specific instance (e.g., Temple of Poseidon) along with a modifying
text query, the task is to retrieve images showing the same instance altered according to the text
(composed positives). Unlike existing datasets [54, 30, 2], i-CIR explicitly ensures the presence of
challenging negative examples across three distinct dimensions: visual, textual, and composed.

Abstract
The progress of composed image retrieval (CIR), a popular research direction in
image retrieval, where a combined visual and textual query is used, is held back
by the absence of high-quality training and evaluation data. We introduce a new
evaluation dataset, i-CIR, which, unlike existing datasets, focuses on an instancelevel class definition. The goal is to retrieve images that contain the same particular
object as the visual query, presented under a variety of modifications defined
by textual queries. Its design and curation process keep the dataset compact to
facilitate future research, while maintaining its challenge—comparable to retrieval
among more than 40M random distractors—through a semi-automated selection of
hard negatives. To overcome the challenge of obtaining clean, diverse, and suitable
training data, we leverage pre-trained vision-and-language models (VLMs) in a
training-free approach called BASIC. The method separately estimates query-imageto-image and query-text-to-image similarities, performing late fusion to upweight
images that satisfy both queries, while downweighting those that exhibit high
similarity with only one of the two. Each individual similarity is further improved
by a set of components that are simple and intuitive. BASIC sets a new state of the
art on i-CIR but also on existing CIR datasets that follow a semantic-level class
definition. Project page: https://vrg.fel.cvut.cz/icir/.
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

