Continual Release Moment Estimation
with Differential Privacy

Nikita P. Kalinin
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
Klosterneuburg, Austria
nikita.kalinin@ist.ac.at

Jalaj Upadhyay
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
jalaj.upadhyay@rutgers.edu

Christoph H. Lampert
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
Klosterneuburg, Austria
chl@ist.ac.at

Abstract
We propose Joint Moment Estimation (JME), a method for continually and privately
estimating both the first and second moments of a data stream with reduced noise
compared to naive approaches. JME supports the matrix mechanism and exploits a
joint sensitivity analysis to identify a privacy regime in which the second-moment
estimation incurs no additional privacy cost, thereby improving accuracy while
maintaining privacy. We demonstrate JME’s effectiveness in two applications:
estimating the running mean and covariance matrix for Gaussian density estimation
and model training with DP-Adam.

1

Introduction

Estimating the first and second moments of data is a fundamental step in many machine learning algorithms, ranging from foundational methods, such as linear regression, principal component analysis,
or Gaussian model fitting, to state-of-the-art neural network components, such as BatchNorm [23],
and optimizers, such as Adam [32]. Often, these estimates must be computed and updated continuously, called the continual release setting [13]. For example, this is the case when the data arrives
sequentially and intermediate results are needed without delay, such as for sequential optimization
algorithms like Adam, or for real-time systems in healthcare, finance, or recommendation systems.
In such scenarios, ensuring the privacy of sensitive data, such as user information or medical records,
is essential.
Differential Privacy (DP) is a widely established formal notion of privacy that ensures that the
inclusion or exclusion of any single individual’s data has a limited impact on the output of an
algorithm. Technically, DP masks sensitive information by adding suitably scaled noise, thereby
creating a trade-off between privacy (formalized as a privacy budget) and utility (measured by the
expected accuracy of the estimates). This trade-off becomes particularly challenging when more
than one quantity is meant to be estimated from the same private data, as is the case when estimating
multiple data moments. Done naively, the privacy budget has to be split between the estimates,
resulting in more noise and lower accuracy for both of them.
In this work, we introduce a new method, Joint Moment Estimation (JME), that is able to privately
estimate the first and second moments of vector-valued data without suffering from this shortcoming.
Algorithmically, JME relies on the recent matrix factorization (MF) mechanism [35] for continual
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

