Janus-Pro-R1: Advancing Collaborative Visual
Comprehension and Generation via Reinforcement
Learning

Kaihang Pan1,∗ , Yang Wu2,∗ , Wendong Bu1,∗ , Kai Shen1,‡ , Juncheng Li1 , Yingting Wang2 ,
Yunfei Li2 , Siliang Tang1,† , Jun Xiao1 , Fei Wu1 , Hang Zhao2 , Yueting Zhuang1
Zhejiang University1 , Ant Group2
{kaihangpan, wendongbu, shenkai, junchengli, siliang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent endeavors in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) aim to unify visual comprehension and generation. However, these two capabilities remain largely
independent, as if they are two separate functions encapsulated within the same
model. Consequently, visual comprehension does not enhance visual generation,
and the reasoning mechanisms of LLMs have not been fully integrated to revolutionize image generation. In this paper, we propose to enable the collaborative
co-evolution of visual comprehension and generation, advancing image generation
into an iterative introspective process. We introduce a two-stage training approach:
supervised fine-tuning teaches the MLLM with the foundational ability to generate
genuine CoT for visual generation, while reinforcement learning activates its full
potential via an exploration-exploitation trade-off. Ultimately, we unlock the Aha
moment in visual generation, advancing MLLMs from text-to-image tasks to unified image generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model not only
excels in text-to-image generation and image editing, but also functions as a superior image semantic evaluator with enhanced visual comprehension capabilities.
Project Page: https://janus-pro-r1.github.io.

1

Introduction

Recently, multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [5, 12] have emerged to unify comprehension
and generation across various modalities within the same next-token prediction paradigm of large
language models (LLMs) [33]. Specifically, given a user query about comprehension—“What kind
of dog is in this picture [IMG]”, or generation—“Generate an image of a cute cat”, the model can
complete the task by sequentially predicting the appropriate text or image tokens.
However, for current MLLMs, visual comprehension and generation remain largely independent rather
than forming a synergistic relationship, integrated into a single model seemingly just for the sake of
avoiding parameter redundancy [5, 40, 51]. Especially in visual generation tasks, auto-regressionbased methods are intended to unleash the powerful reasoning capabilities of MLLMs to infer more
semantic-aligned images in more complex contexts. Unfortunately, even state-of-the-art MLLMs like
Janus-Pro [5], still fall short of user expectations for basic text-to-image generation, also limited to
accepting only pure text input for generation. This highlights that the robust reasoning mechanisms
of LLMs have not been fully integrated to revolutionize, or even advance visual generation. Thus,
* Equal Contribution.
‡
†

Project Leader.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

