Architectural and Inferential Inductive Biases for
Exchangeable Sequence Modeling

Daksh Mittal∗, Ang Li∗, Thomson Yen∗, Daniel Guetta, Hongseok Namkoong
Columbia University
{dm3766, al4263, ty2531, crg2133, hn2369}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Autoregressive models have emerged as a powerful framework for modeling
exchangeable sequences—i.i.d. observations when conditioned on some latent
factor—enabling direct modeling of uncertainty from missing data (rather than
a latent). Motivated by the critical role posterior inference plays as a subroutine
in decision-making (e.g., active learning, bandits), we study the inferential and
architectural inductive biases that are most effective for exchangeable sequence
modeling. For the inference stage, we highlight a fundamental limitation of the
prevalent single-step generation approach: its inability to distinguish between
epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty. Instead, a long line of works in Bayesian
statistics advocates for multi-step autoregressive generation; we demonstrate this
"correct approach" enables superior uncertainty quantification that translates into
better performance on downstream decision-making tasks. This naturally leads
to the next question: which architectures are best suited for multi-step inference?
We identify a subtle yet important gap between recently proposed Transformer
architectures for exchangeable sequences Müller et al. [22], Nguyen and Grover
[23], Ye and Namkoong [30], and prove that they in fact cannot guarantee exchangeability despite introducing significant computational overhead. Through empirical
evaluation, we find that these custom architectures can significantly underperform
compared to standard causal masking, highlighting the need for new architectural
innovations in Transformer-based modeling of exchangeable sequences.

1

Introduction

Intelligent agents must be able to articulate their own uncertainty about the underlying environment,
and sharpen its beliefs as it gathers more information. However, uncertainty quantification can be
difficult in general without a complete characterization of the nature of the data and sources of
uncertainties. Exchangeable sequences represent an important class of data structures on which one
can quantify both the nature and degree of uncertainty principally, thereby enabling more robust
decision-making algorithms. To characterize this concretely, consider a sequence of observations
Y1:∞ gathered from an unseen environment θ, e.g., noisy answers in a math quiz, generated by a
student’s current proficiency level θ. When marginalized over the latent θ, the joint distribution of
the sequence Y1:∞ is permutation invariant. This property defines what are known as exchangeable
sequences, which serve as a fundamental unit of study in uncertainty quantification of latent variables
that govern data generation.
Autoregressive sequence modeling has recently gained significant attention as a powerful approach
for modeling exchangeable sequences Y1:∞ [22, 23, 31, 30, 20]. Unlike conventional Bayesian
modeling—which requires specifying a prior over an unobserved latent variable θ and a likelihood for
the observed data, often a challenging task—autoregressive sequence modeling builds on De Finneti’s
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

