Instant Video Models: Universal Adapters for
Stabilizing Image-Based Networks

Matthew Dutson, Nathan Labiosa, Yin Li, and Mohit Gupta
University of Wisconsin–Madison
{dutson,nlabiosa,yin.li,mgupta37}@wisc.edu

Abstract
When applied sequentially to video, frame-based networks often exhibit temporal
inconsistency—for example, outputs that flicker between frames. This problem is
amplified when the network inputs contain time-varying corruptions. In this work,
we introduce a general approach for adapting frame-based models for stable and
robust inference on video. We describe a class of stability adapters that can be
inserted into virtually any architecture and a resource-efficient training process that
can be performed with a frozen base network. We introduce a unified conceptual
framework for describing temporal stability and corruption robustness, centered
on a proposed accuracy-stability-robustness loss. By analyzing the theoretical
properties of this loss, we identify the conditions where it produces well-behaved
stabilizer training. Our experiments validate our approach on several vision tasks
including denoising (NAFNet), image enhancement (HDRNet), monocular depth
(Depth Anything v2), and semantic segmentation (DeepLabv3+). Our method
improves temporal stability and robustness against a range of image corruptions
(including compression artifacts, noise, and adverse weather), while preserving or
improving the quality of predictions.

1

Introduction

Video is often processed frame-wise—meaning images are passed one by one to a processing pipeline
or model, and each output is independent of the previous one. This design choice is often driven by
practical considerations: single-frame datasets are generally more diverse and accessible than video
datasets, training image-based models is far less demanding in terms of compute and memory, and
improvements in single-frame performance often carry over to video-based tasks.
Unfortunately, frame-wise processing faces the inherent challenge of temporal consistency, where
model predictions fluctuate over time (Figure 1 top-middle). This behavior is especially problematic
in tasks such as denoising or stylization, where temporal inconsistency can significantly reduce perceptual quality. Even in applications where the model output is not intended for human consumption,
instability can impact downstream tasks. For example, inconsistent monocular depth estimates could
produce erratic behavior in a collision avoidance system. Moreover, instability can reduce perceived
reliability and thereby undermine user trust, regardless of objective performance.
Temporal consistency is closely related to corruption robustness. In field deployments, vision systems
often operate in non-ideal conditions. For example, an autonomous vehicle may encounter inclement
weather, sensor artifacts, or low-light noise; robustness in these circumstances is vital for safe system
operation. These real-world corruptions are often transient, with an appearance that changes between
frames (Figure 1 top-right). While it may be challenging to correct such degradations with a single
frame, we can often infer the underlying clean signal from recent context. In this case, we can view
robustness as a natural extension of temporal consistency.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

