Sequentially Auditing Differential Privacy

Tomás González
Carnegie Mellon University
tcgonzal@andrew.cmu.edu

Mateo Dulce Rubio
New York Universiy
mateo.d@nyu.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Carnegie Mellon University
aramdas@cs.cmu.edu

Mónica Ribero
Google Research
mribero@google.com

Abstract
We propose a practical sequential test for auditing differential privacy guarantees
of black-box mechanisms. The test processes streams of mechanisms’ outputs
providing anytime-valid inference while controlling Type I error, overcoming the
fixed sample size limitation of previous batch auditing methods. Experiments
show this test detects violations with sample sizes that are orders of magnitude
smaller than existing methods, reducing this number from 50K to a few hundred
examples, across diverse realistic mechanisms. Notably, it identifies DP-SGD
privacy violations in under one training run, unlike prior methods needing full
model training.

1

Introduction

Auditing privacy guarantees of algorithms that process sensitive data, prevalent in domains like
finance, healthcare, and users’ behavior on the web, is crucial for building and deploying reliable
and trustworthy software. While rigorous privacy protections like Differential Privacy (DP) [15]
have been adopted by industry [3, 20, 41] and government agencies [48], the promised theoretical
guarantees rely on both correct algorithmic design (e.g., avoiding flaws or errors in mathematical
proofs, like those demonstrated with the Sparse Vector Technique [30]) and correct implementation,
where subtle bugs can compromise privacy (e.g., missing constants, incorrect sampling, or fixed
seeds). Furthermore, theoretical privacy parameters ε and δ often represent worst-case upper bounds,
motivating the need for empirical privacy auditing to assess practical privacy leakage and gain
intuition about algorithms’ vulnerabilities [33].
Auditing privacy can be framed as a statistical hypothesis test: distinguishing the null hypothesis H0 :
“the algorithm satisfies a claimed privacy guarantee”, from the alternative H1 : “the algorithm violates
the claimed privacy guarantee”. Current approaches to this testing problem generally fall into two
categories, each with significant drawbacks. First, parametric tests can achieve high statistical power
but rely on strong, often unverifiable, assumptions about the specific workings and output distribution
of the mechanism or the specific flaw [33, 16]. Second, black-box tests, where the auditor observes
only the mechanism’s outputs without knowledge of its internal functioning, make fewer assumptions
but requires an unknown and typically large number of samples to draw statistically meaningful
conclusions [5, 26]. This makes them impractical for auditing complex, resource-intensive algorithms
such as differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD), where obtaining even one sample
often requires significant computation (e.g., backpropagation through millions of model parameters).
In this paper, we propose a new framework for approximate DP auditing that leverages recent
advances in sequential hypothesis testing to overcome these limitations. Our approach uses e-values
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

