Reinforcement Learning with Action Chunking

Qiyang Li, Zhiyuan Zhou, Sergey Levine
UC Berkeley
{qcli,zhiyuan_zhou,svlevine}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present Q-chunking, a simple yet effective recipe for improving reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms for long-horizon, sparse-reward tasks. Our recipe is
designed for the offline-to-online RL setting, where the goal is to leverage an
offline prior dataset to maximize the sample-efficiency of online learning. Effective
exploration and sample-efficient learning remain central challenges in this setting,
as it is not obvious how the offline data should be utilized to acquire a good
exploratory policy. Our key insight is that action chunking, a technique popularized
in imitation learning where sequences of future actions are predicted rather than a
single action at each timestep, can be applied to temporal difference (TD)-based RL
methods to mitigate the exploration challenge. Q-chunking adopts action chunking
by directly running RL in a ‘chunked’ action space, enabling the agent to (1)
leverage temporally consistent behaviors from offline data for more effective online
exploration and (2) use unbiased n-step backups for more stable and efficient TD
learning. Our experimental results demonstrate that Q-chunking exhibits strong
offline performance and online sample efficiency, outperforming prior best offlineto-online methods on a range of long-horizon, sparse-reward manipulation tasks.
Time
Steps

t

t+1 t+2 t+3

t+4

t+5

t+6 t+7 t+8 t+9

1.0

Success Rate

Environment
(1) ef cient exploration
with temporally coherent actions
Action

State

π(

| )

π(

| )

Q( ,

)

Q( ,

)

QC
BFN
FQL
RLPD
IFQL

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

(2) ef cient value backup by
“skipping” time steps

Aggregated (5 OGBench Domains)

0.0

0.5

1.0

Steps (×106)

1.5

2.0

fi

Figure 1: Q-chunking uses action chunking to enable fast value backups and effective exploration with
temporally coherent actions. left: an overview of our approach: Q-chunking operates in a temporally extended
action space that allows for (1) efficient value backups and (2) effective exploration via temporally coherent
actions; right: Our method (QC) first pre-trains on an offline dataset for 1M steps (grey) and then updates
with online data for another 1M steps (white). Our method achieves strong aggregated performance over five
challenging long-horizon sparse-reward domains in OGBench. Code: github.com/ColinQiyangLi/qc

.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

