DynaGuide: Steering Diffusion Polices with
Active Dynamic Guidance

Maximilian Du
Stanford University
maxjdu@stanford.edu

Shuran Song
Stanford University
shuran@stanford.edu

dynaguide.github.io

Abstract
Deploying large, complex policies in the real world requires the ability to steer
them to fit the needs of a situation. Most common steering approaches, like
goal-conditioning, require training the robot policy with a distribution of test-time
objectives in mind. To overcome this limitation, we present DynaGuide, a steering
method for diffusion policies using guidance from an external dynamics model
during the diffusion denoising process. DynaGuide separates the dynamics model
from the base policy, which gives it multiple advantages, including the ability to
steer towards multiple objectives, enhance underrepresented base policy behaviors,
and maintain robustness on low-quality objectives. The separate guidance signal
also allows DynaGuide to work with off-the-shelf pretrained diffusion policies. We
demonstrate the performance and features of DynaGuide against other steering
approaches in a series of simulated and real experiments, showing an average
steering success of 70% on a set of articulated CALVIN tasks and outperforming
goal-conditioning by 5.4x when steered with low-quality objectives. We also successfully steer an off-the-shelf real robot policy to express preference for particular
objects and even create novel behavior. Videos and other visualizations can be
found on the project website: https://dynaguide.github.io

1

Introduction

Pre-trained Policy with
Diverse Behaviors

Dynamics Model Trained
on Diverse Data

The rise of large datasets and expressive
policies has enabled complicated skills in
akt
robots like folding clothes [3, 55], making
sandwiches [44], and washing dishes [7].
When these large policies are deployed in
DynaGuide
the dynamic real world, we face the challenge of steering them to match the needs
of a specific scenario. This means finding a
subset of the policy’s behaviors that are appropriate for the scenario [48]. The policy’s
complexity means that we ideally want to
accomplish this steering without needing to
Press Button
Switch On or Drawer Open
Don’t Open Drawer
Steering to
Steering to
Steering Away From
retrain the policy, sample excessively from
Single Behavior
Multiple Behaviors
Behaviors
it, or anticipate all the possible steering durFigure
1:
DynaGuide
steers
pretrained
diffusion
policies
ing policy training.
Most existing works for policy steering,
however, rely on at least one of those
assumptions.
Even language or goalconditioned policies are trained on a set of

by adding guidance from a dynamics model into the action
denoising process. This dynamics-based guidance can take a
diverse behavior base policy and steer it towards one single
behavior (left), multiple behaviors (middle), and even removing a behavior (right)— all without fine-tuning.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

