Cost-Sensitive Freeze-thaw Bayesian Optimization
for Efficient Hyperparameter Tuning

Dong Bok Lee1 Aoxuan Silvia Zhang1∗ Byungjoo Kim1* Junhyeon Park1*
Steven Adriaensen2 Juho Lee1 Sung Ju Hwang1,3 Hae Beom Lee4
1

KAIST

2

University of Freiburg

markhi@kaist.ac.kr

3

DeepAuto.ai

4

Korea University

haebeomlee@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of cost-sensitive hyperparameter optimization (HPO) built upon freeze-thaw Bayesian optimization (BO). Specifically, we
assume a scenario where users want to early-stop the HPO process when the expected performance improvement is not satisfactory with respect to the additional
computational cost. Motivated by this scenario, we introduce utility in the freezethaw framework, a function describing the trade-off between the cost and performance that can be estimated from the user’s preference data. This utility function,
combined with our novel acquisition function and stopping criterion, allows us to
dynamically continue training the configuration that we expect to maximally improve the utility in the future, and also automatically stop the HPO process around
the maximum utility. Further, we improve the sample efficiency of existing freezethaw methods with transfer learning to develop a specialized surrogate model for
the cost-sensitive HPO problem. We validate our algorithm on established multifidelity HPO benchmarks and show that it outperforms all the previous freezethaw BO and transfer-BO baselines we consider, while achieving a significantly
better trade-off between the cost and performance. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/db-Lee/CFBO.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameter optimization [HPO; 9, 22, 8, 48, 16, 34, 12] stands as a crucial challenge in the
domain of deep learning, given its importance in achieving optimal empirical performance. Unfortunately, the field of HPO for deep learning remains relatively underexplored, with many practitioners resorting to simple trial-and-error methods [8, 34]. Moreover, traditional black-box Bayesian
optimization (BO) approaches for HPO [9, 48, 12] face limitations when applied to deep neural networks due to the impracticality of evaluating a vast number of hyperparameter configurations until
convergence, each of which may take several days.
Recently, multi-fidelity HPO [53, 34, 14, 4, 62, 3, 24, 44] has gained increasing attention to improve
the sample efficiency of traditional black-box HPO. It leverages lower-fidelity information (e.g.,
validation accuracies at fewer training epochs) to predict and optimize performance at higher or full
fidelity (e.g., validation accuracies at the last training epoch). Furthermore, unlike black-box HPO,
multi-fidelity HPO dynamically selects hyperparameter configurations even before finishing a single
training run, demonstrating its ability of finding better configurations sample-efficiently.
∗

Equal Contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

