Learning normalized image densities
via dual score matching

Florentin Guth
Center for Data Science, New York University
Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation
florentin.guth@nyu.edu

Zahra Kadkhodaie
Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation
zk388@nyu.edu

Eero P. Simoncelli
New York University
Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation
eero.simoncelli@nyu.edu

Abstract
Learning probability models from data is at the heart of many machine learning
endeavors, but is notoriously difficult due to the curse of dimensionality. We
introduce a new framework for learning normalized energy (log probability) models
that is inspired by diffusion generative models, which rely on networks optimized
to estimate the score. We modify a score network architecture to compute an energy
while preserving its inductive biases. The gradient of this energy network with
respect to its input image is the score of the learned density, which can be optimized
using a denoising objective. Importantly, the gradient with respect to the noise level
provides an additional score that can be optimized with a novel secondary objective,
ensuring consistent and normalized energies across noise levels. We train an energy
network with this dual score matching objective on the ImageNet64 dataset, and
obtain a cross-entropy (negative log likelihood) value comparable to the state
of the art. We further validate our approach by showing that our energy model
strongly generalizes: log probabilities estimated with two networks trained on nonoverlapping data subsets are nearly identical. Finally, we demonstrate that both
image probability and dimensionality of local neighborhoods vary substantially
depending on image content, in contrast with conventional assumptions such as
concentration of measure or support on a low-dimensional manifold.

1

Introduction

Many problems in image processing and computer vision rely, explicitly or implicitly, on prior
probability models. However, learning such models by maximizing the likelihood of a set of training
images is difficult. The dimensionality of the space (i.e., the number of image pixels) is large, and
worst-case data requirements for estimation grow exponentially (the “curse of dimensionality”). The
machine learning community has developed a variety of methods to train a parametric network to
estimate log p(x), known as an “energy model” (Hinton et al., 1986; LeCun et al., 2006), relying
on the inductive biases of the network to alleviate the data requirements. For all but the simplest
of models, this approach is frustrated by the intractability of estimating the normalization constant
(Hinton, 2002; LeCun and Huang, 2005; Yedidia et al., 2005; Gutmann and Hyvärinen, 2010; Dinh
et al., 2014; Rezende and Mohamed, 2015; Dinh et al., 2017; Song and Kingma, 2021).
A clever means of escaping this conundrum is to estimate the gradient of the energy with respect to
the image (known as the “score”), which eliminates the normalization constant, and can be learned
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

