Privacy Reasoning in Ambiguous Contexts

Ren Yi∗
Google Research
ryi@google.com
Sarah Meiklejohn
Google
s.meiklejohn@ucl.ac.uk

Octavian Suciu∗
Google Research
osuciu@google.com

Adrià Gascón
Google Research
adriag@google.com

Eugene Bagdasarian
Google Research
ebagdasa@google.com

Marco Gruteser
Google Research
gruteser@google.com

Abstract
We study the ability of language models to reason about appropriate information
disclosure—a central aspect of the evolving field of agentic privacy. Whereas
previous works have focused on evaluating a model’s ability to align with human
decisions, we examine the role of ambiguity and missing context on model performance when making information-sharing decisions. We identify context ambiguity
as a crucial barrier for high performance in privacy assessments. By designing
Camber, a framework for context disambiguation, we show that model-generated
decision rationales can reveal ambiguities and that systematically disambiguating
context based on these rationales leads to significant accuracy improvements (up
to 13.3% in precision and up to 22.3% in recall) as well as reductions in prompt
sensitivity. Overall, our results indicate that approaches for context disambiguation
are a promising way forward to enhance agentic privacy reasoning.

1

Introduction

Personal AI agents are expected to interact with a user to complete tasks on their behalf. To effectively
complete a broad variety of tasks in a personalized manner, such agents require access to significant
amounts of personal and potentially sensitive user data. This implies that an agent must be able to
safeguard this personal information while achieving high utility. To be truly useful, the agent must
therefore be able to judge based on the context of the interaction when it is appropriate (as defined in
the contextual integrity framework [1, 2]) and consistent with a specific user’s expectations to share
personal information in interactions with third-party tools and agents.
Prior research [3, 4] has investigated the ability of large language models (LLMs) to maintain
the secrecy of sensitive information, with initial studies reporting limited success. More recent
findings with advanced LLMs, however, indicate substantial improvements on certain datasets [5].
Nevertheless, these existing benchmarks focus on whether an LLM avoids disclosing sensitive
information and do not equally address the crucial aspect of utility; that is, whether the model can
contextually determine when sharing sensitive information is appropriate.
In this paper, we dive deeper into the privacy judgments of LLMs from the angle of personal agents,
where the user could provide insufficient yet trusted context. Figure 1 highlights this setup, where
the agent needs to perform privacy judgments on behalf of users, and these judgments are based on
ambiguous contexts. Specifically, we investigate the capacity of LLMs to make data sharing decisions,
the impact of situational information completeness—i.e. context ambiguity—on the accuracy of these
judgments, and the effectiveness of disambiguating context.
∗

These authors contribute equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

