AutoRedTeamer: Autonomous Red Teaming with
Lifelong Attack Integration

Andy Zhou∗
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Zhaorun Chen
University of Chicago

Yi Zeng
Virtue AI

Kevin Wu
Stanford University
Yu Yang
Virtue AI

James Zou
Stanford University

Francesco Pinto
University of Chicago

Shuang Yang
Meta AI

Sanmi Koyejo
Virtue AI

Bo Li
Virtue AI

Abstract
As large language models (LLMs) become increasingly capable, security and safety
evaluation are crucial. While current red teaming approaches have made strides
in assessing LLM vulnerabilities, they often rely heavily on human input and
lack comprehensive coverage of emerging attack vectors. This paper introduces
AutoRedTeamer, a novel framework for fully automated, end-to-end red teaming against LLMs. AutoRedTeamer combines a multi-agent architecture with a
memory-guided attack selection mechanism to enable continuous discovery and
integration of new attack vectors. The dual-agent framework consists of a red
teaming agent that can operate from high-level risk categories alone to generate
and execute test cases, and a strategy proposer agent that autonomously discovers
and implements new attacks by analyzing recent research. This modular design
allows AutoRedTeamer to adapt to emerging threats while maintaining strong
performance on existing attack vectors. We demonstrate AutoRedTeamer’s
effectiveness across diverse evaluation settings, achieving 20% higher attack success rates on HarmBench against Llama-3.1-70B while reducing computational
costs by 46% compared to existing approaches. AutoRedTeamer also matches
the diversity of human-curated benchmarks in generating test cases, providing a
comprehensive, scalable, and continuously evolving framework for evaluating the
security of AI systems.

1

Introduction

Modern foundation models such as large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2022, 2023; Achiam
et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a,b; Anthropic, 2023; Gemini Team, 2023) are increasingly capable,
demonstrating remarkable performance in challenging domains including mathematical reasoning
(Trinh et al., 2024), software engineering (Yang et al., 2024), and scientific discovery (Lu et al., 2024).
However, these models also pose potential risks, such as generating toxic content and misinformation
(Duffourc & Gerke, 2023) or misuse in cyber attacks (Zhang et al., 2024). Fully understanding
the vulnerability of LLMs to diverse user inputs and adversarial prompts is an open and significant
problem (Anderljung et al., 2023; Bengio et al., 2023).
Before deployment, it is common to systematically evaluate LLMs’ security risks through red teaming,
where input prompts or test cases are created to probe model behavior (Ganguli et al., 2022). Many
∗

Part of work done at internship at Virtue AI

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

