MACS: Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for
Optimization of Crystal Structures

Elena Zamaraeva1
Bei Peng*,3

Christopher M. Collins*,1

Rahul Savani*,†,4,5

Dmytro Antypov1

Paul G. Spirakis1,4
1

George R. Darling*,2

Matthew S. Dyer*,1,2

Vladimir V. Gusev4

Judith Clymo4

Matthew J. Rosseinsky1,2

Leverhulme Research Centre for Functional Materials Design, University of Liverpool, UK
2
Department of Chemistry, University of Liverpool, UK
3
School of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, UK
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, UK
5
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK

Abstract
Geometry optimization of atomic structures is a common and crucial task in
computational chemistry and materials design. Following the learning to optimize paradigm, we propose a new multi-agent reinforcement learning method
called Multi-Agent Crystal Structure optimization (MACS) to address periodic
crystal structure optimization. MACS treats geometry optimization as a partially
observable Markov game in which atoms are agents that adjust their positions
to collectively discover a stable configuration. We train MACS across various
compositions of reported crystalline materials to obtain a policy that successfully
optimizes structures from the training compositions as well as structures of larger
sizes and unseen compositions, confirming its excellent scalability and zero-shot
transferability. We benchmark our approach against a broad range of state-of-theart optimization methods and demonstrate that MACS optimizes periodic crystal
structures significantly faster, with fewer energy calculations, and the lowest failure
rate. Code is available at https://github.com/lrcfmd/macs.

1

Introduction

In computational chemistry, geometry optimization of an atomic structure is the process of finding a
stable arrangement of atoms, following a sequence of displacements in a 3-dimensional space until a
local energy minimum is reached [39]. Within geometry optimization, our focus in this paper is on
crystal structures, which are characterized by their periodicity. The arrangement of atoms within a
crystal directly determines its physical and chemical properties; hence the optimization of the crystal
structure is crucial to the discovery of new crystalline materials and finds applications in electronics,
energy applications, information storage, and other domains.
In fact, an entire field within materials design, known as crystal structure prediction (CSP), focuses
on the computational prediction of stable crystal structures with desirable properties for subsequent
synthesis in the laboratory [53, 54]. Significant effort in a CSP workflow is focused on exploring the
*
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author, e-mail: Rahul.Savani@liverpool.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

