Ada-KV: Optimizing KV Cache Eviction by Adaptive
Budget Allocation for Efficient LLM Inference
Yuan Feng1,3† Junlin Lv1,3† Yukun Cao1,3 Xike Xie2,3* S. Kevin Zhou2,3
1

School of Computer Science, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)
2
School of Biomedical Engineering, USTC
3
Data Darkness Lab, MIRACLE Center, Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research

Abstract
Large Language Models have excelled in various domains but face efficiency
challenges due to the growing Key-Value (KV) cache required for long-sequence
inference. Recent efforts aim to reduce KV cache size by evicting vast non-critical
cache elements during runtime while preserving generation quality. However, these
methods typically allocate compression budgets uniformly across all attention
heads, ignoring the unique attention patterns of each head. In this paper, we establish a theoretical loss upper bound between pre- and post-eviction attention output,
explaining the optimization target of prior cache eviction methods, while guiding
the optimization of adaptive budget allocation. Base on this, we propose Ada-KV,
the first head-wise adaptive budget allocation strategy. It offers plug-and-play
benefits, enabling seamless integration with prior cache eviction methods. Extensive evaluations on 13 datasets from Ruler and 16 datasets from LongBench, all
conducted under both question-aware and question-agnostic scenarios, demonstrate
substantial quality improvements over existing methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/FFY0/AdaKV.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved significant success and are widely
utilized across diverse natural language processing applications, including dialogue systems [1],
document summarization [2], and code generation [3]. The widespread deployments of LLMs have
propelled the development of their capacities to process extended sequences. For instance, GPT
supports sequences up to 128K [4], Claude3 up to 200K [5], and Gemini-Pro-1.5 [6] up to 2M
tokens. However, this growth in token length introduces significant challenges, particularly the
rapid expansion of cache size during inference. For an 8B LLM, handling a single sequence of 2M
tokens can require up to 256GB of cache, severely impacting both GPU memory efficiency and
computational runtime efficiency.
In particular, the inference process, for each multi-head self-attention layer, consists of two phases:
prefilling and decoding. In the prefilling phase, LLMs compute and store all Key-Value (KV) cache
elements for the tokens in the input prompt. In the decoding phase, the model autoregressively uses
the most recently generated token to retrieve information from the stored cache, producing the next
output iteratively. The large KV cache size introduces two important efficiency challenges: First, it
severely affects GPU memory efficiency, making it increasingly difficult to scale with longer inputs.
Second, during decoding, increased I/O latency duo to cache access results in substantial delays,
degrading runtime efficiency.
†

Equal Contribution, * Corresponding Author: Xike Xie(xkxie@ustc.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

