Efficient Rectified Flow for Image Fusion

Zirui Wang1 , Jiayi Zhang2 , Tianwei Guan3 , Yuhan Zhou2 ,
Xingyuan Li4 , Minjing Dong1 , Jinyuan Liu2∗
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Dalian University of Technology
3
Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Zhejiang University
zrwang23-c@my.cityu.edu.hk xingyuan_lxy@163.com

Abstract
Image fusion is a fundamental and important task in computer vision, aiming to
combine complementary information from different modalities to fuse images. In
recent years, diffusion models have made significant developments in the field of
image fusion. However, diffusion models often require complex computations and
redundant inference time, which reduces the applicability of these methods. To
address this issue, we propose RFfusion, an efficient one-step diffusion model for
image fusion based on Rectified Flow. We incorporate Rectified Flow into the
image fusion task to straighten the sampling path in the diffusion model, achieving
one-step sampling without the need for additional training, while still maintaining
high-quality fusion results. Furthermore, we propose a task-specific Variational Autoencoder (VAE) architecture tailored for image fusion, where the fusion operation
is embedded within the latent space to further reduce computational complexity.
To address the inherent discrepancy between conventional reconstruction-oriented
VAE objectives and the requirements of image fusion, we introduce a two-stage
training strategy. This approach facilitates the effective learning and integration of
complementary information from multi-modal source images, thereby enabling the
model to retain fine-grained structural details while significantly enhancing inference efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms
other state-of-the-art methods in terms of both inference speed and fusion quality.
Code is available at https://github.com/zirui0625/RFfusion.

1

Introduction

In computer vision, image fusion is an important task aimed at merging two images from different
modalities to obtain a fused image that contains complementary information from both modalities.
Image fusion has wide applications across various scenarios. Infrared and visible image fusion
(IVIF) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] aims to enhance perception under adverse conditions by integrating the detailed
information from visible images with the thermal radiation characteristics of infrared images. Medical
image fusion (MIF) [6, 7] focuses on mitigating the information discrepancies between MRI and CT
modalities to provide more comprehensive and accurate diagnostic support. Multi-exposure image
fusion (MEF) [8, 9] and multi-focus image fusion (MFF) [10, 11] focus on merging images with
different exposures and different focal planes, to synthesize high-quality photographic images.
In recent years, with the advent of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [12],
diffusion-based methods have been widely adopted across various computer vision tasks, including image fusion. DDPMs learn the denoising process from noisy observations back to clean
images over the data distribution, thereby acquiring the ability to generate high-quality images.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

