Explicitly Modeling Subcortical Vision with a
Neuro-Inspired Front-End Improves CNN Robustness

Lucas Piper 1,2 , Arlindo L. Oliveira 1,2 , Tiago Marques 3,4
1

INESC-ID, Lisboa, Portugal
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
3
Breast Cancer Research Program, Champalimaud Foundation, Lisboa, Portugal
4
Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
lucaspiper99@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
2

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on object recognition achieve high
task performance but continue to exhibit vulnerability under a range of visual perturbations and out-of-domain images, when compared with biological vision. Prior
work has demonstrated that coupling a standard CNN with a front-end (VOneBlock)
that mimics the primate primary visual cortex (V1) can improve overall model
robustness. Expanding on this, we introduce Early Vision Networks (EVNets), a
new class of hybrid CNNs that combine the VOneBlock with a novel SubcorticalBlock, whose architecture draws from computational models in neuroscience and
is parameterized to maximize alignment with subcortical responses reported across
multiple experimental studies. Without being optimized to do so, the assembly of
the SubcorticalBlock with the VOneBlock improved V1 alignment across most
standard V1 benchmarks, and better modeled extra-classical receptive field phenomena. In addition, EVNets exhibit stronger emergent shape bias and outperform
the base CNN architecture by 9.3% on an aggregate benchmark of robustness
evaluations, including adversarial perturbations, common corruptions, and domain
shifts. Finally, we show that EVNets can be further improved when paired with a
state-of-the-art data augmentation technique, surpassing the performance of the
isolated data augmentation approach by 6.2% on our robustness benchmark. This
result reveals complementary benefits between changes in architecture to better
mimic biology and training-based machine learning approaches. 1

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable performance across a range of
object recognition benchmarks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], yet they remain vulnerable when faced with common
corruptions [6], domain shifts [7, 8, 9], and adversarial perturbations [10, 11]. These vulnerabilities
not only limit deployment in real-world settings but also underscore fundamental disparities between
computer vision models and primate vision [7, 8]. In response, recent work has introduced biologically
inspired models that integrate neuroscientific computations into CNN pipelines [12, 13, 14, 15, 16].
A prominent example is the VOneNet family [12], which improves adversarial and corruption
robustness by combining a biologically constrained front-end — the VOneBlock — to conventional
CNN architectures. This block simulates processing in primate primary visual cortex (V1) via a
fixed-weight, empirically constrained Gabor filter bank (GFB), nonlinearities reflecting responses
of V1 simple and complex cells, and a neural noise generator. While VOneNets represent a key
1

Code and model weights available at https://github.com/lucaspiper99/evnet/.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

