Doubly-Robust Estimation of Counterfactual Policy
Mean Embeddings

Houssam Zenati
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
h.zenati@ucl.ac.uk

Bariscan Bozkurt
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
bariscan.bozkurt.23@ucl.ac.uk

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
Google Deepmind
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
Estimating the distribution of outcomes under counterfactual policies is critical for
decision-making in domains such as recommendation, advertising, and healthcare.
We propose and analyze a novel framework—Counterfactual Policy Mean Embedding (CPME)—that represents the entire counterfactual outcome distribution in
a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), enabling flexible and nonparametric
distributional off-policy evaluation. We introduce both a plug-in estimator and
a doubly robust estimator; the latter enjoys improved convergence rates by correcting for bias in both the outcome embedding and propensity models. Building
on this, we develop a doubly robust kernel test statistic for hypothesis testing,
which achieves asymptotic normality and thus enables computationally efficient
testing and straightforward construction of confidence intervals. Our framework
also supports sampling from the counterfactual distribution. Numerical simulations
illustrate the practical benefits of CPME over existing methods.

1

Introduction

Effective decision-making requires anticipating the outcomes of actions driven by given policies [1].
This is especially critical when decisions rely on historical data—whether experimentation is limited
or infeasible [2], or even under sequential designs [3]. For instance, doctors weigh drug effects
before prescribing [4], and businesses predict revenue impact from ads [5]. Off-Policy Evaluation
(OPE) addresses this challenge by estimating the effect of a target policy using data sampled under
a different logging policy. Each logged record includes covariates (e.g., user or patient data), an
action (e.g., recommendation or treatment), and the resulting outcome (e.g., engagement or health
status). The goal is to evaluate the expected outcome under the target policy, which involves inferring
counterfactual outcomes—what would have happened under the alternative target policy.
Although many works have focused on estimating the mean of outcome distributions, for example,
with the policy expected risk (payoff) [6] or the average treatment effects [7]- and their variants
thereof - seminal works have considered inference on counterfactual distributions of outcomes [8]
instead. The developing field of distributional reinforcement learning (RL) [9] and distributional
OPE [10, 11] provides insights on distribution-driven decision making, which goes beyond expected
policy risks. Indeed, reasoning on such distributions allows using alternative risk measure such
as conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) [12], higher moments or quantiles of the distribution [13, 14].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

