Plug-and-play Feature Causality Decomposition for
Multimodal Representation Learning

Ye Liu
Zihan Ji
Hongmin Cai∗
School of Future Technology
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, China 511442
{yliu03, hmcai}@scut.edu.cn ftjizihan@mail.scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal representation learning is critical for a wide range of applications,
such as multimodal sentiment analysis. Current multimodal representation learning
methods mainly focus on the multimodal alignment or fusion strategies, such
that the complementary and consistent information among heterogeneous modalities can be fully explored. However, they mistakenly treat the uncertainty noise
within each modality as the complementary information, failing to simultaneously
leverage both consistent and complementary information while eliminating the
aleatoric uncertainty within each modality. To address this issue, we propose a
plug-and-play feature causality decomposition method for multimodal representation learning from causality perspective, which can be integrated into existing
models with no affects on the original model structures. Specifically, to deal
with the heterogeneity and consistency, according to whether it can be aligned
with other modalities, the unimodal feature is first disentangled into two parts:
modality-invariant (the synergistic information shared by all heterogeneous modalities) and modality-specific part. To deal with complementarity and uncertainty, the
modality-specific part is further decomposed into unique and redundant features,
where the redundant feature is removed and the unique feature is reserved based
on the backdoor-adjustment. The effectiveness of noise removal is supported by
causality theory. Finally, the task-related information, including both synergistic
and unique components, is further fed to the original fusion module to obtain the
final multimodal representations. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of
our proposed strategies.

1

Introduction

Multimodal representation learning is the basis of the downstream tasks, such as multimodal sentiment
analysis [39; 13; 9; 15] and text-image classification [18; 11]. Due to the feature heterogeneity among
different modalities [36], the consistent and complementary information among modalities [12]
are crucial for effective multimodal representation learning. The consistent information refers to
common features that present in multiple modalities, facilitating alignment of modalities within
a common representation space. On the other hand, the complementary information refers to
distinctive features presenting in only one modality but is still useful for the overall understanding. It
enriches multimodal models, enabling them to learn more comprehensive and nuanced representations.
Numerous existing methods have been proposed to effectively explore them. For example, [13]
captures the consistent information via maximizing mutual information among different modalities,
thereby improving multimodal fusion performances. [20] applies the contrastive learning to enhance
∗

The corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

