PoE-World: Compositional World Modeling with
Products of Programmatic Experts

Wasu Top Piriyakulkij1
Yichao Liang2
Hao Tang1
2,3
4
Adrian Weller
Marta Kryven
Kevin Ellis1
Cornell University1 University of Cambridge2
The Alan Turing Institute3
Dalhousie University4

Abstract
Learning how the world works is central to building AI agents that can adapt to
complex environments. Traditional world models based on deep learning demand
vast amounts of training data, and do not flexibly update their knowledge from
sparse observations. Recent advances in program synthesis using Large Language
Models (LLMs) give an alternate approach which learns world models represented
as source code, supporting strong generalization from little data. To date, application of program-structured world models remains limited to natural language and
grid-world domains. We introduce a novel program synthesis method for effectively
modeling complex, non-gridworld domains by representing a world model as an
exponentially-weighted product of programmatic experts (PoE-World) synthesized
by LLMs. We show that this approach can learn complex, stochastic world models
from just a few observations. We evaluate the learned world models by embedding
them in a model-based planning agent, demonstrating efficient performance and
generalization to unseen levels on Atari’s Pong and Montezuma’s Revenge. We
release our code and display the learned world models and videos of the agent’s
gameplay at https://topwasu.github.io/poe-world.

1

Introduction

How should an intelligent agent represent the dynamics of the natural world? We want a representation
that is efficiently learnable, yet flexible enough to handle stochasticity and partial observability, and
which supports planning and decision-making. Neural network world models such as Dreamer [1]
are radically flexible, but demand enormous training data (compared to humans [2]). Symbolic world
models such as WorldCoder [3] instead generate a Python program to represent how the world works.
These programmatic world models are data-efficient, because program synthesis requires less data
than neural network training— but struggle to scale beyond simple gridworlds, as they do a discrete
combinatorial search to find a single large program describing everything about how the world works.
We take inspiration from a longstanding view in philosophy and cognitive science of the mind as a
community of interacting experts [4, 5, 6, 7]. This modular organization is evident across multiple
scales in natural intelligence, from functional specialization of brain systems [8] to the distinct learning
trajectories of specific skills [9, 10]. We integrate this modular perspective with the computational
paradigm of learning as Program Synthesis, which models learned concepts as symbolic programs
[11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. We extend this line of work by proposing a new computational account of
learning world models: as the acquisition of context-specific expert programs, which are refined
through practice and reused compositionally to support flexible, goal-directed behavior.
Algorithmically, our key idea is to decompose the problem of learning a world program into learning
hundreds of small programs. Each of these learned programs encodes a different causal law, which
we probabilistically aggregate to predict future observations (Figure 1a). This makes our world
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

