Spectral Estimation with Free Decompression

Siavash Ameli
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
sameli@berkeley.edu

Chris van der Heide
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Eng.
University of Melbourne
chris.vdh@gmail.com

Liam Hodgkinson
School of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Melbourne
lhodgkinson@unimelb.edu.au

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI, LBNL, and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Computing eigenvalues of very large matrices is a critical task in many machine
learning applications, including the evaluation of log-determinants, the trace of matrix functions, and other important metrics. As datasets continue to grow in scale,
the corresponding covariance and kernel matrices become increasingly large, often
reaching magnitudes that make their direct formation impractical or impossible.
Existing techniques typically rely on matrix-vector products, which can provide
efficient approximations, if the matrix spectrum behaves well. However, in settings
like distributed learning, or when the matrix is defined only indirectly, access to
the full data set can be restricted to only very small sub-matrices of the original
matrix. In these cases, the matrix of nominal interest is not even available as an
implicit operator, meaning that even matrix-vector products may not be available.
In such settings, the matrix is “impalpable,” in the sense that we have access to
only masked snapshots of it. We draw on principles from free probability theory
to introduce a novel method of “free decompression” to estimate the spectrum of
such matrices. Our method can be used to extrapolate from the empirical spectral
densities of small submatrices to infer the eigenspectrum of extremely large (impalpable) matrices (that we cannot form or even evaluate with full matrix-vector
products). We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach through a series of
examples, comparing its performance against known limiting distributions from
random matrix theory in synthetic settings, as well as applying it to submatrices of
real-world datasets, matching them with their full empirical eigenspectra.

1

Introduction

Eigenvalues encode essential information about matrices and are central to the evaluation of spectral
invariants in computational linear algebra. Two such invariants, the log-determinant and the trace of
the inverse, appear frequently in statistical modeling and Bayesian inference (Ubaru & Saad, 2017).
However, these quantities require access to the full range of eigenvalues, posing substantial challenges
in modern large-scale settings. As datasets continue to scale up, it is becoming increasingly common
to encounter matrices that cannot be practically formed in their entirety. This may occur, for example,
if the matrices are so large that they exceed the storage capacity in local memory. Popular methods for
operating with large matrices often rely on randomized low-rank approximations from Randomized
Numerical Linear Algebra (RandNLA) (Drineas & Mahoney, 2016; Murray et al., 2023; Dereziński
& Mahoney, 2021), and can broadly be classified as either iterative subspace or sampling methods,
although hybrid methods have become prominent (Ubaru et al., 2017; Saibaba et al., 2017; Chen
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

