RAD: Training an End-to-End Driving Policy via
Large-Scale 3DGS-based Reinforcement Learning

Hao Gao1,⋄ Shaoyu Chen1,2,† Bo Jiang1 Bencheng Liao1 Yiang Shi1
Xiaoyang Guo2 Yuechuan Pu2 Haoran Yin2 Xiangyu Li2 Xinbang Zhang2
Ying Zhang2 Wenyu Liu1 Qian Zhang2 Xinggang Wang1,
1
Huazhong University of Science & Technology 2 Horizon Robotics

Abstract
Existing end-to-end autonomous driving (AD) algorithms typically follow the
Imitation Learning (IL) paradigm, which faces challenges such as causal confusion
and an open-loop gap. In this work, we propose RAD, a 3DGS-based closed-loop
Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework for end-to-end Autonomous Driving.
By leveraging 3DGS techniques, we construct a photorealistic digital replica
of the real physical world, enabling the AD policy to extensively explore the
state space and learn to handle out-of-distribution scenarios through large-scale
trial and error. To enhance safety, we design specialized rewards to guide the
policy in effectively responding to safety-critical events and understanding realworld causal relationships. To better align with human driving behavior, we
incorporate IL into RL training as a regularization term. We introduce a closed-loop
evaluation benchmark consisting of diverse, previously unseen 3DGS environments.
Compared to IL-based methods, RAD achieves stronger performance in most
closed-loop metrics, particularly exhibiting a 3× lower collision rate. Abundant
closed-loop results are presented in the supplementary material. Code is available
at https://github.com/hustvl/RAD for facilitating future research.

1

Introduction

End-to-end autonomous driving (AD) is currently a trending topic in both academia and industry. It
replaces a modularized pipeline with a holistic one by directly mapping sensory inputs to driving
actions, offering advantages in system simplicity and generalization ability. Most existing end-to-end
AD algorithms [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] follow the Imitation Learning (IL) paradigm, which trains
a neural network to mimic human driving behavior. However, despite their simplicity, IL-based
methods face significant challenges in real-world deployment.
One key issue is causal confusion. IL trains a network to replicate human driving policies by learning
from demonstrations. However, this paradigm primarily captures correlations rather than causal
relationships between observations (states) and actions. As a result, IL-trained policies may struggle
to identify the true causal factors behind planning decisions, leading to shortcut learning [9], e.g.,
merely extrapolating future trajectories from historical ones [10, 11]. Furthermore, since IL training
data predominantly consists of common driving behaviors and does not adequately cover long-tailed
distributions, IL-trained policies tend to converge to trivial solutions, lacking sufficient sensitivity to
safety-critical events such as collisions.
Another major challenge is the gap between open-loop training and closed-loop deployment. IL
policies are trained in an open-loop manner using well-distributed driving demonstrations. However,
⋄
†

The work was done when Hao Gao (g_hao@hust.edu.cn) was an intern of Horizon Robotics.
Project lead (shaoyu.chen@horizon.auto). Corresponding author (xgwang@hust.edu.cn).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

