COME: Adding Scene-Centric Forecasting
Control to Occupancy World Model
∗

Yining Shi1, 2 , Kun Jiang1, 2† , Qiang Meng3 , Ke Wang3 ,
4
Jiabao Wang , Wenchao Sun1, 2 , Tuopu Wen1, 2 , Mengmeng Yang1, 2† , Diange Yang1, 2†
1
School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University
2
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Green Vehicle and Mobility
3
Kargobot Inc 4 Nankai University

Abstract
World models are critical for autonomous driving to simulate environmental dynamics and generate synthetic data. Existing methods struggle to disentangle
ego-vehicle motion (perspective shifts) from scene evolvement (agent interactions),
leading to suboptimal predictions. Instead, we propose to separate environmental changes from ego-motion by leveraging the scene-centric coordinate systems.
In this paper, we introduce COME: a framework that integrates scene-centric
forecasting Control into the Occupancy world ModEl. Specifically, COME first
generates ego-irrelevant, spatially consistent future features through a scene-centric
prediction branch, which are then converted into scene condition using a tailored
ControlNet. These condition features are subsequently injected into the occupancy
world model, enabling more accurate and controllable future occupancy predictions. Experimental results on the nuScenes-Occ3D dataset show that COME
achieves consistent and significant improvements over state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods across diverse configurations, including different input sources (groundtruth, camera-based, fusion-based occupancy) and prediction horizons (3s and
8s). For example, under the same settings, COME achieves 26.3% better mIoU
metric than DOME [4] and 23.7% better mIoU metric than UniScene [11]. These
results highlight the efficacy of disentangled representation learning in enhancing spatio-temporal prediction fidelity for world models. Code is available at
https://github.com/synsin0/COME.

1

Introduction

World models are designed to discern the current state of the environment and predict subsequent
states based on executed actions. This predictive ability of world models not only enables the
assessment of decision-making consequences but also facilitates the generation of synthetic data,
which serves as a crucial resource for training, testing, and simulation in autonomous systems.
Consequently, world models have emerged as a focal point of research in the field of autonomous
driving, garnering substantial attention from both academia and industry.
The synthetic data generated by world models can take various forms to represent future scenes.
These include 2D videos [6, 11, 24, 25], 3D lidar point clouds [1, 9, 11, 31, 37], and 3D occupancy
grids [35, 8, 4, 33, 27, 11, 29, 26]. Irrespective of the representation format, the changes in the
appearance of future scenes predicted by world models are predominantly governed by two key factors:
1) Ego-vehicle motion: The movement of the autonomous vehicle alters its viewing perspective,
∗
†

Work done during the internship at Kargobot Inc.
Corresponding authors: Diange Yang, Kun Jiang, Mengmeng Yang

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

