ı̇Finder: Structured Zero-Shot Vision-Based
LLM Grounding for Dash-Cam Video Reasoning

Manyi Yao† , Bingbing Zhuang‡ , Sparsh Garg‡ , Amit Roy-Chowdhury† ,
Christian Shelton† , Manmohan Chandraker‡,⋆ , Abhishek Aich‡
‡
NEC Laboratories, America, † University of California, Riverside,
⋆
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Grounding large language models (LLMs) in domain-specific tasks like post-hoc
dash-cam driving video analysis is challenging due to their general-purpose training and lack of structured inductive biases. As vision is often the sole modality available for such analysis (i.e. no LiDAR, GPS, etc.), existing video-based
vision-language models (V-VLMs) struggle with spatial reasoning, causal inference, and explainability of events in the input video. To this end, we introduce
ı̇Finder, a structured semantic grounding framework that decouples perception
from reasoning by translating dash-cam videos into a hierarchical, interpretable
data structure for LLMs. ı̇Finder operates as a modular, training-free pipeline
that employs pretrained vision models to extract critical cues—object pose, lane
positions, and object trajectories—which are hierarchically organized into frameand video-level structures. Combined with a three-block prompting strategy, it
enables step-wise, grounded reasoning for the LLM to refine a peer V-VLM’s
outputs and provide accurate reasoning. Evaluations on four public dash-cam
video benchmarks show that ı̇Finder’s proposed grounding with domain-specific
cues—especially object orientation and global context—significantly outperforms
end-to-end V-VLMs on four zero-shot driving benchmarks, with up to 39% gains
in accident reasoning accuracy. By grounding LLMs with driving domain-specific
representations, ı̇Finder offers a zero-shot, interpretable, and reliable alternative
to end-to-end V-VLMs for post-hoc driving video understanding.

1

Introduction

Grounding large language models (LLMs) to domain-specific requirements remains a significant
challenge due to their general-purpose training and lack of inductive bias toward structured domain
knowledge [1]. LLMs are often pretrained on broad internet data, which may lead to imprecise
outputs when applied to specialized domains such as driving video understanding [2]. Furthermore,
the lack of interpretability and limited mechanisms for precise reasoning make it difficult to guarantee reliability in high-stakes applications [3]. In this paper, we tackle the problem of generating
causally and spatially grounded LLM responses to user queries, given a front-view dash-cam video.
The objective is to produce explanations that accurately reflect the underlying events in the scene.
The proliferation of advanced driver assistance systems has led to an abundance of video data, often
serving as the primary or sole modality for system analysis and validation. In many consumer-grade
and fleet-level applications, supplementary sensors like LiDAR, GPS, or CAN bus data are either
unavailable or impractical to collect due to cost and integration complexities [4, 5]. Consequently,
extracting meaningful insights from visual spatio-temporal data becomes crucial for assessing system responses, diagnosing failures, and refining vehicle performance [6–11]. However, developing
video analysis systems that generate grounded and reliable responses solely from camera input remains a formidable challenge, without external supervision [12, 13].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

