On the Convergence of Stochastic Smoothed
Multi-Level Compositional Gradient Descent Ascent

Hongchang Gao ∗
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA
hongchang.gao@temple.edu

Xinwen Zhang
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA
ellenz@temple.edu

Abstract
Multi-level compositional optimization is a fundamental framework in machine
learning with broad applications. While recent advances have addressed compositional minimization problems, the stochastic multi-level compositional minimax
problem introduces significant new challenges—most notably, the biased nature of
stochastic gradients for both the primal and dual variables. In this work, we address
this gap by proposing a novel stochastic multi-level compositional gradient descentascent algorithm, incorporating a smoothing technique√under the nonconvex-PL
condition. We establish a convergence rate to an (ϵ, ϵ/ κ)-stationary point with
improved dependence on the condition number at O(κ3/2 ), where ϵ denotes the
solution accuracy and κ represents the condition number. Moreover, we design a
novel stage-wise algorithm with variance reduction to address the biased gradient
issue under the two-sided √
PL condition. This algorithm successfully enables a
translation from and (ϵ, ϵ/ κ)-stationary point to an ϵ-stationary point. Finally,
extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

This paper investigates the stochastic multi-level compositional minimax optimization problem:
min max f (G(x), y) ,

x∈Rdx y∈Rdy

(1)

where f (G(x), y) = E[f (G(x), y; ζ)] and ζ denotes a random variable. The function G(x) ≜
g (K) (· · · (g (1) (x))) is a K-level compositional function with K > 1, where each inner-level function
g (k) (·) = E[g (k) (·; ξ (k) )] depends on the random sample ξ (k) for k ∈ {1, · · · , K}. The function
f (·, ·) is referred to as the outer-level objective. In this paper, we consider the general nonconvex–PL
setting, where f (G(x), y) is nonconvex in the primal variable x and satisfies the Polyak-Lojasiewicz
(PL) condition with respect to the dual variable y.
Multi-level compositional optimization has emerged as a vital framework in machine learning, with
broad applications across numerous domains. In meta-learning, it enhances model adaptability across
tasks [12, 22]; in finance, it supports risk-averse portfolio optimization under uncertainty [3, 20]; and
in reinforcement learning, it aids policy evaluation and decision refinement [8, 24]. The widespread
impact of the multi-level compositional structure highlights its importance in handling complex and
structured optimization problems. Moreover, the scope of multi-level compositional optimization
extends naturally to the minimax setting, with applications in areas such as deep AUC maximization
[33], multi-instance learning [40], and multi-objective learning [19], etc. Despite the importance of
these applications, the stochastic multi-level compositional minimax optimization problem remains
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

