A Pre-training Framework for Relational Data with
Information-theoretic Principles

Quang Truong1 , Zhikai Chen1 , Mingxuan Ju2 , Tong Zhao2 , Neil Shah2 , Jiliang Tang1
1
Michigan State University, 2 Snap Inc.
{truongc4, chenzh85,tangjili}@msu.edu
{mju, tong, nshah}@snap.com

Abstract
Relational databases underpin critical infrastructure across a wide range of domains,
yet the design of generalizable pre-training strategies for learning from relational
databases remains an open challenge due to task heterogeneity. Specifically, there
exist many possible downstream tasks, as tasks are defined based on relational
schema graphs, temporal dependencies, and SQL-defined label logics. An effective
pre-training framework is desired to take these factors into account in order to
obtain task-aware representations. By incorporating knowledge of the underlying distribution that drives label generation, downstream tasks can benefit from
relevant side-channel information. To bridge this gap, we introduce Task Vector
Estimation (TVE), a novel pre-training framework that constructs predictive supervisory signals via set-based aggregation over schema traversal graphs, explicitly
modeling next-window relational dynamics. We formalize our approach through
an information-theoretic lens, demonstrating that task-informed representations
retain more relevant signals than those obtained without task priors. Extensive
experiments on the RelBench benchmark show that TVE consistently outperforms
traditional pre-training baselines. Our findings advocate for pre-training objectives that encode task heterogeneity and temporal structure as design principles
for predictive modeling on relational databases. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/quang-truong/task-vector-estimation.

1

Introduction

Relational databases (RDBs) have long served as the de facto standard for managing data storage
across diverse industries [4, 5, 28], and learning tasks over RDBs depend on domain expertise for
manually engineering meaningful features [24, 34]. While manual feature engineering can yield
effective models, it demands significant human time and expertise, and it inherently introduces bias,
susceptibility to human errors, and the risk of overlooking valuable predictive signals. Relational
Deep Learning (RDL) [21, 24] has emerged as a powerful paradigm that exploits relational structures—
defined by primary-foreign key (PK-FK) links across tables. By treating RDBs as graphs of tables,
we can leverage existing state-of-the-art tabular feature encoders [17, 27] and Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) [26, 29, 35] to extract meaningful embeddings in an end-to-end manner. This integrated
approach has already demonstrated significant improvements in efficiency over conventional manual
feature engineering techniques due to the end-to-end learning pipeline [24, 46].
Designing pre-training objectives for RDL is particularly challenging. A single RDB typically
supports multiple tasks, each definable by distinct SQL queries. Meanwhile, due to potential
differences in label semantics, it is hard to guarantee that the latent representation obtained during
the pre-training stage is relevant to downstream tasks, which leads to unreliable pre-trained models.
Moreover, downstream tasks depend on temporal dynamics (e.g. next-window properties), which
cannot be simply modeled by just pre-training on unlabeled input data alone. A pre-training framework
is desired to model the dynamics in the latent representation intrinsically without having to rely
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

