Neural Collapse under Gradient Flow on Shallow
ReLU Networks for Orthogonally Separable Data

∗

Hancheng Min∗
Zhihui Zhu†
René Vidal‡
Institute of Natural Sciences & School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
†
Computer Science and Engineering, Ohio State University
‡
Electrical and Systems Engineering & Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania
hanchmin@sjtu.edu.cn, zhu.3400@osu.edu, vidalr@upenn.edu

Abstract
Among many mysteries behind the success of deep networks lies the exceptional
discriminative power of their learned representations as manifested by the intriguing Neural Collapse (NC) phenomenon, where simple feature structures emerge
at the last layer of a trained neural network. Prior works on the theoretical understandings of NC have focused on analyzing the optimization landscape of
matrix-factorization-like problems by considering the last-layer features as unconstrained free optimization variables and showing that their global minima exhibit
NC. In this paper, we show that gradient flow on a two-layer ReLU network for
classifying orthogonally separable data provably exhibits NC, thereby advancing
prior results in two ways: First, we relax the assumption of unconstrained features,
showing the effect of data structure and nonlinear activations on NC characterizations. Second, we reveal the role of the implicit bias of the training dynamics in
facilitating the emergence of NC.

1

Introduction

Among many mysteries behind the success of deep learning lies the
exceptional discriminative power of neural networks as manifested by
the intriguing Neural Collapse (NC) phenomenon [1], where simple
feature structures emerge in the last layer of a trained network. The NC
phenomenon is typically characterized by the following three properties
(see the top plot in Figure 1):

NC in UFM

1. Intra-class variability collapse: The last-layer feature vectors of the
data from the same class collapse into a singleton;
2. Maximal separation of the class means: The class means, i.e., the
mean feature vectors for each class, are maximally separated;
3. Self-duality: The classifier weights align with the class means.
NC in Two-layer ReLU
Prior works on the theoretical understandings of NC have focused on analyzing the optimization landscape of matrix factorization-like problems
Last-layer features
by considering the last-layer features as unconstrained free optimization
Last-layer classifiers
variables [2–9], showing their global minima exhibit NC. Extensions
of this so-called Unconstrained Feature Model (UFM) include adding
nonlinearity and additional hidden layers [7, 8, 10, 11], studying local Figure 1: Visualization of
convergence of gradient-based optimization algorithms around global the NC phenomenon.
∗

Corrrespondance to Hancheng Min

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

