Adjoint Schrödinger Bridge Sampler

Guan-Horng Liu1,∗ , Jaemoo Choi2,∗ , Yongxin Chen2 , Benjamin Kurt Miller1 ,
Ricky T. Q. Chen1,∗
1
2
FAIR at Meta, Georgia Institute of Technology, ∗ Core contributors

Abstract
Computational methods for learning to sample from the Boltzmann distribution—
where the target distribution is known only up to an unnormalized energy function—
have advanced significantly recently. Due to the lack of explicit target samples,
however, prior diffusion-based methods, known as diffusion samplers, often require
importance-weighted estimation or complicated learning processes. Both trade off
scalability with extensive evaluations of the energy and model, thereby limiting their
practical usage. In this work, we propose Adjoint Schrödinger Bridge Sampler
(ASBS), a new diffusion sampler that employs simple and scalable matchingbased objectives yet without the need to estimate target samples during training.
ASBS is grounded on a mathematical model—the Schrödinger Bridge—which
enhances sampling efficiency via kinetic-optimal transportation. Through a new
lens of stochastic optimal control theory, we demonstrate how SB-based diffusion
samplers can be learned at scale via Adjoint Matching and prove convergence to the
global solution. Notably, ASBS generalizes the recent Adjoint Sampling (Havens
et al., 2025) to arbitrary source distributions by relaxing the so-called memoryless
condition that largely restricts the design space. Through extensive experiments, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of ASBS on sampling from classical energy functions,
amortized conformer generation, and molecular Boltzmann distributions. Codes are
available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/adjoint_samplers.

1

Introduction

Sampling from Boltzmann distributions is a fundamental problem in computational science, with
widespread applications in Bayesian inference, statistical physics, and chemistry (Box and Tiao, 2011;
Binder et al., 1992; Tuckerman, 2023). Mathematically, we aim to sample from a target distribution
ν(x) known up to a unnormalized, often differentiable, energy function E(x) : X ⊆ Rd → R,
Z
e−E(x)
,
where Z :=
e−E(x) dx
(1)
ν(x) :=
Z
X
is an intractable normalization constant. For instance, the energy function E(x) of a molecular system
quantifies the stability of a chemical structure based on the 3D positions of particles. A lower energy
indicates a more stable structure and hence a higher likelihood of its occurrence, i.e., ν(x) ∝ e−E(x) .
Classical methods that generate samples from ν(x) rely on Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms,
which run a Markov chain whose stationary distribution is ν(x) (Metropolis et al., 1953; Neal, 2001;
Del Moral et al., 2006). These methods, however, tend to suffer from slow mixing time and require
extensive evaluations of energy function, limiting their practical usages due to prohibitive complexity.
To improve sampling efficiency, modern samplers focus on learning better proposal distributions
(Noé et al., 2019; Midgley et al., 2023). Among those, recent advances in diffusion-based generative
models (Song et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2020) have given rise to a family of Diffusion Samplers, which
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

