Diffusion-Driven Progressive Target Manipulation for
Source-Free Domain Adaptation

Yuyang Huang1∗,

Yabo Chen1∗, Junyu Zhou1 , Wenrui Dai1†, Xiaopeng Zhang2†,
Junni Zou1† , Hongkai Xiong1 , Qi Tian2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Huawei Inc., Shenzhen, China
{huangyuyang, chenyabo, blabla, daiwenrui, zoujunni, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn
zxphistory@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com
*These authors contributed equally to this work. Corresponding authors: Wenrui Dai; Xiaopeng Zhang; Junni Zou.

Abstract
Source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) is a challenging task that tackles domain
shifts using only a pre-trained source model and unlabeled target data. Existing
SFDA methods are restricted by the fundamental limitation of source-target domain
discrepancy. Non-generation SFDA methods suffer from unreliable pseudo-labels
in challenging scenarios with large domain discrepancies, while generation-based
SFDA methods are evidently degraded due to enlarged domain discrepancies
in creating pseudo-source data. To address this limitation, we propose a novel
generation-based framework named Diffusion-Driven Progressive Target Manipulation (DPTM) that leverages unlabeled target data as references to reliably generate
and progressively refine a pseudo-target domain for SFDA. Specifically, we divide
the target samples into a trust set and a non-trust set based on the reliability of
pseudo-labels to sufficiently and reliably exploit their information. For samples
from the non-trust set, we develop a manipulation strategy to semantically transform them into the newly assigned categories, while simultaneously maintaining
them in the target distribution via a latent diffusion model. Furthermore, we design
a progressive refinement mechanism that progressively reduces the domain discrepancy between the pseudo-target domain and the real target domain via iterative
refinement. Experimental results demonstrate that DPTM outperforms existing
methods by a large margin and achieves state-of-the-art performance on four prevailing SFDA benchmark datasets with different scales. Remarkably, DPTM can
significantly enhance the performance by up to 18.6% in scenarios with large
source-target gaps.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success under the independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) assumption. However, it suffers from significantly degraded performance on out-of-distribution
(OOD) data due to domain shifts. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) mitigates this issue by
aligning feature distributions between labeled source and unlabeled target domains, but has to access
both datasets during adaptation [42, 44]. Source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) considers a more
practical but challenging scenario where only the pre-trained source model and unlabeled target data
are available [19, 11], and precludes access to source samples during adaptation.
Existing SFDA methods can be primarily classified into non-generation and generation-based methods,
with both exhibiting inherent limitations on practical effectiveness. Non-generation methods [23, 57,
61, 35, 38, 37] predominantly rely on pseudo-labels generated by the source model, and categorize
them into a small subset of reliable pseudo-labels and a predominant subset of unreliable pseudo-labels
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

