Reliable Lifelong Multimodal Editing: Conflict-Aware
Retrieval Meets Multi-Level Guidance
Qiang Zhang1∗ , Fanrui Zhang1,2∗ , Jiawei Liu1† , Ming Hu3 , Junjun He3 ,
Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, USTC
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{zq_126, zfr888}@mail.ustc.edu.cn {jwliu6, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn
ming.hu@monash.edu hejunjun@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The dynamic nature of real-world information demands efficient knowledge editing
in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) to ensure continuous knowledge
updates. However, existing methods often struggle with precise matching in largescale knowledge retrieval and lack multi-level guidance for coordinated editing,
leading to less reliable outcomes. To tackle these challenges, we propose CARML,
a novel retrieval-augmented editing framework that integrates conflict-aware dynamic retrieval with multi-level implicit and explicit guidance for reliable lifelong
multimodal editing. Specifically, CARML introduces intra-modal uncertainty and
inter-modal conflict quantification to dynamically integrate multi-channel retrieval
results, so as to pinpoint the most relevant knowledge to the incoming edit samples.
Afterwards, an edit scope classifier discerns whether the edit sample semantically aligns with the edit scope of the retrieved knowledge. If deemed in-scope,
CARML refines the retrieved knowledge into information-rich continuous prompt
prefixes, serving as the implicit knowledge guide. These prefixes not only include
static knowledge prompt that capture key textual semantics but also incorporate
token-level, context-aware dynamic prompt to explore fine-grained cross-modal
associations between the edit sample and retrieved knowledge. To further enhance
reliability, CARML incorporates a "hard correction" mechanism, leveraging explicit label knowledge to adjust the model’s output logits. Extensive experiments
across multiple MLLMs and datasets indicate the superior performance of CARML
in lifelong multimodal editing scenarios.

1

Introduction

The rapid evolution of multimodal large language models (MLLMs), distinguished by the deep
integration of visual and textual modalities, has significantly expanded the application boundaries
of language models in real-world scenarios [1, 41, 43]. However, the static nature of pre-trained
MLLMs’ embedded knowledge presents a critical bottleneck in continuously evolving information
environments [7]. To address this, knowledge editing [37, 38] has emerged as a promising paradigm
for efficiently updating or correcting specific knowledge within models, avoiding the high costs of
retraining. This technique plays an indispensable role in critical fields such as privacy preservation
[19], bias mitigation [22], jailbreak attack defense [16], and hallucination correction [44, 8].
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

