Metropolis Adjusted Microcanonical Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo
Jakob Robnik
Physics Department,
University of California at Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
jakob_robnik@berkeley.edu

Reuben Cohn-Gordon
Physics Department,
University of California at Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
reubenharry@gmail.com

Uroš Seljak
Physics Department,
University of California at Berkeley
and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
useljak@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Sampling from high dimensional distributions is a computational bottleneck in
many scientific applications. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC), and in particular
the No-U-Turn Sampler (NUTS), are widely used, yet they struggle on problems with a very large number of parameters or a complicated geometry. Microcanonical Langevin Monte Carlo (MCLMC) has been recently proposed as an
alternative which shows striking gains in efficiency over NUTS, especially for
high-dimensional problems. However, it produces biased samples, with a bias
that is hard to control in general. We introduce the Metropolis-Adjusted Microcanonical sampler (MAMS), which relies on the same dynamics as MCLMC, but
introduces a Metropolis-Hastings step and thus produces asymptotically unbiased
samples. We develop an automated tuning scheme for the hyperparameters of
the algorithm, making it applicable out of the box. We demonstrate that MAMS
outperforms NUTS across the board on benchmark problems of varying complexity
and dimensionality, achieving up to a factor of seven speedup.

1

Introduction

Drawing samples from a given probability density p(x), for x ∈ Rd , has applications in a wide range
of scientific disciplines, from Bayesian inference for statistics (Štrumbelj et al., 2024; Carpenter et al.,
2017) to biology (Gelman and Rubin, 1996), statistical physics (Janke, 2008), quantum mechanics
(Gattringer and Lang, 2010) and cosmology (Campagne et al., 2023). From the perspective of a
practitioner in these fields, what is often desirable is a black-box algorithm, in the sense of taking
as input an unnormalized density and returning samples from the corresponding distribution. An
important special case is where the density is differentiable (either analytically or by automatic
differentiation (Griewank and Walther, 2008)).
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (Metropolis et al., 1953; Hastings, 1970) is a broad class of methods
suited to this task, which construct a Markov Chain {xi }ni=1 such that xj are samples from the
target distribution p. When the density’s gradient is available, Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC)
(Duane et al., 1987; Neal, 2011) is a leading method. In particular, the No-U-Turn sampler is a
black-box version of HMC, where users do not need to manually select the hyperparameters. It has
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

