AutoJudge: Judge Decoding
Without Manual Annotation
Roman Garipov ∗ †
HSE University, Yandex

Fedor Velikonivtsev ∗
HSE University, Yandex

Ruslan Svirschevski
Yandex

Vage Egiazarian ‡
IST Austria

Ivan Ermakov
HSE University, Yandex
Max Ryabinin
Together AI

Abstract
We introduce AutoJudge1 , a method that accelerates large language model (LLM)
inference with task-specific lossy speculative decoding. Instead of matching the
original model output distribution token-by-token, we identify the generated tokens
that affect the downstream quality of the response, relaxing the distribution match
guarantee so that the “unimportant” tokens can be generated faster. Our approach
relies on a semi-greedy search algorithm to test which of the mismatches between
target and draft models should be corrected to preserve quality and which ones
may be skipped. We then train a lightweight classifier based on existing LLM
embeddings to predict, at inference time, which mismatching tokens can be safely
accepted without compromising the final answer quality. We evaluate AutoJudge
with multiple draft/target model pairs on mathematical reasoning and programming benchmarks, achieving significant speedups at the cost of a minor accuracy
reduction. Notably, on GSM8K with the Llama 3.1 70B target model, our approach
achieves up to ≈2× speedup over speculative decoding at the cost of a ≤1% drop
in accuracy. When applied to the LiveCodeBench benchmark, AutoJudge automatically detects programming-specific important tokens, accepting ≥25 tokens
per speculation cycle at a 2% drop in Pass@1. Our approach requires no human
annotation and is easy to integrate with modern LLM inference frameworks.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in LLM capabilities, including chain-of-thought reasoning [Wei et al., 2022, Kojima
et al., 2022, Suzgun et al., 2022], writing complex software [Rozière et al., 2023, Li et al., 2023, Jiang
et al., 2024], or interacting with external tools [Schick et al., 2023, Qin et al., 2023], increasingly rely
on inference-time computation [Snell et al., 2024, Beeching et al., 2024]. This progress is further
accelerated with the release of reasoning-capable models, both proprietary [OpenAI et al., 2024,
Anthropic, 2024, Google DeepMind, 2025] and open-access [DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025, Meta, 2025,
Qwen Team, 2025], that were explicitly trained to perform these kinds of inference-time computation.
However, as LLMs tackle harder problems, they also tend to generate longer sequences [Muennighoff
et al., 2025] with tens of thousands of tokens [Yeo et al., 2025], taking up tens of minutes (and
hundreds of dollars in costs) per task [ARC Prize Foundation, 2024].
A popular way to speed up LLM inference is through speculative decoding [Leviathan et al., 2023,
Chen et al., 2023], which uses a small “draft” model to propose the likely next tokens, then verifies
these tokens with the main model in parallel. This method, along with its successors [Miao et al., 2023,
1

Our code is available at github.com/garipovroma/autojudge.
Equal contribution. †Corresponding author: devilgar@gmail.com.
‡
Work done during employment at Yandex.

∗

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

