SpikingVTG: A Spiking Detection Transformer for
Video Temporal Grounding

Malyaban Bal1,2∗, Brian Matejek2 , Susmit Jha2 , Adam D. Cobb2
1

2

The Pennsylvania State University
Computer Science Laboratory, SRI International

Abstract
Video Temporal Grounding (VTG) aims to retrieve precise temporal segments
in a video conditioned on natural language queries. Unlike conventional neural
frameworks that rely heavily on computationally expensive dense matrix multiplications, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs)—previously underexplored in this
domain—offer a unique opportunity to tackle VTG tasks through bio-plausible
spike-based communication and an event-driven accumulation-based computational paradigm. We introduce SpikingVTG, a multi-modal spiking detection
transformer, designed to harness the computational simplicity and sparsity of SNNs
for VTG tasks. Leveraging the temporal dynamics of SNNs, our model introduces a Saliency Feedback Gating (SFG) mechanism that assigns dynamic saliency
scores to video clips and applies multiplicative gating to highlight relevant clips
while suppressing less informative ones. SFG enhances performance and reduces
computational overhead by minimizing neural activity. We analyze the layer-wise
convergence dynamics of SFG-enabled model and apply implicit differentiation
at equilibrium to enable efficient, BPTT-free training. To improve generalization
and maximize performance, we enable knowledge transfer by optimizing a Cos-L2
representation matching loss that aligns the layer-wise representation and attention
maps of a non-spiking teacher with those of our student SpikingVTG. Additionally,
we present Normalization-Free (NF)-SpikingVTG, which eliminates non-local
operations like softmax and layer normalization, and an extremely quantized 1-bit
(NF)-SpikingVTG variant for potential deployment on edge devices. Our models
achieve competitive results on QVHighlights, Charades-STA, TACoS, and YouTube
Highlights, establishing a strong baseline for multi-modal spiking VTG solutions.

1

Introduction

The rapid expansion of various social medias and portable smart technologies has triggered an
unprecedented surge in video content. This vast influx of data has intensified the need for efficient
methods to retrieve and analyze video information. Consequently, the field of Video Temporal
Grounding (VTG) [1] has emerged as an important area of research. The main objective of VTG is to
identify the precise segment of a video that corresponds to a given natural language query, enabling
accurate and context-driven video content retrieval. In this paper, we focus on two tasks: moment
retrieval [2, 3], which aims to identify video intervals relevant to a given query, and highlight detection
[4], which retrieves the best candidate segment of the video in response to the query. Our work
involves analyzing multimodal data—combining video content with natural language queries—to
develop an effective solution to the problem. With the rise of transformer based architectures the
field of VTG has seen significant advancements [5, 6]. However, these models demand substantial
∗

Work completed while at SRI.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

