How Far Are We from Optimal Reasoning Efficiency?

Jiaxuan Gao12 Shu Yan3 Qixin Tan1 Lu Yang1
Shusheng Xu2 Wei Fu12 Zhiyu Mei2 Kaifeng Lyu1 Yi Wu1∗
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Ant Group 3 Nanjing University
{samjia2000, jxwuyi}@gmail.com

Abstract
Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) demonstrate remarkable problem-solving capabilities through extended Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning but often produce
excessively verbose and redundant reasoning traces. This inefficiency incurs high
inference costs and limits practical deployment. While existing fine-tuning methods
aim to improve reasoning efficiency, assessing their efficiency gains remains challenging due to inconsistent evaluations. In this work, we introduce the reasoning
efficiency frontiers, empirical upper bounds derived from fine-tuning a base LRM
(DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B/7B) across diverse approaches and training configurations. Based on these frontiers, we propose the Reasoning Efficiency Gap
(REG), a unified metric quantifying deviations of any fine-tuned LRMs from these
frontiers. Systematic evaluation on challenging mathematical benchmarks, AMC23,
AIME24, and AIME25, reveals significant gaps in current methods: they either
sacrifice accuracy for short length or use excessive tokens to achieve sub-optimal
accuracies despite high overall accuracy. To reduce the efficiency gap, we propose
REO-RL, a Reinforcement Learning algorithm that optimizes reasoning efficiency
by targeting a sparse set of token budgets. Leveraging numerical integration over
strategically selected budgets, REO-RL approximates the full efficiency objective
with low error using a small set of token budgets. Experiments show that, compared
to vanilla RL with outcome reward, REO-RL reduces the reasoning efficiency gap
by 74.5% and 64.2% in the 1.5B and 7B settings. The 7B LRM fine-tuned with
REO-RL achieves reasoning conciseness surpassing frontier LRMs like Qwen3
and Claude Sonnet 3.7. Ablation studies confirm the efficacy of our token budget
strategy and highlight REO-RL’s flexibility across design choices. This work establishes a systematic framework for evaluating and optimizing reasoning efficiency
in LRMs. We will release the related code, data, and models to support future
research on efficient reasoning in LRMs.

1

Introduction

Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) have recently emerged as a powerful class of models capable of
solving complex tasks that require advanced reasoning. Frontier LRMs such as OpenAI o1 [OpenAI]
and DeepSeek R1 [Guo et al., 2025] have obtained superior performance across a wide range of
tasks, including mathematical reasoning and competitive programming. A major factor behind this
success is their ability to perform deep, multi-step reasoning through extended Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) processes. These reasoning traces often include sophisticated operations such as reflection,
verification, and exploration, within a single inference pass.
However, the powerful capability of long CoT reasoning comes at a cost. LRMs frequently generate
overly verbose and redundant reasoning traces, a phenomenon referred to as the overthinking problem [Yang et al., 2025b, Sui et al., 2025]. Recent studies [Chen et al., 2024b, Sui et al., 2025] have
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

