Towards Large-Scale In-Context Reinforcement
Learning by Meta-Training in Randomized Worlds
*†Fan Wang1,2 , *Pengtao Shao2 , Yiming Zhang2 , Bo Yu2 , †Shaoshan Liu2 ,
Ning Ding2 , Yang Cao1,3 , Yu Kang1,3 , and Haifeng Wang4
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Heifei, China
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, Shenzhen, China
3
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Intelligent Low-Carbon Information Technology and Equipment
4
Baidu Inc, Beijing, China
2

Abstract
In-Context Reinforcement Learning (ICRL) enables agents to learn automatically
and on-the-fly from their interactive experiences. However, a major challenge in
scaling up ICRL is the lack of scalable task collections. To address this, we propose
the procedurally generated tabular Markov Decision Processes, named AnyMDP♣ .
Through a carefully designed randomization process, AnyMDP is capable of generating high-quality tasks on a large scale while maintaining relatively low structural
biases. To facilitate efficient meta-training at scale, we further introduce decoupled
policy distillation and induce prior information in the ICRL framework♠ . Our
results demonstrate that, with a sufficiently large scale of AnyMDP tasks, the
proposed model can generalize to tasks that were not considered in the training set
through versatile in-context learning paradigms. The scalable task set provided
by AnyMDP also enables a more thorough empirical investigation of the relationship between data distribution and ICRL performance. We further show that the
generalization of ICRL potentially comes at the cost of increased task diversity
and longer adaptation periods. This finding carries critical implications for scaling
robust ICRL capabilities, highlighting the necessity of diverse and extensive task
design, and prioritizing asymptotic performance over few-shot adaptation.

1

Introduction

In-Context Learning (ICL) [1] has emerged as a pivotal paradigm for large pre-trained models [2–
5], enabling adaptation to novel tasks without parameter adjustments. Unlike gradient-based inweight learning (IWL), which modifies parameter weights through optimization, ICL facilitates skill
acquisition through natural interaction. This is achieved by unifying versatile learning paradigms by
sequence of interactions in the context, including supervised learning [6, 7], imitation learning [8–10],
and reinforcement learning [11–13], etc. By leveraging those contexts, ICL eliminates reliance on
manually engineered objective functions and the labor-intensive optimization infrastructure required
by traditional IWL frameworks, providing versatile, self-directed manners of learning. ICL further
aligns with black-box meta-learning principles [14, 11] where task-agnostic adaptation occurs through
computation and memorization rather than explicit parameter tuning. It can be regarded as a unifying
*

Equal Contribution
Corresponding to: fanwang.px@gmail.com, shaoshanliu@cuhk.edu.cn
♣
https://github.com/FutureAGI/Xenoverse/tree/main/xenoverse/anymdp
♠
https://github.com/airs-cuhk/airsoul/tree/main/projects/OmniRL
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

