√
Beyond Õ( T ) Constraint Violation for Online
Convex Optimization with Adversarial Constraints

Abhishek Sinha Rahul Vaze
School of Technology and Computer Science
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
Mumbai 400005, India
abhishek.sinha@tifr.res.in, rahul.vaze@gmail.com

Abstract
We study Online Convex Optimization with adversarial constraints (COCO). At
each round a learner selects an action from a convex decision set and then an
adversary reveals a convex cost and a convex constraint function. The goal of
the learner is to select a sequence of actions to minimize both regret and the
cumulative constraint violation (CCV)√over a horizon of length
T . The best-known
√
policy for this problem achieves O( T ) regret and Õ( T ) CCV. In this paper,
we improve this by trading off regret to achieve substantially smaller CCV. This
trade-off is especially important in safety-critical applications, where satisfying the
safety constraints is non-negotiable. Specifically, for any bounded√convex cost and
constraint functions, we propose an online policy that achieves Õ( dT +T β ) regret
and Õ(dT 1−β ) CCV, where d is the dimension of the decision set and β ∈ [0, 1] is a
tunable parameter. We begin with a special case, called the C ONSTRAINED E XPERT
problem, where the decision set is a probability simplex and the cost and constraint
functions are linear. Leveraging a new adaptive small-loss regret bound, we propose
a computationally
efficient policy for the C ONSTRAINED E XPERT problem, that
√
attains O( T ln N + T β ) regret and Õ(T 1−β ln N ) CCV for N number of experts.
The original problem is then reduced to the C ONSTRAINED E XPERT problem via
a covering argument. Finally, with an additional M -smoothness assumption,
we
√
propose a computationally efficient first-order policy attaining O( M T + T β )
regret and Õ(M T 1−β ) CCV.

1

Introduction

Online Convex Optimization (OCO) is a standard framework for sequential decision-making under
adversarial uncertainty [Hazan, 2022]. At each round 1 ≤ t ≤ T , a learner selects an action xt from
a convex decision set X with finite diameter D. The environment then reveals a convex, Lipschitz
continuous cost function ft ∶ X ↦ R, and the learner incurs a cost of ft (xt ). The objective is to
minimize the regret relative to the best fixed action in hindsight. For any comparator action x⋆ ∈ X ,
the regret is defined as:
T

T

t=1

t=1

RegretT (x⋆ ) = ∑ ft (xt ) − ∑ ft (x⋆ ).

(1)

⋆
The worst-case regret is defined to be supx⋆ ∈X Regret√
T (x ). It is well-known that simple algorithms
such as Online Mirror Descent (OMD) attain an O( T ) worst-case regret, which is also minimax
optimal [Hazan, 2022].

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

