Gaussian Processes for Shuffled Regression

Masahiro Kohjima
NTT, Inc.
masahiro.kohjima@ntt.com

Abstract
Shuffled regression is the problem of learning regression functions from shuffled
data where the correspondence between the input features and target response
is unknown. This paper proposes a probabilistic model for shuffled regression
called Gaussian Process Shuffled Regression (GPSR). By introducing Gaussian
processes as a prior of regression functions in function space via the kernel function,
GPSR can express a wide variety of functions in a nonparametric manner while
quantifying the uncertainty of the prediction. By adopting the Bayesian evidence
maximization framework and a theoretical analysis of the connection between the
marginal likelihood/predictive distribution of GPSR and that of standard Gaussian
process regression (GPR), we derive an easy-to-implement inference algorithm for
GPSR that iteratively applies GPR and updates the input-output correspondence. To
reduce computation costs and obtain closed-form solutions for correspondence updates, we also develop a sparse approximate variant of GPSR using its weight space
formulation, which can be seen as Bayesian shuffled linear regression with random
Fourier features. Experiments on benchmark datasets confirm the effectiveness of
our GPSR proposal.

1

Introduction

The purpose of shuffled regression (SR) is to learn regression functions from shuffled data where
the correspondence between the input features and the target response is unknown [1, 2, 3, 4]. This
situation often arises with data collected independently from multiple devices/viewpoints [4, 5, 6]
or when personal information must be anonymized for privacy reasons, such as in cases involving
clinical history [7]. Since traditional supervised regression methods, collectively referred to as coupled
regression (CR), rely on data with input-output correspondences (the pairs of features and responses)
and so cannot deal with shuffled data, SR has become the focus of recent studies [8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
In SR literature, main focus is the use of linear models [1, 2, 4, 9] (an exception is [12] which uses
neural networks as explained in §2). Accordingly, the use of Gaussian processes (GPs) [13] has not
been well investigated. Considering the known benefits of GPs such as nonparametric flexibility and
uncertainty quantification, efforts are needed to realize their benefits in SR.
This study proposes a probabilistic model based on GPs for SR called Gaussian Process Shuffled
Regression (GPSR). By introducing GPs as a prior of regression functions in function space via
the kernel function, GPSR can express wide variety of functions in a nonparametric manner while
quantifying prediction uncertainty as shown in Table 1.
By use of the Bayesian evidence maximization framework and a theoretical analysis of the connection
between the marginal likelihood/predictive distribution of GPSR and that of standard Gaussian
process regression (GPR), we derive an easy-to-implement inference algorithm for GPSR using GPR
as a subroutine; it iteratively applies GPR for the optimization of the kernel’s hyperparameters and
solves the quadratic assignment problem (QAP) for the updates of the input-output correspondence.
Although this algorithm is valid for small-scale data, it seems prohibitive for handling medium/large39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

