Probabilistic Reasoning with LLMs for Privacy
Risk Estimation
Jonathan Zheng1
Sauvik Das2
Alan Ritter1
Wei Xu1
1
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
2
Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
jzheng324@gatech.edu

Abstract
Probabilistic reasoning is a key aspect of both human and artificial intelligence that
allows for handling uncertainty and ambiguity in decision-making. In this paper,
we introduce a new numerical reasoning task under uncertainty for large language
models, focusing on estimating the privacy risk of user-generated documents
containing privacy-sensitive information. We propose B RANCH, a new LLM
methodology that estimates the k-privacy value of a text—the size of the population
matching the given information. B RANCH factorizes a joint probability distribution
of personal information as random variables. The probability of each factor in
a population is estimated separately then combined to compute the final k-value
using a Bayesian network. Our experiments show that this method successfully
estimates the k-value 73% of the time, a 13% increase compared to o3-mini with
chain-of-thought reasoning. We also find that LLM uncertainty is a good indicator
for accuracy, as high variance predictions are 37.47% less accurate on average.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown increasingly strong performance in mathematical and
logical reasoning [88, 65, 17], enabling exploration of a broad suite of user-facing applications. One
such application is helping users understand the magnitude of privacy risks when disclosing personal
information online — a holy grail of usable privacy that remains elusive [63, 40]. For example, how
much riskier is it to disclose one’s precise age versus a general age category (22 vs. 18-25)? To that
end, we introduce a task that instructs LLMs to estimate the k number of people in the world that
match the personal attributes or experiences presented in user-written messages on pseudonymous
online fora like Reddit [19] or anonymous user interactions with ChatGPT [92, 54]. This task serves
both as a new challenge for LLMs’ reasoning abilities beyond conventional math and logic tests
[30, 49, 36] and as a practical security tool to inform users about online safety.
Traditionally, privacy research has focused on quantifiable properties such as k-anonymity [80, 71]
applied by dataset owners to protect individual records, with privacy risk assessed by the success
rate of re-identifying anonymized entries in a database (e.g., a person on Wikipedia) [56, 57, 89]. In
this work, we shift the focus to end-users, who are neither dataset owners nor curators, by providing
an interpretable risk estimate that can be computed without access to a comprehensive database
containing personal records of all internet users. LLMs must rely on their internal knowledge of
demographic statistics from census data to reason about and estimate the identification risk based on
the multiple, potentially interconnected, first-person textual disclosures. For instance, LLMs may
estimate the privacy risk of a post where a user mentions that she is from Italy, 26 years old, on the
spectrum, and has social anxiety (see Figure 1 and 2 for more examples).
Reasoning on these joint attributes remains a significant challenge for language models. In Figure 1,
Chain-of-Thought prompting estimates the prevalence rates of social anxiety and autism indepen39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

