Diffusion on Demand: Selective Caching and
Modulation for Efficient Generation

1

Hee Min Choi 1∗
chm.choi@samsung.com

Hyoa Kang 1 2 ∗
hyoa.kang@samsung.com

Dokwan Oh 1
dokwan.oh@samsung.com

Nam Ik Cho 2 †
nicho@snu.ac.kr

Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.

2

Seoul National University

Abstract
Diffusion transformers demonstrate significant potential for various generation
tasks but are challenged by high computational cost. Recently, feature caching
methods have been introduced to improve inference efficiency by storing features
at certain timesteps and reusing them at subsequent timesteps. However, their
effectiveness is limited as they rely only on choosing between cached features and
performing model inference. Motivated by high cosine similarity between features
across consecutive timesteps, we propose a cache-based framework that reuses
features and selectively adapts them through linear modulation. In our framework,
the selection is performed via a modulation gate, and both the gate and modulation
parameters are learned. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves
similar generation performance to the original sampler while requiring significantly
less computation. For example, FLOPs and inference latency are reduced by 2.93×
and 2.15× for DiT-XL/2 and by 2.83× and 1.50× for PixArt-α, respectively. We
find that modulation is effective when applied to as little as 2% of layers, resulting
in negligible computation overhead.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [14, 45, 46] have emerged as promising generative methods across different
modalities such as images [8, 37] in recent years. Across various backbone architectures for diffusion
models, transformers [49] are increasingly popular for generating high-quality images [35, 1, 54, 3],
videos [27, 36, 6] and 3D content [32, 2]. Although diffusion transformers leverage the scalability of
the architecture, they are challenged by high computational cost and slow inference speed.
Numerous frameworks have been developed to improve inference efficiency in diffusion models.
As the sampling cost scales proportionally with the number of sampling steps and the model size,
efficiency improvements primarily aim to reduce the number of steps and network inference cost.
Several studies reduce the number of sampling steps by optimizing the denoising trajectory [44, 25,
26] or employing distillation methods [39, 47, 28, 16, 50]. Other approaches mainly focus on model
compression by pruning [15, 20, 11] or quantization [19, 48, 12, 4]. Different works use dynamic
inference mechanisms by allocating models of varying sizes for different timesteps [53, 34].
∗
†

Equal contributions
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

