VTON-VLLM: Aligning Virtual Try-On Models with
Human Preferences
Siqi Wan1∗, Jingwen Chen2 , Qi Cai2 , Yingwei Pan2 , Ting Yao2 , Tao Mei2
University of Science and Technology of China1 , 2 HiDream.ai
wansiqi4789@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {chenjingwen, cqcaiqi, pandy, tiyao, tmei}@hidream.ai

Abstract
Diffusion models have yielded remarkable success in virtual try-on (VTON) task,
yet they often fall short of fully meeting user expectations regarding visual quality
and detail preservation. To alleviate this issue, we curate a dataset of synthesized
VTON images annotated with human judgments across multiple perceptual criteria.
A vision large language model (VLLM), namely VTON-VLLM, is then learnt on
these annotations. VTON-VLLM functions as a unified “fashion expert” and is capable of both evaluating and steering VTON synthesis towards human preferences.
Technically, beyond serving as an automatic VTON evaluator, VTON-VLLM
upgrades VTON model through two pivotal ways: (1) providing fine-grained supervisory signals during the training of a plug-and-play VTON refinement model,
and (2) enabling adaptive and preference-aware test-time scaling at inference.
To benchmark VTON models more holistically, we introduce VITON-Bench, a
challenging test suite of complex try-on scenarios, and human-preference–aware
metrics. Extensive experiments demonstrate that powering VTON models with
our VTON-VLLM markedly enhances alignment with human preferences. Code is
publicly available at: https://github.com/HiDream-ai/VTON-VLLM/.

1

Introduction

Image-based Virtual Try-On (VTON) is an increasingly influential task in computer vision that aims
to synthesize realistic images of a person wearing a specified garment, given the input images of both
the individual and the clothing item. By allowing users to virtually preview apparel without the need
for physical trials, VTON holds significant potential for transforming online shopping experiences
and enabling new applications in fashion e-commerce.
Early GAN-based VTON methods [8, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 24, 42, 45] typically adopt a two-stage
pipeline involving pose-guided garment warping and person-garment blending. These approaches
often yield visually implausible garment details and struggle with complex human poses due to
inaccurate warping process. Motivated by the success of diffusion models [2, 4, 6, 7, 17, 22, 33,
35, 51, 53], recent VTON approaches [9, 14, 29, 34, 41] leverage the pre-trained diffusion priors
to enhance generation quality. These approaches generally incorporate garment-specific features
through specialized modules (e.g., ControlNet [49] and ReferenceNet [46]), and synthesize highfidelity images in a progressive manner.
Despite achieving low FID [18] and LPIPS [50] scores by these diffusion-based models, the resultant
try-on images often fall short of fully meeting user expectations (e.g., the inconsistent garment details
in the right example of Figure 1 (a)). These metrics are seemingly effective for measuring general
image quality, but fail to adequately capture fine-grained visual attributes (e.g., texture preservation,
and body–clothing coherence) that are critical for realistic and satisfactory virtual try-on experiences.
∗

This work was performed at HiDream.ai.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

