Towards Interpretability Without Sacrifice: Faithful
Dense Layer Decomposition with Mixture of Decoders
James Oldfieldm,q ∗ Shawn Imm Sharon Lim Mihalis A. Nicolaouc,i
Ioannis Patrasq Grigorios G Chrysosm
m
University of Wisconsin–Madison q Queen Mary University of London c University of Cyprus
i
The Cyprus Institute

Abstract
Multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) are an integral part of large language models, yet
their dense representations render them difficult to understand, edit, and steer.
Recent methods learn interpretable approximations via neuron-level sparsity, yet
fail to faithfully reconstruct the original mapping–significantly increasing model’s
next-token cross-entropy loss. In this paper, we advocate for moving to layer-level
sparsity to overcome the accuracy trade-off in sparse layer approximation. Under
this paradigm, we introduce Mixture of Decoders (MxDs). MxDs generalize MLPs
and Gated Linear Units, expanding pre-trained dense layers into tens of thousands
of specialized sublayers. Through a flexible form of tensor factorization, each
sparsely activating MxD sublayer implements a linear transformation with fullrank weights–preserving the original decoders’ expressive capacity even under
heavy sparsity. Experimentally, we show that MxDs significantly outperform
state-of-the-art methods (e.g., Transcoders) on the sparsity-accuracy frontier in
language models with up to 3B parameters. Further evaluations on sparse probing
and feature steering demonstrate that MxDs learn similarly specialized features of
natural language–opening up a promising new avenue for designing interpretable
yet faithful decompositions. Our code is included at: https://github.com/
james-oldfield/MxD/.

1

Introduction

One strategy for addressing concerns about large language models’ (LLMs) [1, 2, 3] behavior is via a
bottom-up approach to understanding and controlling the network internals–developing models of
how and where human-interpretable features are represented in LLMs and how they affect the output
[4, 5, 6]. Such a mechanistic understanding has proved helpful for a number of issues relating to
safety and transparency, from controlling refusal of harmful requests [7] to detecting generation of
unsafe code [6] and latent model knowledge [8].
However, developing models of LLMs’ internals faces challenges due to the dense nature of their
representations [9, 10]. Indeed, many studies have found that individual neurons in MLP layers
encode multiple distinct concepts. Rather than human-interpretable features being neatly aligned with
individual neurons, they are often distributed across many [11, 12]. As a result, it is not straightforward
to cleanly isolate specific concepts of interest in the models’ latent token representations.
Traditionally, imposing constraints on model form has offered a way to instill more predictable
properties or structure. Indeed, there is a rich history of success with constraints in machine learning:
from parts-based representations through non-negativity [13, 14], to structure through low-rankness
or assumptions on geometry [15, 16]. With the particular issues posed by dense representations
∗

Corresponding author: jamesalexanderoldfield@gmail.com. Work done whilst at UW-Madison.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

