Single-Step Operator Learning for Conditioned
Time-Series Diffusion Models
Hui Chen
Department of Statistics
University of Wisconsin - Madison
hchen795@wisc.edu

Vikas Singh
Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics
University of Wisconsin - Madison
vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved significant success, yet their application to time
series data, particularly with regard to efficient sampling, remains an active area
of research. We describe an operator-learning approach for conditioned timeseries diffusion models that gives efficient single-step generation by leveraging insights from the frequency-domain characteristics of both the time-series
data and the diffusion process itself. The forward diffusion process induces a
structured, frequency-dependent smoothing of the data’s probability density function. However, this frequency smoothing is related (e.g., via likelihood function)
to easily accessible frequency components of time-series data. This suggests
that a module operating in the frequency space of the time-series can, potentially, more effectively learn to reverse the frequency-dependent smoothing of
the data distribution induced by the diffusion process. We set up an operator
learning task, based on frequency-aware building blocks, which satisfies semigroup properties, while exploiting the structure of time-series data. Evaluations
on multiple datasets show that our single-step generation proposal achieves forecasting/imputation results comparable (or superior) to many multi-step diffusion
schemes while significantly reducing inference costs. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/vsingh-group/SSOL-timeseries.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling [Song and Ermon, 2019, Ho et al., 2020] has benefited immensely from the
capabilities of modern diffusion models, which can capture complex data distributions across many
different domains: from image synthesis to high-fidelity audio generation [Kong et al., 2021, Chen
et al., 2021]. However, the application of these models to time-series data is still in its early stages
[Tashiro et al., 2021, Rasul et al., 2021, Li et al., 2022, Alcaraz and Strodthoff, 2023, Yuan and Qiao,
2024, Fan et al., 2024, Li et al., 2025, Ye et al., 2025], and poses unique challenges. One widely
acknowledged obstacle, which applies more generally to diffusion models, is the computational
burden of the iterative denoising process [Song et al., 2021a, Salimans and Ho, 2022, Lu et al., 2022].
We need sequential evaluations during both training and inference, which makes the process slow
and resource-intensive. A few of these issues are further compounded for time-series data with long
time horizons. While excellent progress is being made to mitigate these difficulties broadly [Salimans
and Ho, 2022, Lu et al., 2022], it is natural to ask whether the specific properties and the structure
of time-series data may allow simplifications to diffusion-based generative modeling that retain the
expressiveness/capacity of the models but can reduce the computational burden, especially for the
sampling phase.
We seek to approach the problem above by viewing the forward diffusion process as operators [Li et al.,
2021, Kovachki et al., 2023], where a suitably parameterized operator governs the evolution of data distributions across noise scales. This operator acts as a semigroup [Pazy, 1983, Henry, 1981], governing
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

