A solvable model of learning generative diffusion:
theory and insights

Hugo Cui
Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications,
Harvard University
Cengiz Pehlevan
Center for Brain Science,
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence,
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University
Yue M Lu
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications,
Harvard University

Abstract
In this manuscript, we analyze a solvable model of flow or diffusion-based generative model. We consider the problem of learning a model parametrized by a
two-layer auto-encoder, trained with online stochastic gradient descent, on a highdimensional target density with an underlying low-dimensional manifold structure.
We derive a tight asymptotic characterization of low-dimensional projections of
the distribution of samples generated by the learned model, ascertaining in particular its dependence on the number of training samples. Building on this analysis,
we discuss how mode collapse can arise, and lead to model collapse when the
generative model is re-trained on generated synthetic data.

Introduction
Diffusion and flow-based generative models represent a new paradigm in the sampling of highdimensional probability densities. Such methods operate by recasting the sampling problem as a
transport from a simple base distribution to the target density. The velocity field directing the transport
can further be parameterized by a neural network, and learned from data [68, 70, 36, 34]. These ideas
have been successfully implemented in a number of algorithmic frameworks [70, 48, 4, 49, 71], with
applications ranging from image generation [55, 58, 63] to drug discovery [83].
The surprising effectiveness of such models in learning probability densities in high dimensions
hints at the presence of architectural biases built in the network parametrization, placing strong
priors on the class of densities generated by the model. When aligned with the target density, these
architectural biases can allow generative models to learn a good approximation of the target from only
a small number of training samples [35]. Naturally, when the biases are ill-suited to the task, they
can also lead to poor solutions. Gaining a solid theoretical understanding on how the neural network
architecture shapes the generated density is hence a central, yet still largely open, research question.
Arguably, the prominent technical obstruction lies in the need to reach a precise characterization
of the density a given architecture learns to generate. A large fraction of theoretical studies of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

