Think or Not? Selective Reasoning via
Reinforcement Learning for Vision-Language Models

1

Jiaqi Wang1† Kevin Qinghong Lin2† James Cheng1 Mike Zheng Shou2B
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Show Lab, National University of Singapore

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has proven to be an effective post-training strategy
for enhancing reasoning in vision–language models (VLMs). Group Relative
Policy Optimization (GRPO) is a recent prominent method that encourages models to generate complete reasoning traces before answering, leading to increased
token usage and computational cost. Inspired by the human-like thinking process—where people skip reasoning for easy questions but think carefully when
needed—we pioneer how to enable VLMs to first decide when reasoning is necessary. To realize this, we propose TON, a two-stage training strategy: (i) a
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) stage with a simple yet effective “thought dropout”
operation, where reasoning traces are randomly replaced with empty thoughts. This
introduces a think-or-not format that serves as a cold start for selective reasoning; (ii) a GRPO stage that enables the model to freely explore when to think or
not, while maximizing task-aware outcome rewards. Experimental results show
that TON can reduce the completion length by up to 90% compared to vanilla
GRPO, without sacrificing performance or even improving it. Further evaluations
across LLM (GSM8K), VLM (CLEVR, Super-CLEVR, GeoQA), and Agentic
(AITZ) tasks—covering a range of reasoning difficulties under both 3B and 7B
models—consistently reveal that the model progressively learns to bypass unnecessary reasoning steps as training advances. These findings shed light on the path
toward human-like reasoning patterns in RL approaches. Our code is available at
https://github.com/kokolerk/TON.

1

Introduction

“To think or not to think, that is the question.”
Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently emerged as a dominant post-supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
strategy in vision-language models (VLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4]. Methods like GRPO [5] have shown promising
results in enhancing reasoning capabilities through KL-divergence losses based on rule-driven rewards.
However, these approaches often lead to unnecessarily long and redundant reasoning processes due to
their reliance on full-length generative trajectories [6, 7, 8]. To address this inefficiency, some works
attempt to shorten reasoning chains with rule-based reward penalties [9, 10, 11] during the pre-training
phase or introduce external control mechanisms, such as in very recent Qwen3 [12]. Nonetheless, a
more natural and scalable solution is to enable the model to decide when to think—mirroring how
humans modulate cognitive effort in response to task difficulty.
In this work, we begin by presenting empirical evidence that thinking is not always necessary.
In AITZ [13], we observe that 51% of questions can be answered correctly even when the entire
reasoning trace is omitted, resulting in significant savings in thought tokens. This finding underscores
† Equal contribution. B Corresponding authors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

