Fully Spiking Neural Networks for Unified
Frame-Event Object Tracking

Jingjun Yang∗

Liangwei Fan∗ Jinpu Zhang† Xiangkai Lian Hui Shen† Dewen Hu
College of Intelligence Science and Technology
National University of Defense Technology
{yjingjun, fanliangwei, zhangjinpu, lianxiangkai, shenhui, dwhu}@nudt.edu.cn
Codes and models: https://github.com/Noctis-A/SpikeFET

Abstract
The integration of image and event streams offers a promising approach for achieving robust visual object tracking in complex environments. However, current fusion
methods achieve high performance at the cost of significant computational overhead
and struggle to efficiently extract the sparse, asynchronous information from event
streams, failing to leverage the energy-efficient advantages of event-driven spiking
paradigms. To address this challenge, we propose the first fully Spiking FrameEvent Tracking framework called SpikeFET. This network achieves synergistic
integration of convolutional local feature extraction and Transformer-based global
modeling within the spiking paradigm, effectively fusing frame and event data.
To overcome the degradation of translation invariance caused by convolutional
padding, we introduce a Random Patchwork Module (RPM) that eliminates positional bias through randomized spatial reorganization and learnable type encoding
while preserving residual structures. Furthermore, we propose a Spatial-Temporal
Regularization (STR) strategy that overcomes similarity metric degradation from
asymmetric features by enforcing spatio-temporal consistency among temporal template features in latent space. Extensive experiments across multiple benchmarks
demonstrate that the proposed framework achieves superior tracking accuracy over
existing methods while significantly reducing power consumption, attaining an
optimal balance between performance and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Visual target tracking has important application value in areas such as automatic driving and intelligent
surveillance. Although traditional frame-based tracking methods [1, 2, 3, 4] demonstrate satisfactory
performance in conventional scenarios, robust tracking under complex environments involving lowlight conditions, over-exposure, and high-speed motion remains a challenge. Event cameras offer
new possibilities for tracking tasks due to their high dynamic range, microsecond response, and
low power consumption [5], but their sparse and asynchronous characteristics makes it difficult
to capture target appearance features. Some researchers [6, 7, 8] have attempted to improve
the performance and robustness of tracking by integrating motion information from frames with
appearance information from events. However, most Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)-based
methods rely on dense texture information for tracking and struggle to effectively model sparse
event data. In contrast, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) demonstrate exceptional compatibility
and ultra-low energy consumption advantages in event stream processing through their bio-inspired
spatiotemporal dynamics and event-driven sparse computational paradigm [9, 10]. Recently, an
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

