VeriThinker:
Learning to Verify Makes Reasoning Model Efficient

Zigeng Chen, Xinyin Ma, Gongfan Fang, Ruonan Yu, Xinchao Wang∗
National University of Singapore
zigeng99@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Model Merging or CoT Truncating

SFT Methods
Reasoning
Problem

Solution: Okay, so I need to figure out
how many .......Jennifer brought home a
total of 100 cans of milk. # Tokens: 607

Reasoning
Model

Extensive Sampling

RL Methods
Reasoning
Problem

VeriThinker (ours)

Reasoning
Model

Solution: To determine how many
cans ....... brought home a total of
100 cans of milk. # Tokens: 218

Low Reward

Solution: Okay, so I need to figure out
how many .......Wait, let me double
check ......Jennifer brought home a total
of 100 cans of milk.
# Tokens: 1204

Negative Chain

Solution: To determine how many
cans ....... answer is 100. # Tokens: 788

Target Chain

Reasoning Problem

Small Short-CoT LLM Generated

Target Chain

Reasoning
Model

High Reward

Verification: Yes, I'm sure that
every step is absolutely correct.
Verification: No, I think there
might be mistakes in the solution.

Figure 1: The key distinction between VeriThinker and traditional SFT or RL-based long-to-short
methods. We uniquely train LRMs on an auxiliary CoT verification task, achieving effective CoT
compression without relying on synthetic target reasoning chains.

Abstract
Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) excel at complex tasks using Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) reasoning. However, their tendency to overthinking leads to unnecessarily
lengthy reasoning chains, dramatically increasing inference costs. To mitigate this
issue, we introduce VeriThinker, a novel approach for CoT compression. Unlike
conventional methods that fine-tune LRMs directly on the original reasoning task
using synthetic concise CoT data, we innovatively fine-tune the model solely
through an auxiliary verification task. By training LRMs to accurately verify the
correctness of CoT solutions, the LRMs inherently become more discerning about
the necessity of subsequent self-reflection steps, thereby effectively suppressing
overthinking. Extensive experiments validate that VeriThinker substantially reduces
reasoning chain lengths while maintaining or even slightly improving accuracy.
When applied to DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B, our approach reduces reasoning
tokens on MATH500 from 3790 to 2125 while improving accuracy by 0.8% (94.0%
to 94.8%), and on AIME25, tokens decrease from 14321 to 10287 with a 2.1%
∗

Correspoding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

