Do Neural Networks Need Gradient Descent
to Generalize? A Theoretical Study

Yotam Alexander
Tel Aviv University
yotam.alexander@gmail.com

Yonatan Slutzky
Tel Aviv University
slutzky1@mail.tau.ac.il

Yuval Ran-Milo
Tel Aviv University
yuv.milo@gmail.com

Nadav Cohen
Tel Aviv University
cohennadav@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Conventional wisdom attributes the mysterious generalization abilities of overparameterized neural networks to gradient descent (and its variants). The recent
volume hypothesis challenges this view: it posits that these generalization abilities
persist even when gradient descent is replaced by Guess & Check (G&C), i.e., by
randomly drawing weight settings until one that fits the training data is found. The
validity of the volume hypothesis for wide and deep neural networks remains an
open question. In this paper, we theoretically investigate this question for matrix
factorization (with linear and non-linear activation): a canonical testbed in neural
network theory. We first prove that generalization under G&C deteriorates with
increasing width, establishing what is, to our knowledge, the first canonical case
where G&C is provably inferior to gradient descent. Conversely, we prove that generalization under G&C improves with increasing depth, revealing a stark contrast
between wide and deep networks, which we further validate empirically. These
findings suggest that even in simple settings, there may not be a simple answer to
the question of whether neural networks need gradient descent to generalize well.

1

Introduction

Overparameterized neural networks trained by (variants of) gradient descent are a cornerstone of
modern artificial intelligence (AI) [117, 51, 3, 17, 64, 3]. Typically, an overparameterized neural
network can fit its training data with any of multiple weight settings, some of which generalize well
(i.e., perform well on unseen test data), while others do not. The fact that weight settings found by
gradient descent often generalize well is a mystery attracting vast attention [134, 57, 90, 87, 85].
Conventional wisdom states that this phenomenon stems from a special implicit bias induced by
gradient descent when applied to overparameterized neural networks [107, 44, 63, 70].
Recently, it has been argued that gradient descent is not necessary for overparameterized neural
networks to generalize well, and in fact, any reasonable (non-adversarial) optimizer that fits the
training data can suffice [22, 18, 116, 13]. Notable empirical support for this argument was provided
by Chiang et al. [22], who demonstrated that generalization comparable to that of gradient descent
can be attained by Guess and Check (G&C), i.e., by repeatedly drawing weight settings from a
specified prior distribution, until a weight setting that happens to fit the training data is drawn. For a
particular prior distribution over weight settings, hypothesizing that G&C attains good generalization
is equivalent to the so-called volume hypothesis [22, 89], which states the following. Define the
volume of a collection of weight settings to be the probability assigned to it by a posterior distribution
obtained from conditioning the prior distribution on the training data being fit. Then, the volume of
weight settings that generalize well is much greater than the volume of weight settings that do not.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

