PolarQuant: Leveraging Polar Transformation for Key
Cache Quantization and Decoding Acceleration

Songhao Wu1∗ Ang Lv1∗ Xiao Feng2
Yufei Zhang
Xun Zhang2 Guojun Yin2† Wei Lin2 Rui Yan1†
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
ShanghaiTech University 3 Meituan
{songhaowu, anglv, ruiyan}@ruc.edu.cn
fengxiao2023@shanghaitech.edu.cn
{zhangyufei08, zhangxun12, yinguojun02, linwei31}@meituan.com
2

Abstract
The increasing demand for long-context generation has made the KV cache in large
language models a bottleneck in memory consumption. Quantizing the cache to
lower bit widths is an effective way to reduce memory costs; however, previous
methods struggle with key cache quantization due to outliers, resulting in suboptimal performance. We propose a novel quantization approach PolarQuant, which
provides a new perspective for key cache quantization and efficiently addresses
the outlier dilemma. We observe that the distribution of the key states reveals
well-structured patterns under polar transformation. Outliers generally appear in
only one of the two dimensions, which are rotated together by a specific angle when
rotary position embeddings are applied. When represented as two-dimensional
vectors, these dimensions exhibit well-organized patterns, with radii and angles
smoothly distributed in polar space. This alleviates the channel-wise outliers, making them well-suited for key cache quantization. PolarQuant divides key vectors
into groups of two-dimensional sub-vectors, encoding them as the quantized radius
and the polar angle, rather than quantizing original key vectors directly. PolarQuant achieves the superior efficiency in KV cache quantization and accelerates
the decoding process by turning the query-key inner product into a table lookup,
all while maintaining the downstream performance of full-precision models. Our
code is available at https://github.com/ericshwu/PolarQuant.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success across a wide range of realworld applications. As these models evolve, the demand for enhanced long-context capabilities also
increases, especially in tasks like contextual retrieval in question answering [17] and reasoning chains
generation for complex reflection and decision-making [21, 20]. However, a significant challenge in
developing long-context LLMs is the rising memory cost associated with increasing context lengths,
which hinders both their practical deployment and further research.
The attention mechanism [4] in LLMs3 is a major source of computational overhead and memory
consumption, which increase rapidly with context length. To reduce this cost, Key-Value cache (KV
cache) is a common strategy, which stores and reuses keys and values for generation to avoid the
∗
†

Equal contribution. Work done during Songhao Wu’s internship at Meituan.
Corresponding authors: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn) and Guojun Yin (yinguojun02@meituan.com).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

