RLZero: Direct Policy Inference from Language
Without In-Domain Supervision

Harshit Sikchi∗ ,1 , Siddhant Agarwal∗,1 , Pranaya Jajoo∗,2 , Samyak Parajuli∗,1 , Caleb Chuck∗,1 ,
Max Rudolph∗,1 , Peter Stone†,1,3 , Amy Zhang†,1 , Scott Niekum†,4
1
The University of Texas at Austin, 2 University of Alberta
3
Sony AI, 4 UMass Amherst

Abstract
The reward hypothesis states that all goals and purposes can be understood as the
maximization of a received scalar reward signal. However, in practice, defining
such a reward signal is notoriously difficult, as humans are often unable to predict
the optimal behavior corresponding to a reward function. Natural language offers
an intuitive alternative for instructing reinforcement learning (RL) agents, yet
previous language-conditioned approaches either require costly supervision or
test-time training given a language instruction. In this work, we present a new
approach that uses a pretrained RL agent trained using only unlabeled, offline
interactions—without task-specific supervision or labeled trajectories—to get
zero-shot test-time policy inference from arbitrary natural language instructions.
We introduce a framework comprising three steps: imagine, project, and imitate.
First, the agent imagines a sequence of observations corresponding to the provided
language description using video generative models. Next, these imagined
observations are projected into the target environment domain. Finally, an agent
pretrained in the target environment with unsupervised RL instantly imitates the
projected observation sequence through a closed-form solution. To the best
of our knowledge, our method, RLZero, is the first approach to show direct
language-to-behavior generation abilities on a variety of tasks and environments
without any in-domain supervision. We further show that components of RLZero
can be used to generate policies zero-shot from cross-embodied videos, such as
those available on YouTube, even for complex embodiments like humanoids.

1

Introduction

Underlying the many successes of RL lies the engineering challenge of reward design. It often
takes a skilled expert to engineer a reward function which still might not be fully aligned to the
true task specification [9]. Not only does this challenge restrict the scaling of RL agents, but it
also makes those agents inaccessible to any user inexperienced in reward design. Even for experts,
confidently specifying reward functions is generally infeasible because learning agents have often
been found to hack them [38, 4, 18, 31]; i.e. the learned policies for the reward function produce
behaviors that do not align with what the human intended. Language is an expressive communication
channel for human intent and allows bypassing traditional reward design, but learning a mapping from
language to behaviors has historically required collecting and annotating behaviors that correspond
to language [26, 33, 54] in the domain where the agent is to be deployed. Scaling this strategy is
impractical as it requires labeling the agent’s large space of behaviors with corresponding language
descriptions, and repeating the process in every new domain.
This paper is motivated by the vision that a true generalist agent should be able to solve new tasks that
are presented to it in a way that is natural for people to specify. Language offers an intuitive channel
∗

Equal contribution,† Equal Advising. Correspondence to hsikchi@utexas.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

