Adaptive Gradient Masking for Balancing ID and
MLLM-based Representations in Recommendation

Yidong Wu ∗
Imperial College London
London, UK

Siyuan Chen ∗
University of Bristol
Bristol, UK

Binrui Wu
Fudan University
Shanghai, China

Jiechao Gao †
Stanford University
Stanford, USA

Fan Li
KuaiShou Technology
Beijing, China

Abstract
In large-scale recommendation systems, multimodal (MM) content is increasingly
introduced to enhance the generalization of ID features. The rise of Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) enables the construction of unified user and
item representations. However, the semantic distribution gap between MM and
ID representations leads to convergence inconsistency during joint training: the
ID branch converges quickly, while the MM branch requires more epochs, thus
limiting overall performance. To address this, we propose a two-stage framework
including MM representation learning and joint training optimization. First, we
fine-tune the MLLM to generate unified user and item representations, and introduce collaborative signals by post-aligning user ID representations to alleviate
semantic differences. Then, we propose an Adaptive Gradient Masking (AGM)
training strategy to dynamically regulate parameter updates between ID and MLLM
branches. AGM estimates the contribution of each representation with mutual information, and applies non-uniform gradient masking at the sub-network level to
balance optimization. We provide theoretical analysis of AGM’s effectiveness and
further introduce an unbiased variant, AGM*, to enhance training stability. Experiments on offline and online A/B tests validate the effectiveness of our approach in
mitigating convergence inconsistency and improving performance.

1

Introduction

Large-scale industrial recommendation systems have traditionally relied on ID-based features, such
as cross ID features (e.g., FM [1], DCN [2]), list-wise ID features (e.g., DIN [3], TWIN [4]), to
model user–item interactions. These features offer strong memorization capabilities and are effective
in capturing co-occurrence patterns. However, they suffer from limited generalization, making them
inadequate for addressing long-tail items, data sparsity, and cold-start scenarios. To mitigate these
limitations, recent research [5, 6, 7] has incorporated multimodal (MM) content (e.g., images and
textual descriptions) to enrich the semantic representations of users and items.
The emergence of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) facilitates the generation of unified,
high-level semantic embeddings from diverse modalities, offering promising avenues for enhancing
recommendation performance. As is demonstrated in many recent studies, integrating categorical
features (e.g., ID and category) with MLLM-based representations (e.g., images and texts) can
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author: jiechao@stanford.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

