VIKING: Deep variational inference
with stochastic projections

Samuel G. Fadel, Hrittik Roy, Nicholas Krämer,
Yevgen Zainchkovskyy, Stas Syrota, Alejandro Valverde Mahou
Technical University of Denmark
{samma,hroy,pekra,yeza,stasy,avama}@dtu.dk
Carl Henrik Ek
University of Cambridge
che29@cam.ac.uk

Søren Hauberg
Technical University of Denmark
sohau@dtu.dk

Abstract
Variational mean field approximations tend to struggle with contemporary overparametrized deep neural networks. Where a Bayesian treatment is usually associated with high-quality predictions and uncertainties, the practical reality has been
the opposite, with unstable training, poor predictive power, and subpar calibration.
Building upon recent work on reparametrizations of neural networks, we propose a
simple variational family that considers two independent linear subspaces of the
parameter space. These represent functional changes inside and outside the support
of training data. This allows us to build a fully-correlated approximate posterior
reflecting the overparametrization that tunes easy-to-interpret hyperparameters.
We develop scalable numerical routines that maximize the associated evidence
lower bound (ELBO) and sample from the approximate posterior. Empirically, we
observe state-of-the-art performance across tasks, models, and datasets compared
to a wide array of baseline methods. Our results show that approximate Bayesian
inference applied to deep neural networks is far from a lost cause when constructing
inference mechanisms that reflect the geometry of reparametrizations.

1

The troubles of the overparametrized Bayesian

Bayesian inference provides an attractive framework for learning from data, marginalizing a datadependent likelihood with a data-independent prior leads to a combined probability measure that can
be used for learning. For most model classes, the marginalization is intractable, and we resort to
approximate methods of integration. While this has shown itself to be a very successful approach,
overparametrized models have subtle characteristics that lead to significant challenges in practice.
Specifically, overparametrizations lead to a many-to-one relationship where several parameter configurations describe the same function. Dinh et al. (2017) exemplify that the neural network
f (x) = w1 ReLU(w2 x) can be reparametrized as f (x) = w1/γ ReLU(γ w2 x) for any γ ̸= 0,
implying that the weights (w1 , w2 ) and (w1/γ , γw2 ) yield identical functions. Thus, despite having
two trainable parameters, the neural network only has one degree of freedom. Making matters worse,
the discrepancy between the number of parameters and degrees of freedom generally grows with the
model size. If the marginalization can be performed analytically, the resulting measure will reflect
this structure; however, if we need to resort to approximate methods, we need to carefully design our
approximation so that the correct geometry of the problem can be parametrized. If not, the resulting
object will not be a valid probability measure over the space of functions and application of this
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

