A CLT for Polynomial GNNs on Community-Based
Graphs
Arash A. Amini
University of California, Los Angeles
aaamini@g.ucla.edu

Luciano Vinas
University of California, Los Angeles
lucianovinas@g.ucla.edu

Abstract
We consider the empirical distribution of the embeddings of a k-layer polynomial
GNN on a semi-supervised node classification task and prove a central limit
theorem for them. Assuming a community based model for the underlying graph,
with growing average degree νn → ∞, we show that the empirical distribution of
k−1/2
the centered features, when scaled by νn
converge in 1-Wasserstein distance to
a centered stable mixture of multivariate normal distributions. In addition, the joint
empirical distribution of uncentered features and labels when normalized by νnk
approach that of mixture of multivariate normal distributions, with stable means and
covariance matrices vanishing as νn−1 . We explicitly identify the asymptotic means
and covariances, showing that the mixture collapses towards a 1-D version as k is
increased. Our results provide a precise and nuanced lens on how oversmoothing
presents itself in the large graph limit, in the sparse regime. In particular, we show
that training with cross-entropy on these embeddings is asymptotically equivalent
to training on these nearly collapsed Gaussian mixtures.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are now a key tool for machine learning on graphs. Their success
is largely due to the graph convolution operation—also known as message passing or neighbor
aggregation—where node features are updated by gathering information from their graph neighbors
[12; 15; 23]. This process helps GNNs learn powerful embeddings for tasks like node classification
and regression. For graphs with community structure, theory shows
√ that even one aggregation step
can improve feature separation between classes by a factor of νn , where νn is the average node
degree [3].
Analyzing deep GNNs with multiple aggregation layers (k > 1) is important but theoretically difficult.
Unlike single aggregations, the resulting features, ϕ(k) , lose desirable properties such as entry-wise
independence. To study these multi-aggregated features, researchers have used techniques like
walk-based decompositions, which classify feature contributions by underlying graph walk patterns
[6; 18]. For community-based graphs, these methods suggest that while feature cluster centers can
k−1/2
separate at a rate of νnk , their standard deviation often grows as νn
.
This paper focuses on Polynomial GNNs (Poly-GNNs). In these models, features ϕ(k) = Ak X are
created by applying the adjacency matrix A, k times to initial node features X ∈ Rn×d , without any
non-linear functions in between. These features ϕ(k) , when passed through a final linear layer W ,
produce classification scores. Poly-GNNs, despite their simplicity, are not just theoretical ideas. They
form the basis of several practical and effective GNNs like APPNP [16], GPR-GNN [7], and models
using Chebyshev, Bernstein, and Jacobi polynomials [9; 13; 20]. Such models have achieved strong
results, sometimes state-of-the-art, on standard benchmarks [20]; indeed, recent rigorous evaluations
demonstrate that simplified aggregators and polynomial baselines remain highly competitive with
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

