Sequential Attention-based Sampling for
Histopathological Analysis

Tarun G
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
tarung@iisc.ac.in

Naman Malpani
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
namanmalpani@iisc.ac.in

Gugan Thoppe
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
gthoppe@iisc.ac.in

Devarajan Sridharan
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
sridhar@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Deep neural networks are increasingly applied in automated histopathology. Yet,
whole-slide images (WSIs) are often acquired at gigapixel sizes, rendering them
computationally infeasible to analyze entirely at high resolution. Diagnostic labels
are largely available only at the slide-level, because expert annotation of images
at a finer (patch) level is both laborious and expensive. Moreover, regions with
diagnostic information typically occupy only a small fraction of the WSI, making it inefficient to examine the entire slide at full resolution. Here, we propose
SASHA – Sequential Attention-based Sampling for Histopathological Analysis – a
deep reinforcement learning approach for efficient analysis of histopathological
images. First, SASHA learns informative features with a lightweight hierarchical,
attention-based multiple instance learning (MIL) model. Second, SASHA samples
intelligently and zooms selectively into a small fraction (10-20%) of high-resolution
patches to achieve reliable diagnoses. We show that SASHA matches state-of-theart methods that analyze the WSI fully at high resolution, albeit at a fraction of
their computational and memory costs. In addition, it significantly outperforms
competing, sparse sampling methods. We propose SASHA as an intelligent sampling model for medical imaging challenges that involve automated diagnosis with
exceptionally large images containing sparsely informative features1 .

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have emerged as a major frontier in automated medical imaging diagnosis. For
example, such models accurately identify tumorous tissue in whole-slide histopathological images
(WSI) [14, 10, 12, 19]. Yet, hardware and memory bottlenecks render it impractical to analyze WSIs
acquired at gigapixel sizes. Moreover, analyzing WSI-s at high resolution is inefficient because
regions with diagnostic information (e.g., tumor cells) make up only a small fraction of the entire
image, and are not clearly identifiable at low resolutions. As a result, methods that predict slide-level
labels from low-resolution WSIs suffer from performance bottlenecks [29, 16]. By contrast, methods
that incorporate fine-grained “patch-level” information perform better [28, 37]. Yet, these latter
methods require significant resources and expert annotations of WSIs at the patch level.
The Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) framework [5], addresses these limitations elegantly. In
MIL, the WSI is divided into non-overlapping patches, with each patch being encoded into a highdimensional feature vector. The feature vectors are aggregated using simple methods, like max- or
mean-pooling, and this “bag” of features is slide-level labels. Furthermore, diagnostic regions can be
identified with weighted aggregation methods, like Attention-Based deep Multiple Instance Learning
(ABMIL) [15], which assigns patch-level attention scores, based on their relevance.
1

Model implementation is available at: https://github.com/coglabiisc/SASHA

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

