Frame Context Packing and Drift Prevention in
Next-Frame-Prediction Video Diffusion Models
Lvmin Zhang1

Shengqu Cai1

Muyang Li2 Gordon Wetzstein1 Maneesh Agrawala1
Stanford University 2 MIT
{lvmin,shengqu,gordon.wetzstein,maneesh}@cs.stanford.edu, muyangli@mit.edu
1

Abstract
We present a neural network structure, FramePack, to train next-frame (or nextframe-section) prediction models for video generation. FramePack compresses
input frame contexts with frame-wise importance so that more frames can be encoded within a fixed context length, with more important frames having longer
contexts. The frame importance can be measured using time proximity, feature
similarity, or hybrid metrics. The packing method allows for inference with thousands of frames and training with relatively large batch sizes. We also present drift
prevention methods to address observation bias (error accumulation), including
early-established endpoints, adjusted sampling orders, and discrete history representation. Ablation studies validate the effectiveness of the anti-drifting methods in
both single-directional video streaming and bi-directional video generation. Finally,
we show that existing video diffusion models can be finetuned with FramePack,
and analyze the differences between different packing schedules.

1

Introduction

Forgetting and drifting are the two most critical problems in next-frame-prediction models for video
generation. “Forgetting” refers to the fading of memory as the model struggles to remember earlier
content and maintain consistent temporal dependencies. “Drifting” refers to the degradation of visual
quality due to error accumulation over time (also called exposure/observation bias).
A fundamental dilemma emerges when attempting to simultaneously address both forgetting and
drifting: any method that mitigates forgetting by enhancing memory may also increase error
accumulation/propagation, thereby exacerbating drifting; any method that reduces drifting by
interrupting error propagation needs to weaken temporal dependencies (e.g., masking or re-noising
the history), thus worsening the forgetting. This is a fundamental trade-off that hinders the scalability
of next-frame prediction models.
A naive solution to forgetting is to encode more frames. But this approach quickly becomes
computationally intractable due to the quadratic attention complexity of transformers (even with
optimizations like Flash Attention [10], etc.). Moreover, video frames contain significant temporal
redundancy, making naive full-context approaches very inefficient. The substantial duplication of
visual features across consecutive frames suggests the potential to design effective compression
systems to facilitate memorization.
Drifting is influenced by memorizing mechanisms in several ways. The source of drifting lies in
the initial errors that occur in individual frames, while the effect is the propagation and accumulation
of these errors across subsequent frames, and the eventual drifting out of the train distribution. A
stronger memorization mechanism, on one hand, can lead to better temporal consistency and reduce
the occurrence of initial errors. On the other hand, it also memorizes more errors and thus accelerates
error propagation when errors do occur. This paradoxical relationship between memory mechanisms
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

