R AVAN: Multi-Head Low-Rank Adaptation for
Federated Fine-Tuning

Arian Raje∗ Baris Askin Divyansh Jhunjhunwala Gauri Joshi
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have not yet effectively leveraged the vast amounts
of edge-device data, and federated learning (FL) offers a promising paradigm to
collaboratively fine-tune LLMs without transferring private edge data to the cloud.
To operate within the computation and communication constraints of edge devices,
recent literature on federated fine-tuning of LLMs proposes the use of low-rank
adaptation (LoRA) and similar parameter-efficient methods. However, LoRAbased methods suffer from accuracy degradation in FL settings, primarily because
of data and computational heterogeneity across clients. We propose R AVAN, an
adaptive multi-head LoRA method that balances parameter efficiency and model
expressivity by reparameterizing the weight updates as the sum of multiple LoRA
heads si Bi Hi Ai in which only the core matrices Hi and their lightweight scaling
factors si are trained. These trainable scaling factors let the optimization focus on
the most useful heads, recovering a higher-rank approximation of the full update
without increasing the number of communicated parameters since clients upload
si Hi directly. Experiments on vision and language benchmarks show that R AVAN
improves test accuracy by 2–8% over prior parameter-efficient baselines, making it
a robust and scalable solution for federated fine-tuning of LLMs.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the amount of data available on edge devices has increased exponentially, opening
the doors for applications that perform machine learning (ML) at the edge. One such paradigm is
federated learning (FL), a model training regime where edge devices, or “clients”, collaboratively train
a model without sharing their local data with a central server [27]. FL training offers a way to perform
large-scale ML on a distributed network of clients by utilizing on-device data while reducing potential
privacy risks. The primary challenge in FL is to design methods that are robust in the presence of both
data heterogeneity [24, 20, 23, 1]—variations in clients’ local data distributions—and computational
heterogeneity [10, 8, 30]—differences in clients’ computing capacities.
Recent literature has begun exploring the integration of large language models (LLMs) into FL
frameworks, driven by the surge in LLM-based edge applications and the resultant need to leverage
on-device data for training [40, 41]. Unfortunately, naively training LLMs in FL settings is intractable
as a result of the memory constraints of edge devices and communication constraints of wireless
networks. As a consequence, these works have examined the impact of parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) for LLMs in federated settings [17, 41]. These methods reduce the computational load of
fine-tuning pretrained LLMs by scaling down the number of trainable parameters. A particularly
∗

Corresponding Author. araje@andrew.cmu.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

