Gradient-Weight Alignment as a Train-Time Proxy for
Generalization in Classification Tasks
Florian A. Hölzl, Daniel Rueckert, Georgios Kaissis
Institute for Artifical Intelligence in Medicine
Technical University of Munich
{florian.hoelzl, daniel.rueckert, g.kaissis}@tum.de

Abstract
Robust validation metrics remain essential in contemporary deep learning, not only
to detect overfitting and poor generalization, but also to monitor training dynamics. In the supervised classification setting, we investigate whether interactions
between training data and model weights can yield such a metric that both tracks
generalization during training and attributes performance to individual training
samples. We introduce Gradient-Weight Alignment (GWA), quantifying the coherence between per-sample gradients and model weights. We show that effective
learning corresponds to coherent alignment, while misalignment indicates deteriorating generalization. GWA is efficiently computable during training and reflects
both sample-specific contributions and dataset-wide learning dynamics. Extensive
experiments show that GWA accurately predicts optimal early stopping, enables
principled model comparisons, and identifies influential training samples, providing
a validation-set-free approach for model analysis directly from the training data.

1

Introduction

Despite the recent surge in self-supervised learning, optimization with cross-entropy loss remains
dominant in modern deep learning for both supervised training and fine-tuning. Its enduring popularity
stems from its strong label-based learning signal and implicit modeling of predictions as probabilities.
However, this very strength – relying on maximum likelihood estimation – introduces vulnerabilities
to overconfidence and sensitivity to noise in both input data and labels. Diagnosing these issues
typically relies on hold-out validation sets, which operate under the assumption of independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data. While effective, this standard approach necessitates labeled
data that is rendered unavailable for training and offers limited insight into how these issues can be
attributed to training set samples. This motivates a critical question: can we effectively assess model
generalization and diagnose potential problems solely using information available during training?
Prior work indicates that robust generalization emerges when all training samples contribute coherently towards a shared learning goal, that is, their gradients are directionally well aligned [1, 2].
Conversely, conflicting or misaligned gradient directions indicate a potential failure to generalize.
However, computing pairwise gradient alignment is highly memory-intensive and is not an inherently
distributional quantity; in other words, the average gradient alignment over the dataset provides
minimal insight into individual samples’ contribution to training. In this work, we thus turn to the
alignment between per-sample gradients and the model weights as a measure for estimating key
training dynamics and predicting generalization in training with cross-entropy. This quantity, which
we refer to as Gradient-Weight Alignment (GWA), as well as its distribution, capture the degree of
gradient coherence across the dataset and allow linking model performance directly to the individual
underlying input-label pairs (Fig. 1). Moreover, we show that GWA can be efficiently estimated during training (online), providing insights into training dynamics even during large-scale optimization
with negligible overhead. We argue through extensive empirical evaluation that GWA accurately
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

