Bayesian Optimization with Preference Exploration
using a Monotonic Neural Network Ensemble

Hanyang Wang
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
Hanyang.Wang@warwick.ac.uk

Juergen Branke
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
Juergen.Branke@wbs.ac.uk

Matthias Poloczek∗
Amazon
San Francisco, CA 94105, USA
matpol@amazon.com

Abstract
Many real-world black-box optimization problems have multiple conflicting objectives. Rather than attempting to approximate the entire set of Pareto-optimal
solutions, interactive preference learning, i.e., optimization with a decision maker
in the loop, allows us to focus the search on the most relevant subset. However,
few previous studies have exploited the fact that utility functions are typically
monotonic. In this paper, we address the Bayesian Optimization with Preference
Exploration (BOPE) problem and propose using a neural network ensemble as
a utility surrogate model. This approach naturally integrates monotonicity and
allows learning the decision maker’s preferences from pairwise comparisons. Our
experiments demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches and is robust to noise in utility evaluations. An ablation study highlights
the critical role of monotonicity in enhancing performance.

1

Introduction

Global optimization of complex and expensive-to-evaluate functions is a fundamental challenge in
various scientific and engineering fields. Bayesian Optimization (BO) has emerged as a powerful
framework for addressing such problems in a sample-efficient way. BO has also been extended
to multi-objective optimization (MOO), where multiple, often conflicting, objectives need to be
optimized simultaneously. It has demonstrated its effectiveness in real-world applications such as
protein design, where both protein stability and additional desired properties like solvent-accessible
surface area need to be considered, see, e.g., Stanton et al. [2022] or Fromer and Coley [2023].
In MOO, there is usually not a single optimal solution, but a range of so-called Pareto optimal or
non-dominated solutions with different trade-offs. Several approaches have been developed for
finding good representations of Pareto-optimal solutions, with two methods standing out: ParEGO
[Knowles, 2006], which employs random augmented Chebyshev scalarizations for optimization in
each iteration, and expected hypervolume maximization [Yang et al., 2019, Daulton et al., 2020],
which directly maximizes the hypervolume of the Pareto front. Although both methods can generate
a Pareto front (a set of Pareto optimal trade-off solutions), eventually one is usually interested in a
single solution, and while it may be convenient for a decision maker (DM) to pick a solution from
the Pareto front, it means that a lot of computational effort is spent searching for solutions that are
eventually discarded.
∗

This research does not relate to Matthias’ work at Amazon.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

