Adjusted Count Quantification Learning on Graphs

Clemens Damke
LMU Munich, MCML
clemens.damke@ifi.lmu.de

Eyke Hüllermeier
LMU Munich, MCML, DFKI
eyke@lmu.de

Abstract
Quantification learning is the task of predicting the label distribution of a set of
instances. We study this problem in the context of graph-structured data, where
the instances are vertices. Previously, this problem has only been addressed via
node clustering methods. In this paper, we extend the popular Adjusted Classify
& Count (ACC) method to graphs. We show that the prior probability shift assumption upon which ACC relies is often not applicable to graph quantification
problems. To address this issue, we propose structural importance sampling (SIS),
the first graph quantification method that is applicable under (structural) covariate
shift. Additionally, we propose Neighborhood-aware ACC, which improves quantification in the presence of non-homophilic edges. We show the effectiveness of
our techniques on multiple graph quantification tasks.

1

Introduction

We consider the task of quantification learning (QL) on graph-structured data. This term was first
coined by Forman [8, 9, 10] and is used to describe the task of estimating label prevalences via
supervised learning. A QL method receives a set of training instances with known labels, which is
used to train a quantifier. The quantifier is then used to predict the label distribution of a set of test
instances. Unlike standard instance-wise classification, QL does not concern itself with predicting
an accurate label for each test instance but rather with predicting the overall prevalence of each label
across all instances. QL can thus be seen as a dataset-level prediction task, where a single prediction
is made for a population of instances.
Quantification problems naturally arise in polling and surveying, where the goal is to estimate the
proportion of a population that has a certain property or holds a certain opinion. Examples include
estimating the proportion of voters who support a certain political party or the proportion of customers who are satisfied with a product. Similarly, QL can be applied to epidemiology or ecological
modelling to estimate the prevalence of diseases or species in a given population. We refer to Esuli
et al. [5] for a comprehensive overview of the applications of quantification.
Typically, QL is studied in the context of tabular data, where each instance x ∈ X = Rd is represented by a feature vector. In this setting, instances are assumed to be independent, i.e., the label
distribution P (Y | X = x) is fully determined by the instance x. However, in many real-world
applications, this independence assumption does not hold. Consider the example of estimating the
proportion of voters supporting a certain party. Assume we have access to a social network where
each node represents a voter and each edge represents a social connection. In this case, the label
distribution of a voter, i.e., their political preferences, may depend not only on their own features
but also on the features of their social connections. Incorporating this relational information into the
quantification process can lead to more accurate estimates.
Generally speaking, QL methods can be divided into two categories: aggregative and nonaggregative. Aggregative quantifiers rely upon an instance-wise label estimator, i.e., a regular classifier; the instance-level label estimates are then aggregated to obtain dataset-level label prevalence
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

