TC-Light: Temporally Coherent Generative
Rendering for Realistic World Transfer

Yang Liu1,2,7 Chuanchen Luo3,7 Zimo Tang6 Yingyan Li1,2 Yuran Yang5
Yuanyong Ning5 Lue Fan1,2 Junran Peng4,7∗ Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2∗
1
NLPR, MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Shandong University
4
Shunde Innovation School, University of Science and Technology Beijing
5
Tencent 6 Huazhong University of Science and Technology 7 Linketic
{liuyang2022, liyingyan2021, lue.fan, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
u202315173@hust.edu.cn yangyuran@bupt.edu.cn yyning@tencent.com
chuanchen.luo@sdu.edu.cn jrpeng4ever@126.com

Abstract
Illumination and texture rerendering are critical dimensions for world-to-world
transfer, which is valuable for applications including sim2real and real2real visual
data scaling up for embodied AI. Existing techniques generatively re-render the
input video to realize the transfer, such as video relighting models and conditioned
world generation models. Nevertheless, these models are predominantly limited to
the domain of training data (e.g., portrait) or fall into the bottleneck of temporal
consistency and computation efficiency, especially when the input video involves
complex dynamics and long durations. In this paper, we propose TC-Light, a novel
paradigm characterized by the proposed two-stage post optimization mechanism.
Starting from the video preliminarily relighted by an inflated video relighting model,
it optimizes appearance embedding in the first stage to align global illumination.
Then it optimizes the proposed canonical video representation, i.e., Unique Video
Tensor (UVT), to align fine-grained texture and lighting in the second stage.
To comprehensively evaluate performance, we also establish a long and highly
dynamic video benchmark. Extensive experiments show that our method enables
physically plausible re-rendering results with superior temporal coherence and low
computation cost. The code and video demos are available at our Project Page.

1

Introduction

Lighting and its interaction with both real and synthetic environments fundamentally shapes how
humans—and embodied agents—perceive the world. The ability to re-render the illumination and
texture (or so-called relighting) of captured image sequences, especially in complex, highly dynamic
scenes, is critically valuable for various world-to-world transfer use cases like filmmaking [49] and
augmented reality [35]. Crucially, by re-rendering the CG-simulated or realistic video data used to
train embodied agents, it can bridge the sim-to-real gap and enable real-to-real transfer, thus unlocking
access to massive high-quality data that is essential for stepping towards embodied intelligence.
Despite its importance, the video illumination and texture rerendering remains a highly challenging
problem, particularly when camera motion is highly dynamic and foreground objects frequently
enter and exit scenes, as shown in Fig. 1. Most existing generative relighting techniques [60,
35, 23, 48, 29, 57] are tailored for static images. As shown in Sec. 4.2, naively inflating them to
∗

Correponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

