Pairwise Optimal Transports for Training All-to-All
Flow-Based Condition Transfer Model
Kotaro Ikeda
The University of Tokyo
Preferred Networks, Inc.∗
kotaro-ikeda@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Jinzhe Zhang
Preferred Networks, Inc.

Kohei Hayashi
The University of Tokyo
Preferred Networks, Inc.

Masanori Koyama
The University of Tokyo
Preferred Networks, Inc.

Kenji Fukumizu
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
Preferred Networks, Inc.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a flow-based method for learning all-to-all transfer
maps among conditional distributions that approximates pairwise optimal transport.
The proposed method addresses the challenge of handling the case of continuous
conditions, which often involve a large set of conditions with sparse empirical
observations per condition. We introduce a novel cost function that enables simultaneous learning of optimal transports for all pairs of conditional distributions. Our
method is supported by a theoretical guarantee that, in the limit, it converges to the
pairwise optimal transports among infinite pairs of conditional distributions. The
learned transport maps are subsequently used to couple data points in conditional
flow matching. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this method on synthetic and
benchmark datasets, as well as on chemical datasets in which continuous physical
properties are defined as conditions. The code for this project can be found at
https://github.com/kotatumuri-room/A2A-FM

1

Introduction

Recent advances in generative modeling have been largely driven by the theory of dynamical systems,
which describes the transport of one probability measure to another. Methods such as diffusion
models [40, 18] and flow matching (FM, [31, 32, 2]) achieve this transport by leveraging stochastic
or ordinary differential equations to map an uninformative source distribution to target distribution(s).
Incorporating conditional distributions is a critical aspect of these dynamical generative models, as
this enables the generation of outputs with specific desired attributes. Considerable research has
been dedicated to designing mechanisms to condition these models. For example, in image and
video generation, text prompts are commonly used to guide the output toward specified content
[12, 17]. Similarly, in molecular design, conditioning on physical properties enables the generation
of molecules with target characteristics [46, 25].
This paper focuses on condition transfer (Fig. 1 (a)), an essential task in conditional generative
modeling whose goal is to transport an arbitrary conditional distribution to another. In applications,
it is often used to modify the specific attributes or conditions of a given instance while preserving
its other features. Applications span various domains; for example, in computer vision, image style
transfer has been an active area of research [16, 48], whereas chemistry, modifying molecules to
achieve desired physical properties is vital for exploring new materials and drugs [23, 25].
∗

This work was partially done while Kotaro was an intern in Preferred Networks.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

