Counteractive RL: Rethinking Core Principles for
Efficient and Scalable Deep Reinforcement Learning

Ezgi Korkmaz

Abstract
Following the pivotal success of learning strategies to win at tasks, solely by interacting with an environment without any supervision, agents have gained the ability
to make sequential decisions in complex MDPs. Yet, reinforcement learning policies face exponentially growing state spaces in high dimensional MDPs resulting in
a dichotomy between computational complexity and policy success. In our paper
we focus on the agent’s interaction with the environment in a high-dimensional
MDP during the learning phase and we introduce a theoretically-founded novel
paradigm based on experiences obtained through counteractive actions. Our analysis and method provide a theoretical basis for efficient, effective, scalable and
accelerated learning, and further comes with zero additional computational complexity while leading to significant acceleration in training. We conduct extensive
experiments in the Arcade Learning Environment with high-dimensional state
representation MDPs. The experimental results further verify our theoretical analysis, and our method achieves significant performance increase with substantial
sample-efficiency in high-dimensional environments.

1

Introduction

Utilization of deep neural networks as function approximators enabled learning functioning policies
in high-dimensional state representation MDPs [Mnih et al., 2015]. Following this initial work, the
current line of research trains deep reinforcement learning policies to solve highly complex problems
from game solving [Hasselt et al., 2016, Schrittwieser et al., 2020] to mathematical and scientific
reasoning of large language models [Guo et al., 2025]. Yet, there are still remaining unsolved
problems restricting the current capabilities of reinforcement learning in exponentially growing
state spaces. One of the main intrinsic open problems in deep reinforcement learning research is
sample complexity and experience collection in high-dimensional state representation MDPs. While
prior work extensively studied the policy’s interaction with the environment in bandits and tabular
reinforcement learning, and proposed various algorithms and techniques optimal to the tabular form
or the bandit context [Fiechter, 1994, Kearns and Singh, 2002, Brafman and Tennenholtz, 2002,
Kakade, 2003, Lu and Roy, 2019], experience collection in deep reinforcement learning remains an
open challenging problem while practitioners repeatedly employ quite simple yet effective techniques
(i.e. ϵ-greedy) [Whitehead and Ballard, 1991, Flennerhag et al., 2022, Hasselt et al., 2016, Wang
et al., 2016, Hamrick et al., 2020, Kapturowski et al., 2023, Korkmaz, 2024, Schmied et al., 2025,
Krishnamurthy et al., 2024].
Despite the provable optimality of the techniques designed for the tabular or bandit setting, they
generally rely strongly on the assumptions of tabular reinforcement learning, and in particular on the
ability to record tables of statistical estimates for every state-action pair which have size growing
with the number of states times the number of actions. Hence, these assumptions are far from what is
being faced in the deep reinforcement learning setting where states and actions can be parametrized
by high-dimensional representations. Thus, in high-dimensional complex MDPs, for which deep
Correspondence to Ezgi Korkmaz: ezgikorkmazmail@gmail.com
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

