Democratizing Clinical Risk Prediction with
Cross-Cohort Cross-Modal Knowledge Transfer

Qiannan Zhang, Manqi Zhou, Zilong Bai, Chang Su, Fei Wang∗
Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell University
{qiz4005,maz4010,zib4001,chs4001,few2001}@med.cornell.edu

Abstract
Clinical risk prediction plays a crucial role in early disease detection and personalized intervention. While recent models increasingly incorporate multimodal data,
their development typically assumes access to large-scale, multimodal datasets
and substantial computational resources. In practice, however, most clinical sites
operate under resource constraints, with access limited to EHR data alone and insufficient capacity to train complicated models. This gap highlights the urgent need
to democratize clinical risk prediction by enabling effective deployment in dataand resource-limited local clinical settings. In this work, we propose a cross-cohort
cross-modal knowledge transfer framework that leverages the multimodal model
trained on a nationwide cohort and adapts it to local cohorts with only EHR data.
We focus on EHR and genetic data as representative multimodal inputs and address
two key challenges. First, to mitigate the influence of noisy or less informative
biological signals, we propose a novel mixture-of-aggregations design to enhance
the modeling of informative and relevant genetic features. Second, to support rapid
model adaptation in low-resource sites, we develop a lightweight graph-guided
fine-tuning method that adapts pretrained phenotypical EHR representations to
local cohorts using limited patient data. Extensive experiments on real-world
clinical data validate the effectiveness of our proposed model.

1

Introduction

Predictive diagnosis and risk prediction play a pivotal role in clinical practice, particularly for chronic
conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias, which stem from a complex interplay
of genetic and environmental factors and impose significant socioeconomic burdens and public
health challenges. As current treatments may slow progression yet cannot reverse the pathological
process, early risk prediction before clinical diagnosis aims for personalized monitoring, proactive
management and preventive care in advance to slow disease progression and improve health outcomes.
Recent studies on disease risk prediction primarily rely on electronic health record (EHR) data to capture real-world patient phenotypical information [21, 27, 50, 43], including diagnoses, prescriptions,
etc. A growing number of research has explored introducing additional biological modalities, such as
medical imaging, genomics and proteomics, to boost predictive performance [22, 40, 10, 2, 56, 59].
However, most existing approaches are developed for a single cohort, under the assumption that
large patient populations, modalities, and ample computational resources are available for training.
In reality, this assumption often fails to hold, as many regional health providers may contend with
insufficiency of patient samples, costly modalities, and computing infrastructures to train predictive
models locally. Thus, democratizing clinical risk prediction capability to local cohorts is an important
step toward enabling accessible and equitable healthcare solutions across diverse clinical scenarios.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

