NeurIPT: Foundation Model for Neural Interfaces
Zitao Fang1 Chenxuan Li1 Hongting Zhou1 Shuyang Yu2 Guodong Du3
Ashwaq Qasem1 Yang Lu4 Jing Li5 Junsong Zhang4∗ Sim Kuan Goh1∗
1
Xiamen University Malaysia 2 Columbia University
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 4 Xiamen University
5
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
ait2209071@xmu.edu.my zhangjs@xmu.edu.cn simkuangoh@gmail.com

Abstract
Electroencephalography (EEG) has wide-ranging applications, from clinical diagnosis to brain-computer interfaces (BCIs). With the increasing volume and variety
of EEG data, there has been growing interest in establishing foundation models
(FMs) to scale up and generalize neural decoding. Despite showing early potential,
applying FMs to EEG remains challenging due to substantial inter-subject, intertask, and inter-condition variability, as well as diverse electrode configurations
across recording setups. To tackle these open challenges, we propose N EUR IPT,
a foundation model developed for diverse EEG-based Neural Interfaces with
a Pre-trained Transformer by capturing both homogeneous and heterogeneous
spatio-temporal characteristics inherent in EEG signals. Temporally, we introduce Amplitude-Aware Masked Pretraining (AAMP), masking based on signal
amplitude rather than random intervals, to learn robust representations across
varying signal intensities beyond local interpolation. Moreover, this temporal
representation is enhanced by a Progressive Mixture-of-Experts (PMoE) architecture, where specialized expert subnetworks are progressively introduced at deeper
layers, adapting effectively to the diverse temporal characteristics of EEG signals.
Spatially, NeurIPT leverages the 3D physical coordinates of electrodes, enabling
effective transfer of embedding across varying EEG settings, and develops IntraInter Lobe Pooling (IILP) during fine-tuning to efficiently exploit regional brain
features. Empirical evaluations across eight downstream BCI datasets, via finetuning, demonstrated NeurIPT consistently achieved state-of-the-art performance,
highlighting its broad applicability and robust generalization. Our work pushes
forward the state of FMs in EEG and offers insights into scalable and generalizable
neural information processing systems. Our project is available at this https URL.

1

Introduction

Electroencephalography (EEG) has been widely adopted as a proxy for brain activity and dynamics,
due to its non-invasiveness, portability, and high temporal resolution for real-time monitoring [1].
EEG facilitates investigations into brain function, assists in neurological diagnoses [2], provides objective biomarkers for cognitive and affective states [3], and enables the development of brain-computer
interfaces (BCIs) [4]. The growing availability of large-scale EEG datasets (spanning diverse populations, recording configurations, and experimental paradigms) has spurred the development of a wide
range of computational approaches, including machine learning and deep learning models (CNN [5],
RNN [6], GNN [7], Transformers [8]) for learning representations. However, these models are often
tailored to specific tasks and settings, limiting their generalizability and cross-setting applicability.
Hence, a paradigm shift is necessary to establish generalizable models that can effectively leverage
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

