Rethinking Tokenized Graph Transformers
for Node Classification

1

Jinsong Chen1,2∗, Chenyang Li1,3∗, Gaichao Li1,3 , John E. Hopcroft3,4 , Kun He1,3†
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Faculty of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Central China Normal University
3
Hopcroft Center on Computing Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
guangnianchenai@ccnu.edu.cn, {chenyangli,gaichaolee}@hust.edu.cn,
jeh@cs.cornell.edu, brooklet60@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Node tokenized graph Transformers (GTs) have shown promising performance
in node classification. The generation of token sequences is the key module in
existing tokenized GTs which transforms the input graph into token sequences,
facilitating the node representation learning via Transformer. In this paper, we
observe that the generations of token sequences in existing GTs only focus on
the first-order neighbors on the constructed similarity graphs, which leads to the
limited usage of nodes to generate diverse token sequences, further restricting the
potential of tokenized GTs for node classification. To this end, we propose a new
method termed SwapGT. SwapGT first introduces a novel token swapping operation
based on the characteristics of token sequences that fully leverages the semantic
relevance of nodes to generate more informative token sequences. Then, SwapGT
leverages a Transformer-based backbone to learn node representations from the
generated token sequences. Moreover, SwapGT develops a center alignment loss
to constrain the representation learning from multiple token sequences, further
enhancing the model performance. Extensive empirical results on various datasets
showcase the superiority of SwapGT for node classification. Code is available at
https://github.com/JHL-HUST/SwapGT.

1

Introduction

Node classification [22], the task of predicting node labels in a graph, is a fundamental problem in
graph data mining with numerous real-world applications. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [42, 23]
have traditionally been the dominant approaches. However, the message passing mechanism inherent
to GNNs suffers from some limitations, such as over-smoothing [5], which prevents them from
effectively capturing deep graph structural information and hinders their performance in downstream
tasks. In contrast, Graph Transformers (GTs), which adapt the Transformer framework for graphbased learning, have emerged as a promising alternative, demonstrating impressive performance in
node classification. Existing GTs can be broadly classified into two categories based on their model
architecture: hybrid GTs and tokenized GTs.
Hybrid GTs combine the strengths of GNN and Transformer, using GNNs to capture local graph
topology and Transformers to model global semantic relationships. However, recent studies have
highlighted a key issue with this approach: directly modeling semantic correlations among all node
pairs using Transformers can lead to the over-globalization problem [39], which compromises model
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

