Sparse Optimistic Information Directed Sampling

Ludovic Schwartz Hamish Flynn Gergely Neu
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
{ludovic.schwartz, hamishedward.flynn, gergely.neu}@upf.edu

Abstract
Many high-dimensional online decision-making problems can be modeled as
stochastic sparse linear bandits. Most existing algorithms are designed to achieve
optimal worst-case regret in either the data-rich regime, where polynomial dependence on the ambient dimension is unavoidable, or the data-poor regime, where
dimension-independence is possible at the cost of worse dependence on the number of rounds. In contrast, the sparse Information Directed Sampling (IDS) algorithm satisfies a Bayesian regret bound that has the optimal rate in both regimes
simultaneously. In this work, we explore the use of Sparse Optimistic Information Directed Sampling (SOIDS) to achieve the same adaptivity in the worst-case
setting, without Bayesian assumptions. Through a novel analysis that enables the
use of a time-dependent learning rate, we show that SOIDS can optimally balance
information and regret. Our results extend the theoretical guarantees of IDS, providing the first algorithm that simultaneously achieves optimal worst-case regret
in both the data-rich and data-poor regimes. We empirically demonstrate the good
performance of SOIDS.

1

Introduction

In stochastic linear bandits, one assumes that the mean reward associated with each action is linear
in an unknown d-dimensional parameter vector [Abe and Long, 1999, Auer, 2002, Dani et al., 2008,
Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011].
√ Under standard conditions, it is known that the minimax regret in this
setting is of the order O(d T ) [Dani et al., 2008, Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis, 2010]. Numerous follow-up works have investigated the possibility of reduced regret under various structural
assumptions on the unknown parameter vector, the noise, or the shape of the decision set [Valko
et al., 2014, Chu et al., 2011, Kirschner and Krause, 2018], [Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020, Chapter 22]. One such assumption is that the unknown parameter vector is sparse, which means that it
has only s ≪ d non-zero components. This setting is called sparse linear bandits and s is referred to
as the sparsity level.√In this setting, previous work has established the existence of algorithms with
regret scaling as O( sdT ) [Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2012]. This result is complemented by a lower
bound, which says that this rate cannot be improved as long as T ≥ dα for some α > 0 [Lattimore
and Szepesvári, 2020]. We refer to this scenario as the data-rich regime. Since this bound scales
polynomially with the dimension d, many researchers have considered this to be a negative result,
interpreting it as a sign that sparsity cannot be effectively exploited in linear bandit problems. This
interpretation has been challenged by a more recent observation that, when the action set admits
an exploratory distribution, simple “explore-then-commit” algorithms enjoy regret bounds of order
2
O((sT ) 3 ) [Hao et al., 2020, Jang et al., 2022]. These bounds scale only logarithmically with the
dimension, and constitute a major improvement over the previously mentioned rate in the data-poor
3
regime, where T ≪ ds . Most known algorithms are specialized to either the data-poor or datarich regime, and perform poorly in the other one. A notable exception is the sparse Information
Directed Sampling algorithm introduced in Hao et al. [2021], which performs almost optimally in
both regimes. However, Hao et al. [2021] only provide Bayesian performance guarantees for sparse
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

