T RACE: Contrastive learning for multi-trial
time-series data in neuroscience
Lisa Schmors1 Dominic Gonschorek2,3 Jan Niklas Böhm1 Yongrong Qiu7–9
Na Zhou4,5 Dmitry Kobak1 Andreas Tolias7–10 Fabian Sinz4–6
Jacob Reimer4,5 Katrin Franke2,7–9 Sebastian Damrich1 Philipp Berens1
1
Hertie Institute for AI in Brain Health, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
2
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, Germany
3
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
4
Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA
5
Center for Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA
6
Institute for Computer Science and Campus Institute Data Science, University of Göttingen, Germany
7
Department of Ophthalmology, Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, USA
8
Stanford Bio-X, Stanford University, USA
9
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, USA
10
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, USA

Abstract
Modern neural recording techniques such as two-photon imaging or Neuropixel
probes allow to acquire vast time-series datasets with responses of hundreds or
thousands of neurons. Contrastive learning is a powerful self-supervised framework
for learning representations of complex datasets. Existing applications for neural
time series rely on generic data augmentations and do not exploit the multi-trial
data structure inherent in many neural datasets. Here we present T RACE, a new
contrastive learning framework that averages across different subsets of trials to
generate positive pairs. T RACE allows to directly learn a two-dimensional embedding, combining ideas from contrastive learning and neighbor embeddings. We
show that T RACE outperforms other methods, resolving fine response differences
in simulated data. Further, using in vivo recordings, we show that the representations learned by T RACE capture both biologically relevant continuous variation,
cell-type-related cluster structure, and can assist data quality control.

1

Introduction

With advances in recording techniques, datasets in neuroscience have grown in size and complexity [7, 38]. For example, two-photon imaging and Neuropixel probes have made it possible to
record responses of tens of thousands of neurons from multiple cortical areas under comparable
conditions [12, 36]. To summarize and visually explore such noisy, high-dimensional data, it is
invaluable to represent it in two dimensions to identify functionally similar groups of neurons [47].
A prominent paradigm for learning informative representations of data is contrastive learning [17, 29].
Here, representations are created by contrasting similar samples (referred to as “positive pairs”)
against dissimilar ones (“negative pairs”), ensuring that similar samples are grouped together, while
dissimilar ones are separated. Contrastive learning has been popular for image data for some years [8],
but has only recently seen first applications for neuroscience time-series data [35, 42]. For example,
the contrastive method CEED [42] learns representations of extracellular action potential wave
forms using generic data augmentations such as amplitude jitter. However, most contrastive learning
methods, including CEED, do not directly embed into two dimensions necessary for visualization.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

