Finite-Time Analysis of Stochastic Nonconvex
Nonsmooth Optimization on the Riemannian
Manifolds
Emre Sahinoglu
Northeastern University
sahinoglu.m@northeastern.edu

Youbang Sun
Tsinghua University
ybsun@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Shahin Shahrampour
Northeastern University
s.shahrampour@northeastern.edu

Abstract
This work addresses the finite-time analysis of nonsmooth nonconvex stochastic optimization under Riemannian manifold constraints. We adapt the notion
of Goldstein stationarity to the Riemannian setting as a performance metric for
nonsmooth optimization on manifolds. We then propose a Riemannian Online to
NonConvex (RO2NC) algorithm, for which we establish the sample complexity of
O(ϵ−3 δ −1 ) in finding (δ, ϵ)-stationary points. This result is the first-ever finite-time
guarantee for fully nonsmooth, nonconvex optimization on manifolds and matches
the optimal complexity in the Euclidean setting. When gradient information is
unavailable, we develop a zeroth order version of RO2NC algorithm (ZO-RO2NC),
for which we establish the same sample complexity. The numerical results support
the theory and demonstrate the practical effectiveness of the algorithms.

1

Introduction

Gradient-based iterative optimization algorithms are frequently used as numerical solvers for machine
learning problems, many of which deal with search spaces with manifold structures. This includes
deep learning [61], natural language processing [34], principal component analysis (PCA) [19],
dictionary learning [11, 56], Gaussian mixture models [29] and low-rank matrix completion [27].
Riemannian optimization methods [1, 5, 54] offer a toolkit to solve optimization problems with
manifold constraints and have attracted great interest due to their wide range of applications. However,
unfortunately, conventional Riemannian optimization algorithms require access to the derivative of
a smooth function, often falling short in highly nonsmooth, nonconvex problems such as training
neural networks.
In this paper, we consider stochastic Riemannian optimization of an objective function f : M → R,
n
o
min f (x) := Eν [F (x, ν)] ,
(1)
x∈M

where F is a stochastic nonsmooth objective function, defined on a d-dimensional complete manifold
M that can be embedded in the Euclidean space, and ν corresponds to random data samples. Many
important problems can be formulated as nonsmooth Riemannian optimization over smooth manifolds,
including sparse PCA, compressed modes in physics, unsupervised feature selection, and robust
low-rank matrix completion [10, 30]. This problem setting is also commonly encountered in deep
neural networks, where optimization algorithms must be able to cope with deep nonlinear layers with
ReLU activations [2, 20, 21, 55, 69].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

