Watch and Listen: Understanding
Audio-Visual-Speech Moments with Multimodal LLM

Zinuo Li1 , Xian Zhang1 , Yongxin Guo2 , Mohammed Bennamoun1 , Farid Boussaid1 ,
Girish Dwivedi1 , Luqi Gong3∗, Qiuhong Ke4∗
https://github.com/zinuoli/TriSense
1
University of Western Australia 2 Alibaba Group 3 Zhejiang Laboratory 4 Monash University
VS Segment Captioning

AV Segment Captioning

What’s happening between [97.3,
105.6],considering from both audio,
visual and speech aspects?

AVS Segment Captioning

From [97.3, 105.6], would you describe
the visual-speech event happening,
focusing on what’s visible and spoken?

In the time window [97.3, 105.6], please
identify the visual-sound event and
explain what’s happening.

A man wearing a white mask is

A man wearing a face mask talks to

speaking about sponsor Bokksu snacks

another person about the sponsor

A man wearing a face mask is talking

with noisy background sound, which

Bokksu, mentioning they have been

under noisy background sound.

they have been trying for over a year.

trying out the snacks for over a year.

For the query 'A man recommends
visiting local areas in Tokyo, filming the
vibrant shopping mall with various
shops.', find the second at which it
occurs in the video

Speech: 35 yuan,
it’s like 30 cents,
can you believe…

Speech: People start to gather in
this area, and this place is also
known to very cheap street food
and take out food…

6s

0s

Sound: Street Noise

Speech: By the way guys, this
video is sponsored by bokksu, you
guys know, we’ve trying out the
boxes snacks for over a year…

…

…

Sound: Street Noise

Determine the precise timestamp in
seconds of the content described by
'two men walking' in the video, and
provide this information.

[50.2, 59.4]

Speech: I really really recommend
if you’ve never been to one, to visit
one of these local areas, and walk
around one of the…

106s 256s

Sound: Street Noise

Speech: Ok guys, there’s one more
shopping day in this area, and
instead of me like backtracking…

…

…

60s 97s

50s

Visual-Only Moment Retrieval

Where does 'A man is walking in a
narrow alley, with street noise and
conversations in the background.
Another man rides a bike down the
street while an old man speaks on the
sidewalk.” appears within the video.
[1747.9, 1759.1]

[256.3, 265.6]

[97.3, 105.6]

A man is wearing a face mask is talking.

AV Moment Retrieval

VS Moment Retrieval

AVS Moment Retrieval
Locate the moment where “A man
wearing a white mask is speaking
about sponsor Bokksu snacks with
noisy background sound, which they
have been trying for over a year.”

Visual-Only Segment Captioning
At the interval [97.3, 105.6], explain
what visual event is happening in the
video.

267s

Sound: Street Noise, People Talking

1747s

1759s

Sound: Street Noise, People Talking

Figure 1: TriSense supports segment captioning and moment retrieval for videos from audio, visual,
and speech modalities, as well as any combination of them, covering a total of eight different tasks.

Abstract
Humans naturally understand moments in a video by integrating visual and auditory
cues. For example, localizing a scene in the video like “A scientist passionately
speaks on wildlife conservation as dramatic orchestral music plays, with the
audience nodding and applauding” requires simultaneous processing of visual,
audio, and speech signals. However, existing models often struggle to effectively
fuse and interpret audio information, limiting their capacity for comprehensive
video temporal understanding. To address this, we present TriSense, a triplemodality large language model designed for holistic video temporal understanding
through the integration of visual, audio, and speech modalities. Central to TriSense
is a Query-Based Connector that adaptively reweights modality contributions
based on the input query, enabling robust performance under modality dropout
and allowing flexible combinations of available inputs. To support TriSense’s
multimodal capabilities, we introduce TriSense-2M, a high-quality dataset of
over 2 million curated samples generated via an automated pipeline powered by
fine-tuned LLMs. TriSense-2M includes long-form videos and diverse modality
combinations, facilitating broad generalization. Extensive experiments across
multiple benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of TriSense and its potential to
advance multimodal video analysis.
∗

corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

