VR-Drive: Viewpoint-Robust End-to-End Driving with
Feed-Forward 3D Gaussian Splatting

Hoonhee Cho1∗ Jae-Young Kang1∗ Giwon Lee1∗ Hyemin Yang1∗
Heejun Park1 Seokwoo Jung2 Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1
KAIST 2 42dot
https://vrdriveneurips.github.io/

Abstract
End-to-end autonomous driving (E2E-AD) has emerged as a promising paradigm
that unifies perception, prediction, and planning into a holistic, data-driven framework. However, achieving robustness to varying camera viewpoints, a common
real-world challenge due to diverse vehicle configurations, remains an open problem. In this work, we propose VR-Drive, a novel E2E-AD framework that addresses
viewpoint generalization by jointly learning 3D scene reconstruction as an auxiliary
task to enable planning-aware view synthesis. Unlike prior scene-specific synthesis approaches, VR-Drive adopts a feed-forward inference strategy that supports
online training-time augmentation from sparse views without additional annotations. To further improve viewpoint consistency, we introduce a viewpoint-mixed
memory bank that facilitates temporal interaction across multiple viewpoints and a
viewpoint-consistent distillation strategy that transfers knowledge from original
to synthesized views. Trained in a fully end-to-end manner, VR-Drive effectively
mitigates synthesis-induced noise and improves planning under viewpoint shifts.
In addition, we release a new benchmark dataset to evaluate E2E-AD performance
under novel camera viewpoints, enabling comprehensive analysis. Our results
demonstrate that VR-Drive is a scalable and robust solution for the real-world
deployment of end-to-end autonomous driving systems.

1

Introduction

The end-to-end autonomous driving (E2E-AD) system refers to the integration of all modules,
including perception, prediction, and planning nodes. The end-to-end driving paradigm [9, 11, 55, 10,
47, 4, 16, 54, 17, 72] has consistently gained attention as a holistic approach, wherein the perception
and prediction tasks are effectively integrated to support planning. This integration enhances both
performance and efficiency, favoring a unified model for the entire driving task. This data-driven
approach, compared to traditional rule-based planning, is designed to function robustly in complex
scenarios by integrating various perception tasks (e.g., detection, tracking, mapping, etc.). During the
training process, it incorporates vast amounts of data and annotations to enhance its capabilities.
Despite significant advancements and strong performance across various scenarios, existing end-toend autonomous driving (E2E-AD) must evolve into scalable and flexible holistic models to become
viable industry solutions. Recent E2E-AD systems [14, 67, 63, 31, 73, 50, 8, 32], in particular, aim
to achieve comparable performance using only raw camera input. However, the viewpoint of the
camera [30, 45] can vary depending on the vehicle’s type and make, and systems that can effectively
adapt to these changes are crucial from a real-world application perspective. A straightforward
solution to this challenge would be to collect data using a variety of vehicles and camera rigs, and
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

