Gradient-Variation Online Adaptivity for
Accelerated Optimization with Hölder Smoothness
Yuheng Zhao1,2 , Yu-Hu Yan1,2 , Kfir Yehuda Levy3 , Peng Zhao1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel

Abstract
Smoothness is known to be crucial for acceleration in offline optimization, and
for gradient-variation regret minimization in online learning. Interestingly, these
two problems are actually closely connected — accelerated optimization can be
understood through the lens of gradient-variation online learning. In this paper,
we investigate online learning with Hölder smooth functions, a general class encompassing both smooth and non-smooth (Lipschitz) functions, and explore its
implications for offline optimization. For (strongly) convex online functions, we
design the corresponding gradient-variation online learning algorithm whose regret
smoothly interpolates between the optimal guarantees in smooth and non-smooth
regimes. Notably, our algorithms do not require prior knowledge of the Hölder
smoothness parameter, exhibiting strong adaptivity over existing methods. Through
online-to-batch conversion, this gradient-variation online adaptivity yields an optimal universal method for stochastic convex optimization under Hölder smoothness.
However, achieving universality in offline strongly convex optimization is more
challenging. We address this by integrating online adaptivity with a detectionbased guess-and-check procedure, which, for the first time, yields a universal
offline method that achieves accelerated convergence in the smooth regime while
maintaining near-optimal convergence in the non-smooth one.

1

Introduction

First-order optimization methods based on (stochastic) gradients are widely used in machine learning
due to their efficiency and simplicity [Nesterov, 2018; Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma and Ba, 2015].
It is well-known that the curvature of the objective function strongly influences the difficulty of
optimization. In particular, the optimal convergence rates differ significantly between smooth√and
non-smooth objectives. For convex functions, the optimal rate in the non-smooth case is O(1/ T ),
achievable by standard gradient descent (GD), where T denotes the total number of gradient queries.
In contrast, for smooth functions, GD only attains an O(1/T ) rate, which exhibits a large gap with the
accelerated rate O(1/T 2 ) attained by the Nesterov’s accelerated gradient (NAG) method [Nesterov,
2018]. Similar acceleration phenomena also arise in the strongly convex setting.
The significant performance gap between smooth and non-smooth optimization has motivated the
study of universality in optimization [Nesterov, 2015]: an ideal universal method should adapt to both
unknown smooth and non-smooth cases, achieving optimal convergence in both regimes. Several
studies have explored adapting to a more challenging setting known as Hölder smoothness [Devolder
et al., 2014; Nesterov, 2015], which continuously interpolates between smooth and non-smooth
∗

Correspondence: Peng Zhao <zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

