Topology-Aware Learning of Tubular Manifolds via
SE(3)-Equivariant Network on Ball B-Spline Curve

Jingxuan Wang1∗ Zhongke Wu1 Xingce Wang1† Zeyao Zhang1
Chunghao Zheng1 Di Wang2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, China
2
LILY Research Centre, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract
Tubular-like system shape analysis is quite difficult in geometry and topology, while
it is widely used in plants and organs analysis in practice. However, traditional
discrete representations such as voxels and point clouds often require substantial
storage and may lead to the loss of fine-grained geometric and topological details.
To address these challenges, we propose SE(3)-BBSCformerGCN, a novel framework for learning shape-aware representations from continuous tubular topological
manifolds with equivariance to rotations and translations. Our approach leverages
Ball B-Spline Curve (BBSC) to define tubular manifolds and its functional space.
We provide a formal mathematical definition and analysis of the resulting manifolds and the BBSC functional space, and incorporate an equivariant mapping that
preserves geometric and topological stability. Compared to the point cloud and
voxel based representations, our manifold-based formulation significantly reduces
data complexity while preserving geometric attributes together with topological
features. We validate our method on the branch classification task for Circle of
Willis (CoW) on the TopCoW 2024 dataset and the clinical dataset. Our method
consistently outperforms voxel and point cloud based baselines in terms of classification performance, generalization ability, convergence speed, and robustness to
overfitting.

1

Introduction

Tubular structures play a vital role in a wide range of tasks across computer vision, computer graphics,
and interdisciplinary domains, including vascular segmentation [1], classification [2], and traffic
network planning [3, 4]. However, the analysis of tubular-like models is quite difficult in both
geometry and topology. From a geometric perspective, the branch morphology within tubular-like
models varies significantly, with marked differences in tortuosity among individuals for branches
of the same designation. From a topological perspective, the morphology and connectivity of the
branches are not unique. Certain branches are prone to stenosis, absence, or duplication, and tubularlike model structures frequently exhibit fusion or crossover. Meanwhile, both the geometric structure
and topological configuration of tubular-like models, such as vascular networks, may vary across
different subjects or even between different scans of the same subject.
The B-Spline model [5, 6, 7], along with its extensions such as Ball B-Spline Curves (BBSC) [8],
serves as an industry-standard tool widely adopted in computer graphics and computer-aided design
(CAD). In this work, we propose a compact and differentiable representation for tubular structures
based on BBSC, using a small set of control points, radii, and knot vectors. Compared to existing
voxel-based methods [9] and point cloud-based methods [10], our model not only reduces storage
∗
†

First author. Email: 202431081034@mail.bnu.edu.cn
Corresponding author. Email: wangxingce@bnu.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

