MOOSE-Chem2: Exploring LLM Limits
in Fine-Grained Scientific Hypothesis Discovery
via Hierarchical Search
Zonglin Yang1,2‡ , Wanhao Liu3,2 , Ben Gao4,2 , Yujie Liu2 , Wei Li5 , Tong Xie6 ,
Lidong Bing7 , Wanli Ouyang2,8 , Erik Cambria1† , Dongzhan Zhou2†
1

3

Nanyang Technological University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
University of Science and Technology of China 4 Wuhan University 5 National University of Singapore
6
University of New South Wales 7 MiroMind 8 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{zonglin001,cambria}@ntu.edu.sg, zhoudongzhan@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown promise in automating scientific
hypothesis generation, yet existing approaches primarily yield coarse-grained
hypotheses lacking critical methodological and experimental details. We introduce
and formally define the new task of fine-grained scientific hypothesis discovery,
which entails generating detailed, experimentally actionable hypotheses from
coarse initial research directions. We frame this as a combinatorial optimization
problem and investigate the upper limits of LLMs’ capacity to solve it when
maximally leveraged. Specifically, we explore four foundational questions: (1)
how to best harness an LLM’s internal heuristics to formulate the fine-grained
hypothesis it itself would judge as the most promising among all the possible
hypotheses it might generate, based on its own internal scoring-thus defining a
latent reward landscape over the hypothesis space; (2) whether such LLM-judged
better hypotheses exhibit stronger alignment with ground-truth hypotheses; (3)
whether shaping the reward landscape using an ensemble of diverse LLMs of
similar capacity yields better outcomes than defining it with repeated instances of
the strongest LLM among them; and (4) whether an ensemble of identical LLMs
provides a more reliable reward landscape than a single LLM. To address these
questions, we propose a hierarchical search method that incrementally proposes and
integrates details into the hypothesis, progressing from general concepts to specific
experimental configurations. We show that this hierarchical process smooths the
reward landscape and enables more effective optimization. Empirical evaluations
on a new benchmark of expert-annotated fine-grained hypotheses from recent
literature show that our method consistently outperforms strong baselines.1

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have increasingly been applied to assist scientific research (Luo
et al., 2025), with one of the most ambitious applications being the automated discovery of novel
and valid scientific hypotheses. However, current methods produce hypotheses that are criticized for
being overly coarse, lacking sufficient detail, offering simplistic suggestions, or omitting concrete
implementation strategies (Wang et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024; Si et al., 2025).
1

All code and data can be found in https://github.com/ZonglinY/MOOSE-Chem2
‡
Contribution during internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. † Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

