Language Models Are Capable of Metacognitive
Monitoring and Control of Their Internal Activations

Li Ji-An ∗
Neurosciences Graduate Program
University of California San Diego
Marcelo G. Mattar †
Department of Psychology
New York University

Hua-Dong Xiong ∗
School of Psychology
Georgia Tech

Robert C. Wilson †
School of Psychology
Georgia Tech

Marcus K. Benna †
Department of Neurobiology
University of California San Diego

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) can sometimes report the strategies they actually
use to solve tasks, yet at other times seem unable to recognize those strategies
that govern their behavior. This suggests a limited degree of metacognition — the
capacity to monitor one’s own cognitive processes for subsequent reporting and
self-control. Metacognition enhances LLMs’ capabilities in solving complex tasks
but also raises safety concerns, as models may obfuscate their internal processes
to evade neural-activation-based oversight (e.g., safety detector). Given society’s
increased reliance on these models, it is critical that we understand their metacognitive abilities. To address this, we introduce a neuroscience-inspired neurofeedback
paradigm that uses in-context learning to quantify metacognitive abilities of LLMs
to report and control their activation patterns. We demonstrate that their abilities
depend on several factors: the number of in-context examples provided, the semantic interpretability of the neural activation direction (to be reported/controlled), and
the variance explained by that direction. These directions span a “metacognitive
space” with dimensionality much lower than the model’s neural space, suggesting
LLMs can monitor only a small subset of their neural activations. Our paradigm
provides empirical evidence to quantify metacognition in LLMs, with significant
implications for AI safety (e.g., adversarial attack and defense).

1

Introduction

Modern large language models (LLMs) are becoming increasingly capable [Grattafiori et al., 2024,
Yang et al., 2024]. With their growing deployment in real-world settings, it is crucial to understand
not only what they can do but where they might go wrong. For instance, LLMs may exhibit behaviors
that are harmful or misleading. In particular, LLMs can sometimes form internal representations —
similar to humans’ mental processes — that provide deceptive answers to users or act in unexpected
ways 3 [Azaria and Mitchell, 2023]. Understanding [Arditi et al., 2024], monitoring [Zou et al.,
2023a, He et al., 2024], and controlling [Turner et al., 2023] their internal processes is thus a key
step to ensure LLMs remain transparent, safe, and aligned with human values [Bricken et al., 2023,
Hendrycks et al., 2021, Shah et al., 2025].
∗

Co-first authors.
Co-last authors.
3
We use anthropomorphic terms (e.g., thought, metacognition, deception) to describe LLM behavior and internal activations, without implying human-like neural mechanisms, consciousness, or philosophical equivalence
between humans and LLMs.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

