WeatherPrompt: Multi-modality Representation
Learning for All-Weather Drone Visual
Geo-Localization
Jiahao Wen1 Hang Yu1∗ Zhedong Zheng2
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, China
2
Faculty of Science and Technology and Institute of Collaborative Innovation, University of Macau, China
{wenjh,yuhang}@shu.edu.cn, zhedongzheng@um.edu.mo
1

Abstract
Visual geo-localization for drones faces critical degradation under weather perturbations, e.g., rain and fog, where existing methods struggle with two inherent
limitations: 1) Heavy reliance on limited weather categories that constrain generalization, and 2) Suboptimal disentanglement of entangled scene-weather features
through pseudo weather categories. We present WeatherPrompt, a multi-modality
learning paradigm that establishes weather-invariant representations through fusing
the image embedding with the text context. Our framework introduces two key
contributions: First, a Training-free Weather Reasoning mechanism that employs
off-the-shelf large multi-modality models to synthesize multi-weather textual descriptions through human-like reasoning. It improves the scalability to unseen or
complex weather, and could reflect different weather strength. Second, to better disentangle the scene and weather features, we propose a multi-modality framework
with the dynamic gating mechanism driven by the text embedding to adaptively
reweight and fuse visual features across modalities. The framework is further
optimized by the cross-modal objectives, including image-text contrastive learning
and image-text matching, which maps the same scene with different weather conditions closer in the representation space. Extensive experiments validate that, under
diverse weather conditions, our method achieves competitive recall rates compared
to state-of-the-art drone geo-localization methods. Notably, it improves Recall@1
by 13.37% under night conditions and by 18.69% under fog and snow conditions.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Jahawn-Wen/WeatherPrompt.

1

Introduction

Drone visual geo-localization aims to match drone-view image with corresponding satellite views,
supporting critical applications such as disaster response, urban surveillance, search-and-rescue, and
environmental monitoring [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. However, variable weather conditions such as rain, fog
and snow introduce noise, occlusions and low visibility, which severely distort image features [7, 8,
9] and leading conventional localization methods to suffer drastic performance degradation under
extreme weather. Recent advances in cross-modal retrieval show that integrating natural language
descriptions can substantially enhance the discrimination power of vision models, allowing better
generalization in complex or ambiguous scenarios [10, 11, 12, 13]. Despite this progress, leveraging
textual guidance for cross-weather drone geo-localization remains largely underexplored, especially
considering the nuanced and dynamic nature of weather conditions encountered in the field. The
ability of text to capture complex semantics and fine-grained details [14, 15] offers a promising
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

