Recurrent Attention-based Token Selection for
Efficient Streaming Video-LLMs

Vaggelis Dorovatas1,2

Soroush Seifi1

Gunshi Gupta3

Rahaf Aljundi1

1

2

Toyota Motor Europe
Archimedes RU, Athena RC
3
University of Oxford

Abstract
Video Large Language Models (Video-LLMs) excel at understanding videos incontext, provided they have full access to the video when answering queries.
However, these models face challenges in streaming scenarios where hour-long
videos must be processed online, and questions need timely responses. In this
work, we propose a training-free approach compatible with standard Video-LLMs,
leveraging three key concepts: 1) LLM-informed selection of visual tokens to
identify those that the LLM has attended to and contributed to its understanding of
each short clip. Our attention-based selection allows us to discard up to ∼ 95% of
unimportant visual tokens with minimal performance loss; 2) Recurrent processing
of past selected tokens to generate temporally coherent understanding of each
processed clip; 3) Caption-based question answering for lightweight and accurate
responses. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on streaming video
benchmarks, striking a balance between efficiency and effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Efficient and effective video question answering and understanding are crucial for deploying Large
Language Models (LLMs) as intelligent assistants in domains requiring continuous visual input
comprehension. This capability is essential for applications such as autonomous driving, surveillance, healthcare, and entertainment, where dynamic visual information must be understood in
real-time. Current video understanding research with VLMs [31, 17, 2] typically processes entire
videos in-context, presenting densely sampled frames alongside text queries to generate responses,
with common training approaches focusing on text generation tasks like video captioning or question
answering. While effective for short clips, this brute-force approach faces critical limitations with
longer videos: computational costs escalate as visual tokens multiply, and exceeding context length
limits forces sparse sampling that risks information loss. These challenges become particularly
pronounced in streaming scenarios where continuous visual input renders full-video processing unsustainable. This necessitates efficient compression techniques that selectively process frames, condense
visual information, and maintain easily retrievable memory structures for effective query response.
Recent efforts have focused on compressing the information from short video clips, moving away
from the brute-force approach of processing the entire video in a single pass, and thus extending
model capabilities to handle long video understanding. These approaches include methods that either
compress only the visual information (before the LLM) encoded by a vision encoder [38, 12, 10],
or store only textual descriptions of short clips [1], and retrieve only those relevant to the input
*First two authors provide contracted services for Toyota.
*Correspondence: vdorovatas@hotmail.gr
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

