Accelerating Optimization via Differentiable
Stopping Time

Zhonglin Xie
Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research
Peking University
zlxie@pku.edu.cn
Yiman Fong
Department of Industrial Engineering
Tsinghua University
fangym23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Haoran Yuan
School of Mathematical Science
Peking University
yuanhr@stu.pku.edu.cn

Zaiwen Wen
Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research
Peking University
wenzw@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
A common approach for accelerating optimization algorithms is to minimize the
loss achieved in a fixed time, which enables a differentiable framework with
respect to the algorithm’s hyperparameters. In contrast, the complementary objective of minimizing the time to reach a target loss is traditionally considered
non-differentiable. To address this limitation, we propose a differentiable discrete
stopping time and theoretically justify it based on its connection to continuous
differential equations. We design an efficient algorithm to compute its sensitivities, thereby enabling a new differentiable formulation for directly accelerating
algorithms. We demonstrate its effectiveness in applications such as online hyperparameter tuning and learning to optimize. Our proposed methods show superior
performance in comprehensive experiments across various problems, which confirms their effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Optimization algorithms are fundamental to a wide range of applications, including operations
research [1], the training of large language models [2], and decision-making in financial markets
[3]. Consequently, significant research effort has been dedicated to accelerating these algorithms.
A common formulation for algorithm design and tuning, prevalent in areas like hyperparameter
optimization [4] and learning to optimize (L2O) [5], is to minimize the objective function value
achieved after a fixed number of iterations or a predetermined time budget. This approach often
leads to differentiable training objectives with respect to algorithmic hyperparameters, enabling
gradient-based optimization of the algorithm itself.
However, this formulation does not directly optimize the number of iterations required to reach
a desired performance level or target loss, which is often the practical goal in deployment. This
complementary objective, minimizing the time to reach a target loss, is traditionally perceived as
non-differentiable with respect to algorithm parameters, as stopping time is typically an integer-valued
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

