Partner Modelling Emerges in Recurrent Agents
(But Only When It Matters)

Ruaridh Mon-Williams1∗ Max Taylor-Davies1∗ Elizabeth Mieczkowski2 Natalia Vélez2
Neil R. Bramley1 Yanwei Wang3† Thomas L. Griffiths2† Christopher G. Lucas1†
1
University of Edinburgh 2 Princeton University 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
Humans are remarkably adept at collaboration, able to infer the strengths and weaknesses of new partners in order to work successfully towards shared goals. To build
AI systems with this capability, we must first understand its building blocks: does
such flexibility require explicit, dedicated mechanisms for modelling others—or
can it emerge spontaneously from the pressures of open-ended cooperative interaction? To investigate this question, we train simple model-free RNN agents to
collaborate with a population of diverse partners. Using the ‘Overcooked-AI’ environment, we collect data from thousands of collaborative teams, and analyse agents’
internal hidden states. Despite a lack of additional architectural features, inductive
biases, or auxiliary objectives, the agents nevertheless develop structured internal
representations of their partners’ task abilities, enabling rapid adaptation and generalisation to novel collaborators. We investigated these internal models through
probing techniques, and large-scale behavioural analysis. Notably, we find that
structured partner modelling emerges when agents can influence partner behaviour
by controlling task allocation. Our results show that partner modelling can arise
spontaneously in model-free agents—but only under environmental conditions that
impose the right kind of social pressure.

1

Introduction

While humans are certainly impressive ‘solo’ learners and problem-solvers, our capacity for cooperation and collaboration is even more remarkable—enabling us to achieve goals beyond the reach of
any single individual, and leverage the complementary abilities of others while sharing or mitigating
the costs of action. In particular, humans display exceptional flexibility in adapting to unfamiliar
partners and task contexts. Indeed, it could be argued that this capacity for flexible collaboration is
one of the primary contributors to the success of our species—without it, it is hard to see how our
ancestors could have developed the culture and civilisation that persist to this day [1, 2, 3]. As we
develop artificial agents that will operate alongside us, occupying our homes and workplaces, it is
crucial that they too can share in this collaborative process [4].
One explanation for the powerful flexibility of human collaboration lies in our well-developed ‘Theory
of Mind’ (ToM)—our general faculty for inferring and representing the latent mental properties (such
as goals, beliefs, desires or intentions) that drive others’ behaviour [5]. As with many other social
contexts, effective collaboration with diverse partners requires an individual to not only react to the
actions of others, but also attempt to predict, and where appropriate to influence them—processes
which rely on the formation of predictive representations (‘mental models’) of other agents’ decisionmaking [6, 7, 8]. In collaborative contexts, we can use our ToM to infer and represent the varying
∗
†

Equal contribution. Correspondence to ruaridh.mw@ed.ac.uk or m.taylor-davies@sms.ed.ac.uk
Equal senior authorship

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

