Joint Hierarchical Representation Learning of Samples
and Features via Informed Tree-Wasserstein Distance
Ya-Wei Eileen Lin1 Ronald R. Coifman2 Gal Mishne3 Ronen Talmon1
1

Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion
2
Department of Mathematics, Yale University
3
Halicioǧlu Data Science Institute, University of California San Diego

Abstract
High-dimensional data often exhibit hierarchical structures in both modes: samples
and features. Yet, most existing approaches for hierarchical representation learning
consider only one mode at a time. In this work, we propose an unsupervised method
for jointly learning hierarchical representations of samples and features via TreeWasserstein Distance (TWD). Our method alternates between the two data modes. It
first constructs a tree for one mode, then computes a TWD for the other mode based
on that tree, and finally uses the resulting TWD to build the second mode’s tree. By
repeatedly alternating through these steps, the method gradually refines both trees
and the corresponding TWDs, capturing meaningful hierarchical representations
of the data. We provide a theoretical analysis showing that our method converges.
We show that our method can be integrated into hyperbolic graph convolutional
networks as a pre-processing technique, improving performance in link prediction
and node classification tasks. In addition, our method outperforms baselines in
sparse approximation and unsupervised Wasserstein distance learning tasks on
word-document and single-cell RNA-sequencing datasets.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional data with hierarchical structures are prevalent in numerous fields, e.g., gene
expression [1–3], image analysis [4–6], neuroscience [7, 8], and citation networks [9–11]. Therefore,
finding meaningful hierarchical representations for these data is an important task that has attracted
considerable attention [12–20]. While hierarchical structure is often assumed to exist in either the
samples or the features [13, 21–23] (i.e., one of the data modes of a matrix), many real-world datasets
exhibit hierarchical structure in both modes. For example, word-document data [24–26] commonly
contain hierarchies within features (e.g., related keywords) and within samples (e.g., document topics).
Another example is recommendation systems [27, 28], where items (features) could be arranged
into taxonomies or product categories, and users (samples) can be represented by multiple levels of
behavioral or demographic relations [29, 30].
An emerging approach to represent hierarchical data is based on embedding in hyperbolic space
[13, 14, 21–23, 31]. However, most existing hyperbolic representation learning methods focus only
on one mode of a data matrix [13, 21, 22], either the rows (samples) or the columns (features). A
straightforward way to handle hierarchies in both modes is to learn a separate hierarchical representation for each. We postulate that a joint approach facilitates significant advantages and investigate
how the hierarchical structure of features can improve the discovery of the sample hierarchy, and,
conversely, how the sample hierarchy can improve the discovery of the feature hierarchy.
To this end, we propose to jointly learn the hierarchical representation of features and samples
using Tree-Wasserstein Distance (TWD) [32] in an iterative manner. Our approach departs from
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

