Parsimonious Predictions for Strategyproof
Scheduling

Richard Cole

Anupam Gupta

Pranav Jangir

Department of Computer Science
New York University
New York, NY 10012.

Abstract
We consider the problem of scheduling m jobs on n unrelated strategic machines
to minimize the maximum load of any machine. As the machines are strategic they
may misreport processing times to minimize their own load. The pioneering work
of Nisan and Ronen gave an n-approximate deterministic strategyproof mechanism
for this setting, and this was recently shown to be best possible by the breakthrough
results of Christodoulou et al. This large approxation guarantee begs the question:
how can we avoid these large worst-case results. In this work, we use the powerful
framework of algorithms with (machine-learned) predictions to bypass these strong
impossibility results. We show how we can predict O(m + n) values to obtain a
deterministic strategyproof algorithm whose makespan is within a constant factor
of the optimal makespan when the predictions are correct, and O(n) times the
optimum no matter how poor the predictions are.

1

Introduction

We consider the NP-hard problem of scheduling jobs on unrelated machines to minimize the makespan,
i.e., the load of the most loaded machine, in the setting where the machines are agents which can
behave strategically. In this game-theoretic setting, introduced by Nisan and Ronen (2001), only
the machines know the processing times for the jobs. Since they suffer a cost for processing jobs
(i.e., the processing time/size of the job), they have an incentive to misreport sizes (i.e., to overstate
or understate them) to the mechanism in order to get a more desirable bundle of jobs. Our goal
is to design a mechanism that achieves (a) a good approximation ratio, so that we always find a
schedule with makespan comparable to that of the optimal solution on the true processing sizes, and
(b) strategyproofness, so that no machine has any incentive to misstate their processing times.
In the non-strategic setting of classical approximation algorithms, the unrelated machines scheduling
problem can be approximated to a factor of 2 (due to works of Lenstra et al. (1990) and Shmoys and
Tardos (1993)), and it is NP-hard to approximate it better than a factor of 3/2, leaving a small gap
between the constants in the upper and lower bounds. But when the machines can behave strategically,
it is now known that the optimal approximation factor of any strategyproof mechanism is not a
constant, but exactly n. The paper of Nisan and Ronen (2001) gave a mechanism achieving the
n-approximation, and now a matching lower bound of n for any strategyproof mechanism is known
due to Christodoulou et al. (2022, 2023). This leaves us with a large gap between the results that are
achievable in the non-strategic and strategic settings in the worst-case.
Since worst-case instances may be pathological and the analysis pessimistic, we can ask: how can
we give mechanisms that perform better in non-worst-case settings? An important approach of
algorithms with predictions or learning-augmented framework, has gained momentum, giving a
balance between the robustness guarantees of the worst-case model, and better results when given
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

