Uniform Wrappers: Bridging Concave to
Quadratizable Functions in Online Optimization
Mohammad Pedramfar
Mila - Quebec AI Institute/McGill University
mohammad.pedramfar@mila.quebec

Christopher J. Quinn
Iowa State University
cjquinn@iastate.edu

Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University
vaneet@purdue.edu

Abstract
This paper presents novel contributions to the field of online optimization, particularly focusing on the adaptation of algorithms from concave optimization to
more challenging classes of functions. Key contributions include the introduction
of uniform wrappers, a class of meta-algorithms that could be used for algorithmic conversions such as converting algorithms for convex optimization into those
for quadratizable optimization. Moreover, we propose a guideline that, given a
base algorithm A for concave optimization and a uniform wrapper W, describes
how to convert a proof of the regret bound of A in the concave setting into a
proof of the regret bound of W(A) for quadratizable setting. Through this framework, the paper demonstrates improved regret guarantees for various classes of
DR-submodular functions under zeroth-order feedback. Furthermore, the paper
extends zeroth-order online algorithms to bandit feedback and offline counterparts, achieving notable improvements in regret/sample complexity compared to
existing approaches.

1

Introduction

The optimization of continuous DR-submodular functions has become increasingly prominent in
recent years. This form of optimization represents an important subset of non-convex optimization
problems at the forefront of machine learning and statistics. These challenges have numerous realworld applications like revenue maximization, mean-field inference, and recommendation systems,
among others [Bian et al., 2019, Hassani et al., 2017, Mitra et al., 2021, Djolonga and Krause, 2014,
Ito and Fujimaki, 2016, Gu et al., 2023, Li et al., 2023].
A natural starting point for DR-submodular maximization is to begin with a convex optimization
algorithm and adapt it to the setting of DR-submodular functions. Online Convex Optimization
(OCO) is extensively utilized across various fields due to its numerous practical applications and
robust theoretical underpinnings. The tools from the area of online convex optimization have been
applied to many online non-concave optimization algorithms, e.g., to converge to stationary points
in online non-concave optimization [Yang et al., 2018], or algorithms with approximation guarantees for DR-submodular optimization [Chen et al., 2018, Niazadeh et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2022,
Pedramfar et al., 2023].
In this paper, we focus on a large class of functions, namely the class of quadratizable functions,
first introduced in [Pedramfar and Aggarwal, 2024a]. Quadratizable functions includes special subclasses of non-convex/non-concave functions where the offline constrained optimization problem
is NP-hard to solve but we can find an α-approximation of the optimal value in polynomial time.
Indeed, it is shown that this class of online upper quadratizable optimization includes up-concave
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

