Enabling Differentially Private Federated Learning
for Speech Recognition: Benchmarks,
Adaptive Optimizers and Gradient Clipping

Martin Pelikan∗ , Sheikh Shams Azam∗ , Vitaly Feldman, Jan “Honza” Silovsky,
Kunal Talwar, Christopher G. Brinton†, Tatiana Likhomanenko∗
Apple, Purdue University†
{mpelikan,s azam,vitalyf,jsilovsky}@apple.com
cgb@purdue.edu,{ktalwar,antares}@apple.com

Abstract
While federated learning (FL) and differential privacy (DP) have been extensively
studied, their application to automatic speech recognition (ASR) remains largely
unexplored due to the challenges in training large transformer models. Specifically,
large models further exacerbate issues in FL as they are particularly susceptible to
gradient heterogeneity across layers, unlike the relatively uniform gradient behavior
observed in shallow models. As a result, prior works struggle to converge with
standard optimization techniques, even in the absence of DP mechanisms. To the
best of our knowledge, no existing work establishes a competitive, practical recipe
for FL with DP in the context of ASR. To address this gap, we establish the first
benchmark for FL with DP in end-to-end ASR. Our approach centers on per-layer
clipping and layer-wise gradient normalization: theoretical analysis reveals that
these techniques together mitigate clipping bias and gradient heterogeneity across
layers in deeper models. Consistent with these theoretical insights, our empirical
results show that FL with DP is viable under strong privacy guarantees, provided a
population of at least several million users. Specifically, we achieve user-level (7.2,
10−9 )-DP (resp. (4.5, 10−9 )-DP) with only a 1.3% (resp. 4.6%) absolute drop in
word error rate when extrapolating to high (resp. low) population scales for FL with
DP in ASR. Although our experiments focus on ASR, the underlying principles
we uncover — particularly those concerning gradient heterogeneity and layer-wise
gradient normalization — offer broader guidance for designing scalable, privacypreserving FL algorithms for large models across domains. Code of all experiments
and benchmarks is available at https://github.com/apple/ml-pfl4asr.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) allows training models in a distributed manner without storing data centrally
on a server [1]. While FL eliminates privacy risks associated with data aggregation, it remains
vulnerable to inference attacks [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Stronger user-level privacy guarantees can be achieved
by combining FL with differential privacy (DP) [7, 8] and secure aggregation [9, 10]. FL introduces
several challenges in training including: heterogeneous data distribution [11, 12], sensitivity to cohort
size [13], and slower convergence rate due to local training [14]. A practical FL with DP with limited
privacy budget also limits extensive hyper-parameter tuning as it incurs additional privacy overhead
apart from communication and computation cost [15, 16], thus necessitating robust training strategies.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

