Abstract Counterfactuals for Language Model Agents

Edoardo Pona
King’s College in London
edoardo.1.pona@kcl.ac.uk
Yali Du
King’s College in London
yali.du@kcl.ac.uk

Milad Kazemi
King’s College in London
milad.kazemi@kcl.ac.uk

David Watson
King’s College in London
david.watson@kcl.ac.uk

Nicola Paoletti
King’s College in London
nicola.paoletti@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
Counterfactual inference is a powerful tool for analysing and evaluating autonomous agents, but its application to language model (LM) agents remains
challenging. Existing work on counterfactuals in LMs has primarily focused on
token-level counterfactuals, which are often inadequate for LM agents due to their
open-ended action spaces. Unlike traditional agents with fixed, clearly defined
action spaces, the actions of LM agents are often implicit in the strings they output,
making their action spaces difficult to define and interpret. Furthermore, the meanings of individual tokens can shift depending on the context, adding complexity
to token-level reasoning and sometimes leading to biased or meaningless counterfactuals. We introduce Abstract Counterfactuals, a framework that emphasises
high-level characteristics of actions and interactions within an environment, enabling counterfactual reasoning tailored to user-relevant features. Our experiments
demonstrate that the approach produces consistent and meaningful counterfactuals while minimising the undesired side effects of token-level methods. We
conduct experiments on text-based games and counterfactual text generation, while
considering both token-level and latent-space interventions.

1

Introduction

The recent successes of Large Language Models (LLMs) have paved the way for a novel approach to
developing autonomous agents. Previously, agents were typically trained in isolated environments
with limited knowledge. Language Model (LM) Agents [37] instead leverage their vast background
knowledge (owing to their training on internet-scale datasets) to solve increasingly general tasks,
including web browsing and research [38], multi-modal robotics [4], and navigating open-ended
environments [36, 39]. As such, LM Agents have also been studied for high-risk domains such as
medicine, law, and diplomacy [17, 20, 29, 32, 33]. This, however, has important safety implications
due to the (well-known) issues surrounding LLM safety, such as social biases and opaque reasoning
[1, 13, 21].
Causal and counterfactual explanations are effective techniques to enhance the explainability and
reliability of AI models. These techniques can answer how a model would have behaved in alternative
(counterfactual) settings, given observations of its behaviour in a factual setting [15, 24, 34]. This
ability to reason about “what if” scenarios is crucial in understanding responsibility and blame in
autonomous systems [6, 14] and deriving counterfactual policies—i.e., policies which, in hindsight,
would have been optimal with minimal interventions [2, 16, 19]. Recently, Ravfogel et al. [27] and
Chatzi et al. [7] have proposed methods for counterfactual inference on LLMs based on structural
causal models (SCMs) [24]. These two methods are the first to apply SCMs for LLM counterfactuals.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

