Human Texts Are Outliers: Detecting LLM-generated
Texts via Out-of-distribution Detection
Cong Zeng∗
MBZUAI
Wenchao Yu
NEC Lab

Shengkun Tang∗
MBZUAI
Xujiang Zhao
NEC Lab

Yuanzhou Chen
UCLA

Haifeng Chen
NEC Lab

Zhiqiang Shen
MBZUAI

Wei ChengB
NEC Lab

Zhiqiang XuB
MBZUAI

Abstract
The rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT,
DeepSeek, and Claude has significantly increased the presence of AI-generated
text in digital communication. This trend has heightened the need for reliable
detection methods to distinguish between human-authored and machine-generated
content. Existing approaches both zero-shot methods and supervised classifiers
largely conceptualize this task as a binary classification problem, often leading
to poor generalization across domains and models. In this paper, we argue that
such a binary formulation fundamentally mischaracterizes the detection task by
assuming a coherent representation of human-written texts. In reality, human texts
do not constitute a unified distribution, and their diversity cannot be effectively
captured through limited sampling. This causes previous classifiers to memorize
observed OOD characteristics rather than learn the essence of ‘non-ID’ behavior,
limiting generalization to unseen human-authored inputs. Based on this observation, we propose reframing the detection task as an out-of-distribution (OOD)
detection problem, treating human-written texts as distributional outliers while
machine-generated texts are in-distribution (ID) samples. To this end, we develop
a detection framework using one-class learning method including DeepSVDD and
HRN, and score-based learning techniques such as energy-based method, enabling
robust and generalizable performance. Extensive experiments across multiple
datasets validate the effectiveness of our OOD-based approach. Specifically, the
OOD-based method achieves 98.3% AUROC and AUPR with only 8.9% FPR95
on DeepFake dataset. Moreover, we test our detection framework on multilingual,
attacked, and unseen-model and -domain text settings, demonstrating the robustness and generalizability of our framework. Code, pretrained weights, and demo
will be released openly at https://github.com/cong-zeng/ood-llm-detect.

1

Introduction

In recent years, with the continuous iteration and rapid advancement of large language models
(LLMs) such as ChatGPT [1], DeepSeek [2] and Claude [3], the adoption of LLM-powered products
in everyday life and professional settings has increased significantly [4, 5, 6]. While these textgeneration models have greatly enhanced productivity and efficiency, they also pose risks of misuse
[7, 8, 9]. The phenomenon of hallucinations, instances where LLMs generate incorrect or misleading
content can lead to serious consequences if such outputs are inadvertently relied upon [10]. As LLMs
become increasingly powerful, there is a critical need for detection techniques that are stable, robust,
and accurate in distinguishing machine-generated text from human-written content[11, 12].
∗

Equal contribution. The names are ordered by coin flip. B Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

