Evaluating Robustness of Monocular Depth
Estimation with Procedural Scene Perturbations
Jack Nugent, Siyang Wu, Zeyu Ma, Beining Han, Meenal Parakh,
Abhishek Joshi, Lingjie Mei, Alexander Raistrick, Xinyuan Li, Jia Deng
Princeton University
{jacknugent, sw2776, zeyum, bh7032, meenalp,
aj9792, lm5483, araistrick, xl2855, jiadeng}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed substantial progress on monocular depth estimation,
particularly as measured by the success of large models on standard benchmarks.
However, performance on standard benchmarks does not offer a complete assessment, because most evaluate accuracy but not robustness. In this work, we
introduce PDE (Procedural Depth Evaluation), a new benchmark which enables
systematic evaluation of robustness to changes in 3D scene content. PDE uses
procedural generation to create 3D scenes that test robustness to various controlled
perturbations, including object, camera, material and lighting changes. Our analysis
yields interesting findings on what perturbations are challenging for state-of-the-art
depth models, which we hope will inform further research. Code and data are
available at https://github.com/princeton-vl/proc-depth-eval.

1

Introduction

The need for robustness evaluation. Monocular depth estimation refers to the task of producing a
per-pixel depth map from a single image. It is a key task in 3D vision. It is especially important when
only a single image is available, or multiple images are available but parts of the scene are motionless
relative to the camera.
In recent years, monocular depth estimation has seen significant advancements. Most notable is
the success of large models geared toward general monocular depth estimation. These models
are designed and trained with the goal of performing well on arbitrary scenes. Accuracy on standard benchmarks such as KITTI[10], NYU-D[33], ETH3D[32] and DIODE[37] have seen large
improvements.
However, standard benchmarks do not offer a complete assessment of performance, as most only
evaluate accuracy, not robustness. They do not tell us whether the predictions would remain reliable
under perturbations of the scene content. Would the estimated depth change significantly if the light
comes from below instead of above? What if the material is more specular? What if the object
has a slightly different shape? What if the camera moves slightly away? Existing depth robustness
evaluations [18] do not address these changes, instead focusing only on 2D image corruptions.
Assessing robustness to camera, object, lighting and material changes is important because they
are prevalent in downstream applications such as robotics and view-synthesis. A model that is
insufficiently robust is prone to unpredictable performance degradation, is vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, and cannot be deployed in mission-critical applications.
In other domains such as natural language reasoning and visual question answering [39, 38, 47, 12],
it has been revealed through targeted evaluation that many leading foundation models can struggle
under small perturbations of the input questions. Such evaluations have provided valuable insights
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

