HMVLM: Human Motion-Vision-Lanuage Model via
MoE LoRA
Lei Hu1,2∗

1

Yongjing Ye1∗

Shihong Xia1,2†

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{hulei19z, yeyongjing, xsh}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
The expansion of instruction-tuning data has enabled foundation language models
to exhibit improved instruction adherence and superior performance across diverse
downstream tasks. Semantically-rich 3D human motion is being progressively
integrated with these foundation models to enhance multimodal understanding and
cross-modal generation capabilities. However, the modality gap between human
motion and text raises unresolved concerns about catastrophic forgetting during this
integration. In addition, developing autoregressive-compatible pose representations
that preserve generalizability across heterogeneous downstream tasks remains a
critical technical barrier. To address these issues, we propose the Human MotionVision-Language Model (HMVLM), a unified framework based on the Mixture
of Expert Low-Rank Adaption(MoE LoRA) strategy. The framework leverages
the gating network to dynamically allocate LoRA expert weights based on the
input prompt, enabling synchronized fine-tuning of multiple tasks. To mitigate
catastrophic forgetting during instruction-tuning, we introduce a novel zero expert
that preserves the pre-trained parameters for general linguistic tasks. For pose
representation, we implement body-part-specific tokenization by partitioning the
human body into different joint groups, enhancing the spatial resolution of the
representation. Experiments show that our method effectively alleviates knowledge
forgetting during instruction-tuning and achieves remarkable performance across
diverse human motion downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

With the capability of encoding semantic information and emotional expression, 3D human motion
plays a critical role in virtual reality, embodied intelligence, computer graphics and visions. Recent
advances in foundation language models [1, 61, 58, 23] have facilitated multimodal integration.
This has stimulated researchers’ interest in embedding 3D human motion into these models to
address diverse motion-centric tasks, including text-to-motion synthesis[32, 76, 67], motion video
understanding[5] and pose estimation [16]. Notably, M3GPT [44] develops a unified vocabulary that
integrates text, motion, and music modalities, supporting both text-driven and music-driven motion
generation applications.
Although prior work has made progress in motion-centric multimodal modeling, two key issues
remain underexplored. First, the effect of incorporating human motion modalities on the foundation
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Shihong Xia is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

