SAFE: Multitask Failure Detection for
Vision-Language-Action Models

Qiao Gu1,2,3 Yuanliang Ju1,2,3 Shengxiang Sun1,2 Igor Gilitschenski1,2,3
Haruki Nishimura4 Masha Itkina4 Florian Shkurti1,2,3
1
University of Toronto (UofT), 2 UofT Robotics Institute,
3
Vector Institute, 4 Toyota Research Institute (TRI)
q.gu@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract
While vision-language-action models (VLAs) have shown promising robotic behaviors across a diverse set of manipulation tasks, they achieve limited success
rates when deployed on novel tasks out of the box. To allow these policies to safely
interact with their environments, we need a failure detector that gives a timely alert
such that the robot can stop, backtrack, or ask for help. However, existing failure
detectors are trained and tested only on one or a few specific tasks, while generalist
VLAs require the detector to generalize and detect failures also in unseen tasks
and novel environments. In this paper, we introduce the multitask failure detection
problem and propose SAFE, a failure detector for generalist robot policies such as
VLAs. We analyze the VLA feature space and find that VLAs have sufficient highlevel knowledge about task success and failure, which is generic across different
tasks. Based on this insight, we design SAFE to learn from VLA internal features
and predict a single scalar indicating the likelihood of task failure. SAFE is trained
on both successful and failed rollouts, and is evaluated on unseen tasks. SAFE is
compatible with different policy architectures. We test it on OpenVLA, π0 , and
π0 -FAST in both simulated and real-world environments extensively. We compare
SAFE with diverse baselines and show that SAFE achieves state-of-the-art failure
detection performance and a favorable trade-off between accuracy and detection
time using conformal prediction. More qualitative results and code can be found at
the project webpage: https://vla-safe.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Recently, scaling up robot manipulation datasets has enabled the development of large visionlanguage-action (VLA) models, which are generalist manipulation policies that can follow language
instructions and accomplish a wide range of tasks [1–6]. However, when VLAs are directly deployed
on unseen tasks without collecting additional demonstrations and finetuning the model, they still
suffer from limited success rates and a wide range of failure modes. This has been demonstrated
by evaluations in recent work [2, 4, 7]: while VLAs achieve success rates of 80–90% on seen tasks,
their performance on unseen tasks drops to 30–60% out of the box. Therefore, to safely and reliably
deploy VLA policies in the real world, it is important to promptly detect their potential failures.
Most existing failure detection methods train a separate failure detector for each task, and evaluate
the detector only on that task [8–17]. While these methods work well for specialist policies, they do
not suit generalists like VLAs. VLAs are designed to accomplish diverse tasks and may frequently
encounter novel task instructions and unseen environments during deployment. In such cases, it is
impractical to exhaustively collect rollouts and train a failure detector for every new task. Some recent
works introduce task-generic failure detectors, but they either require sampling multiple actions [18]
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

