Entropy-Calibrated Label Distribution Learning

Yunan Lu
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong, China
yunan.lu@polyu.edu.hk

Bowen Xue
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong, China
bowen.xue@connect.polyu.hk

Xiuyi Jia
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
Nanjing, China
jiaxy@njust.edu.cn

Lei Yang ∗
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong, China
ray.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Label Distribution Learning (LDL) has emerged as a powerful framework for
estimating complete conditional label distributions, providing crucial reliability for
risk-sensitive decision-making tasks. While existing LDL algorithms exhibit competent performance under the conventional LDL performance evaluation methods,
two key limitations remain: (1) current algorithms systematically underperform on
the samples with low-entropy label distributions, which can be particularly valuable
for decision making, and (2) the conventional performance evaluation methods are
inherently biased due to the numerical imbalance of samples. In this paper, through
empirical and theoretical analyses, we find that excessive cohesion between anchor
vectors contributes significantly to the observed entropy bias phenomenon in LDL
algorithms. Accordingly, we propose an inter-anchor angular regularization term
that mitigates cohesion among anchor vectors by penalizing over-small angles. Besides, to alleviate the numerical imbalance of high-entropy samples in test set, we
propose an entropy-calibrated aggregation strategy that obtains the overall model
performance by evaluating performance on the low-entropy and high-entropy subsets of the overall test set separately. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on
various real-world datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposal.

1

Introduction

Accurately estimating the entire conditional distribution of labels (a.k.a. the label distribution)
according to a set of feature variables, beyond merely the mean or mode of the distribution, is
receiving increasing attention both in the field of statistics and machine learning [4, 28], as the
information about the entire distribution is crucial in scenarios that are sensitive to risk, extremes, or
uncertainty. To achieve this goal, researchers have developed various kinds of techniques, such as
model calibration [27, 29] and mixture density neural network. These techniques aim to estimate
the true label distributions using the training samples that are labeled only with the mean or mode
of the underlying true label distribution, which are beneficial in practical tasks where the true label
distributions are hardly available. However, there remain a large number of real-world scenarios
where the true label distributions are readily available. For example, in rating prediction tasks or
crowd-sourced learning, the labeling results for a given sample usually can be normalized as the
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

