Differentiable Hierarchical Visual Tokenization
Marius Aasan1 , Martine Hjelkrem-Tan1 , Nico Catalano2 ,
Changkyu Choi3 , Adín Ramírez Rivera1
1
University of Oslo 2 Polytechnic University of Milan 3 UiT The Arctic University of Norway
Deptartment of Informatics

Artificial Intelligence and Robotics Lab

Department of Physics and Technology

mariuaas@uio.no, matan@uio.no, nico.catalano@polimi.it,
changkyu.choi@uit.no, adinr@uio.no

Abstract
Vision Transformers rely on fixed patch tokens that ignore the spatial and semantic
structure of images. In this work, we introduce an end-to-end differentiable tokenizer that adapts to image content with pixel-level granularity while remaining
backward-compatible with existing architectures for retrofitting pretrained models.
Our method uses hierarchical model selection with information criteria to provide
competitive performance in both image-level classification and dense-prediction
tasks, and even supports out-of-the-box raster-to-vector conversion.

1

Introduction

Transformers [1] have become the de facto architecture for all but a few data modalities [2–8].
The architecture is, however, contingent on the process of tokenization. Tokenizers for natural
language [9, 10] are designed to compress text into morphemes and semantic subwords—minimal
units aligned with meaning. Yet in vision, tokenization is comprised of partitioning images into
uniform square patches, ignoring semantic content and object boundaries in favor of computational
convenience. This highlights a key incongruity; text tokenizers align with semantic units while
patch-based vision tokenizers fragment objects without regard for their structure. Figure 1 illustrates
how patch tokens lack the semantic coherence and granularity necessary for dense predictions.
Efforts to move beyond the grid paradigm include clustering or merging [11, 12] for grouping features
dynamically, or deformable patches [13, 14] to improve spatial adaptivity. Recent work propose
subobject tokenizers [15–17] to partition images into semantically coherent regions, providing gains
in classification, segmentation accuracy, and interpretability. However, each method tackles only one
or two facets of the larger tokenization problem, and none are fully end-to-end learnable.
An effective visual tokenizer must unify precise semantic alignment, differentiability, and adaptive
granularity. Our key insight is that hierarchical pixel-level partitioning can be formulated as a multiscale model selection problem, and can be combined with differentiable mechanisms for end-to-end
learning. We propose differentiable hierarchical tokenization (∂HT) for Vision Transformers (ViTs),
emphasizing modularity [18, 19] for reuse and backward compatibility.
Original

ViT [2]

Quadtree [20]

SLIC [16]

∂HT (Ours)

Figure 1: Comparing spatial granularity in visual tokenizers. ∂HT (right) provides an end-to-end learnable
framework for multi-scale tokenization. We provide more examples in Figure E.6.
Code and model weights: https://github.com/dsb-ifi/dHT
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

