Stackelberg Learning with Outcome-based Payment
Tom Yan
Carnegie Mellon University
tyyan@cmu.edu

Chicheng Zhang
University of Arizona
chichengz@cs.arizona.edu

Abstract
With businesses starting to deploy agents to act on their behalf, an emerging
challenge that businesses have to contend with is how to incentivize other agents
with differing interests to work alongside its own agent. In present day commerce,
payment is a common way that different parties use to economically align their
interests. In this paper, we study how one could analogously learn such payment
schemes for aligning agents in the decentralized multi-agent setting. We model
this problem as a Stackelberg Markov game, in which the leader can commit to a
policy and also designate a set of outcome-based payments. We are interested in
answering the question: when do efficient learning algorithms exist? To this end, we
characterize the computational and statistical complexity of planning and learning
in general-sum and cooperative games. In general-sum games, we find that planning
is computationally intractable. In cooperative games, we show that learning can
be statistically hard without payment and efficient with payment, showing that
payment is necessary for learning even with aligned rewards. Altogether, our
work aims to consolidate our theoretical understanding of outcome-based payment
algorithms that can economically align decentralized agents.

1

Introduction

Increasingly, we are seeing businesses deploying agents to carry out tasks on their behalf. In the
coming agentic era, we will inevitably have multiple, decentralized agents interacting together. An
emerging challenge that businesses may have to face is how to incentivize other agents to work
alongside its agent. This challenge requires addressing a central difficulty in decentralized multi-agent
systems, which is that of differing interests.
In present day commerce, payment is a standard way that two parties use to resolve this challenge
and more closely align their business interests. This inspires us to study the overarching question in
this paper: how can we analogously implement such payment schemes in the multi-agent setting and
enable economic alignment? That is, if I am a business looking to use payment to incentivize another
business (and/or its agent) to work with my agent, how can I learn a good policy for my agent along
with a payment scheme to go with it?
On a technical level, this setting may be viewed as a Stackelberg Markov game. In this paper, we
study the two-player Stackelberg game, where one player (leader) commits to a policy taking into
account the best response to the policy by the other player (follower). We focus on Stackelberg
Markov games in particular as agents will be interacting over multiple turns and potentially long
horizons. Finally, to model the payment aspect, the leader is able to also increase the reward of the
follower in the Markov game, which may be viewed as a form of reward shaping in line with the
existing formulation in the literature [Ben-Porat et al., 2024, Bollini et al., 2024, Ivanov et al., 2024,
Scheid et al., 2024, Wu et al., 2024].
In this work, we aim to consolidate the theoretical foundations of Stackelberg learning with payment,
as complexity results have yet to be established for two-player Stackelberg Markov games. We focus
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

