ReDit: Reward Dithering for Improved LLM Policy
Optimization

Chenxing Wei†§♮ , Jiarui Yu◦ , Ying He† , Hande Dong◦ , Yao Shu≀∗, F. Richard Yu‡
§
Guangdong Lab of AI and Digital Economy (SZ), China
†
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
≀
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
◦
Tencent, Shenzhen, China
‡
School of Information Technology, Carleton University, Canada
weichenxing2023@email.szu.edu.cn, yaoshu@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
DeepSeek-R1 has successfully enhanced Large Language Models (LLMs) reasoning capabilities through its rule-based reward system. While it’s a “perfect”
reward system that effectively mitigates reward hacking, such reward functions
are often discrete. Our experimental observations suggest that discrete rewards
can lead to gradient anomaly, unstable optimization, and slow convergence. To
address this issue, we propose ReDit (Reward Dithering), a method that dithers
the discrete reward signal by adding simple random noise. With this perturbed
reward, exploratory gradients are continuously provided throughout the learning
process, enabling smoother gradient updates and accelerating convergence. The
injected noise also introduces stochasticity into flat reward regions, encouraging
the model to explore novel policies and escape local optima. Experiments across
diverse tasks and different LLMs demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of
ReDit. On average, ReDit achieves performance comparable to vanilla GRPO
with only approximately 10% the training steps, and furthermore, still exhibits a
4% performance improvement over vanilla GRPO when trained for a similar duration. Visualizations confirm significant mitigation of gradient issues with ReDit.
Moreover, theoretical analyses are provided to further validate these advantages.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is pivotal in Large Language Models (LLMs) development [1, 2, 3,
4]. Initially, RL from human feedback (RLHF) [5, 6] was employed to align pre-trained LLMs
with human preferences [7, 8]. This typically involves training a separate reward model (RM) on
human preference data [9], which then guides the LLM policy optimization [10]. While effective,
this approach introduces considerable training overhead [11]. Subsequently, methods like Direct
Preference Optimization (DPO) [12, 13] were developed, enabling LLMs to learn directly from
preference data and thus bypassing explicit RM training. However, these methods still require
extensive collection of high-quality preference data. For reasoning tasks such as mathematics
and coding, DeepSeek-R1 [14] with Group Relative Policy Optimization [15](GRPO) proposes an
alternative: optimizing the LLM policy directly using a rule-based reward system [16, 17], thereby
avoiding the need for external RMs or large preference datasets. For instance, such a system might
assign a reward of 1 for outputs meeting predefined criteria (e.g., correctness, format compliance)
and 0 otherwise [14]. The simplicity and unbiased nature of these rule-based rewards prevent LLMs
from hacking them, potentially fostering enhanced reasoning capabilities [18].
∗

corresponding author. ♮ Work done during an internship at Tencent.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

