SPiDR: A Simple Approach for Zero-Shot Safety in
Sim-to-Real Transfer
Yarden As∗
ETH Zurich

Chengrui Qu
Caltech

Laixi Shi
Johns Hopkins University

Benjamin Unger
ETH Zurich
Stelian Coros
ETH Zurich

Dongho Kang
ETH Zurich

Max van der Hart
ETH Zurich

Adam Wierman
Caltech

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich

Abstract
Deploying reinforcement learning (RL) safely in the real world is challenging,
as policies trained in simulators must face the inevitable ‘sim-to-real gap’. Robust
safe RL techniques are provably safe however difficult to scale, while domain randomization is more practical yet prone to unsafe behaviors. We address this gap by
proposing SPiDR, short for Sim-to-real via Pessimistic Domain Randomization—a
scalable algorithm with provable guarantees for safe sim-to-real transfer. SPiDR
uses domain randomization to incorporate the uncertainty about the sim-to-real gap
into the safety constraints, making it versatile and highly compatible with existing
training pipelines. Through extensive experiments on sim-to-sim benchmarks and
two distinct real-world robotic platforms, we demonstrate that SPiDR effectively
ensures safety despite the sim-to-real gap while maintaining strong performance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant strides in recent years, demonstrating remarkable
progress across a range of domains. These include achieving superhuman capabilities in games (Mnih
et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016), fine-tuning large language models (Ouyang et al., 2022), advancing
applications in healthcare (Fox et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020), robotics (Lee et al., 2020; Degrave et al.,
2022; Lin et al., 2025) and autonomous driving (Cusumano-Towner et al., 2025; Cornelisse et al.,
2025). Yet despite these achievements, ensuring safety and preventing harmful behaviors remains a
critical challenge and a prerequisite for unlocking the full potential of RL as a ubiquitous element in
everyday life (Amodei et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2022).
The use of simulators has been a key component behind the success of many of the mentioned
applications (Visentin et al., 2014; Makoviychuk et al., 2021; Degrave et al., 2022; Kazemkhani
et al., 2024). Training in simulation allows agents to learn from unsafe interactions, which in reality
would lead to catastrophic outcomes. In addition, learning complex behaviors fully online can be
prohibitively time-consuming. Modern simulators accelerate training, reducing hours of real-world
experience to minutes on consumer-grade GPUs (Rudin et al., 2022). However, while being a major
driver in the development of the above examples, even state-of-the-art simulators often fall short
in precisely mirroring the real-world. Indeed, “all models are wrong” (Box, 1976)—the so-called
sim-to-real gap can make simulation-trained policies violate real-world constraints, which can be
particularly dangerous in high-stakes settings where safety must be guaranteed on first contact.
Existing literature to address this challenge often relies on tools from robust optimization (Queeney
and Benosman, 2024; Kitamura et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). While being theoretically grounded,
such methods typically require practitioners to significantly alter their existing training pipelines,
∗

Corresponding author: yardas@ethz.ch

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

