Fantastic Features and Where to Find Them:
A Probing Method to combine Features from Multiple
Foundation Models
Benjamin Ramtoula1 Pierre-Yves Lajoie2 Paul Newman1 Daniele De Martini1
1
University of Oxford 2 Polytechnique Montréal
{benjamin, pnewman, daniele}@robots.ox.ac.uk
pierre-yves.lajoie@polymtl.ca

Abstract
Foundation models (FMs) trained with different objectives and data learn diverse
representations, making some more effective than others for specific downstream
tasks. Existing adaptation strategies, such as parameter-efficient fine-tuning, focus on individual models and do not exploit the complementary strengths across
models. Probing methods offer a promising alternative by extracting information
from frozen models, but current techniques do not scale well with large feature sets
and often rely on dataset-specific hyperparameter tuning. We propose Combined
backBones (ComBo), a simple and scalable probing-based adapter that effectively
integrates features from multiple models and layers. ComBo compresses activations from layers of one or more FMs into compact token-wise representations
and processes them with a lightweight transformer for task-specific prediction.
Crucially, ComBo does not require dataset-specific tuning or backpropagation
through the backbone models. However, not all models are equally relevant for all
tasks. To address this, we introduce a mechanism that leverages ComBo’s joint
multi-backbone probing to efficiently evaluate each backbone’s task-relevance,
enabling both practical model comparison and improved performance through
selective adaptation. On the 19 tasks of the VTAB-1k benchmark, ComBo outperforms previous probing methods, matches or surpasses more expensive alternatives,
such as distillation-based model merging, and enables efficient probing of tuned
models. Our results demonstrate that ComBo offers a practical and general-purpose
framework for combining diverse representations from multiple FMs.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning of foundation models (FMs) has become the predominant approach to solve new
downstream tasks in computer vision. Through large-scale pre-training, these models develop general
representations, useful across diverse tasks. Practitioners now have access to multiple such models,
each trained with specific data and supervision: CLIP [1] to align text and image embeddings, MAE
[2] to reconstruct missing image patches, or SAM [3] to segment regions in images. These differences
in training objectives and data distribution influence the learned representations, making specific
models more suitable than others for downstream tasks (Fig. 1a).
Ideally, the complementary representations of these models should be harnessed when solving a new
task, but it is unclear how to combine these different models. Whilst effective, tuning techniques are
usually designed to be applied to individual models and often require backpropagating through the
backbone. Trial-and-error of tuning techniques to find the best model would mean that users need to
Project page: bramtoula.github.io/combo
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

