Think Only When You Need
with Large Hybrid-Reasoning Models

Lingjie Jiang∗ †‡ Xun Wu∗ † Shaohan Huang† Qingxiu Dong†‡ Zewen Chi†
Li Dong† Xingxing Zhang† Tengchao Lv† Lei Cui† Furu Wei†⋄
†
Microsoft Research ‡ Peking University
lingjiejiang@stu.pku.edu.cn; {xunwu, shaohanh, fuwei}@microsoft.com

https://aka.ms/GeneralAI

Abstract
Recent Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) have shown substantially improved
reasoning capabilities over traditional Large Language Models (LLMs) by incorporating extended thinking processes prior to producing final responses. However,
excessively lengthy thinking introduces substantial overhead in terms of token
consumption and latency, particularly unnecessary for simple queries. In this
work, we introduce Large Hybrid-Reasoning Models (LHRMs), the first kind of
model capable of adaptively determining whether to perform thinking based on the
contextual information of user queries. To achieve this, we propose a two-stage
training pipeline comprising Hybrid Fine-Tuning (HFT) as a cold start, followed by
online reinforcement learning with the proposed Hybrid Group Policy Optimization
(HGPO) to implicitly learn to select the appropriate thinking mode. Furthermore,
we introduce a metric called Hybrid Accuracy to quantitatively assess the model’s
capability for hybrid thinking. Extensive experimental results show that LHRMs
can adaptively perform hybrid thinking on queries of varying difficulty and type. It
outperforms existing LRMs and LLMs in reasoning and general capabilities while
significantly improving efficiency. Together, our work advocates for a reconsideration of the appropriate use of extended thinking processes, and provides a solid
starting point for building hybrid thinking systems.

1

Introduction

Recent remarkable advancements in Large Reasoning Models (LRMs), such as DeepSeek-R1 [15],
OpenAI o1/o3 series [38] and others [46, 37], have catalyzed a significant paradigm shift from
conventional Large Language Models (LLMs) toward LRMs. Compared to LLMs, LRMs exhibit
substantially improved reasoning capabilities and generalization across tasks such as programming,
mathematics, and commonsense reasoning [49, 15, 48]. These improvements are primarily attributed
to the generation of extended thinking traces, often marked by special tokens such as <think>, prior
to producing the final responses. Despite the effectiveness of LRMs, existing work primarily focuses
on converting LLMs into LRMs to enhance performance across various domains, typically through
reinforcement learning algorithms such as GRPO [15] and REINFORCE++ [17], or by fine-tuning
on distilled thinking traces [36].
However, broader implications regarding the potential challenges faced by LRMs in real-world
applications remain underexplored. A prominent issue is the problem of overthinking [? ? ], where
excessive computational resources are expended on simple queries with negligible performance gains,
even for trivial inputs such as a single word (e.g. “Hello”). These findings highlight several pressing
limitations of current LRMs and raise a critical question:
∗

Equal contribution. ⋄ Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

