Curly Flow Matching for
Learning Non-gradient Field Dynamics

Katarina Petrović1∗, Lazar Atanackovic2,3,4 , Viggo Moro1 , Kacper Kapuśniak1 ,
İsmail İlkan Ceylan5,6,1 , Michael Bronstein1,6 , Avishek Joey Bose1,7†, Alexander Tong6,7,8†
1
University of Oxford, 2 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 3 University of Toronto,
4
Vector Institute, 5 TU Wien, 6 AITHYRA, 7 Mila – Quebec AI Institute, 8 Université de Montréal

Abstract
Modeling the transport dynamics of natural processes from population-level
observations is a ubiquitous problem in the natural sciences. Such models rely on
key assumptions about the underlying process in order to enable faithful learning
of governing dynamics that mimic the actual system behavior. The de facto
assumption in current approaches relies on the principle of least action that results
in gradient field dynamics and leads to trajectories minimizing an energy functional
between two probability measures. However, many real-world systems, such as cell
cycles in single-cell RNA, are known to exhibit non-gradient, periodic behavior,
which fundamentally cannot be captured by current state-of-the-art methods such
as flow and bridge matching. In this paper, we introduce C URLY F LOW M ATCH ING (C URLY-FM), a novel approach that is capable of learning non-gradient field
dynamics by designing and solving a Schrödinger bridge problem with a non-zero
drift reference process—in stark contrast to typical zero-drift reference processes—
which is constructed using inferred velocities in addition to population snapshot
data. We showcase C URLY-FM by solving the trajectory inference problems for
single cells, computational fluid dynamics, and ocean currents with approximate
velocities. We demonstrate that C URLY-FM can learn trajectories that better match
both the reference process and population marginals. C URLY-FM expands flow
matching models beyond the modeling of populations and towards the modeling
of known periodic behavior in physical systems. Our code repository is accessible
at: https://github.com/kpetrovicc/curly-flow-matching.git.
x(0)
x(1)

q(0)
q(1)

(a) Asymmetric circles

(b) C URLY-FM

x(0)
x(1)

(c) CFM

Figure 1: Particle trajectories generated between samples drawn from asymmetric circles distribution at t = 0 and t = 1 and respective to underlying reference velocity field ft (xt ). Traditional
flow-based models such as OT-CFM and CFM cannot capture cyclical patterns in physical systems.
C URLY-FM is capable of learning non-gradient field dynamics behavior in the underlying data.
∗
†

Correspondence to: {katarina.petrovic}@cs.ox.ac.uk
Equal advising

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

