FlowMoE: A Scalable Pipeline Scheduling
Framework for Distributed Mixture-of-Experts
Training

Yunqi Gao1 , Bing Hu1∗, Mahdi Boloursaz Mashhadi2 , A-Long Jin3 , Yanfeng Zhang4 ,
Pei Xiao2 , Rahim Tafazolli2 , Mérouane Debbah5
1
School of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
5GIC & 6GIC, Institute for Communication Systems (ICS), University of Surrey
3
School of Advanced Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University
5
KU 6G Research Center, Department of Computer and Information Engineering, Khalifa University
{gaoyunqi1999, binghu}@zju.edu.cn,
{m.boloursazmashhadi, p.xiao, r.tafazolli}@surrey.ac.uk,
along.jin@xjtlu.edu.cn, zhangyf@mail.neu.edu.cn, merouane.debbah@ku.ac.ae

Abstract
The parameter size of modern large language models (LLMs) can be scaled up
via the sparsely-activated Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) technique to avoid excessive increase of the computational costs. To further improve training efficiency,
pipelining computation and communication has become a promising solution for
distributed MoE training. However, existing work primarily focuses on scheduling
tasks within the MoE layer, such as expert computing and all-to-all (A2A) communication, while neglecting other key operations including multi-head attention
(MHA) computing, gating, and all-reduce communication. In this paper, we propose FlowMoE, a scalable framework for scheduling multi-type task pipelines.
First, FlowMoE constructs a unified pipeline to consistently scheduling MHA computing, gating, expert computing, and A2A communication. Second, FlowMoE
introduces a tensor chunk-based priority scheduling mechanism to overlap the
all-reduce communication with all computing tasks. We implement FlowMoE as
an adaptive and generic framework atop PyTorch. Extensive experiments with
675 typical MoE layers and four real-world MoE models across two GPU clusters
demonstrate that our proposed FlowMoE framework outperforms state-of-the-art
MoE training frameworks, reducing training time by 13%-57%, energy consumption by 10%-39%, and memory usage by 7%-32%. FlowMoE’s code is available at
https://github.com/ZJU-CNLAB/FlowMoE.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance on natural language processing (NLP) tasks as model sizes increase (e.g., GPT-3 [1] with 175 billion parameters, LLaMA3.1
[2] with 405 billion parameters, and DeepSeek-R1 [3] with 671 billion parameters). However,
parameter scaling causes a linear increase in the computational cost. Currently, sparsely-activated
LLMs with Mixture-of-Experts layers (MoE models) have become extremely popular [4], where
the MoE layer replaces the standard feed-forward layer in traditional transformer blocks. In MoE,
a gating function selects a small subset of dense layers, known as experts, to be activated for the
input sample tokens. This dynamic selection enables only a few experts to participate in computation
during each iteration [5, 6]. Therefore, MoE techniques can scale the model size with limited increase
in computation [5, 7, 8], e.g., Google’s Switch Transformer expands parameters from a few billion to
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

