Learning to Insert for Constructive Neural Vehicle
Routing Solver

Fu Luo1,2 , Xi Lin3 , Mengyuan Zhong4 , Fei Liu3 , Zhenkun Wang1,2∗ , Jianyong Sun4∗ , Qingfu Zhang3
1
School of Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fully Actuated System Control Theory and Technology,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
4
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
luof2023@mail.sustech.edu.cn, xi.lin@my.cityu.edu.hk, my.zhong@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
fliu36-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, wangzhenkun90@gmail.com,
jy.sun@xjtu.edu.cn, qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Neural Combinatorial Optimisation (NCO) is a promising learning-based approach
for solving Vehicle Routing Problems (VRPs) without extensive manual design.
While existing constructive NCO methods typically follow an appending-based
paradigm that sequentially adds unvisited nodes to partial solutions, this rigid
approach often leads to suboptimal results. To overcome this limitation, we explore
the idea of the insertion-based paradigm and propose Learning to Construct with
Insertion-based Paradigm (L2C-Insert), a novel learning-based method for constructive NCO. Unlike traditional approaches, L2C-Insert builds solutions by strategically inserting unvisited nodes at any valid position in the current partial solution,
which can significantly enhance the flexibility and solution quality. The proposed
framework introduces three key components: a novel model architecture for precise
insertion position prediction, an efficient training scheme for model optimization,
and an advanced inference technique that fully exploits the insertion paradigm’s
flexibility. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world instances of
the Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP) and Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem
(CVRP) demonstrate that L2C-Insert consistently achieves superior performance
across various problem sizes. The code is available at https://github.com/CIAMGroup/L2C_Insert.

1

Introduction

The vehicle routing problem (VRP) [1] is an important combinatorial optimization problem with
extensive real-world applications in domains such as transportation [2], logistics [3], and circuit
design [4]. Due to its NP-hard nature [5], obtaining exact VRP solutions is computationally difficult [5]. The existing approaches, therefore, focus on finding approximate solutions within a practical
runtime using problem-specific heuristics. However, designing these heuristics requires substantial
domain expertise. Recently, Neural Combinatorial Optimization (NCO) methods have emerged as a
promising alternative, as they can leverage neural networks to automatically learn effective heuristics
from data, thereby significantly reducing the need for extensive manual design [6–18].
Among NCO methods, constructive approaches attract considerable research interest [6, 19–26].
These methods typically employ an appending-based constructive paradigm that sequentially selects
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

