A Unifying View of Linear Function Approximation in
Off-Policy Reinforcement Learning through Matrix
Splitting and Preconditioning

Zechen Wu
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
zechen.wu@duke.edu

Amy Greenwald
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
amy_greenwald@brown.edu

Ronald Parr
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
parr@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
In off-policy policy evaluation (OPE) tasks within reinforcement learning, Temporal Difference Learning(TD) and Fitted Q-Iteration (FQI) have traditionally been
viewed as differing in the number of updates toward the target value function: TD
makes one update, FQI makes an infinite number, and Partial Fitted Q-Iteration
(PFQI) performs a finite number. We show that this view is not accurate, and
provide a new mathematical perspective under linear value function approximation
that unifies these methods as a single iterative method solving the same linear
system, but using different matrix splitting schemes and preconditioners. We show
that increasing the number of updates under the same target value function, i.e.,
the target network technique, is a transition from using a constant preconditioner
to using a data-feature adaptive preconditioner. This elucidates, for the first time,
why TD convergence does not necessarily imply FQI convergence, and establishes
tight convergence connections among TD, PFQI, and FQI. Our framework enables sharper theoretical results than previous work and characterization of the
convergence conditions for each algorithm, without relying on assumptions about
the features (e.g., linear independence). We also provide an encoder-decoder perspective to better understand the convergence conditions of TD, and prove, for
the first time, that when a large learning rate doesn’t work, trying a smaller one
may help. Our framework also leads to the discovery of new crucial conditions
on features for convergence, and shows how common assumptions about features
influence convergence, e.g., the assumption of linearly independent features can be
dropped without compromising the convergence guarantees of stochastic TD in the
on-policy setting. This paper is also the first to introduce matrix splitting into the
convergence analysis of these algorithms.

1

Introduction

In off-policy policy evaluation (OPE) tasks within reinforcement learning, the Temporal Difference
(TD) algorithm [36, 38] can be prone to divergence [2], while Fitted Q-Iteration (FQI) [15, 31, 24]
is reputed to be more stable [43]. Traditionally, TD and FQI are viewed as differing in the number
of updates toward a target value function: TD makes one update, FQI makes an infinite number,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

