From Judgment to Interference: Early Stopping LLM
Harmful Outputs via Streaming Content Monitoring

Yang Li1,2
1

Qiang Sheng1,2,∗ Yehan Yang1,2

Xueyao Zhang3

Juan Cao1,2

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{liyang23s, shengqiang18z, caojuan}@ict.ac.cn
Code & Models: https://liesy.github.io/SCM

Data: https://huggingface.co/datasets/liyang-ict/FineHarm

Abstract
Warning: this paper may contain potentially generated harmful content.
Though safety alignment has been applied to most large language models (LLMs),
LLM service providers generally deploy a subsequent moderation as the external
safety guardrail in real-world products. Existing moderators mainly practice a conventional full detection, which determines the harmfulness based on the complete
LLM output, causing high service latency. Recent works pay more attention to partial detection where moderators oversee the generation midway and early stop the
output if harmfulness is detected, but they directly apply moderators trained with
the full detection paradigm to incomplete outputs, introducing a training-inference
gap that lowers the performance. In this paper, we explore how to form a data-andmodel solution that natively supports partial detection. For the data, we construct
FineHarm, a dataset consisting of 29K prompt-response pairs with fine-grained
token-level annotations to provide reasonable supervision for token-level training.
Then, we propose the Streaming Content Monitor (SCM), which is trained with
dual supervision of response- and token-level labels and can follow the output
stream of LLM to make a timely judgment of harmfulness. Experiments show that
SCM gains 0.95+ in macro F1 score that is comparable to full detection, by only
seeing the first 18% of tokens in responses on average. Moreover, the SCM can
serve as a pseudo-harmfulness annotator for improving safety alignment and lead
to a higher harmlessness score than DPO.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) that utilize the autoregressive paradigm have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across diverse tasks, playing increasingly important roles in multiple applications [52]. However, potential safety risks such as harmful content generation still remain key
concerns for stakeholders [45, 25]. LLMs may fail to refuse to output harmful content, no matter
whether they are induced by well-designed malicious prompts or just receive benign requests, which
may cause undesirable societal consequences [7, 8, 28, 50, 22].
To mitigate harmful outputs, safety alignment techniques are applied to enhance LLMs’ intrinsic capability of refusing harmful outputs [3, 37, 51], but current alignment still cannot maintain helpfulness
without trading harmlessness, leaving harmful output risks unsolved [42, 13, 36]. This necessitates
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

