PC-Net: Weakly Supervised Compositional Moment
Retrieval via Proposal-Centric Network

Mingyao Zhou1,2,3

Hao Sun1,2,3∗
Wei Xie1,2,3
Ming Dong1,2,3
1,2,3
4
Chengji Wang
Mang Ye
1
School of Computer Science, Central China Normal University
2
Hubei Provincial Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Smart Learning,
Central China Normal University
3
National Language Resources Monitoring and Research Center for Network Media,
Central China Normal University
4
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University

Abstract
With the exponential growth of video content, aiming at localizing relevant video
moments based on natural language queries, video moment retrieval (VMR) has
gained significant attention. Existing weakly supervised VMR methods focus on
designing various feature modeling and modal interaction modules to alleviate
the reliance on precise temporal annotations. However, these methods have poor
generalization capabilities on compositional queries with novel syntactic structures
or vocabulary in real-world scenarios. To this end, we propose a new task: weakly
supervised compositional moment retrieval (WSCMR). This task trains models
using only video-query pairs without precise temporal annotations, while enabling
generalization to complex compositional queries. Furthermore, a proposal-centric
network (PC-Net) is proposed to tackle this challenging task. First, video and
query features are extracted through frozen feature extractors, followed by modality interaction to obtain multimodal features. Second, to handle compositional
queries with explicit temporal associations, a dual-granularity proposal generator decodes multimodal global and frame-level features to obtain query-relevant
proposal boundaries with fine-grained temporal perception. Third, to improve the
discrimination of proposal features, a proposal feature aggregator is constructed to
conduct semantic alignment of frames and queries, and employ a learnable peakaware Gaussian distributor to fit the frame weights within the proposals to derive
proposal features from the video frame features. Finally, the proposal quality is
assessed based on the results of reconstructing the masked query using the obtained
proposal features. To further enhance the model’s ability to capture semantic associations between proposals and queries, a quality margin regularizer is constructed
to dynamically stratify proposals into high and low query-relevance subsets and
enhance the association between queries and common elements within proposals,
and suppress spurious correlations via inter-subset contrastive learning. Notably,
PC-Net achieves superior performance with 54% fewer parameters than prior works
by parameter-efficient design. Experiments on Charades-CG and ActivityNet-CG
demonstrate PC-Net’s ability to generalize across diverse compositional queries.
Code is available at https://github.com/mingyao1120/PC-Net.

1

Introduction

Video moment retrieval aims to identify the precise timestamps in videos corresponding to user
queries, which has gained significant research attention. Fully supervised methods heavily rely on
∗

Corresponding author: haosun@ccnu.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

