When Semantics Mislead Vision:
Mitigating Large Multimodal Models Hallucinations
in Scene Text Spotting and Understanding

Yan Shu1∗
Hangui Lin3∗
Yexin Liu2∗
Yan Zhang4,5
Gangyan Zeng6
3†
7
8
2
Yan Li
Yu Zhou
Ser-Nam Lim
Harry Yang
Nicu Sebe1
1
University of Trento 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
University of International Relations
4
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
7
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
8
University of Central Florida
{yan.shu,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it
https://github.com/shuyansy/MLLM-Semantic-Hallucination

Abstract
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have achieved impressive progress in visual
perception and reasoning. However, when confronted with visually ambiguous
or non-semantic scene text, they often struggle to accurately spot and understand
the content, frequently generating semantically plausible yet visually incorrect
answers, which we refer to as semantic hallucination. In this work, we investigate the underlying causes of semantic hallucination and identify a key finding:
Transformer layers in LLM with stronger attention focus on scene text regions are
less prone to producing semantic hallucinations. Thus, we propose a training-free
semantic hallucination mitigation framework comprising two key components: (1)
ZoomText, a coarse-to-fine strategy that identifies potential text regions without
external detectors; and (2) Grounded Layer Correction, which adaptively leverages
the internal representations from layers less prone to hallucination to guide decoding, correcting hallucinated outputs for non-semantic samples while preserving
the semantics of meaningful ones. To enable rigorous evaluation, we introduce
TextHalu-Bench, a benchmark of 1,740 samples spanning both semantic and nonsemantic cases, with manually curated question–answer pairs designed to probe
model hallucinations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method not only
effectively mitigates semantic hallucination but also achieves strong performance
on public benchmarks for scene text spotting and understanding.

1

Introduction

Scene text, as a self-descriptive visual element, conveys rich semantic information that is crucial for
downstream applications such as autonomous driving, product analysis, and assistive technologies.
Effectively spotting and understanding scene text [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] thus attracts growing attention
from the deep learning community.
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author <liyan@uir.edu.cn>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

