A*-Thought: Efficient Reasoning via Bidirectional
Compression for Low-Resource Settings

Xiaoang Xu1 Shuo Wang2∗ Xu Han2,4,5 Zhenghao Liu3
Huijia Wu1 Peipei Li1 Zhiyuan Liu2,4,5 Maosong Sun2,4,5 Zhaofeng He1∗
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Northeastern University 4 Institute for AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology

Abstract
Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) achieve superior performance by extending the
thought length. However, a lengthy thinking trajectory leads to reduced efficiency.
Most of the existing methods are stuck in the assumption of overthinking and
attempt to reason efficiently by compressing the Chain-of-Thought, but this often
leads to performance degradation. To address this problem, we introduce A*Thought, an efficient tree search-based unified framework designed to identify and
isolate the most essential thoughts from the extensive reasoning chains produced by
these models. It formulates the reasoning process of LRMs as a search tree, where
each node represents a reasoning span in the giant reasoning space. By combining
the A* search algorithm with a cost function specific to the reasoning path, it can
efficiently compress the chain of thought and determine a reasoning path with high
information density and low cost. In addition, we also propose a bidirectional
importance estimation mechanism, which further refines this search process and
enhances its efficiency beyond uniform sampling. Extensive experiments on several
advanced math tasks show that A*-Thought effectively balances performance and
efficiency over a huge search space. Specifically, A*-Thought can improve the
performance of QwQ-32B by 2.39× with low-budget and reduce the length of the
output token by nearly 50% with high-budget. The proposed method is also compatible with several other LRMs, demonstrating its generalization capability. The
code can be accessed at: https://github.com/AI9Stars/AStar-Thought.

Question

Question

Solution

Solution
Thought Steps

Thought Steps with BIS

(a) Chain-of-Thought

(b) A*-Thought

Figure 1: Illustration of the comparison between the standard CoT and the proposed A*-Thought.
In A*-Thought, each thinking step is assigned a bidirectional importance score (BIS), represented
by varying color shades. Guided by the carefully-designed cost functions, A*-Thought efficiently
arrives at the solution using fewer steps, reducing the redundancy inherent in the original CoT.
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

