Rollout Roulette: A Probabilistic Inference Approach
to Inference-Time Scaling of LLMs using
Particle-Based Monte Carlo Methods
Isha Puri1

Shiv Sudalairaj2
1

GX Xu2

MIT CSAIL

2

Kai Xu2

Akash Srivastava2

RedHat AI

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved significant performance gains via
scaling up model sizes and/or data. However, recent evidence suggests diminishing
returns from such approaches, motivating a pivot to scaling test-time compute.
Existing deterministic inference-time scaling methods, usually with reward models, cast the task as a search problem, but suffer from a key limitation: early
pruning. Due to inherently imperfect reward models, promising trajectories may
be discarded prematurely, leading to suboptimal performance. We propose a
novel inference-time scaling approach by adapting particle-based Monte Carlo
methods. Our method maintains a diverse set of candidates and robustly balances exploration and exploitation. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates that
our particle filtering methods have a 4–16x better scaling rate over deterministic
search counterparts on both various challenging mathematical and more general
reasoning tasks. Using our approach, we show that Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B-Instruct
surpasses GPT-4o accuracy in only 4 rollouts, while Qwen2.5-Math-7B-Instruct
scales to o1 level accuracy in only 32 rollouts. Our work not only presents an
effective method to inference-time scaling, but also connects rich literature in
probabilistic inference with inference-time scaling of LLMs to develop more
robust algorithms in future work. Code and further information is available at
https://probabilistic-inference-scaling.github.io/

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) continue to improve through larger architectures and massive training
corpora [13, 22]. In parallel, inference-time scaling (ITS)—allocating more computation at inference
time—has emerged as a complementary approach to improve performance without increasing model
size. Recent work has shown that ITS enables smaller models to match or exceed the accuracy
of larger ones on complex reasoning tasks [3], with proprietary systems like OpenAI’s o1 and o3
explicitly incorporating multi-trial inference for better answers [21].
Beyond answer-level scaling methods like self-consistency and best-of-n sampling [4], a popular
class of ITS methods formulates inference as search guided by a process reward model (PRM),
which scores partial sequences step-by-step. This perspective has led to the adoption of algorithms
like beam search [34] and Monte Carlo tree search [11]. These methods refine LLM outputs by
prioritizing trajectories that score highly according to the PRM. However, they also inherit a major
limitation from classical search: early pruning. Because the PRM is an imperfect approximation of
true correctness, these methods often eliminate promising candidates too early-based on noisy or
miscalibrated partial scores. This failure mode is illustrated in Figure 1. The PRM assigns a higher
initial score to Answer 2, which ultimately turns out to be incorrect, and a lower score to the correct
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

