MRO: Enhancing Reasoning in Diffusion Language
Models via Multi-Reward Optimization

Chenglong Wang1 Yang Gan1∗ Hang Zhou1 Chi Hu2
Yongyu Mu1 Kai Song2 Murun Yang1 Bei Li1 Chunliang Zhang1,3
Tongran Liu4 Jingbo Zhu1,3 Zhengtao Yu5 Tong Xiao1,3†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
ByteDance 3 NiuTrans Research, Shenyang, China
4
CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Institute of Psychology, CAS, Beijing, China
5
Kunming University of Science and Technology
{clwang1119, zzhu8250}@gmail.com
{xiaotong, zhujingbo}@mail.neu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in diffusion language models (DLMs) have presented a promising
alternative to traditional autoregressive large language models (LLMs). However,
DLMs still lag behind LLMs in reasoning performance, especially as the number
of denoising steps decreases. Our analysis reveals that this shortcoming arises
primarily from the independent generation of masked tokens across denoising steps,
which fails to capture the token correlation. In this paper, we define two types of
token correlation: intra-sequence correlation and inter-sequence correlation, and
demonstrate that enhancing these correlations improves reasoning performance.
To this end, we propose a Multi-Reward Optimization (MRO) approach, which
encourages DLMs to consider the token correlation during the denoising process. More specifically, our MRO approach leverages test-time scaling, rejection
sampling, and reinforcement learning to directly optimize token correlation with
multiple elaborate rewards. Furthermore, we introduce a step-wise group reward
optimization approach to mitigate reward variance during the reward optimization.
Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that MRO not only improves
reasoning performance but also achieves significant denoising speedups while
maintaining high performance across reasoning tasks.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have recently made remarkable strides, profoundly impacting the
entire field of artificial intelligence. Almost all of these models share a typical recipe: learn a model
that maximizes data likelihoods using an autoregressive (AR) paradigm [1, 2, 3]. This AR paradigm
enables LLMs to perform exceptionally well in a wide range of downstream tasks, particularly
demonstrating impressive abilities to solve complex reasoning problems using chain of thought (CoT)
methods [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Models such as OpenAI’s o1 [9], Qwen2.5 [10], and DeepSeek-R1 [11]
are at the forefront of this progress. Despite its empirical success, the AR paradigm has inherent
limitations. During decoding, AR models generate tokens in a left-to-right, token-by-token manner,
which constrains both the efficiency and flexibility of generation [12, 13]. Furthermore, the generation
process heavily depends on previously generated tokens, which often leads to error accumulation
(also known as exposure bias) [14, 15].
∗
†

Work was done when Yang Gan was interning at ByteDance.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

