Continuous Subspace Optimization
for Continual Learning

Quan Cheng1,2 , Yuanyu Wan3,4 , Lingyu Wu1,2 , Chenping Hou5 , Lijun Zhang1,2,∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
4
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security, Hangzhou, China
5
College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
{chengq, wuly, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
wanyy@zju.edu.cn, hcpnudt@hotmail.com
1

Abstract
Continual learning aims to learn multiple tasks sequentially while preserving prior
knowledge, but faces the challenge of catastrophic forgetting when adapting to
new tasks. Recently, approaches leveraging pre-trained models have gained increasing popularity in mitigating this issue, due to the strong generalization ability
of foundation models. To adjust pre-trained models for new tasks, existing methods usually employ low-rank adaptation, which restricts parameter updates to a
ﬁxed low-rank subspace. However, constraining the optimization space inherently
compromises the model’s learning capacity, resulting in inferior performance. To
address this limitation, we propose Continuous Subspace Optimization for Continual Learning (CoSO) to ﬁne-tune the model in a series of subspaces rather than
a single one. These sequential subspaces are dynamically determined through the
singular value decomposition of the gradients. CoSO updates the model by projecting gradients onto these subspaces, ensuring memory-efﬁcient optimization.
To mitigate forgetting, the optimization subspace of each task is constrained to be
orthogonal to the historical task subspace. During task learning, CoSO maintains a
task-speciﬁc component that captures the critical update directions for the current
task. Upon completing a task, this component is used to update the historical task
subspace, laying the groundwork for subsequent learning. Extensive experiments
on multiple datasets demonstrate that CoSO signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-theart methods, especially in challenging scenarios with long task sequences.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success when trained on large-scale ofﬂine data
under the assumption of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples [He et al., 2016,
Vaswani et al., 2017, Dosovitskiy et al., 2021]. However, real-world applications often require models to learn from a sequence of tasks with different data distributions, a scenario known as continual
learning [De Lange et al., 2022, Van de Ven et al., 2022, Masana et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2024, Zhou
et al., 2024b]. The major challenge in continual learning is catastrophic forgetting [McCloskey and
Cohen, 1989], where the model’s performance on previously learned tasks deteriorates signiﬁcantly
as it adapts to new tasks.
In recent years, pre-trained models especially vision transformers (ViTs) [Dosovitskiy et al., 2021]
have demonstrated exceptional performance across various downstream tasks through their robust
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

