RidgeLoRA: Matrix Ridge Enhanced Low-Rank
Adaptation of Large Language Models

Junda Zhu1 Jun Ai1 Yujun Li2∗ Yichun Yin2
Yasheng Wang2 Lifeng Shang2 Qun Liu2
1
Beihang University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
junda_zhu@outlook.com liyujun145@gmail.com
https://github.com/chuhac/RidgeLoRA

Abstract
As one of the state-of-the-art parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, LowRank Adaptation (LoRA) enables model optimization with reduced computational
cost through trainable low-rank matrix. However, the low-rank nature makes it
prone to produce a decrease in the representation ability, leading to suboptimal performance. In order to break this limitation, we propose RidgeLoRA, a lightweight
architecture like LoRA that incorporates novel architecture and matrix ridge enhanced full-rank approximation, to match the performance of full-rank training,
while eliminating the need for high memory and a large number of parameters to
restore the rank of matrices. We provide a rigorous mathematical derivation to
prove that RidgeLoRA has a better upper bound on the representations than vanilla
LoRA. Furthermore, extensive experiments across multiple domains demonstrate
that RidgeLoRA achieves better performance than other LoRA variants, and can
even match or surpass full-rank training.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) with large number of parameters [1–8] have demonstrated exceptional performance in natural language generation tasks. These models acquire their primary
knowledge during the pre-training phase, through training on massive high-quality datasets from
both real-world corpora or model-generated synthetic data. To align with real-world scenarios [9],
LLMs also require supervised fine-tuning (SFT). Traditionally, this fine-tuning process employs
full-parameter (also full-rank) training (FFT) to achieve optimal performance. However, this approach
demands substantial computational resources.
When adapting LLMs for downstream tasks, training is often constrained by limited computational
resources, calling for efficient and lightweight solutions. Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (10, 11,
PEFT) methods achieve comparable performance to full-parameter fine-tuning with minimal cost.
Low-rank adaptation (LoRA, 12), as a representative PEFT method, is widely adopted due to the fact
that downstream tasks largely rely on the generic capabilities developed in pre-training. To maintain
model performance, LoRA’s initial state should also align with the original model’s output, which we
refer to as “the transform-calibrating restriction”.
However, vanilla LoRA, while significantly reducing the number of trainable parameters, is often
criticized for its lower performance ceiling [13–15]. Its low-rank nature results in significantly lower
representation capability compared to full-parameter fine-tuning, making it prone to underfitting in
downstream tasks [14]. Existing LoRA variants [16–21] primarily focus on matrix decomposition or
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

