AdaDetectGPT: Adaptive Detection of
LLM-Generated Text with Statistical Guarantees
Hongyi Zhou∗
Department of Mathematics
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Kai Ye
Department of Statistics
LSE
London, UK

Jin Zhu∗
School of Mathematics
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, UK

Pingfan Su
Department of Statistics
LSE
London, UK

Ying Yang
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Shakeel A O B Gavioli-Akilagun†
Department of Decision Analytics and Operations
City University Hong Kong
Hongkong, China

Chengchun Shi†
Department of Statistics
LSE
London, UK

Abstract
We study the problem of determining whether a piece of text has been authored by
a human or by a large language model (LLM). Existing state of the art logits-based
detectors make use of statistics derived from the log-probability of the observed
text evaluated using the distribution function of a given source LLM. However,
relying solely on log probabilities can be sub-optimal. In response, we introduce
AdaDetectGPT – a novel classifier that adaptively learns a witness function from
training data to enhance the performance of logits-based detectors. We provide
statistical guarantees on its true positive rate, false positive rate, true negative rate
and false negative rate. Extensive numerical studies show AdaDetectGPT nearly
uniformly improves the state-of-the-art method in various combination of datasets
and LLMs, and the improvement can reach up to 37%. A python implementation of
our method is available at https://github.com/Mamba413/AdaDetectGPT.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023),
Llama (Grattafiori et al., 2024) and DeepSeek (Bi et al., 2024) have revolutionized the field of
generative artificial intelligence by enabling large-scale content generation across various fields
including journalism, education, and creative writing (Demszky et al., 2023; Milano et al., 2023;
Doshi & Hauser, 2024). However, their ability to produce highly human-like text poses serious
risks, such as the spread of misinformation, academic dishonesty, and the erosion of trust in written
communication (Ahmed et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2023; Christian, 2023). Consequently, accurately
distinguishing between human- and LLM-generated text has emerged as a critical area of research.
There is a growing literature on the detection of machine-generated text; refer to Section 1.1 for
a review. One popular line of research focuses on statistics-based detectors, typically rely on log∗
†

Hongyi Zhou and Jin Zhu contributed equally to this paper and are listed in alphabetical order.
Corresponding authors: sgavioli@cityu.edu.hk, c.shi7@lse.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

