Failure Prediction at Runtime for
Generative Robot Policies
Ralf Römer1,∗
1

Adrian Kobras1,∗

Luca Worbis1

Angela P. Schoellig1,2,3

Technical University of Munich, Germany; Learning Systems and Robotics Lab;
Munich Institute of Robotics and Machine Intelligence (MIRMI)
2
3
Robotics Institute Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning
ralf.roemer@tum.de

Abstract
Imitation learning (IL) with generative models, such as diffusion and flow matching,
has enabled robots to perform complex, long-horizon tasks. However, distribution
shifts from unseen environments or compounding action errors can still cause
unpredictable and unsafe behavior, leading to task failure. Therefore, early failure
prediction during runtime is essential for deploying robots in human-centered
and safety-critical environments. We propose FIPER, a general framework for
Failure Prediction at Runtime for generative IL policies that does not require
failure data. FIPER identifies two key indicators of impending failure: (i) out-ofdistribution (OOD) observations detected via random network distillation in the
policy’s embedding space, and (ii) high uncertainty in generated actions measured
by a novel action-chunk entropy score. Both failure prediction scores are calibrated
using a small set of successful rollouts via conformal prediction. A failure alarm
is triggered when both indicators, aggregated over short time windows, exceed
their thresholds. We evaluate FIPER across five simulation and real-world environments involving diverse failure modes. Our results demonstrate that FIPER better
distinguishes actual failures from benign OOD situations and predicts failures
more accurately and earlier than existing methods. We thus consider this work
an important step towards more interpretable and safer generative robot policies.
Code, data, and videos are available at tum-lsy.github.io/fiper_website.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) for robotics usually involves high-dimensional, diverse, and multimodal
data [69, 39]. Recent advances in generative modeling, such as diffusion models [64, 25] and
flow matching [40], have led to significant progress in IL algorithms, substantially expanding the
range of complex, long-horizon tasks that robots can perform [11, 78, 56, 6, 5]. Despite these
improvements, generative IL policies remain imperfect even when trained on large-scale robot
data [39, 50]: Unexpected visual or state shifts and compounding errors in action predictions
can cause erratic or unsafe behavior, ultimately leading to task failure [37, 1, 42, 75]. In humancentered and safety-critical settings, it is therefore crucial to predict such failures as early as possible
during runtime to enable timely intervention [44] or safe fallbacks [8] or to ask human experts to
demonstrate the task [74]. However, failure prediction is difficult because it cannot be treated as
a typical classification problem for two main reasons: First, it is often not possible to generate
examples of failures [18, 42], as this would endanger the robot and its environment. Second, the
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

