Stochastic Momentum Methods for Non-smooth
Non-Convex Finite-Sum Coupled Compositional
Optimization

Xingyu Chen∗
tamucxy2023@tamu.edu

Bokun Wang∗
bokun-wang@tamu.edu

Qihang Lin†
qihang-lin@uiowa.edu

Ming Yang∗
myang@tamu.edu

Tianbao Yang∗‡
tianbao-yang@tamu.edu.

Abstract
Finite-sum Coupled Compositional Optimization (FCCO), characterized by its
coupled compositional objective structure, emerges as an important optimization
paradigm for addressing a wide range of machine learning problems. In this paper,
we focus on a challenging class of non-convex non-smooth FCCO, where the outer
functions are non-smooth weakly convex or convex and the inner functions are
smooth or weakly convex. Existing state-of-the-art result face two key limitations:
(1) a high iteration complexity of O(1/ϵ6 ) under the assumption that the stochastic
inner functions are Lipschitz continuous in expectation; (2) reliance on vanilla
SGD-type updates, which are not suitable for deep learning applications. Our main
contributions are two fold: (i) We propose stochastic momentum methods tailored
for non-smooth FCCO that come with provable convergence guarantees; (ii) We
establish a new state-of-the-art iteration complexity of O(1/ϵ5 ). Moreover, we
apply our algorithms to multiple inequality constrained non-convex optimization
problems involving smooth or weakly convex functional inequality constraints.
By optimizing a smoothed hinge penalty based formulation, we achieve a new
state-of-the-art complexity of O(1/ϵ5 ) for finding an (nearly) ϵ-level KKT solution. Experiments on three tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
algorithms.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the finite-sum coupled compositional optimization (FCCO) problem
1 Xn
min F (w) :=
fi (gi (w)),
d
i=1
n
w∈R

(1)

where fi : Rd1 → R is continuous, gi : Rd → Rd1 is continuous and satisfies gi (w) = Egi (w, ξi ),
and the expectation is taken over the random variable ξi for i = 1, . . . , n.
FCCO has been effectively applied to optimizing a wide range of risk functions known as Xrisks [1, 2, 3, 4], and group distributionally robust optimization (GDRO) [5, 6]. Recently, it was
also applied to solving non-convex inequality constrained optimization problems [7, 8]. Several
optimization algorithms have been developed for non-convex FCCO (1) under different conditions.
∗

Department of CSE, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA
Tippie College of Business, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA.
‡
Correspondence to: tianbao-yang@tamu.edu.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

