Probing Equivariance and Symmetry Breaking in
Convolutional Networks
Sharvaree Vadgama1,2,∗
Mohammad Mohaiminul Islam†3
Domas Buracas†2†
2,4
5
Christian Shewmake
Artem Moskalev
Erik J. Bekkers 1
1
2
AMLab, University of Amsterdam
New Theory AI
3
QurAI, University of Amsterdam 4 UC Berkeley 5 Independent Researcher

Abstract
In this work, we explore the trade-offs of explicit structural priors, particularly
group-equivariance. We address this through theoretical analysis and a comprehensive empirical study focusing on point clouds. To enable controlled and fair
comparisons, we introduce Rapidash, a unified group convolutional architecture
that allows for different variants of equivariant and non-equivariant models. Our
results suggest that more constrained equivariant models outperform less constrained alternatives when aligned with the geometry of the task, and increasing
representation capacity does not fully eliminate performance gaps. We see improved performance of models with equivariance and symmetry-breaking through
tasks like segmentation, regression, and generation across diverse datasets. Explicit symmetry breaking via geometric reference frames consistently improves
performance, while breaking equivariance through geometric input features can
be helpful when aligned with task geometry. Our results provide task-specific
performance trends that offer a more nuanced way for model selection. Code
available at github.com/Sharvaree/EquivarianceStudy.

1

Introduction

There is an ongoing debate about the necessity of explicit structural priors, particularly groupequivariance. A growing line of work argues that strict equivariance may over-constrain a model
and limit its scalability, and that increasing model capacity and training data [Qu and Krishnapriyan,
2024] can compensate for the lack of built-in symmetry. This perspective is supported by models
like AlphaFold [Abramson et al., 2024], which train equivariance by data augmentation. In contrast,
several recent works highlight the limitations of learning equivariance from data alone. Moskalev
et al. [2023] show that learned symmetries can be unreliable and rapidly degrade out-of-distribution.
Gruver et al. [2024] demonstrates that aliasing and nonlinearities are primary contributors to layerwise equivariance loss, and that data and training scale can have a greater influence than architectural
design in learning equivariances.Petrache and Trivedi [2023] demonstrate that even partial symmetry
alignment can improve generalization. Theoretical results by Perin and Deny [2024] further highlight
that learning equivariance is fundamentally limited when class orbits are sparse or poorly separated.
Given these competing perspectives, it remains unclear under what conditions equivariance leads
to tangible benefits, and when unconstrained models may be preferable, highlighting the need for a
deeper understanding of this trade-off.
To address this debate, we systematically investigate the impact of equivariant and non-equivariant
models across a range of learning tasks involving geometry. We begin by formalizing five core
research questions: (i) how kernel constraints affect expressivity and generalization, (ii) whether
∗
†

Corresponding author: <sharvaree.vadgama@gmail.com>
equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

