PLD: A Choice-Theoretic List-Wise Knowledge
Distillation
Ejafa Bassam∗ Dawei Zhu† Kaigui Bian‡
School of Computer Science, Peking University

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is a model compression technique in which a compact "student" network is trained to replicate the predictive behavior of a larger "teacher"
network. In logit-based knowledge distillation, it has become the de facto approach to augment cross-entropy with a distillation term. Typically, this term is
either a KL divergence that matches marginal probabilities or a correlation-based
loss that captures intra- and inter-class relationships. In every case, it acts as an
additional term to cross-entropy. This term has its own weight, which must be
carefully tuned. In this paper, we adopt a choice-theoretic perspective and recast
knowledge distillation under the Plackett–Luce model by interpreting teacher logits
as "worth" scores. We introduce Plackett-Luce Distillation (PLD), a weighted
list-wise ranking loss. In PLD, the teacher model transfers knowledge of its full
ranking of classes, weighting each ranked choice by its own confidence. PLD
directly optimizes a single "teacher-optimal" ranking. The true label is placed first,
followed by the remaining classes in descending teacher confidence. This process
yields a convex and translation-invariant surrogate that subsumes weighted crossentropy. Empirically, across CIFAR-100, ImageNet-1K, and MS-COCO, PLD
achieves consistent gains across diverse architectures and distillation objectives,
including divergence-based, correlation-based, and feature-based methods, in both
homogeneous and heterogeneous teacher–student pairs.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success across a wide array of tasks-from
image classification and object detection to semantic segmentation and beyond [47, 41]. Accuracy,
generalization, and robustness usually improve as models become deeper and larger [42]. However,
these gains require more computation and memory, which limits deployment on mobile or embedded
devices.
Knowledge distillation (KD) [12] addresses this by training a compact "student" network to mimic a
large "teacher" network. Classically, KD minimizes a weighted sum of cross-entropy on hard labels
and a temperature-scaled Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between teacher and student logits. This
simple framework enriches the student’s learning signal and has seen widespread adoption for model
compression and robustness enhancement [9, 34].
Despite its popularity, recent studies reveal a paradox. Distilling from larger or more accurate teachers
can sometimes degrade the student’s performance, especially when there is a capacity mismatch
[24, 33, 13]. Several methods have been proposed to address this issue. These include teacherassistant frameworks [24, 33], selective distillation [3, 54], and auxiliary classifiers [18]. However,
these methods often add extra architectural components or training stages. An alternative line of
∗

Email: ejafabassam@stu.pku.edu.cn
Email: dwzhu@pku.edu.cn
‡
Corresponding author; Email: bkg@pku.edu.cn
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

