Unlocking Multimodal Mathematical Reasoning
via Process Reward Model
Ruilin Luo12∗ Zhuofan Zheng2∗ Lei Wang3 Yifan Wang1
Xinzhe Ni1 Zicheng Lin1 Songtao Jiang4 Yiyao Yu1
Chufan Shi1 Ruihang Chu1† Jin Zeng2† Yujiu Yang1
1

3

Tsinghua University 2 ByteDance
Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. 4 Zhejiang University

Abstract
Process Reward Models (PRMs) have shown promise in enhancing the mathematical reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) through Test-Time
Scaling (TTS). However, their integration into multimodal reasoning remains
largely unexplored. In this work, we take the first step toward unlocking the potential of PRMs in multimodal mathematical reasoning. We identify three key
challenges: (i) the scarcity of high-quality reasoning data constrains the capabilities
of foundation Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), which imposes
further limitations on the upper bounds of TTS and reinforcement learning (RL);
(ii) a lack of automated methods for process labeling within multimodal contexts
persists; (iii) the employment of process rewards in unimodal RL faces issues
like reward hacking, which may extend to multimodal scenarios. To address
these issues, we introduce URSA, a three-stage Unfolding multimodal pRocessSupervision Aided training framework. We first construct MMathCoT-1M, a
high-quality large-scale multimodal Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning dataset,
to build a stronger math reasoning foundation MLLM, URSA-8B. Subsequently,
we go through an automatic process to synthesize process supervision data, which
emphasizes both logical correctness and perceptual consistency. We introduce
DualMath-1.1M to facilitate the training of URSA-8B-RM. Finally, we propose
Process-Supervised Group-Relative-Policy-Optimization (PS-GRPO), pioneering
a multimodal PRM-aided online RL method that outperforms vanilla GRPO. With
PS-GRPO application, URSA-8B-PS-GRPO outperforms Gemma3-12B and GPT4o by 8.4% and 2.7% on average across 6 benchmarks. Code, data and checkpoint
can be found at https://github.com/URSA-MATH.

1

Introduction

Following the substantial progress of Large Language Models (LLMs) in math reasoning [1–8], the
math reasoning capabilities of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have increasingly
garnered attention [9–13]. Previous work has typically focused on aspects such as math reasoning
data curation [14–18], training math-intensive vision encoders [19, 20], enhancing vision-language
alignment [11, 21], or the application of post-training techniques [22–24, 13]. Given the success
of Process Reward Models (PRMs) in improving LLM reasoning through methods like Test-Time
Scaling (TTS) [25, 26] and Reinforcement Fine-Tuning (ReFT) [27, 28], the application of PRMs to
multimodal reasoning remains unexplored.
* Equal contribution. Work done during Ruilin’s internship at ByteDance. † Corresponding author.
ruihangchu@gmail.com, zengjin@bytedance.com
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

