Reliable Decision-Making via Calibration-Oriented
Retrieval-Augmented Generation

Chaeyun Jang
KAIST
jcy9911@kaist.ac.kr

Deukhwan Cho
KAIST
macro_boomin@kaist.ac.kr

Seanie Lee
KAIST
lsnfamily02@kaist.ac.kr

Hyungi Lee†
Kookmin University
lhk2708@kookmin.ac.kr

Juho Lee†
KAIST
juholee@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have been increasingly used to support
various decision-making tasks, assisting humans in making informed decisions.
However, when LLMs confidently provide incorrect information, it can lead humans to make suboptimal decisions. To prevent LLMs from generating incorrect
information on topics they are unsure of and to improve the accuracy of generated content, prior works have proposed Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG),
where external documents are referenced to generate responses. However, previous RAG methods focus only on retrieving documents most relevant to the input
query, without specifically aiming to ensure that the human user’s decisions are
well-calibrated. To address this limitation, we propose a novel retrieval method
called Calibrated Retrieval-Augmented Generation (CalibRAG), which ensures
that decisions informed by RAG are well-calibrated. Then we empirically validate
that CalibRAG improves calibration performance as well as accuracy, compared
to other baselines across various datasets.

1

Introduction

Large language models [LLMs; 1, 2, 3, 4] have demonstrated remarkable performance on numerous
downstream natural language processing (NLP) tasks, leading to their widespread integration into
various decision-making processes [5, 6, 7]. However, even with significant increases in model
size and the expansion of training datasets, it remains infeasible for LLMs to encode all possible
knowledge within their parameters. As a result, the outputs produced by LLMs may not consistently
be reliable for important human decision-making processes, potentially overlooking key or hidden
details. Additionally, LLMs frequently provide inaccurate or misleading information with a high
degree of confidence, a phenomenon referred to as hallucination [8, 9], which can lead humans to
make flawed decisions. In addition, Zhou et al. [7] has empirically demonstrated that human users
often over-rely on LLM outputs during decision-making processes, and this over-reliance tends
to increase in proportion to the model’s confidence. Here, the model’s confidence refers to the
expression of how certain the model is when asked how confident it is in its answer. Specifically,
†

Co-corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

