Offline Actor-Critic for Average Reward MDPs

Jeongyeol Kwon
Wisconsin Institute for Discovery
Madison, WI 53706
jeongyeol.kwon@wisc.edu

William Powell
Department of Mathematics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
wgpowell@wisc.edu
Qiaomin Xie
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
qiaomin.xie@wisc.edu

Hanbaek Lyu
Department of Mathematics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
hlyu@math.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study offline policy optimization for infinite-horizon average-reward Markov
decision processes (MDPs) with large or infinite state spaces. Specifically, we
propose a pessimistic version of actor-critic methods using a computationally
efficient linear function class for value function estimation. At the core of our
method is a critic that computes a pessimistic estimate of the average reward under
the current policy, as well as the corresponding policy gradient, by solving a fixedpoint Bellman equation, rather than solving a successive sequence of regression
problems as in finite horizon settings. Due to the nature of our policy-based method,
the critic only needs to solve a linear optimization problem with convex quadratic
constraints. We show that a very mild data coverage requirement is sufficient for
our algorithm to achieve O(ε−2 ) sample complexity for learning a near-optimal
policy up to model misspecification errors. To our knowledge, this is the first result
with optimal ε dependence in the offline average reward setting.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a sequential decision making framework commonly studied in the
online setting where an agent attempts to learn an optimal policy through active interactions with its
environment. However, in many relevant applications such as autonomous driving and health care,
online learning can be intractable or dangerous [Tang and Wiens, 2021]. In such cases, it is common
to resort to offline learning, where the agent’s goal is to learn a near-optimal policy from a static data
set which was collected in a manner known to be safe and efficient for the application.
Without the ability to actively explore the environment, the agent’s capability to learn is subject to
the quality of the collected data. In particular, it is well known that effective learning is difficult
or impossible if the data set does not sufficiently cover the space of states and actions. Thus, a
major challenge in offline RL is the design of algorithms with provable guarantees under the weakest
possible data coverage requirements. Initial work [Antos et al., 2007, Munos and Szepesvári, 2008]
rely on strong uniform coverage assumptions that effectively require the data generating policy to
visit the entire state-action space. However, this assumption is often unreasonable, especially for
large or infinite state spaces. Accordingly, more recent work [Rashidinejad et al., 2021, Zanette et al.,
2021, Zhan et al., 2022, Hong and Tewari, 2024, Li et al., 2024, Gabbianelli et al., 2024, Neu and
Okolo, 2025] have focused on provable guarantees depending only on partial coverage conditions
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

