Memory-Efficient Training with In-Place FFT
Implementation

Xinyu Ding1 , Bangtian Liu, Siyu Liao1∗, Zhongfeng Wang1
1
School of Integrated Circuits, Sun Yat-sen University
{dingxy33, liaosy36, wangzf83}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, liubangtian@gmail.com,

Abstract
Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT) are widely used to reduce memory and computational costs in deep learning. However, existing implementations, including
standard FFT and real FFT (rFFT), cannot achieve true in-place computation. In
particular, rFFT maps an input of size n to a complex output of size n/2 + 1,
causing dimensional mismatch and requiring additional memory allocation. We
propose the first real-domain, fully in-place FFT framework (rdFFT) that preserves
input-output memory space consistency. By leveraging butterfly operation symmetry and conjugate properties in the frequency domain, we design an implicit
complex encoding scheme that eliminates intermediate cache usage entirely. Experiments on multiple natural language understanding tasks demonstrate the method
effectiveness in reducing training memory cost, offering a promising direction for
frequency-domain lightweight adaptation.

1

Introduction

Large-scale neural models have achieved remarkable success across a wide range of applications,
such as natural language processing [1][2] and computer vision [3]. As model sizes increase, memory
consumption has emerged as a significant challenge. Notably, model training memory cost is larger
than the deployment cost, primarily due to the backpropagation process [4]. Thus, reducing memory
usage has become a critical research study, especially for the training stage.
Numerous methods have been proposed to reduce memory usage during model training and deployment. Commonly used approaches such as model distillation [5], quantization [6], and pruning [7]
mainly aim to reduce memory consumption by decreasing the number or precision of model parameters. In contrast, this work takes a novel approach at the arithmetic operator level, implementing
in-place Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) operations for model training through the use of circulantstructured parameter matrices [8–10]. The FFT operator has been widely employed in various
neural network architectures due to its efficiency in capturing global patterns and enabling structured
transformations. For instance, Fourier-based fine-tuning methods such as FourierFT [11] and Block
Circulant Adapter (BCA) [10] rely heavily on FFT to perform efficient parameter transformations in
the frequency domain.
It should be noted that FFT-based operators typically involve both FFT and IFFT computations, which
generate intermediate tensors that consume memory and use different data type since the result of
FFT is complex number. Numerous studies have explored memory optimization strategies for FFT
operators, particularly in high-performance programming libraries such as FFTW [12] and cuFFT
[13]. These libraries support in-place computation, where input and output share memory space.
However, they suffer from the inability to maintain the original (input) memory space and lack of
support for bfloat16 data type that is widely used for modern neural models.
∗

Siyu Liao is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

