Defining and Discovering Hyper-meta-paths for
Heterogeneous Hypergraphs

Yaming Yang1 , Ziyu Zheng1 , Weigang Lu2 , Zhe Wang1 , Xinyan Huang3 , Wei Zhao1 , Ziyu Guan1∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
2
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, China
{yym@, zhengziyu@stu., wglu@stu., zwang@stu., ywzhao@mail., zyguan@}xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Heterogeneous hypergraph is a kind of structural data that contains multiple types of
nodes and multiple types of hyperedges. Each hyperedge type corresponds to a specific multi-ary relation (called hyper-relation) among subsets of nodes, which goes
beyond traditional pair-wise relations in simple graphs. Existing representation
learning methods for heterogeneous hypergraphs typically learn embeddings for
nodes and hyperedges based on graph neural networks. Although achieving promising performance, they are still limited in capturing more complex structural features
and richer semantics conveyed by the composition of various hyper-relations. To
fill this research gap, in this work, we propose the concept of hyper-meta-path for
heterogeneous hypergraphs, which is defined as the composition of a sequence of
hyper-relations. Besides, we design an attention-based heterogeneous hypergraph
neural network (HHNN) to automatically learn the importance of hyper-meta-paths.
By exploiting useful ones, HHNN is able to capture more complex structural
features to boost the model’s performance, as well as leverage their conveyed
semantics to improve the model’s interpretability. Extensive experiments show that
HHNN can achieve significantly better performance than state-of-the-art baselines,
and the discovered hyper-meta-paths bring good interpretability for the model
predictions. To facilitate the reproducibility of this work, we provide our dataset as
well as source code at: https://github.com/zhengziyu77/HHNN.

1

Introduction

Graph data is a common type of non-independent identically (non-i.i.d.) distributed data in our realworld life, which can be used to describe various complex relations between objects. Representation
learning and knowledge mining on graph data are beneficial for many real-world scenarios, such as
social networks [29], bioinformatics [42], e-commerce platform [43], and relational databases [13],
etc. In this paper, we categorize the existing graph data into four categories based on their complexity,
as shown in Figure 1.
❶ Homogeneous Simple Graphs consist of one type of nodes and one type of edges, and each edge
represents a binary (pair-wise) relation between two nodes. Figure 1(a) shows a toy homogeneous
simple graph, which describes five users and their pairwise friendship relations.
❷ Heterogeneous Simple Graphs consist of multiple types of nodes and multiple types of edges,
with edges representing various types of binary relations between node pairs. Figure 1(b) shows a toy
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

