Oracle-Efficient Combinatorial Semi-Bandits
Jung-hun Kim
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
FairPlay joint team, France
junghun.kim@ensae.fr

Milan Vojnović
London School of Economics
United Kingdom
m.vojnovic@lse.ac.uk

Min-hwan Oh
Seoul National University
South Korea
minoh@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We study the combinatorial semi-bandit problem where an agent selects a subset of
base arms and receives individual feedback. While this generalizes the classical
multi-armed bandit and has broad applicability, its scalability is limited by the
high cost of combinatorial optimization, requiring oracle queries at every round.
To tackle this, we propose oracle-efficient frameworks that significantly reduce
oracle calls while maintaining tight regret guarantees.
For the worst-case linear
√
e T ) regret using only O(log log T )
reward setting, our algorithms achieve O(
oracle queries. We also propose covariance-adaptive algorithms that leverage
noise structure for improved regret, and extend our approach to general (nonlinear) rewards. Overall, our methods reduce oracle usage from linear to (doubly)
logarithmic in time, with strong theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

The combinatorial semi-bandit problem extends the classical multi-armed bandit (MAB) model to
settings where an agent selects a subset of base arms (a combinatorial action) and receives individual
feedback for each. This general framework captures many real-world scenarios, such as product
recommendation, where a set of items is recommended to a user [16]; ad slot allocation, where
multiple ads are displayed on a webpage [12]; and network routing, where a path comprising several
links is selected in a communication network [27].
Due to its broad applicability, the combinatorial semi-bandit problem has been extensively studied in
the literature [5, 7, 18, 9, 22, 32]. However, a central challenge lies in the computational complexity
of solving the combinatorial optimization problem, which is often NP-hard. As a result, most
existing algorithms assume access to an oracle that returns a solution to the combinatorial problem.
These algorithms rely on querying the oracle at every round, leading to excessive oracle usage and
substantial computational overhead in practice.
In this work, following the computational complexity notions introduced in Balkanski and Singer
[1], Fahrbach et al. [11], we distinguish between two measures of oracle efficiency: adaptivity
complexity and query complexity, which are defined later. Our goal is to improve oracle efficiency
by substantially reducing the overall oracle adaptivity and query complexities in decision-making
over a time horizon T , while maintaining tight gap-free regret guarantees that do not depend on the
suboptimality gaps. Our main contributions are summarized below and compared with prior work on
gap-free combinatorial semi-bandits in Table 1.
• Oracle-efficient algorithms for worst-case linear rewards: We propose two frameworks
that significantly reduce oracle query usage while maintaining tight regret guarantees.
√ Using
e
an adaptive oracle query framework, AROQ-CMAB achieves near-optimal regret of O( mdT ),
with both adaptivity and query complexity bounded by O(d log log(T m/d)), where d
denotes the number of base arms and m is the maximum number of activated base arms per
action. To further improve computational practicality by reducing adaptivity complexity,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

