The Best Instruction-Tuning Data are Those That Fit

Dylan Zhang
University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign
shizhuo2@illinois.edu

Qirun Dai
University of Chicago
qirundai@uchicago.edu

Hao Peng
University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign
haopeng@illinois.edu

Abstract
High-quality supervised finetuning (SFT) data are essential for unlocking pretrained
LLMs’ capabilities. Typically, instructions are paired with responses from various
sources by humans annotators or other LMs, which are often out of the distribution
of the target model to be finetuned. This, at scale, can lead to diminishing returns
and even hurt the models’ performance and robustness. We hypothesize that SFT is
most effective with data aligned to the model’s pretrained distribution and propose
GRAPE— a novel SFT framework that tailors supervision to the target model. For
each instruction, it gathers responses from various sources, and selects the one that
aligns most closely to the target model’s pretrained distribution, as measured by
the normalized probability. We then proceed with standard SFT with these selected
responses. We first evaluate GRAPE with a controlled experiment, where we
sample various solutions for each question in UltraInteract from multiple models
and finetune on GRAPE-selected data using LMs from different families including
LLaMA.1-8B, Mistral-7B and Qwen2.5-7B. GRAPE significantly outperforms
strong baselines, including distilling from the strongest model with absolute gain
up to 13.8% averaging across benchmarks, and a baseline trained on 3× more data
with maximum 17.3% performance improvements. GRAPE’s strong performance
generalizes to off-the-shelf SFT data. We use GRAPE to subsample responses
from the post-training data used for Tulu3 and Olmo-2. GRAPE can outperform
strong baselines with 4.5 times the data by 6.1% and state-of-the-art data selection
approaches by 3.9% on average performance. Remarkably, using 1/3 data and
half number of epochs, GRAPE allows LLaMA.1-8B to surpass the performance
of Tulu3-SFT by 3.5%. Our findings highlight that aligning supervision with the
pretrained distribution offers a simple yet powerful way to improve SFT efficiency
and performance.

1

Introduction

High-quality, large-scale supervised data is crucial for supervised fine-tuing(SFT; Databricks, 2023;
Köpf et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024a; Zheng et al., 2024). A common practice of collecting SFT data
involves sampling responses from strong language models, predominantly focusing on expanding the
size of the dataset and improving the overall quality of the responses (Sun et al., 2023; Taori et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024c; Chen et al., 2024). However, recent research suggests
that there is more complex dynamics involved (Xu et al., 2024d). A plateau effect in synthetic
data scaling, where performance either stagnates or even declines as the size of the synthetic data
increases beyond a certain point, has been widely observed. This phenomenon arises due to issues
such as diminishing diversity (Padmakumar & He, 2024; Guo et al., 2023) and distortion in the data
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

