Seeing What Matters: Generalizable AI-generated
Video Detection with Forensic-Oriented Augmentation

Riccardo Corvi1,2∗, Davide Cozzolino1 , Ekta Prashnani2 ,
Shalini De Mello2 , Koki Nagano2 , Luisa Verdoliva1
1
University Federico II of Naples, 2 NVIDIA

Abstract
Synthetic video generation is progressing very rapidly. The latest models can
produce very realistic high-resolution videos that are virtually indistinguishable
from real ones. Although several video forensic detectors have been recently
proposed, they often exhibit poor generalization, which limits their applicability
in a real-world scenario. Our key insight to overcome this issue is to guide the
detector towards seeing what really matters. In fact, a well-designed forensic
classifier should focus on identifying intrinsic low-level artifacts introduced by
a generative architecture rather than relying on high-level semantic flaws that
characterize a specific model. In this work, first, we study different generative
architectures, searching and identifying discriminative features that are unbiased,
robust to impairments, and shared across models. Then, we introduce a novel
forensic-oriented data augmentation strategy based on the wavelet decomposition
and replace specific frequency-related bands to drive the model to exploit more
relevant forensic cues. Our novel training paradigm improves the generalizability
of AI-generated video detectors, without the need for complex algorithms and
large datasets that include multiple synthetic generators. To evaluate our approach,
we train the detector using data from a single generative model and test it against
videos produced by a wide range of other models. Despite its simplicity, our
method achieves a significant accuracy improvement over state-of-the-art detectors
and obtains excellent results even on very recent generative models, such as NOVA
and FLUX.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of AI-based video generation has witnessed rapid advancements. Several
flexible tools exist, based on diffusion models, that generate high-quality videos from general
conditional inputs like text and images [41, 77, 95]. These powerful tools enable professionals
to use AI for innovative and creative applications, such as design, marketing, and entertainment.
However, the misuse of such technologies also raises ethical and social concerns related to the spread
of disinformation, the violation of intellectual property rights and more generally the erosion of
trust in digital media [28, 5, 46]. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop effective methods for
distinguishing real from AI-generated videos.
Previous work in video forensics focused mostly on facial forgery detection [66, 83, 85, 33] and
proposed solutions that are specifically tailored to faces, for example, by analyzing head pose or
facial landmarks and appearance [54, 15], inconsistencies in skin texture or lip motion [49, 94, 34],
∗

Part of the work was done during an internship at NVIDIA.
Project page: https://github.com/grip-unina/WaveRep-SyntheticVideoDetection

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

