Fast Non-Log-Concave Sampling under Nonconvex
Equality and Inequality Constraints with Landing

Kijung Jeon
Georgia Institute of Technology
kjeon@gatech.edu

Michael Muehlebach
MPI-IS
michaelm@tue.mpg.de

Molei Tao
Georgia Institute of Technology
mtao@gatech.edu

Abstract
Sampling from constrained statistical distributions is a fundamental task in various
fields including Bayesian statistics, computational chemistry, and statistical physics.
This article considers sampling from a constrained distribution that is described
by an unconstrained density, as well as additional equality and/or inequality constraints, which often make the constraint set nonconvex. Existing methods struggle
in the presence of such nonconvex constraints, as they rely on projections, which
are computationally expensive or intractable, are specialized to either inequality
or equality constraints, and often lack rigorous quantitative convergence guarantees. In this paper, we introduce Overdamped Langevin with LAnding (OLLA), a
new framework that can design overdamped Langevin dynamics accommodating
both nonlinear equality and inequality constraints. The proposed dynamics also
deterministically corrects trajectories along the normal direction of the constraint
surface, thus obviating the need for explicit projections. We show that, under suitable regularity conditions on the target density and the feasible set Σ ⊂ Rd , OLLA
converges exponentially fast in 2-Wasserstein distance to the constrained target
density ρΣ (x) ∝ exp(−f (x))dσΣ . Lastly, through experiments, we demonstrate
the efficiency of OLLA compared to known constrained Langevin algorithms and
their slack variable variants, highlighting its favorable computational cost and fast
empirical mixing.1

1

Introduction

Sampling from complex, constrained statistical distributions is a fundamental problem in machine
learning, with applications ranging from Bayesian inference under structured priors to training
generative models with safety or fairness constraints. When there is no constraint, a prominent
class of sampling techniques is centered around (overdamped) Langevin dynamics, where the drift
is set to the gradient of the log-target density. These have gained significant traction due to their
strong theoretical guarantees: for example under log-concave target densities [1–8] or more general
densities that satisfy relaxed conditions such as isoperimetric inequalities [9, 10] one can obtain fast,
non-asymptotic convergence rates. Langevin dynamics can even be generalized, via a Riemannian
Langevin approach, to sample under convex constraints [e.g., 11, 12]. However, extending Langevinbased approaches to sample from distributions supported on nonconvex sets Σ ⊂ Rd remains a
major challenge. Existing techniques typically rely on projection steps, which are computationally
expensive and require convexity to ensure convergence. Moreover, most methods offer limited
or no quantitative convergence guarantees in this case; in fact, even if the density is log-concave,
a nonconvex constraint can easily make the target distribution much harder to sample from, also
rendering the analysis more difficult. This is a critical bottleneck for many emerging machine learning
1

All code is provided in the following repository: https://github.com/KraitGit/OLLA

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

