Time Reversal Symmetry for Efficient Robotic
Manipulations in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Yunpeng Jiang
jyp9961@sjtu.edu.cn
Global College
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Jianshu Hu
hjs1998@sjtu.edu.cn
Global College
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Paul Weng∗
paul.weng@dukekunshan.edu.cn
Digital Innovation Research Center
Duke Kunshan University

Yutong Ban∗
yban@sjtu.edu.cn
Global College
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Symmetry is pervasive in robotics and has been widely exploited to improve sample
efficiency in deep reinforcement learning (DRL). However, existing approaches
primarily focus on spatial symmetries—such as reflection, rotation, and translation—while largely neglecting temporal symmetries. To address this gap, we
explore time reversal symmetry, a form of temporal symmetry commonly found
in robotics tasks such as door opening and closing. We propose Time Reversal
symmetry enhanced Deep Reinforcement Learning (TR-DRL), a framework that
combines trajectory reversal augmentation and time reversal guided reward shaping
to efficiently solve temporally symmetric tasks. Our method generates reversed
transitions from fully reversible transitions, identified by a proposed dynamicsconsistent filter, to augment the training data. For partially reversible transitions,
we apply reward shaping to guide learning, according to successful trajectories
from the reversed task. Extensive experiments on the Robosuite and MetaWorld
benchmarks demonstrate that TR-DRL is effective in both single-task and multitask settings, achieving higher sample efficiency and stronger final performance
compared to baseline methods. Our project website and source code can be found
in 1 and 2.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is a powerful machine learning framework capable of solving
complex tasks, with applications across robotics, quantitative trading, and video games. Despite
its successes, DRL often suffers from low sample efficiency and poor agent robustness. To address
these challenges, symmetry, a common property in many real-world scenarios, has been leveraged to
improve both sample efficiency and agent performance. Symmetry can be used to augment trajectories
collected during training in both state-based [Lin et al., 2020, Kidziński et al., 2018] and image-based
settings [Yarats et al., 2022]. Alternatively, symmetry can be embedded directly into the network
architecture, making it an inherent property of the model [Cohen and Welling, 2016, Wang et al.,
2022]. In addition, it can be enforced as a regularization term [Hu et al., 2024a, Raileanu et al., 2021].
∗

Corresponding authors.
Project Page: https://jyp9961.github.io/TR-DRL_project_page/
2
Source Code: https://github.com/jyp9961/TR-DRL
1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

