Discovering Data Structures:
Nearest Neighbor Search and Beyond

Omar Salemohamed ∗
Université de Montréal, Mila

Laurent Charlin †
HEC Montréal, Mila

Vatsal Sharan†
University of Southern California

Shivam Garg†
Microsoft Research
Gregory Valiant†
Stanford University

Abstract
We explore if it is possible to learn data structures end-to-end with neural networks,
with a focus on the problem of nearest-neighbor (NN) search. To answer this
question, we introduce a framework for data structure discovery which adapts
to the underlying data distribution and provides fine-grained control over query
and space complexity. Crucially, the data structure is learned from scratch, and
does not require careful initialization or seeding with candidate data structures. In
several settings, we are able to reverse-engineer the learned data structures and
query algorithms. For 1D nearest neighbor search, the model discovers optimal
distribution (in)dependent algorithms such as binary search and variants of interpolation search. In higher dimensions, the model learns solutions that resemble
k-d trees in some regimes, while in others, elements of locality-sensitive hashing
emerge. Additionally, the model learns useful representations of high-dimensional
data such as images and exploits them to design effective data structures. Beyond
NN search, we believe the framework could be a powerful tool for data structure
discovery for other problems, and adapt it to the problem of estimating frequencies
over a data stream. To encourage future work in this direction, we conclude with a
discussion on some of the opportunities and remaining challenges of learning data
structures end-to-end.3

1

Introduction
Can neural networks discover data structures from scratch?

There are several motivations for this question. The first is scientific. Deep learning models are
increasingly performing tasks once considered exclusive to humans, from image recognition and
mastering the game of Go to engaging in natural language conversations. Designing data structures
and algorithms, along with solving complex math problems, are particularly challenging tasks. They
require searching through a vast combinatorial space with a difficult to define structure. It is therefore
natural to ask what it would take for deep learning models to solve such problems. There are already
promising signs: these models have discovered fast matrix-multiplication algorithms [1], solved SAT
problems [2], and learned optimization algorithms for various learning tasks [3, 4, 5].
The second motivation is practical. Data structures are ubiquitous objects that enable efficient
querying. Traditionally, they have been designed to be worst-case optimal and therefore agnostic to
the underlying data and query distributions. However, in many applications there are patterns in these
distributions that can be exploited to design more efficient data structures. This has motivated recent
∗

Corresponding Author: omar.salemohamed@gmail.com
Authors listed in alphabetical order.
3
Our code is available at: https://github.com/omar-s1/data_structure_discovery

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

