Shaping Sequence Attractor Schema in Recurrent
Neural Networks
Zhikun Chu1
chukunzhi@outlook.com

Bo Hong3
hongbo@tsinghua.edu.cn

Xiaolong Zou3,B
benzou@mail.bnu.edu.cn

Yuanyuan Mi2,B
miyuanyuan@tsinghua.edu.cn
1, Bioengineering College,School of Medicine, Chongqing University.
2, Department of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
3, Biomedical Engineering,School of Medicine, Tsinghua University.
B: Corresponding authors.

Abstract
Sequence schemas are abstract, reusable knowledge structures that facilitate rapid
adaptation and generalization in novel sequential tasks. In both animals and humans, shaping is an efficient way to acquire such schemas, particularly in complex
sequential tasks. As a form of curriculum learning, shaping works by progressively
advancing from simple subtasks to integrated full sequences, and ultimately enabling generalization across different task variations. Despite the importance of
schemas in cognition and shaping in schema acquisition, the underlying neural
dynamics at play remain poorly understood. To explore this, we train recurrent
neural networks on an odor-sequence task using a shaping protocol inspired by
well-established paradigms in experimental neuroscience. Our model provides
the first systematic reproduction of key features of schema learning observed in
the orbitofrontal cortex, including rapid adaptation to novel tasks, structured neural representation geometry, and progressive dimensionality compression during
learning. Crucially, analysis of the trained RNN reveals that the learned schema
is implemented through sequence attractors. These attractor dynamics emerge
gradually through the shaping process: starting with isolated discrete attractors
in simple tasks, evolving into linked sequences, and eventually abstracting into
generalizable attractors that capture shared task structure. Moreover, applying
our method to a keyword spotting task shows that shaping facilitates the rapid
development of sequence attractor schemas, leading to enhanced learning efficiency.
In summary, our work elucidates a novel attractor-based mechanism underlying
schema representation and its evolution via shaping, offering new insights into the
acquisition of abstract knowledge across biological and artificial intelligence.

1

Introduction

Imagine taking the subway in a new station: you can effortlessly anticipate the sequence of events entering the station, purchasing a ticket, scanning it, waiting for the train, and boarding. This ability
stems from an abstract knowledge structure encoded in your brain [1], which organizes the typical
order and relationship among these events, commonly referred to as a schema. Schemas facilitate
rapid learning [2, 3], flexible decision-making [4], and efficient generalization [5, 6, 7], forming the
foundation of cognitive flexibility and generalization in both animal and human intelligence [3]. How39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

