Near-Optimal Quantum Algorithms for Computing
(Coarse) Correlated Equilibria of
General-Sum Games
Tongyang Li
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies,
and School of Computer Science,
Peking University,
Beijing, China
tongyangli@pku.edu.cn

Xinzhao Wang
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies,
and School of Computer Science,
Peking University,
Beijing, China
wangxz@stu.pku.edu.cn

Yexin Zhang
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies,
and School of Computer Science,
Peking University,
Beijing, China
zhangyexin@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Computing Nash equilibria of zero-sum games in classical and quantum settings
is extensively studied. For general-sum games, computing Nash equilibria is
PPAD-hard and the computing of a more general concept called correlated equilibria has been widely explored in game theory. In this paper, we initiate the
study of quantum algorithms for computing ε-approximate correlated equilibria
(CE) and coarse correlated equilibria (CCE) in multi-player normal-form games.
Our approach utilizes quantum improvements to the multi-scale Multiplicative
Weight Update (MWU) method for CE calculations, achieving a query complex√
ity of Õ(m n) for ﬁxed ε. For CCE, we extend techniques from quantum algorithms for zero-sum games to multi-player settings, achieving query complexity
√
Õ(m n/ε2.5 ). Both algorithms demonstrate a near-optimal scaling in the number
of players m and actions n, as conﬁrmed by our quantum query lower bounds.

1

Introduction

Motivations. Game theory is a branch of mathematics that studies the interactions between strategies of rational decision-makers. It focuses on the situations where the outcome of each participant
depends on not only their own strategies but also the strategies of others. One of the simplest scenarios is a two-player zero-sum game, where the total payoff of the two players does not change
regardless of their individual strategies. A key concept in game theory is Nash equilibrium, which
describes a situation where no player can unilaterally change their strategy to achieve a better payoff, with the strategies of the other players being ﬁxed. Notably, a Nash equilibrium in a two-player
zero-sum game can be reached by no-regret online learning: when both players repeatedly adjust
their strategies to minimize regret, the average play converges to the equilibrium. This observation is central to the design of several classical and quantum algorithms for computing equilibria.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

