Toward Interpretable Evaluation Measures for Time
Series Segmentation

Félix Chavelli
Inria, ENS, CNRS, PSL
Paris, France
felix.chavelli@inria.fr

Paul Boniol
Inria, ENS, CNRS, PSL
Paris, France
paul.boniol@inria.fr

Michaël Thomazo
Inria, ENS, CNRS, PSL
Paris, France
michael.thomazo@inria.fr

Abstract
Time series segmentation is a fundamental task in analyzing temporal data across
various domains, from human activity recognition to energy monitoring. While
numerous state-of-the-art methods have been developed to tackle this problem,
the evaluation of their performance remains critically limited. Existing measures
predominantly focus on change point accuracy or rely on point-based measures
such as Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), which fail to capture the quality of the
detected segments, ignore the nature of errors, and offer limited interpretability.
In this paper, we address these shortcomings by introducing two novel evaluation
measures: WARI (Weighted Adjusted Rand Index), that accounts for the position
of segmentation errors, and SMS (State Matching Score), a fine-grained measure
that identifies and scores four fundamental types of segmentation errors while
allowing error-specific weighting. We empirically validate WARI and SMS on
synthetic and real-world benchmarks, showing that they not only provide a more
accurate assessment of segmentation quality but also uncover insights, such as
error provenance and type, that are inaccessible with traditional measures.

1

Introduction

Massive collections of time-varying measurements, commonly referred to as time series, have become
a reality in every scientific and industrial domain [1–4]. Such temporal measurements can correspond
to different physical quantities, such as temperature and pressure [5], electricity consumption [6], or
human pose [7]. Several tasks have emerged from the pressing need to analyze time series, such as
classification [8], clustering [9], anomaly detection [10–12], motif discovery [13], and time series
segmentation [14]. The latter (sometimes referred to as change point detection or state detection) is
a crucial task. The goal is to identify distinct states or patterns within the data, which can provide
valuable insights into the underlying processes. More generally, time series segmentation aims
to respectively detect change points, which delineate different states, and to cluster these states
in order to recognize recurring states. Such states can correspond to a human activity such as
walking and running [15], or specific appliances in electrical consumption time series [6]. Although
a wide variety of state-of-the-art algorithms have been proposed, leveraging diverse approaches
(e.g., statistical methods [14, 16, 17], Markov models [18, 19], auto-encoders [20–22], or symbolic
representations [23]), enabling notable progress in recent benchmarks, we observe three major
limitations that undermine their ability to reliably assess segmentation quality.
First, change point-based measures, which focus solely on the accuracy of detecting transition points,
do not adequately capture the overall quality of the segmentation itself. Even if change points
are correctly detected, the resulting segment labels might still be incorrect or uninformative. Second,
most widely used measures, such as Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), are point-based and thus treat all
errors (i.e., points belonging to wrongly segmented subsequences) equally, failing to distinguish
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

