On Traceability in ℓp Stochastic Convex
Optimization

Sasha Voitovych∗

Mahdi Haghifam†

Gintare Karolina Dziugaite§

Roi Livni¶

Idan Attias‡
Daniel M. Roy∥

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the necessity of traceability for accurate learning
in stochastic convex optimization (SCO) under ℓp geometries. Informally,
we say a learning algorithm is m-traceable if, by analyzing its output, it
is possible to identify at least m of its training samples. Our main results
uncover a fundamental tradeoff between traceability and excess risk in
SCO. For every p ∈ [1, ∞), we establish the existence of an excess risk
threshold below which every sample-efficient learner is traceable with the
number of samples which is a constant fraction of its training sample. For
p ∈ [1, 2], this threshold coincides with the best excess risk of differentially
private (DP) algorithms, i.e., above this threshold, there exist algorithms
that are not traceable, which corresponds to a sharp phase transition. For
p ∈ (2, ∞), this threshold instead gives novel lower bounds for DP learning,
partially closing an open problem in this setup. En route to establishing
these results, we prove a sparse variant of the fingerprinting lemma, which
is of independent interest to the community.

1

Introduction

Tracing or membership inference informally asks whether it is possible, using only the
output of a learning algorithm, to distinguish samples in the training set from held-out
samples. The existence of a tracer that identifies training examples reveals that the model has
memorized specific examples rather than purely captured the underlying distribution [SSSS17;
CCNSTT22]. In particular, understanding tracing has an important role in generalization
theory, where an algorithm that is not traceable is known to generalize well beyond its
training data [SZ20]. Tracing is also an important technical tool in, e.g., differential privacy
(DP), where tracing attacks are the workhorse behind tight lower bounds for the risk-privacy
trade-offs [BUV14]. From a privacy standpoint, even the leakage of a single example is viewed
as catastrophic. However, from a generalization theory standpoint, we want to understand
the exact relationship between an algorithm’s generalization performance and the number of
traceable examples.
To reason rigorously about tracing, following [DSSUV15], we define the problem of tracing
as follows. Let An be a learning algorithm that, given a training set Sn = (Z1 , . . . , Zn ) of
∗

SV and MH are equal contribution authors.
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
†
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University
‡
University of Illinois at Chicago; Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
§
Google DeepMind
¶
Department of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv University
∥
Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto; Vector Institute
∗

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

