Capturing Individual Human Preferences with
Reward Features
André Barreto
Google DeepMind

Vincent Dumoulin
Google DeepMind

Yiran Mao
Google DeepMind

Mark Rowland
Google DeepMind

Nicolas Perez-Nieves
Google DeepMind

Bobak Shahriari
Google DeepMind

Yann Dauphin
Google DeepMind

Doina Precup
Google DeepMind

Hugo Larochelle
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Reinforcement learning from human feedback usually models preferences using
a reward function that does not distinguish between people. We argue that this is
unlikely to be a good design choice in contexts with high potential for disagreement,
like in the training of large language models. We formalise and analyse the problem
of learning a reward model that can be specialised to a user. Using the principle
of empirical risk minimisation, we derive a probably approximately correct (PAC)
bound showing the dependency of the approximation error on the number of
training examples, as usual, and also on the number of human raters who provided
feedback on them. Based on our theoretical findings, we discuss how to best collect
pairwise preference data and argue that adaptive reward models should be beneficial
when there is considerable disagreement among users. We also propose a concrete
architecture for an adaptive reward model. Our approach leverages the observation
that individual preferences can be captured as a linear combination of a set of
general reward features. We show how to learn such features and subsequently
use them to quickly adapt the reward model to a specific individual, even if their
preferences are not reflected in the training data. We present experiments with large
language models illustrating our theoretical results and comparing the proposed
architecture with a non-adaptive baseline. Consistent with our analysis, the benefits
provided by our model increase with the number of raters and the heterogeneity of
their preferences. We also show that our model compares favourably to adaptive
counterparts, including those performing in-context personalisation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) can be useful when we do not have an explicit
reward function but can distinguish between good and bad behaviour [15]. This is often the case
in the training of large language models (LLMs), in which RLHF has been applied with great
success [46, 48, 41, 58].
The most common way to collect human feedback is to ask humans to rank examples of an agent’s
behaviour. Usually, all the feedback is integrated to derive a single reward function that reflects as
well as possible the preferences of the population of interest. Although this is a sensible strategy
when preferences are homogeneous across the population, it may be less effective when there is
considerable disagreement. This is likely the case in the training of LLMs.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

