Low Rank Gradients and Where to Find Them
Rishi Sonthalia∗
Department of Mathematics
Boston College
rishi.sonthalia@bc.edu

Michael Murray
Department of Mathematics
Bath University
mjm253@bath.ac.uk

Guido Montúfar
Mathematics and Statistics & Data Science
University of California, Los Angeles
montufar@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates low-rank structure in the gradients of the training loss
for two-layer neural networks while relaxing the usual isotropy assumptions on
the training data and parameters. We consider a spiked data model in which the
bulk can be anisotropic and ill-conditioned, we do not require independent data
and weight matrices and we also analyze both the mean-field and neural-tangentkernel scalings. We show that the gradient with respect to the input weights is
approximately low rank and is dominated by two rank-one terms: one aligned
with the bulk data-residue, and another aligned with the rank one spike in the
input data. We characterize how properties of the training data, the scaling regime
and the activation function govern the balance between these two components.
Additionally, we also demonstrate that standard regularizers, such as weight decay,
input noise and Jacobian penalties, also selectively modulate these components.
Experiments on synthetic and real data corroborate our theoretical predictions.

1

Introduction

Feature learning is a critical driver behind the success of deep learning. Despite this, a theoretical
characterization of it remains elusive. In order to drive understanding, a line of research [3, 12–
14, 28, 45] has emerged studying two-layer networks whose inner weights are trained or updated
via one step of gradient descent. In this context, feature learning can be characterized through the
emergence of a low-rank structure in the network weights. In particular, when the weights of many of
the neurons align in a predominant direction, the matrix of weights becomes approximately low rank.
Moreover, Ba et al. [3] proved that a ridge estimator trained on such features can outperform random
feature models and other kernel methods. However, these prior investigations require idealized
conditions, for example isotropic data or weights, which diverge from real-world scenarios where data
typically exhibits anisotropy or an ill-conditioned covariance. In addition, the effects of regularization
in this context have also been underexplored.
This paper addresses two questions: 1) how do low-rank gradient phenomena arise and behave
under more general conditions of anisotropy and ill-conditioning? and 2) what impact do common
regularizers have on feature learning in this context? Our analysis accommodates spiked data with
an anisotropic ill-conditioned bulk. This allows us to explore the effect of the size of the data spike,
controlled by a parameter ν ≥ 0, as well as spectral decay profiles of the bulk, controlled by a
parameter α ≥ 0. Our central finding is that the gradient of the inner-layer weights is generically
well approximated by a rank-two matrix. This structure arises from the interplay of two primary
rank-one components: S1 , driven by the input bulk and target residue, and S2 , driven by the leading
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

