MuSLR: Multimodal Symbolic Logical Reasoning
Jundong Xu1 , Hao Fei1∗, Yuhui Zhang2 , Liangming Pan3 , Qijun Huang4 , Qian Liu5 ,
Preslav Nakov6 , Min-Yen Kan1 , William Yang Wang7 , Mong-Li Lee1 , Wynne Hsu1
1
National University of Singapore, 2 Stanford University, 3 Peking University, 4 UniMelb,
5
University of Auckland, 6 MBZUAI, 7 University of California, Santa Barbara
jundong.xu@u.nus.edu, haofei37@nus.edu.sg, yuhuiz@cs.stanford.edu,
liangmingpan@pku.edu.cn, qijunhuang@student.unimelb.edu.au,
liu.qian@auckland.ac.nz, preslav.nakov@mbzuai.ac.ae, knmnyn@nus.edu.sg,
william@cs.ucsb.edu, dcsleeml@nus.edu.sg, dcshsuw@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Multimodal symbolic logical reasoning, which aims to deduce new facts from multimodal input
via formal logic, is critical in high-stakes applications such as autonomous driving and medical
diagnosis, as its rigorous, deterministic reasoning helps prevent serious consequences. To evaluate such capabilities of current state-of-the-art vision language models (VLMs), we introduce
MuSLR, the first multimodal symbolic logical reasoning grounded in formal logical rules. We
curate a benchmark dataset for MuSLR comprising 1,093 instances across 7 domains, including
35 atomic symbolic logic and 976 logical combinations, with reasoning depths ranging from 2
to 9. We evaluate 7 state-of-the-art VLMs on our benchmark and find that they all struggle with
multimodal symbolic reasoning, with the best model, GPT-4.1, achieving only 46.8%. Thus,
we propose LogiCAM, a modular framework that applies formal logical rules to multimodal
inputs, boosting GPT-4.1’s Chain-of-Thought performance by 14.13%, and delivering even
larger gains on complex logics such as first-order logic. We also conduct a comprehensive
error analysis, showing that around 70% of failures stem from logical misalignment between
modalities, offering key insights to guide future improvements. All data and code are publicly
available at https://llm-symbol.github.io/MuSLR.

1

Introduction

Recent progress has extensively highlighted the pivotal role of reasoning capabilities in enhancing the
generality and robustness of large language models (LLMs) [9, 12, 29–31]. Yet, achieving humanlevel intelligence demands more than commonsense or heuristic thinking. In particular, symbolic
logical reasoning, grounded in formal logic such as first-order logic, offers a rigorous, precise,
and verifiable paradigm essential for high-stakes scenarios where reasoning errors can have critical
consequences. Although previous works have shown that LLMs can handle symbolic reasoning
in purely textual contexts [22, 36, 37], these capabilities remain limited to unimodal inputs, i.e.,
text. However, many real-world domains, such as autonomous driving, healthcare, law, and finance,
demand reasoning that integrates multiple modalities, particularly combining visual and textual
information, to support accurate and reliable conclusions. Consider an autonomous driving system
that observes a traffic sign (from a camera image) indicating “Road Closed Ahead”, given the traffic
rule “Only if the road ahead is open (B), the vehicles may proceed straight (A).” From the image,
the system detects that the road is in fact closed (¬B), and must infer that continuing straight is not
permitted (¬A), forming a formal logical reasoning (Modus Tollens; (A → B) ∧ ¬B → ¬A) to
avoid traffic accidents. Despite the significance of such multimodal symbolic reasoning, no standard
definition or benchmark currently exists for this capability.
To fill this gap, we introduce Multimodal Symbolic Logical Reasoning (MuSLR), a novel task that
challenges VLMs to perform symbolic reasoning over combined visual and textual inputs. Figure 1
illustrates the MuSLR task with the above example. We define MuSLR under two task formats: Truth
∗

Corresponding author: Hao Fei

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

