Accelerated Distance-adaptive Methods for Hölder
Smooth and Convex Optimization

Yijin Ren∗
Haifeng Xu∗
School of Information Management and Engineering
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Qi Deng †
Antai College of Economics and Management
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
lanyjr@stu.sufe.edu.cn, xuhaifeng2004@stu.sufe.edu.cn,

qdeng24@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper introduces new parameter-free first-order methods for convex optimization problems in which the objective function exhibits Hölder smoothness. Inspired
by the recently proposed distance-over-gradient (DOG) technique, we propose an
accelerated distance-adaptive method which achieves optimal anytime convergence
rates for Hölder smooth problems without requiring prior knowledge of smoothness
parameters or explicit parameter tuning. Importantly, our parameter-free approach
removes the necessity of specifying target accuracy in advance, addressing a significant limitation found in the universal fast gradient methods (Nesterov, 2015). We
further present a parameter-free accelerated method that eliminates the need for
line-search procedures and extend it to convex stochastic optimization. Preliminary
experimental results highlight the effectiveness of our approach on convex nonsmooth problems and its advantages over existing parameter-free or accelerated
methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following composite function
min ψ(x) := f (x) + g(x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a continuous convex function, and g : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} is a simple proper
lower semi-continuous (lsc) convex function of which the proximal operator is easy to evaluate.
First-order algorithms—(sub)gradient descent and their accelerated variants—are the workhorses for
solving (1), particularly in large-scale machine learning and AI applications. Their empirical success,
however, hinges on judiciously chosen stepsizes; manual tuning quickly becomes the dominant
practical bottleneck.
In standard analysis, the stepsize policy is often designed based on the smoothness level of the
objective function. Specifically, subgradient methods for nonsmooth problems typically employ
diminishing stepsizes, whereas gradient descent methods for smooth optimization often utilize a
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

