Multipole Attention for
Efficient Long Context Reasoning
Coleman Hooper∗ 1 Sebastian Zhao∗ 1 Luca Manolache1
Sehoon Kim1 Michael W. Mahoney1,2,3 Yakun Sophia Shao1
Kurt Keutzer1 Amir Gholami1,2
1 University of California, Berkeley 2 ICSI 3 LBNL
{chooper, sebbyzhao, luca.manolache, sehoonkim,
mahoneymw, ysshao, keutzer, amirgh}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) have shown promising accuracy improvements
for complex problem-solving tasks. While these models have attained high accuracy by leveraging additional computation at test time, they need to generate
long chain-of-thought reasoning in order to think before answering, which requires
generating thousands of tokens. While sparse attention methods can help reduce the
KV cache pressure induced by this long autoregressive reasoning, these methods
can introduce errors which disrupt the reasoning process. Additionally, prior methods often pre-processed the input to make it easier to identify the important prompt
tokens when computing attention during generation, and this pre-processing is
challenging to perform online for newly generated reasoning tokens. Our work
addresses these challenges by introducing M ULTIPOLE ATTENTION, which accelerates autoregressive reasoning by only computing exact attention for the most
important tokens, while maintaining approximate representations for the remaining tokens. Our method first performs clustering to group together semantically
similar key vectors, and then uses the cluster centroids both to identify important
key vectors and to approximate the remaining key vectors in order to retain high
accuracy. Additionally, we design a fast cluster update process to quickly re-cluster
the input and previously generated tokens, thereby allowing for accelerating attention to the previous output tokens. We evaluate our method using emerging
LRMs such as Qwen-8B and Deepseek-R1-Distil-Qwen2.5-14B, demonstrating
that our approach can maintain accuracy on complex reasoning tasks even with
aggressive attention sparsity settings. We also provide kernel implementations to
demonstrate the practical efficiency gains from our method, achieving up to 4.5×
speedup for attention in long-context reasoning applications. Our code is available
at https://github.com/SqueezeAILab/MultipoleAttention.

1

Introduction

Test-time compute has emerged as a new dimension for scaling up Large Language Model (LLM)
performance [Snell et al., 2024]. By scaling the amount of computation used at test time, we can allow
LLMs to think longer on harder problems in order to attain higher accuracy. Large Reasoning Models
(LRMs), which are LLMs post-trained to have strong reasoning capabilities, typically reason by
generating long chain-of-thought, where they produce a step-by-step chain to help guide themselves
to the correct solution [Wei et al., 2022, Guo et al., 2025, Qwen, 2025]. This has been shown to
∗ Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

