Generalized Contrastive Learning for
Universal Multimodal Retrieval
Jungsoo Lee Janghoon Cho Hyojin Park Munawar Hayat
Kyuwoong Hwang Fatih Porikli Sungha Choi†
Qualcomm AI Research∗
{jungsool, janghoon, hyojinp, hayat, kyuwoong, fporikli, sunghac}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Despite their consistent performance improvements, cross-modal retrieval models
(e.g., CLIP) show degraded performances with retrieving keys composed of fused
image-text modality (e.g., Wikipedia pages with both images and text). To address
this critical challenge, multimodal retrieval has been recently explored to develop a
unified single retrieval model capable of retrieving keys across diverse modality
combinations. A common approach involves constructing new composed sets
of image-text triplets (e.g., retrieving a pair of image and text given a query
image). However, such an approach requires careful curation to ensure the dataset
quality and fails to generalize to unseen modality combinations. To overcome
these limitations, this paper proposes Generalized Contrastive Learning (GCL), a
novel loss formulation that improves multimodal retrieval performance without
the burdensome need for new dataset curation. Specifically, GCL operates by
enforcing contrastive learning across all modalities within a mini-batch, utilizing
existing image-caption paired datasets to learn a unified representation space.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of GCL by showing consistent performance
improvements on off-the-shelf multimodal retrieval models (e.g.VISTA, CLIP, and
TinyCLIP) using the M-BEIR, MMEB, and CoVR benchmarks.

1

Introduction

With the growing availability of multimodal data, the ability to retrieve relevant keys across different
modalities has become increasingly important. While cross-modal retrieval, retrieving images with
given text or vice versa, has garnered significant attention and progress [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8],
performing retrieval with fused image-text modality still remains a challenge [9, 10]. Consider, for
instance, the task of finding a Wikipedia page composed of both images and text (e.g., the Eiffel
Tower paired with its history) in response to a query (e.g., “What is the history of the Eiffel Tower?”).
For such real-world multimodal retrieval scenarios, existing approaches deliver limited performance.
This performance drop stems primarily from the pervasive modality gap [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], a
critical barrier in retrieval systems. The modality gap arises when semantically similar samples across
different modalities (e.g., an image and its caption) exhibit low similarity in the embedding space,
while semantically dissimilar samples within the same modality appear misleadingly close [18]. For
example, although an image of teddy bears is paired with the annotated caption ‘a photo of teddy
bears’, it may be embedded closer to images of other animals in the representation space, rather
than to its corresponding caption. This misalignment becomes especially acute when retrieval keys spanning text-only, image-only, or fused text-image formats - are stored in a unified database [9, 10].
For example, a search query might ideally match a Wikipedia page with both images and text.
However, without a shared representation space to bridge the three different modalities, models
struggle to pinpoint the most relevant candidate, which undermines their effectiveness.
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. † indicates corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

