Register and [CLS]tokens induce a decoupling of
local and global features in large ViTs

1

Alexander Lappe1,2
Martin A. Giese1
Hertie Institute, University Clinics Tübingen 2 IMPRS-IS
alexander.lappe@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Recent work has shown that the attention maps of the widely popular DINOv2
model exhibit artifacts, which hurt both model interpretability and performance
on dense image tasks. These artifacts emerge due to the model repurposing patch
tokens with redundant local information for the storage of global image information.
To address this problem, additional register tokens have been incorporated in which
the model can store such information instead. We carefully examine the influence
of these register tokens on the relationship between global and local image features,
showing that while register tokens yield cleaner attention maps, these maps do
not accurately reflect the integration of local image information in large models.
Instead, global information is dominated by information extracted from register
tokens, leading to a disconnect between local and global features. Inspired by these
findings, we show that the [CLS]token itself leads to a very similar phenomenon
in models without explicit register tokens. Our work shows that care must be taken
when interpreting attention maps of large ViTs. Further, by clearly attributing
the faulty behavior to register and [CLS]tokens, we show a path towards more
interpretable vision models.
Violation of the patch integration assumption
Patch features

...
Global
representation

Self-attention layers

[CLS]attention

Figure 1: The global image representation computed by a Vision Transformer is usually understood as
a weighted average of the local patch features, where weights are given by the [CLS]token attention
scores. This notion, which we refer to as the patch integration assumption, underlies attribution
methods like plotting the attention maps to identify patches that strongly contribute to the global
output. In this work, we show that both register tokens and the [CLS]token lead to violations of this
assumption in large ViT models.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

