Unifying Text Semantics and Graph Structures for
Temporal Text-attributed Graphs with Large
Language Models
Siwei Zhang1 , Yun Xiong1∗, Yateng Tang3 , Jiarong Xu2 , Xi Chen1
Zehao Gu1 , Xuehao Zheng3 , Zi’an Jia1 , Jiawei Zhang4
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
School of Management, Fudan University 3 Tencent Weixin Group
4
IFM Lab, University of California, Davis
{swzhang24, x_chen21, guzh22, 24110240035}@m.fudan.edu.cn jiawei@ifmlab.org
{yunx, jiarongxu}@fudan.edu.cn {fredyttang, xuehaozheng}@tencent.com

Abstract
Temporal graph neural networks (TGNNs) have shown remarkable performance in
temporal graph modeling. However, real-world temporal graphs often possess rich
textual information, giving rise to temporal text-attributed graphs (TTAGs). Such
combination of dynamic text semantics and evolving graph structures introduces
heightened complexity. Existing TGNNs embed texts statically and rely heavily on
encoding mechanisms that biasedly prioritize structural information, overlooking
the temporal evolution of text semantics and the essential interplay between semantics and structures for synergistic reinforcement. To tackle these issues, we present
C ROSS, a flexible framework that seamlessly extends existing TGNNs for TTAG
modeling. C ROSS is designed by decomposing the TTAG modeling process into
two phases: (i) temporal semantics extraction; and (ii) semantic-structural information unification. The key idea is to advance the large language models (LLMs) to
dynamically extract the temporal semantics in text space and then generate cohesive
representations unifying both semantics and structures. Specifically, we propose a
Temporal Semantics Extractor in the C ROSS framework, which empowers LLMs
to offer the dynamic semantic understanding of node’s evolving contexts of textual
neighborhoods, facilitating semantic dynamics. Subsequently, we introduce the
Semantic-structural Co-encoder, which collaborates with the above Extractor for
synthesizing illuminating representations by jointly considering both semantic and
structural information while encouraging their mutual reinforcement. Extensive experiments show that C ROSS achieves state-of-the-art results on four public datasets
and one industrial dataset, with 24.7% absolute MRR gain on average in temporal
link prediction and 3.7% AUC gain in node classification of industrial application.

1

Introduction

Temporal graphs are crucial for modeling dynamic interaction data, where objects are represented as
nodes and timestamped interactions are depicted as edges [1, 2]. Unlike static graphs, temporal graphs
continuously evolve over time [3]. To capture the temporal dependencies and realize representation
learning for such graphs, extensive research has developed temporal graph neural networks (TGNNs)
[4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. These works typically adopt structural encoding mechanisms [9, 10] to encapsulate the
dynamics of graph structures [11], thus enabling representations for downstream tasks.
Meanwhile, besides the dynamically evolving graph structures, real-world temporal graphs are also
often accompanied by rich text attributes, giving rise to temporal text-attributed graphs (TTAGs) [12].
As shown in Fig. 1(a), in e-commerce networks, nodes may encompass elaborate text descriptions
such as user profile or product introduction, while timestamped edges can attach transaction details
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

