REOrdering Patches Improves Vision Models

Declan Kutscher1
1

David M. Chan2

University of Pittsburgh

Yutong Bai2
2

Trevor Darrell2

Ritwik Gupta2

University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Sequence models such as transformers require inputs to be represented as onedimensional sequences. In vision, this typically involves flattening images using
a fixed row-major (raster-scan) order. While full self-attention is permutationequivariant, modern long-sequence transformers increasingly rely on architectural
approximations that break this invariance and introduce sensitivity to patch ordering.
We show that patch order significantly affects model performance in such settings,
with simple alternatives like column-major or Hilbert curves yielding notable
accuracy shifts. Motivated by this, we propose REOrder, a two-stage framework for
discovering task-optimal patch orderings. First, we derive an information-theoretic
prior by evaluating the compressibility of various patch sequences. Then, we learn a
policy over permutations by optimizing a Plackett-Luce policy using REINFORCE.
This approach enables efficient learning in a combinatorial permutation space.
REOrder improves top-1 accuracy over row-major ordering on ImageNet-1K by
up to 3.01% and Functional Map of the World by 13.35%.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive sequence models have become the backbone of leading systems in both language and
vision. These models operate on images by first converting their 2-D grid structure into a 1-D sequence
of patches. Conventionally, a row-major order is used for this linearization under the assumption that
full self-attention is utilized by the model. As self-attention, augmented with positional embeddings,
is permutation-equivariant, the exact patch order has been treated as inconsequential.
However, this assumption does not hold in the context of modern, long-sequence models which
introduce strong inductive biases such as locality [1], recurrence [2], or input-dependent state
dynamics [3] that are sensitive to input ordering. Through mechanisms such as sparse attention via
masking summarizing early parts of a long-sequence into latent representations, these methods are
able to model long-sequences in a computationally tractable fashion. However, these design choices
introduce a strong dependency on patch ordering, something that has previously been overlooked.
In this work, we demonstrate that merely swapping the row-major scan for an alternative, such as
column-major or Hilbert curves, yields measurable accuracy gains across multiple long-sequence
backbones. Further, we introduce REOrder, a method to learn an optimal patch ordering. REOrder
first approximates which patch ordering may lead to best performance and then learns to rank patches
in order of importance with reinforcement learning. Specifically, to convert the 2-D image into
a 1-D sequence, we first quantify the compressibility resulting from each of six different patch
orderings. Then, a Plackett-Luce ranking model is initialized with the least compressible ordering and
further trained to minimize classification loss with REINFORCE. REOrder improves performance on
ImageNet-1K by up to 3.01% (±0.23%) and Functional Map of the World by 13.35% (±0.21%).
Code and animations are available on the project page.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

