Provable Sample-Efficient Transfer Learning
Conditional Diffusion Models via Representation
Learning

1

Ziheng Cheng1 , Tianyu Xie2 , Shiyue Zhang2 , Cheng Zhang2,3,∗
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, University of California, Berkeley
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Center for Statistical Science, Peking University
ziheng_cheng@berkeley.edu, tianyuxie@pku.edu.cn,
zhangshiyue@stu.pku.edu.cn, chengzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
While conditional diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in various
applications, they require abundant data to train from scratch, which is often
infeasible in practice. To address this issue, transfer learning has emerged as
an essential paradigm in small data regimes. Despite its empirical success, the
theoretical underpinnings of transfer learning conditional diffusion models remain
unexplored. In this paper, we take the first step towards understanding the sample
efficiency of transfer learning conditional diffusion models through the lens of
representation learning. Inspired by practical training procedures, we assume
that there exists a low-dimensional representation of conditions shared across all
tasks. Our analysis shows that with a well-learned representation from source tasks,
the sample complexity of target tasks can be reduced substantially. Numerical
experiments are also conducted to verify our results.

1

Introduction

Conditional diffusion models (CDMs) utilize a user-defined condition to guide the generative process
of diffusion models (DMs) to sample from the desired conditional distribution. In recent years, CDMs
have achieved groundbreaking success in various generative tasks, including text-to-image generation
[Ho et al., 2020, Song et al., 2020, Ho and Salimans, 2022, Rombach et al., 2022], reinforcement
learning [Janner et al., 2022, Chi et al., 2023, Wang et al., 2022, Reuss et al., 2023], time series
[Tashiro et al., 2021, Rasul et al., 2021], and life science [Song et al., 2021, Watson et al., 2022,
Gruver et al., 2024, Guo et al., 2024].
Training a CDM from scratch requires a large amount of data to achieve good generalization. However,
in practical scenarios, users often have access to only limited data for the target distribution due to cost
or risk concerns, making the model prone to over-fitting. In such small data regime, transfer learning
has emerged as a predominant paradigm [Moon et al., 2022, Ruiz et al., 2023, Xie et al., 2023, Han
et al., 2023]. By leveraging knowledge acquired during pre-training on large source datasets, transfer
learning enhances the performance of fine-tuning on target tasks, facilitating few-shot learning and
significantly improving practicality.
Among the successful applications of transfer learning CDMs, the conditions are typically highdimensional vectors with embedded low-dimensional representations (features) that encapsulate all
the information required for inference. In addition, these representations are likely to be task-agnostic,
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

